Good morning, everyone. 2-minute
warning. We'll get
I don't.
All right, everyone.
Before we get started, I just
want to go over a couple of
housekeeping matters, um,
because this wouldn't be a
seminar CLE without them. So
here we go. First of all,
restrooms, uh, this is a
roundhouse, so if you keep going
down the hall, eventually you
will find one, but the closest
ones, the men's are right around
the corner out this way and the
women's are just
pass that through the lobby, uh,
to the left. Second
coffee and refreshments are out
through these doors, please feel
free to help yourself. Um,
please be responsible adults,
recognizing that we are in a
borrowed room and do your best
not to make a mess and spill.
2 or 3rd CLEs, if you're here
for a CLE, please be sure to
sign in. What we will do is
provide a certificate of
completion at the end of the
course, which you will then
submit to the bar, uh, on your
own, unless you are PRC staff
and then talk to Jordan, we'll
get you hooked up. And last but
not least, last year we didn't
think this far ahead, uh, but
this year we are, there are
feedback forms over there as you
come across an idea, something
that either works really well or
didn't work or maybe
you'd like to see next year,
please feel free to fill out a,
a feedback form and drop it in
the basket.
Um, and with that, secretary,
are you ready?
OK.
Um,
Secretary Melanie Kenderine, uh,
was appointed
by Governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham to the New Mexico and
Energy minerals and natural
resources department prior to
joining Mner, the secretary was
co-founder, principal, and
executive vice president of the
Energy Futures Initiative, a
Washington DC based nonprofit
dedicated to harnessing the
power of technology and policy
innovation to accelerate the
clean energy transition.
Secretary Kenderine has held
high-level positions at the US
Department of Energy in both the
Obama and Clinton
administrations. Please join me
in welcoming Secretary Melanie
Kenderine.
Thank you. And can you all hear
me? I'm having uh extreme
technical difficulties today and
uh it's made me nasty, all
right? So if I swear in the
middle of this, uh, forgive me,
OK? Don't record it. The uh are
all edit it. The um, so, uh
thank you so much and, and uh I
see some familiar faces in the
room, uh, some of you have seen
these, uh, already. New Mexico
is a small state, so I
apologize, but
Um, uh, uh, some of the
messaging is very important, and
I'm gonna say it over and over
again, and I'm not gonna
Experts here, I'm not gonna talk
about uh grid regulation. That's
not, that's uh the uh uh area of
expertise of many people in the
room, and so I'm going to
instead focus on some very
high-level trends that I'm
seeing and issues that may
impact what we do in the power
sector in emissions and energy
security and the energy
transition and uh you may notice
that my, uh,
Presentation uh is nerdy, the
nerd and M nerd is very
appropriate for me. Um, I'm a
data nerd, OK? So, um, having
said all that, let's get going
and uh I'm going to start, um,
uh, I think that these, this,
these are stunning data about
climate change, and we need to
think about this. The last
decade is warmer than any period
for approximately 125,000
In years glacial retreats are
unmatched for 2000 plus years,
that, of course, has enormous
impacts.
For uh regions of the country
and the world where they have a
glacier-fed hydro as their power
generation. It's gonna be a huge
problem in the Himalayas. It's
already a huge problem in the
Andes, um, uh, 85% of the power
generation in uh
And uh 10 countries or so in
South America is Glacier fed
Hydro and uh and in the
northwestern US and so what
happens when the glaciers melt,
you get a huge rush of water and
then nothing.
And so, so that's a problem. The
share of the global population
exposed to flooding will rise by
24%. We've seen that in the
world. We've seen in Spain,
we've seen it in Roswell. We're
seeing it everywhere. Summer
Arctic ice coverage is smaller
than any time in the last 1000
years, sea level rise is faster
than any prior century for 3000
years, the ocean is warming
faster than at any time.
Since the last ice age.
And 950 million people, and this
is relevant to New Mexico as
well across the world's dry
lands will experience water
stress, heat stress, and
desertification.
Um, so, uh, in spite of the
weather today, OK, and this is a
picture of elephant Butte in
1994. This is a NASA photograph.
This is elephant Butte in 2013.
So I was stunning and I've used
this, uh, picture a lot, um, but
it's old, so I wanted to see if
I could find something more
recent.
This is Elephant Butte in 2019.
Look at that. Look at this, the
large boat in the water there
and the water level declined. So
that's what we're seeing in New
Mexico, we're seeing it around
the world too, and the world is
responding. This is net zero
target coverage. This is of June
of last year. OK, I haven't had
time to update it on the, the
data are not uh uh very robust,
uh, we can say more about that
in a minute.
But in 20 between 21, 2021 and
2023.
Um, and these are nations over
here, uh, 76% of all countries
now have net zero targets and
increase in 2.5 years of 20%,
states and regions in 2.5 years
and increase of 99% cities 63%.
Companies 123%. This is
important because investor uh
companies are included in this
number. And so they've got net
zero targets that's going
To affect what they invest in.
And this is more recent. I was
able to find this, um, uh, as,
as of July of last year. I mean,
this year, uh, global net zero
coverage covers 88% of the
world's emissions, 93% of our
global GDP and 89% of the
world's populations. So the
world is responding, but I just
uh got a story last night that
investment, uh, this, this
quarter.
compared to investment in a
quarter 2 years ago, uh, in
clean energy technologies is
down by about uh uh 70%.
So, so the world's responding,
but investment is in clean
energy technologies is not so
much.
So, this is New Mexico's uh
energy profile and 7th in the
nation in power generation from
wind, 3rd in total energy
production.
Second in the nation in total
oil production. I was a little
surprised about that number when
I started this job. I knew we
had a lot of oil. I didn't know
we were #2, and 6 in the nation
in marketed natural gas
production, forty-eighth in the
nation in natural gas prices.
Thirty-seventh in the nation in
CO2 emissions, and this is
important, this is New Mexico's
price differences from the US
average, important for
investors and companies that
want to come here, our
electricity uh for the
industrial sector is uh almost
25% lower than the national
average.
And good for the cost of living,
our residential is uh about uh
14, 13% lower than the national
average. So that's a nice
profile of New Mexico, uh, some
good numbers, but it also shows
you that we have very
significant conventional energy
resources in New Mexico and
clean energy resources in New
Mexico.
I'm gonna switch gears here and
these are
Lifeline networks, uh, the
Department of Homeland Security
and what you're seeing here is
how they are connected to each
other.
And so, so oil is used for
shipping as a fuel for
generators. You can see them
coming up, but electricity is
connected to all of them. Some
of them are 3 or 4. Electricity
is connected to all of them, and
I forgot to uh uh communications
is connected to all of them. I
forgot to put finance on here
when I, I animated this, so
it's, it's awkward, OK, but it
is connected to all of them as
well. So communications,
electricity, and and.
finances are connected to all of
the Lifeline networks, but
electricity runs communications
and finance. So it is the Uber
infrastructure that uh is
running and everything these
days, huge implications, uh, for
security, quite frankly.
So, um, this, I just wanted to
give an example of what, uh, uh,
uh what uh PNM OK. This is their
existing and underdevelopment
resources, um, uh, it's your
generation portfolio and a
nameplate capacity and it's
interesting to me. This is
installed capacity by resource
type existing in
underdevelopment. So this is
real. It's not phony, you know,
pie in the sky numbers.
And look, so our PV investments
132% increase between 2023 and
2026 for projects in
development.
Energy storage of 483% increase.
That's hugely important. I'll
say why in a minute. Your wind,
natural gas and coal are flat
nuclear. I, I'm, that's, that's
got to be out of state, must be
Arizona or something, it's not
here, OK, but, and so this is
PNM New Mexico utility scale
generation in 2023, 41% wind,
another surprise to me, our
number one.
source of generation in New
Mexico is wind, 38% natural gas,
21% coal. So no solar utility
scale generation a year or so
ago, there's a lot being
installed.
But it's still 59% fossil
generation in 2023. So, so we've
got to manage that, we'll deal
with it.
Um, uh, uh, Troyer mentioned
that I uh worked, uh, at, was a
principal and founder of the
Energy Futures Initiative. We
did a study of California.
And it was a technology study,
not a policy study. What
technologies did they need to
meet their goals, their policy
goals, and the number, this is
actual data, not a modeling.
These are real numbers, every
day of the year in 2017, wind
and solar generation in
California.
The, the reddish so or the blue
is wind, the green numbers that
you see popping up there,
California in one year had 90
days with no wind.
California had 10 days in a row
with no wind, 7, I had many,
many periods with no wind.
And battery storage is 4 hours.
California's adding a lot of
battery storage, OK, it, it's
now in 2022, 15,400 megawatt
hours of battery storage, but
it's in-state generation was
203,000 gigawatt hours.
So, so, um, there are some
messages and and uh uh
technology limitations that come
out of this. I'll say a little
bit more about that in a in a
minute. Our conclusion was at
that point in time, it, they
need a fuel to back up their
wind and solar generation. You
can't do it with batteries.
Um, these are, uh, this is, it
was another surprise to me. I, I
love when I am researching New
Mexico and I find great things.
Top 10 states in install battery
capacity, New Mexico is number
8, OK? So, so it's not a lot
compared to California, but we
don't need nearly as much as
California, but still, we're one
of the top 10 in the country,
OK? And, and, uh, but there's
13,000 megawatts of instal.
battery capacity in those states
and the generation in those
states was 1.4 billion megawatt
hours. So, these are the top 10
states, those are the numbers.
Again,
Uh, the message is battery
storage at this point in time is
needed, it's inadequate for the
time being, we need a fuel that
fuel is natural gas right now in
the United States. The rest of
the world, it's cold.
Um, and, uh, the operational
battery storage in the US went
from virtually 0 gigawatts in
2016 to 15 gigawatts in 2023. So
we're working on it, OK, we got
a long way to go though, that's
a message.
OK, and this, this is, it makes
me crazy. I get up and I read uh
the paper all the time, when and
solar are cheaper than gas and
coal. OK, this is power
generation. This is, these are
EIA data and these are levelized
costs plants entering service in
2027, the red type is a total
system cost, LCOE uh or LCOS
dollars per megawatt hour.
Green is the levelized capital
cost.
And the turquoise or I'm sorry,
the navy is the capacity factor,
so coal, $82 a megawatt hour
capacity factor 85%, $52 a
megawatt um cap cost.
Uh, natural gas is $3940
basically, uh, a megawatt hour,
87% capacity factor, and $9.36
capital cost.
Advanced nuclear, 90% has the
highest capacity factor, but
high capital costs and and high
um uh LCOE geothermal is
inexpensive, we need to be
looking at geothermal a lot more
in the US. It has a 90% in in
New Mexico has a 90% capacity
factor 39 $40 a capital costs
are higher than gas, but still,
90% capacity factor.
OK, here are your onshore wind,
$40
per megawatt hour, 41% capacity
factor 2990 in capital cost,
offshore wind very expensive so
we standalone 29% capacity
factor, $36. OK, hydro,
you uh 54% capacity factor
expensive.
OK, and here are, this is your
cost of battery storage.
$128 a megawatt hour.
So I got up one morning, I read
in the New York Times Energy too
cheap to meter has long been a
sci-fi dream, but as the cost of
solar power plummets toward 0,
it might just become a reality.
OK, but shower standalone has a
29% capacity factor. So, to, to
reach the capacity factor of
gas, you need 3 times as much,
uh, capital cost, OK, cause you
need that much to meet that
capacity factor, and it doesn't
include the cost of storage,
which is $128. So it is, it is a
um a uh
Uh
We need to be realistic about
these costs, OK? And, and I know
that the experts here know this,
uh, uh, you're not hearing it
from the ideologues, however.
Um, and this is, this is another
uh look at uh information is is
saying the host would like me to
unmute.
OK, there we go, um, the, uh,
this is another uh look at cost.
And this is construction costs
for wind, solar, and natural gas
generation in 2022.
And it's not working.
Something's wrong.
I knew this would happen.
Mhm.
OK, there it goes. OK, so this
is capacity weighted average
utility scale construction
caused by technology, and here,
You see solar and has come down
dramatically since 2013. Look at
the drop in cost from, you know,
$3700 to 1,588. OK, and this is
per megawatt. Wind has come down
a little.
Natural gas has been flat, had a
little bump up and but has been
flat and but still it is 94%
less expensive than solar for
construction 77% less than wind.
So, any rate, um, that is takes
me to, and this is another
surprise and a very good story
for the state of New Mexico.
State actions on grid
modernization.
And this isn't down here, you
see the number of actions and
New Mexico is number 10 in the
country, in state actions on
grid modernization.
So, so we're getting a lot of
battery storage, we're working
very, very hard on grid
modernization and the
approximate number of New Mexico
actions by category of 7
policies, 5 utility business
model, uh, a rate reforms, 5
incentives, uh, for planning and
market access actions, 3
deployments, and 1 study slash
investigation. And what I'd like
to see here, there's a lot of
action when you look at both the
the right and the left here.
On
Market structure.
And, and that's what you're
seeing, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna
digress and tell a story about,
it'll show you how old I am too,
but while I was at DOE in the
Clinton administration.
In 1998, we had huge, huge
debates across the federal
government on the structure of
electricity markets.
And we finally reached agreement
after, you know, many
interagency meetings, Betsy
Moeller had worked at FERC. She
was a deputy secretary of
Energy.
We reached agreement as a
government on the, the new
structure of electricity markets
in 1998.
It wasn't codified until 2005,
but we reached agreement in
91998.
And it's codified. That's what
we're dealing with today. Think
what has changed since 1998.
From a technology perspective.
You saw the cost of solar, you
know, coming way down and, and
I uh think that it's really time
for us to revisit the structure
of our electricity markets at
the national level. And the
Federal Policy Act that governs
a lot of that was written in
1936. OK, it's time to modernize
how we approach our markets.
And this is just New Mexico's
responding and what we're doing,
this is just an example. This is
the uh the um South line
transmission project be
approximately 280 miles long,
connecting the electrical
systems of El Paso, Tucson
metropolitan areas, Viet New
Mexico and, and other
substations, and it will enable
substantial renewable
development opportunities, we
need to expedite this.
And so that's a huge issue, and
some of, some people in the
audience were with us in San
Diego last week, um, the, uh,
The, uh, and, and where it was
the repsy and weave Energy
board, the we board meeting and
they, there was a presentation
made on wet connected west
analysis, and this is some
information from that connected
West analysis. I thought you all
might be interested in.
And it's, it's a scenario the
anchor data set, and that's a
baseline that they use for their
uh connected west, uh 2032
baseline, which is a weird way
to look at a baseline, but 2032,
and this is their reference case
based off that 22, 2032
baseline.
And it's a representation of the
Western interconnection based on
the baseline and what you see
there is um New Mexico, uh, the,
um, this is, uh, generation
capacity gigawatts, New Mexico,
almost tripled its need for uh
generation, uh, by, by 2045. So,
so we need to expedite that too.
It's the entire fleet.
It is roughly 2 times the size
of the fork forecasted fleet and
its wind solar and geothermal
and storage that are the vast
number of additions.
This is from that same study,
and I just wanted to show you
the generator additions by type.
It's a size transmission lines,
and here's I focused in on New
Mexico, and it's a lot of wind
and solar, the, the, uh, the
yellow so or the blue is wind,
so you can see a lot of wind and
solar a little natural gas and a
lot of 345 kB lines, um, and a
lot of 500 KV's and a little
230 to 300. So that's what New
Mexico is going to be adding in
this analysis by 2045.
And the um and couple I wanna
drive some of those numbers to
ground.
I did a reference frame, so it's
not reality, but it's based on
reality, OK? And in, in EIA they
really need to update their
data. Everyone needs to update
their data. It took me a week to
find 160,000 miles of high
voltage transmission lines,
that's 2016. That was the most
current I could find. So I'm
using that for my reference
frame.
The Princeton Net Zero analysis,
I'm sure a lot of you have heard
of the Princeton net you
analysis, one of their
scenarios, says the US will need
a 75% increase in transmission
capacity by 2030 to meet net
zero targets. That's my tweets,
that's 5 years from now, OK? And
I assume 60% of that capacity is
achieved by adding new miles. I
assume 40% is technologies to
which we
have now to get more electricity
onto existing lines, OK, but 60%
is new miles.
60% of 96,000, that's 72,000
miles of new high voltage
transmission lines by 2030.
OK, there are 5 to 5.6 towers
per mile.
By 2030, we need 360,000
transmission towers.
OK, and those towers are made
with steel, aluminum, and
copper.
Among other materials, but so
are transmission lines, so our
wind turbines, so our cell
towers, so our EVs, so are EV
charging stations. That suggests
a lot of competition for those
supplies, in addition to a huge
demand just for the towers
themselves, but competition and
probably higher cost in order to
meet our net zero targets by
2030.
So
And there's another problem, and
I'm sure you all are very
familiar with this. It's
permitting times, and it's not
just, uh, it, it's, it's not
just conventional energy gas
transit pipelines. It's a clean
energy as well. This is a South
Fork wind permitting uh uh
timeline, and these are are are
occurring concurrently, so
that's number of days, but it's
showing you the number of
reviews.
That it, they went through to
get uh to, to get permitted, uh,
so the air permit 1,082 days,
um, at OCS Shelf Lands Act or 2
years, um, the clean Water Act
400 over a year, actual
construction times was 3 years.
It took 3.1 years to get to
construction and almost 5 years
from the start of the process to
the end of construction. So
that's for
A wind
Uh, uh, project, OK? And uh so
it's not, uh, uh, this is
natural gas pipelines. I wanted
to show you, this is 923 22, so
it's a couple of years old. He
completed gas pipeline and
transmission projects
approximately 5 years.
Or electricity transmission, the
average is 7 years.
OK, that takes us to 2032. We
need, we need to get net zero.
We need things by 2030. OK, so
we've got to do something about
this and um and love just uh
discuss and analyze policies
that might help expedite this.
Here's another issue.
OK, that we have with power
generation, and this is a life
cycle water consumption and
withdrawal by generation
technologies and it's gallons
per megawatt hour. Withdrawal
describes a total amount of
water withdrawn from a surface
water or groundwater consumption
is means that it's permanently
lost. When you look at these,
Um, sometimes there's not a lot
of distinction.
Uh, withdrawal and consumption
get very, very blurred, OK, but,
but it's huge issue for New
Mexico and what we are choosing,
and this is concentrated solar
that's a trough right above it
is is towers. It is the most
water intensive of any of the
generation technologies, nuclear
is very water intensive, that's
conventional nuclear gas
combined cycles are the lowest
except for offshore wind.
and solar PV.
We, we can't, let's not even
think about offshore wind in New
Mexico, obviously, and solar PV
is not going to provide you, um,
a large scale power generation.
So it's really the ones you're
looking at. So water consumption
and withdrawal is a huge uh
consideration that we need to be
making for uh um the uh various
generation technologies in the
state of New Mexico. Here's why,
and again today notwithstanding.
New Mexico, these are, uh, look
at the state of New Mexico,
there's nothing that's normal
and it goes from moderate
drought to severe drought to
extreme drought to exceptional
drought.
OK, the entire state. So, so,
um, that is, uh, that's only a
year old, OK? So, so, again,
water consumption, huge issue uh
in power generation and for a
lot of other things as well.
I'm gonna switch gears here and
I mentioned the lifeline
networks earlier, um, this is a
depiction of the changes that
have happened and one reason why
we need to revisit uh the
structure of our electricity
markets, you can tell I made
this myself because it says
Kinderine utility are there on
the box, OK, but um this is how
our system used to work. One way
flows of electricity from the
transmission system onto your
distribution system, 3 sets of
customers, industrial,
residential, commercial.
This is how it's working now.
OK, you've got many, many
different kinds of customers,
uh, electricity flowing all over
the place and flowing back onto
your transmission system.
From, from uh your distribution
system. It raises huge, huge
cybersecurity issues, and I know
that the utilities have been
working on this very, very
diligently. We cannot stop
because cybersecurity Russia
shut down 3 distribution systems
in Ukraine, uh uh uh with a
cyberattack, OK? So it can be
done and what I showed you
earlier also the Lifeline
networks all depend on
electricity.
So, so we we cannot lose sight
of this, and I think
It's another reason why we need
to revisit the structure of our
electricity markets because the
federal jurisdiction because of
the federal Power Act of 1936
basically stops at the state
line.
And this is a huge national
security issue.
OK, so the number one
responsibility of the federal
government to address with
electricity stops at the state
line.
And so something we need to look
at.
Um, uh, this is development and
deployment timelines for key
technologies, hugely important
for when we're talking like
2030, OK, and this is from
around the world, but in the
light blue is invention,
development and demonstration,
the yellow is market deployment
and commercialization, to
lithium-ion batteries took 27
years, and deployment and
deployment and commercialization
took longer than development.
Um, nuclear power, and this is
in France.
39 years wind in Denmark 40
years, um, combined cycles in
the UK 45.
So our PV in Germany 55, so when
I read, oh, we, so we developed
overnight. That's nonsense. And
I would tell you, do you was
started in 1978.
1978, Jimmy Carter started the
US Department of Energy, the
first investment he made in the
energy space was in solar.
OK, so costs have come way down
recently, but it's taken a long,
long time to get there. So let's
not tell fairy stories about
this. I'm gonna uh switch gears
here, um, and talk about
electricity. We're gonna
electrify everything. It's
inadequate for key industrial
processes. So, so, uh, steel
begins melting at 1,425 degrees
Fahrenheit, 734 degrees C.
need that for your wind turbines
and your cell towers, etc. etc.
A glass, OK, is 1700 degrees she
of forging steel, this is
forging uh 2000 °F.
And what you can get from
electricity, max is 400 degrees.
OK. Again, the message here is
in, in approximately 32% of key
industrial processes require
very high heat.
So the message again is, you
need a fuel. How we manage this
transition and the policies that
that do thoughtful sequencing,
understanding these data, um,
is, is hugely, hugely important,
and so we need to spend a lot of
time thinking about that. This
is a wind turbine blades.
They're made basically with oil,
they're made out of plastic,
and, and the third stage of
of a wind turbine blade requires
2800 °C.
OK, so we need all these wind
turbines and we need the towers
by 2030 to meet net zero
targets, and you need 2800 °C to
make those blades, and you need
oil right now.
So
Um, these are US industrial
uses, um, uh, uh.
Uh energy uses, OK, and what you
use in the various uh sectors,
and it's percentage, OK, by
industry, so food, approximately
50% of the energy to make the
food uh we need is natural gas,
that's the blue, OK, and the top
bar is 2019 in the bottom bars,
I mean at 2050.
And glass 87% is natural gas,
and again, that's the, it
doesn't include electricity. The
yellow in those bars is
electricity.
So this is just the fuel you
need either for the heat or as a
feedstock to make these uh to to
make these products. Aluminum
47%, chemicals, 45%, chemicals
are very, very important for
making those wind turbine
blades.
Um, iron and steel also very
important for that 30%, but iron
and steel, low gas, but the gray
there, that's cool.
So iron and steel were made
using uh 52 82% are either gas
or coal, OK, to make iron and
steel and the rest is
electricity, and then refining
again important for making those
wind turbine blades, uh, 30% um
natural gas and the brown there
is petroleum products.
So, so you need high heat, we're
using uh uh fossil fuels for the
industrial sector. We don't have
the technologies yet in order to
um in order to make uh these
products, and even where you can
electrify.
These are the cost natural gas
prices for industry, electricity
prices for industry worldwide
and in the United States, um,
the, uh, gas compared to the
electricity cost per unit of
energy, 5013% less expensive for
the gas than the electricity.
So even where you can electrify,
you could be rendering your
industrial products,
non-competitive with other
places in the world that are
using coal and don't care. OK,
and if, if we're not very
exceedingly careful and
conscious of these issues.
There's another issue and a
switch gears here, and I'm gonna
shut up here pretty soon. OK,
well, not that soon. OK, the um
the, uh, this, uh, I was invited
to testify before the Senate
Energy Committee, um, when uh
after Russia invaded Ukraine.
And Russia, these numbers are
stunning.
And it shows you the importance
of US exports. OK, gas exports.
Russia cut off 22 BCM of natural
gas to Europe.
The United States.
supplied them with 19 BCM in
that same period. Without US LNG
exports, uh, uh, Europe would
have frozen to death in the
dark, OK, in that winter. And
so, um, so it's hugely
important.
From the energy security
perspective of our allies that
we have these LNG exports.
Um, and this is another
important, this is LNG export
capacity growth.
OK, and it's supposed to grow by
over 350 BCM between 2022 and
2030.
And there that yellow is Russia.
But the blue on those bars,
that's the, that's North
America. That's all the US, OK,
so that's the LNG export
capacity, um, and we are
expanding our capacity in spite
of the pause that President
Biden put on LNG exports.
Um, our export capacity will
still double.
OK, because he, he, he didn't uh
put a pause on projects in
development.
So, so our export capacity is
still going to double. This is
LNG import capacity growth.
And what you see here, that blue
is South Asia, the dark blue,
but the green is china.
And the uh the uh let's see, the
green is china, so just China
and Southeast Asia alone, uh,
are huge amounts of uh building
import capacity. OK, so they're
banking on LNG and the uh Europe
is orange there, so after the
loss of Russian gas, they
started rapidly building LNG
import capacity in Europe, and
you can see what happened in
2020.
3 and 2024. And the import
capacity additions by 2030, 550
BCM export capacity additions,
350 BCM. You don't want to let
Russia fill that gap.
OK, they are desperately looking
for export markets for their
natural gas. They've lost Europe
and, and so they are very
anxious to find markets for
their gas. There are enormous,
as we all know, geopolitical
implications if we allow Russia
to fill that gap.
So, I'm gonna switch gears here
and uh talk about hydrogen. I've
talked about the need for a
fuel.
Hydrogen could be that fuel in
the future. It's 3 to 5 times
more expensive. It's just way
too expensive, um, but we need
to be investing time in it and,
and money in it, and we are, and
uh this is what New Mexico
brings to the table on hydrogen.
And one thing I think is very
important that we tend to forget
and are not too sensitive about,
uh, on many occasions, are the
jobs that are associated with
conventional oil and gas
production in New Mexico.
OK.
You can crosswalk those skill
sets to hydrogen, and we should
be developing training programs
for doing that, OK? And you need
pipelines, you need knowledge of
the subsurface. So there are a
lot of skill sets that we could
translate and crosswalk uh with
our workforce. OK, we have a
major oil gas, refined products,
CO2 pipelines across state.
Um, that provides opportunities
for retrofitting.
The top 3 greenhouse gas sources
in New Mexico, excluding
electricity generation, oil and
gas are refineries, cement. I
grew up near the, yeah, I went
to junior high school under that
cement plant in the Territ's
Canyon, uh, and mining, OK, so,
so we need to be mindful of
that. Uh, we can reduce those
emissions with uh hydrogen.
Innovation assets, we have
enormous innovation assets in
New Mexico. We've got 2 national
labs. We have significant
existing pipeline rights of way.
And, and the, the, um
Our sector, the power lines
actually own their rights of
way.
Uh, oil and gas are those at
least.
Um, but the power sector owns
those rights of ways and I've
looked to see if we could
expedite the sighting that I
showed earlier of of hydrogen
pipelines, working with the, I'm
sorry, the railroads on the
rights for forgive me for what I
said. It's railroads that own
the rights of way, and we have
railroads crisscrossing New
Mexico. Last time I looked, 55%
of freight rails revenues or
coal, and coal's going away. So
could the railroads
monetize those rights of way,
make some money that they need
that they're losing in coal by
sighting uh hydrogen pipelines.
You could you could cite CCS
pipelines on those rights of
ways as well. So, so that's
something, and we have a lot of
existing rights of way and um
and uh Sandia right now is
looking at potential for
blending and using those
existing rights of way, and we
have a lot of experience and
sensitivities to the native.
Populations and a history of uh
energy production, so we, we
know how to do that as well, so
that's important for hydrogen.
Um, this is the value of New
Mexico's produced water. The one
thing I would say going into
this is that
Hydrogen, green hydrogen.
New Mexico and its water issues,
OK? The drought and it's, it's,
uh, just, it's uh a desert, uh,
is an issue for green hydrogen.
OK, you need, it's all you need
huge amounts of water to make
green hydrogen.
Blue hydrogen, you need CCS, OK?
I know that the governor is
supporting both blue and green
hydrogen, as is the federal
government, um, quite frankly, I
think we need both and um but
New Mexico, because we have a
lot of produced water. It's uh
we are generating 4 million
barrels a day of produced water,
that's from oil and gas
production. Uh, most of that's
deposed through deep injection
up to 15,000.
acre feet of produced water is
available on an annual basis,
that's 3 times the amount of
water used by Albuquerque.
Treatment and reuse is an
avoided cost for oil and gas
companies could lower costs to
consumers and has also 2 billion
acre feet of brackish water, all
of this could be utilized to
make green hydrogen. We need the
technologies to clean it up and
desalinate it, but Saudi Arabia
is desalinating seawater uh to
to use for hydrogen production.
So it can be done, it's
expensive. We need to invest in
it.
to keep focusing on it. And uh
let me skip over that. OK.
The, uh, these are, I'm gonna
switch a little bit. He's, here
are our greenhouse gas
emissions. This was shocking to
me. Here, you've got buildings
uh twice as much from power
generation, a little more from
transportation, non-energy, and
this is uh a greenhouse gas
emissions, so that non-energy is
methane.
OK, methane from, from, uh,
landfills and agriculture in the
US methane emissions are 62%
compared to 22% methane
emissions from gas systems. OK,
so that's nationwide. I'm sure
it's higher in New Mexico
because we have so much gas
production, but that's what that
is. OK, so that's gonna be your
agriculture and your uh
landfills. Um, uh, that's from,
and this is from fuel combustion
from com uh production of oil
and gas.
And fugitive emissions from
production of oil and gas.
53% of New Mexico's greenhouse
gas emissions are from oil and
gas production.
OK, we need to capture those
emissions or or lower those
emissions, the industry is
looking to electrify their
operations in the Permian Basin,
but right now, as I've shown
you, we need the oil and gas.
We've got to figure out how to
get off of it, so we need to
lower those emissions for New
Mexico to meet its targets, and
uh so that's another area where
we need to invest.
Um, this is, uh, uh,
Uh, uh, related to what I just
uh discussed. This is an overlay
of two maps. The first map is
electricity region, so the green
states, California, Oregon,
Washington, that's an
electricity, electricity region,
and it's an overlay on top of
potential sequestration sites.
So oil and gas reservoirs are
the red saline formations, look
at New Mexico, large saline
formations. So that can be used
used for hydrogen to make, uh,
if you can clean it up, you can
use it for uh for green
hydrogen, but it's also a
potential sequestration site.
And, and I'm gonna show you the
uh these are sources of CO2
emissions around the country. So
first, I looked at gas and coal
generation, um, uh, percentages,
and this is, uh, this is, I
don't know, 2019, 2020, um, but
it was 69% in the mountain
region where uh New Mexico is
gas and coal, go around the
country. You get down here to
West, South Central.
71% gas and coal. They're the
highest, the lowest is Pacific
contiguous, 36%. That's because
they have so much glacier-fed
hydro. They're gonna have
problems with that in the
future, and California is using
a whole lot of New Mexico wind
generation. OK, so, so that just
shows you, and I've got
associated jobs with there in
our region, 458,000 jobs
associated with that gas and
coal generation.
So this is where your cement
plants are in the country.
This is where your steel plants
are.
These are where your refineries
are. These are the approximate
number of gas processing units
again, large sources of CO2
emissions and New Mexico, both
in the northwest and the
Southeast has a lot of gas
processing, and this is me
counting dots on a map, so it's,
that's why it's approximate, OK,
but that's what I could come up
with and approximate number of
chemical processing facilities.
This is where they all are.
OK, it took a long time to
animate this slide. So, um, but
Look at New Mexico here.
You've got hubs, basically.
Where hydrogen hubs, CCS hubs,
um, uh, both, you could do both.
You've gotta be very careful
about your subsurface managing
if you're gonna do CCS and
hydrogen, OK? But great
potential for New Mexico and
it's all, it's largely gas
processing. We have a couple of
cement plants, as I mentioned,
and a couple of refineries, but
that's where our CO2 emissions
from industrial sources are
coming from.
And you I also besides reading
that wind and solar are cheaper
than gas and coal. I also read
that there are no operational
CCS projects in the world, it
doesn't, you know, it doesn't,
we do, it's not tested. That's
nonsense as well. These are CCS
projects in 2022 operational
under construction advanced
development, early development,
you can see where they are, OK,
the US has the bulk of them,
operating has increased,
increased 58% in three years.
Advanced development 670% in
three years. So the world is
banking on CCS and I can tell
you I went to India with the
governor, 71% of India's power
generation is coal.
We need CCS, OK, but here are
the types, the operating uh
types by operating by type, and
I show you this because
13 of the 30 operating.
CCS projects in the world in
2022 were gas processing.
When you looked at New Mexico,
we had a lot of gas processing
facilities.
13 of 30 in 2022 operating CCS
facilities are, where our gas
processing. So we need to look
at that, we need to be thinking
about that in the Southeast and
the northeast.
And this is advanced development
by type, a lot of betting on
ethanol, OK, uh, hugely
important for antiseptics and a
whole range of reasons what we
use uh ethanol for, but here's
where you start seeing power
generation. There are no
operating, no, there are just a
couple of operating uh power
generation, but um, anyway, uh,
uh, generation, power
generation, ethanol, hydrogen is
now starting to come into play.
Camera to switch gears here
again and I said I was almost
done before. Now I really am.
OK, I'm gonna switch gears and
talk about the metals and
minerals we need for the clean
energy transition.
Also in very important for New
Mexico and I'll show you why in
a minute. The navy type on here,
so in the boxes, arsenic navy
type. It's on the USGS Critical
Minerals List 2022 red Type
highlights some of the key uses.
So we're uh in uh the left
column 100% import dependent and
the right column is 96 to 50%.
So we're 100% import dependent
um on arsenic, and we use it for
solar cells. Steel alloys 100%
import dependent, uh, which I
just showed you how much steel
we need by 2030 and uh etc. etc.
So this is giving you an idea
about our
The the value of these for the
clean energy transition, and
batteries and fuel cells, you
can see there are graphite, um,
uh, electricity and electricity
uh conductivity, silver, um, uh,
so cobalt, you all know that's
for batteries, OK? So those are
key metals and minerals that we
need for the clean energy
transition.
And this is where we're getting
them from, OK, the green type on
here denotes a 100% imported
supply, Navy is 80 to 96%
imported supply. So US is a 100%
import dependent on graphite,
we're getting 17% of that from
Canada. You go around the world,
Mexico, providing us with a lot
of metals and minerals we need
to be working things with them.
Brazil, a lot of metals and
minerals go around the world.
I'm gonna skip.
over here quickly.
Look at China.
OK, look at that. 100% import
dependent.
For, I don't know, 12.
Metals and minerals, we are
getting it from China. I'm
surprised at how we all are
treating, how we treat them, and
they treat us because we're huge
customers.
And so, um, so, but it just
shows you some of the
geopolitical implications of
what's going on with China right
now. We need to be very
thoughtful about this, and I'd
say one other thing from a
climate perspective, these are
shipped around the world. Global
shipping is only 3%.
Of a mission, total emissions,
but in a net zero world, 3% is a
lot.
So we're shipping this around
the world too, and adding
emissions as we do that.
Um, I was a little surprised by
how
How, uh how much Europe has and
is sending to the US as well.
Um, we ought to be working with
them uh on uh on mining issues
responsible mining issues, and
they need our natural gas. So
there's an, there's an
opportunity for a deal there.
Copper is not on the USGS list.
It's on the DOE 18 list. I was
just back in from Silver City a
couple of days ago, toured huge
copper mines, uh, and, and
remediation there. I don't think
everyone should do that. You
cannot believe the extensive,
the size of those operations,
and the energy intensity of
those operations, OK, but this
is what we need copper for.
This copper content by vehicle
type, internal combustion engine
48 pounds and electric vehicle
uses 183 pounds of copper per
vehicle.
So, so it's, it's, it's um uh
shows you how important copper
is for electrification.
And this is green
electrification, copper demand
by region in 2020, the entire
global copper demand for for
renewables, 1000 kilotons in
2030, China is going to be 1400
alone, EU 11,000 US 700 and then
the rest of the world there.
What that has done is driven up
the price of copper in 4 years
doubled.
OK, competition for copper is
huge, OK, and I did, this is
another EIA there's IEA sorry,
their sustainable development
scenario, what we need to meet
net zero by 2070, I think is
sustainable development.
They estimate we need um 140
million EVs on the road in the
world, um, uh, by 2030, that is
11.6 million metric tons of
copper in 2020, the entire world
produced 20 million metric tons
of copper.
OK, so huge demand and a huge
percentage of that demand right
now could be for um for EVs
alone, and in the US we use
copper for building
construction, 43% of our copper,
electrical and electronic
components, 21%, etc. etc. etc.
So copper is hugely important
when I toured the copper mines,
they want to be on the USGS
critical list. I it's, there are
multiple sources, OK, and I
think that it's, it's, uh, it's
not constrained, but the demand
is huge. I think it should be on
a critical list. And this is why
this is so important for New
Mexico.
This is New Mexico Metals,
minerals on which the US is 75%
to 100% import dependent.
The country of suppliers of US
market percent total imports
from that country.
And, and so you see, I went
through and compared the lists,
and these are all on the USGS
critical list, and these have
been found and or produced in
New Mexico, so there are 14 of
them, again, they're all on the
USGS critical list, and
antimony, which we use to make
glass, which you need for solar
panels, 63% is from China.
Manganese for steel production,
69% is from Gabon.
Rare earths 100% import
dependent and 80% of those are
from China.
So, if uh the mining industry
has a well-deserved horrible
reputation. OK, we need to
develop a, an i've been
advocating developing a
lead-like standard for mines.
Um, we need to do that. We need
these metals and minerals. Um,
it will be commerce. You won't
be shipping them around the
world. They're huge energy
security implications, and we
need them for clean, the clean
energy transition. So hugely
important.
And this is in closing, um, when
I was at the Department of
Energy, President Obama.
Via executive order established
a quadrennial energy review.
And it was affordable, clean,
and secure energy and energy
services are essential to help
the federal government better
meet this responsibility. I am
directing the undertaking of a
QER, we called it.
And he that order went to 22
agencies of the federal
government, which were all
deemed to have interest
inequities in the future of
energy and the clean energy
transition.
So 22 agencies, but my office
DOE uh Secretary Moniz led the
effort in my office did the
analysis, the writing, and the
management, the coordination,
etc. etc.
So, um, the, the important point
coming out of that, we did
installments.
Because we didn't want 1 600
page book no one read, so we
decided to do installments. The
first one was energy
infrastructure.
The second one was electricity.
And then we uh then Trump won,
and we would have continued it,
I think, had he not won, but he
discontinued it and uh we were
going to do a supply chains
next, I just showed you supply
chain issues, um, and, uh, but
we did an analysis of the
implementation of the
recommendations in the first
installment, 36% of them were
enacted into law or executive
policy by a Republican
Republican Congress. So we had
workshops around the country. We
had workshops in Mexico and
Canada, uh, very well analyzed
very well vetted and a lot of
success in policies for the
clean energy transition. I think
we need to do something like
that for New Mexico.
And so I'm working with the
governor's office and working
with my staff and I would call
this New Mexico's energy
trilemma.
And I've just gone through a
whole bunch of issues on all of
these, ensuring energy system
security, reliability and
resilience, enabling a clean
energy of future, maximizing uh
economic value, affordability,
OK, showed you all the price
information. So that could, that
could help frame New Mexico's
comprehensive clean energy
transition strategy, there are a
lot of cross-cutting issues and
innovation, infrastructure,
investment incentives.
inclusion, you can tell I like
cute stuff, OK, all my eye
words, OK. And uh this, I'll
show you what's really cute
here. OK, so these are, these
are the areas of analytical
folk, you know, the analytical
structure, I would look at all
of these with climate change,
clean energy, collaboration,
conservation, all seas.
Affordability, etc.
acceleration, adaptation,
accessibility, allocation of
resources, all ages reductions,
reliability, resilience.
purposing recycling, retraining,
etc. etc.
Sequencing supply chains,
siding, safeguards,
standardization, services, all
S's and all these
decarbonization technologies
design of markets, deployment,
diversification, disaster,
recovery. So those are all
these, so that's cars, OK, and
uh so I got 5 eyes and I've got
cards, OK, as how we're gonna
what how and what we're gonna
analyze and um and I think it's
hugely important. I said at the
beginning, New Mexico is, has
Huge conventional and clean
energy resources. It has uh
energy transition targets. It
has significant emissions from
oil and gas production. Um, a
lot of jobs associated with
that, but we are transitioning
to clean energy technologies we
have huge innovation resources
are national labs, our
universities. I'm speaking at
New Mexico Tech on Friday, um,
and so we've got huge resources,
I think we can.
lead the country and lead the
world, if we can demonstrate the
thoughtful sequenced policies
that we need to accommodate all
the different uh information
requirements.
Uh, assets, incentives, needs
that I showed you, uh, while,
uh, transitioning to clean
energy and uh and I hope to uh
set us up for doing that in the
next couple of years. So thank
you all very much.
What time is it? We have time?
Recording stop. No, we actually
just hit our hour mark.
So, um, OK,
well timed, well 60 minutes on
the mark. OK, great. Thank you.
Please join me once again for
thanking the secretary.
So we're gonna do a quick
transition, um, talking about co
op snacks, we'll have our
presenters come up and we'll get
started shortly.
2-minute warning.
Just if you could take your
seats, please.
If we could take our seats
please, so we can get started
with the next panel.
All right. We're gonna get
started with our next
presentation
about which if you're anything
like me, co-ops are always a
little bit of a mystery, so I'm
excited to shed some light on
this. Our presenters are, uh,
start with Dan Najar, who is a
graduate of the University of
New Mexico and the Georgetown
University Law Center, a Santa
Fe native, he's been practicing
law in the state for more than
40 years, or excuse me, for the
past 40 years, I don't wanna
give you too many years.
with he's, he's made an emphasis
on administrative and regulatory
law and government relations.
Throughout his career, he's
represented gas and electric
investor owned utilities, both
in New Mexico and at the federal
level, municipal utilities and
for the past 22 years, rural
electric distribution
cooperatives.
Our other presenter is Shari
Swanson, who joined the New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperatives as the CEO in
November of 2022. Prior to this
position, she was the vice
president of client services at
Hometown Connections Inc.
She has also served as the chief
risk and compliance officer at
Lee County Electric Cooperative
in North Fort Myers, Florida,
and held the position held the
positions of advanced utilities
technology manager and
compliance and risk mitigation
manager at Colorado Springs
Utilities for 13 years. She has
a jurist master's from FSU
College of Law.
Thank you for being here today.
Good morning everybody. Um,
thank you.
Um, I also want to let you know
that during this presentation,
um, we are going to encourage
you if you have questions, you
can interrupt us if you would
like. Um, so that we can take
questions as we go along. Today
we're going to talk about
nonprofit power and
understanding New Mexico's role
electric cooperatives. Um, I'll
be talking to you about some
operational issues and how uh we
are set up as electric
cooperatives and Dan will be
discussing some regulatory um
Issues and regulatory compliance
as we move forward.
So what is an electric
cooperative. This is a mystery
to, to some people. We are
nonprofit. A lot of you may be
familiar with PNM or um Xcel
Energy and the co-ops cover
about 80% of New Mexico in the
rural areas. Uh, we are a
nonprofit, again, we are member
owned and member governed
utilities, meaning our
membership are the people who
the communities who own us, uh,
we also
are governed by them. Um, we
have an elected board of
directors that are elected by
the owners or member owners, and
we also provide electricity to
our members in rural and
underserved areas where investor
owned utilities do not operate.
Each member does have an equal
say in the co op's decisions,
and again, they each, each board
um director is elected by their
representatives.
So we do operate under 7
cooperative principles, and I
will just give you some
statistics that some of you may
not know, but over uh we cover
about 52% of the United States'
elector cooperatives do. There
are 900 cooperatives across the
US both generation and
transmission and distribution
cooperatives. The co-ops here in
New Mexico are distribution
cooperatives, meaning that they
don't generate or transmit in
some cases, some do own some
transmission lines, but
primarily, um, we get from our
co-ops, we have Western farmers
out of Oklahoma, 4 of our
cooperatives that are members of
New Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperatives are served by them,
and then tri-state, uh, in
Denver, also supplies 11 of our
cooperative members, um, from
New Mexico or into New Mexico.
It's from our seven cooperative
principles, we have open and
voluntary membership, meaning
anyone who is within that area,
um, and gets supplied, uh,
electricity from our
cooperatives can be a member. We
have Democratic member control,
as I just said, meaning that our
board of directors are elected
and those boards of directors
set um all of our policies and
um provide direction and they
have fiscal responsibility uh
for our electric.
cooperatives, members economic
participation, same thing, we
make sure that everything is
equitable. We try to keep
everything affordable, reliable
for all of our members and they
are the ones who tell the
electric cooperatives what they
can and cannot do. We have
autonomy and independence,
meaning that those we are not
governed by anyone else other
than our board of directors, and
we are partially regulated here
by the regulatory commission.
Education, training and
information. We make sure that
we are educating our employees,
boards of directors, or CEOs,
and also communicating out um to
the general public about what
our policies are and how we are
operating. We also have
cooperation amongst
cooperatives. So anytime we have
a wildfires anytime we have
hurricanes in other parts of the
country, tornadoes, we respond,
um, to those, um,
utilities, those cooperatives,
we also help each other here
locally and we have mutual aid
agreements amongst all of the
co-ops within New Mexico.
And we also have concern for
community, which means that we
are involved in any piece of our
community, meaning economic
development, we want to support
economic development, and we
also, all of our employees are
from those communities that they
serve.
So power delivery, um, to
generate, generate in our G&Ts,
which is generation and
transmission, they generate and
purchase energy for our
distribution cooperatives that
are here in New Mexico. Uh, they
also own the transmission lines
delivering electricity to
distribution cooperatives
through long-term power
contracts, and if you take a
look at the um picture here, the
infographic. This shows you how
the power plant generates the
electricity or they
purchase that electricity, the
transformers stepped that down
to the voltage for transmission
and then the transmission lines
are carrying that long distances
to get out to the rural
cooperatives, um, and then the
transformers that you see out on
those poles, they stepped those
down again so that they can go
into the houses without blowing
up meters, which is our goal is
for that not to happen. Um, we
work with, they also work with
the
distribution cooperatives to
obtain local renewable energy
mix, um, and that includes
behind the meter energy and
that's generated by cooperative
members such as solar.
And then we own the
infrastructure that delivers
power to all the members out in
the rural communities.
This is just some of our
history um in 1844, believe it
or not, the cooperative
principles established, were
established in England, um, in
1935, President Franklin
Roosevelt created the role
electrification Act, REA, and
that was by executive order.
And then, uh, in 1944 here in
New Mexico, our New Mexico rural
Electric Cooperative Association
was formed after we had formed
in 1937 our first rural Electric
Cooperative, which was Central
Valley.
And that was on June 23rd of
1937.
So in 2024, again, that's 89
years after the creation of the
rural electrification.
Um
Our co op members, uh, are in 48
states and we serve an estimated
42 million people across the US.
So here are the stats that I was
talking about earlier, uh, the
cooperatives power, I guess it's
56. I was thinking it's 52, it's
56% of the American landscape
and here in New Mexico, again,
it's about 80% and 90s we serve
in 92% of persistent poverty
counties nationwide.
So here's a map of where we're
located, uh, within New Mexico
and then we have 3 that come
across our lines from Texas and
Arizona, Navipache, Duncan
Valley, and Rio Grande that are
in yellow.
All of the light blue are served
by Tri-State.
Kit Carson is not a member of
our association, but they are
one of the 16 cooperatives here
in New Mexico and then farmers,
Roosevelt, Central Valley, and
Lee County that you see in that
kind of blue-green are served by
Western farmers, um, generation
and transmission.
So we serve close to 450,000 New
Mexico residents. We have 61,000
miles of wine that we operate
across New Mexico and we
distribute over 5 million
megawatt hours of electricity
every year.
Our service areas are in 32 out
of the 33 New Mexico counties
and we average about 4 m per
mile. So we're P&M um may have
around 50 or so, um, we have on
an average of 4, and we have
some uh cooperatives that have
less than one customer per mile.
We
Go ahead.
OK.
So we provide over
Uh, 1100 jobs across New Mexico
and that is with our generation
and transmission plants as well
as our distribution
cooperatives.
And then 22% of population and
poverty compared to the 17% for
New Mexico and 13%.
Or the US.
For long-term electrification
planning, this is how, uh, that
works for us. We have 4 year and
long-range work plans that we
plan for both for systems
improvements and new
construction. We do have
partnerships with the DOT,
forestry, energy, um,
environmental broadband rural
telecommunications, and then the
other utilities in both uh
federal and state agencies. We
also ensure alignment with state
initiatives and
collaborate to secure funding
and that could be uh grants in
particular to help offset some
of the costs for our rural
members.
And then our plant acceleration
for those federal and state
applications.
Any of the funds that we acquire
help us get there faster, uh,
again, because we do serve uh
the poverty uh stricken areas
within the New Mexico primarily,
um, we try to offset that, as I
said with any sort of funding
that's available.
Some of our current initiatives
are expanding current solar
generation and adding battery
storage or rebuilding
transmission lines to a higher
voltage. We're adding
transmission lines to tie into
substations or deploying new
technology where possible,
replacing wood poles with steel
poles, and this helps us with
wildfire mitigation and
planning, and then adding pools
to reduce span to increase
reliability. Sometimes we have
miles of span in between poles,
and then we're
and upgrading substations as we
go along.
This is a snapshot of our
current um mix for the New
Mexico energy transition. You
take a look there at Tri-State
generation that illustrates
where we're at in this
transition transition, we are
with our renewables at about 33%
uh with tri-state in particular,
and then on the Western farmer
side, we're, we have wind at 37%
and this is um for the
West Power pool. This is their
generation mix.
As well, um, which is where
we're primarily getting all of
our purchasing powers through
SPP.
And then coops, co-ops have
exceeded the current ETA
requirement of 25% by 2024, um,
with power provided by the GNTs
that include local utility solar
and behind the meter generation.
And I'm gonna let Dan talk about
some of the challenges that we
currently have with
cooperatives.
Good morning. I was told I'm
going to, yes, we have a
question already.
You bet.
We drove.
I
So it's, it, it counts as under
the renewables of 33%.
In the bolt there.
So this
You're welcome.
Now
We are, we are on track and then
again, I think the next
threshold that they're trying to
meet is 50%.
Good morning. Uh, I am in charge
of the complaining and whining
portion of our presentation, so
try not to do too much of that
to this re, yeah. I, I want to
show this because I think it
highlights some of the points
you made. Those are the number
of members per mile of line that
we have.
And, and the reason I think it's
important is because a mile of
line costs the same to a co op
as it does to P&M or SPS or
anybody else. We just have a
heck of a lot fewer people
paying for it. The other thing
is because of where we operate.
A mile of line could cost a lot
more than it would to put it in
Albuquerque.
go back to this one. So I'd like
to talk about a few of the major
issues that we have, geographic
we can split to next geographic
is a major one because of the
vast regions we serve, because
there's so few customers in them
and because of our limited
staffing, we, we have a hard
time managing those systems,
especially when you add in
weather hazards.
And it's become all too apparent
in recent years, the Mora fires
at Hermit's peak wiped out 8% of
that co op's revenue sources.
They haven't come back yet,
because we're a nonprofit.
When we lose 8% of our revenue
stream, we either have to have
an emergency rate case. There's
no other place to recover the
money from, and, and we are
still now at the mercy of FEMA,
which is hopefully accelerated
finally, but you have a co op,
which had borrowed millions of
dollars based on an assumed
revenue stream that disappeared
overnight.
And, and that is no different
than what they are facing at
Otero County as a result of this
summer's fires are Riodoso area,
and it's no different than what
Hamus went through with the lus
conscious fire several years
ago. It's a dilemma, it's gonna
be there if we're nonprofits.
The weather hazards are another
dilemma for us which because of
the areas we work in, uh,
lightning strikes, take out
poles all the time, but in
addition to the wildfires, wind
events occur. We try to manage
it, but it is again one of the
biggest challenges we have
moving forward into modernizing
the grid.
I thought I saw a question
there.
And right away access is, is
something we don't often talk
about, but increasingly
difficult because of the areas
of the state that we operate in,
we have to get lots of ride away
access. That's not just tribal
access, but it includes large
ranches, some people, many
people are most willing to give
us free access across their
lands in return for getting
electric service. A lot of
people, especially if they're
not taking electric service for
us, one to charge different
rates. It got a lot of
publicity.
In the late teens in terms of
rates paid to tribal entities,
but it's true of ranchers as
well.
can go to the next one. Limited
resources, uh, we will talk a
lot about this, and I urge any
questions you have, our
staffing.
is the major challenge that
every co op faces. It's, it's
not just staffing and the
professional categories, but as
our commissioners know and
they've been very understanding
of the situation when it comes
to professional staff, we can't
attract them, attracting an
engineer or an accountant to
Clayton or to Demming or or to
Springer is a challenge, and
basically we're at the mercy of
trying to get local kids, went
off to school and want to move
back home, or we get retirees
who are retired to those.
Communities I want a second.
Career.
But it remains, it's even a
challenge for us when we come
down to staffing at the front
desk.
Whether you're talking about the
billing department, customer
relations, we have co-ops. We
had one coop earlier this year,
dropped to 13 employees, 1212
employees, because two linemen
left.
And that is another part of it,
which is some of our trained
personnel, the line crews. When
you're dealing with the vast
areas that we deal with, you
can't afford to lose linemen,
and we lose them all the time
for a lot of reasons. One, they
can get offered better salaries
at larger utilities.
Another one is they choose to no
longer live in the rural areas.
It's, it's a challenge with our
linemen on call in some of these
areas, they're out in the middle
of the night often, particularly
during bad weather events, and
at times they just would rather
go somewhere else, replacing
them becomes a major challenge
we have to outsource it.
And, and, yes, the question.
I
The administrative staff is
probably 25% or less.
It's typically, um, everything
that we can do to keep the
lights on, it's primarily going
to be alignment and operations
versus administrative staff.
Yeah, we,
what we've done and and the
commission urged us to do this
and has been, we're appreciative
of it is we're trying to
collaborate as a group to hire
consulting engineers.
So, and that helps us, but the
interesting thing there, which
we often don't forget, is when
you bring in a consulting
engineer to represent 15 co-ops
looking at the map that Cherie
showed you already. Our co-ops
are not uniform. They're very
diverse. They're very diverse
geographically. They're very
diverse ethnically. The
demographics are demographics
are very different and so
bringing in engineer in which we
did, doesn't it helps us, but it
doesn't surefire solve the
problem.
Because that engineer has to
become familiar with 15
distinct, and I say 15 only
because Kit Carson was not a
part of that effort, but 15
distinct cooperatives, and that
that becomes an issue.
Accounting is another issue for
us, we borrow money from
primarily 3 sources, all federal
agencies.
All of them require a good
amount of reporting and record
keeping. So we have to have a
staff person available just to
monitor compliance with these
large loans that we get
primarily from the RUS.
And until the legislature
changed the law several years
ago. Every time a co op borrowed
money from an RUS, we have to
come to the commission and go
through a security filing, even
though it was largely
duplicative of what we have to
go through just to get the money
in the first place from the RUS.
That was a major help for us
removing that requirement.
Those, those co-ops, and there's
3 that do not borrow money from
the RUS, but they go to some of
the other two sources still have
to come in and file a securities
case with the commission to get
permission to go ahead and
borrow the money.
Technology and supplies are two
other challenges for us in the
limited resources area, post
COVID, as most utilities know,
supplies were in short demand
large back orders, and frankly
our people are not ordering the
quantities that are going to get
them to the front of the queue.
We, we have tried now grouping
together in in various clumps of
corpse to ordered poles and
other supplies as a group so
that we can stockpile them, and
that may be the only way we can
go forward.
Into the future but absent some
other solution there, we're
gonna always be waiting near the
bottom of the list for a lot of
those supplies. Moreover, the
cost of those supplies, like
everything else has gone through
the roof and just things like
bucket trucks have doubled and
tripled in cost to us,
transformers, major, major
issues for us.
Technology, I, I'm proud to say
that I think in some areas the
co-ops are actually leading the
way into Mexico when it comes to
smart meters, we're way ahead of
the curve. We've put our meters
in, uh, for most co-ops have
already installed those meters.
Part of it is to give us credit.
Part of it is out of necessity.
We could not have people running
out doing meter reading over 500
miles of territory with maybe
400 or 4000 customers in that
area. It was, it was cost
prohibitive, but that has helped
us and that has helped us
identify problems on our system
because with the smart meters
has come software technology
that's put us ahead of the game.
But in other areas, we're still
lagging far behind. And we've
just been through this, and
we're going to be going through
it uh with the commission and
the commission staff on the
interconnection rules, because
if and when those rare cases
occur where a large
interconnection customer comes
to our co-ops and wants to
interconnect at a relatively
remote part of our of our
system. We don't have the
technology right now to know
what the impacts would be.
We would be reaching out to
consultants and others to get
that kind of detail and
information available to us, and
we are very grateful for the
action taken by the commission
this week to look forward
towards having a separate rule
for cooperatives and are eager
to work with them on all of
that.
We have. Other airs, what's the
next one? regulatory, a partly
have discussed this already. I
don't mind admitting that
historically a lot of co-ops
took the Don't Ask, Don't tell
approach to compliance with
regulations. We, we knew we
weren't in compliance, we just
didn't mention it, and we
prepared to ask for forgiveness
at the time when it came. We're
trying to change that. We've
been working hard to change
that, and now,
The staff of the co-ops has been
directed to identify problems
non-compliance problems, failure
to report outages, similar
things, and to identify him for
commission staff and try to work
ahead of time to figure out how
we can bring ourselves into
compliance with these issues,
but it, it remains a challenge
because sometimes we don't know
what we don't know.
I've, I'd have to talk to
several co-ops and ask them
about compliance with the rule
that I find out their local
staff wasn't even aware existed.
And, and that again comes down
to the issue of of a lack of
staff.
Because in the midst of all the
other staffing issues we have,
what we don't have, with the
exception of 3 co-ops that I can
think of. We don't have the
luxury of having a person
assigned to regulatory
compliance.
So often and it's not a joke,
the receptionist at the front
desk is not only customer
relations, she's regulatory
compliance, and she may be in
charge of calling in outages.
Because when you're talking 15
or 12 or 18 employees, there's
no way we can specialize.
So, so regulatory compliance is
now and I think for the
foreseeable future will be a
major challenge for us, but
we're trying to address it. And
I'm happy to say that we've had
great, great feedback from the
staff who's helping us to
address it and, and been willing
to come sit down in countless
meetings with our people to
explain how the processes are
supposed to work.
Power supply, yes, ma'am.
That's a great question, and,
and two co-ops that I know of,
and I can't speak for all of
them, 2 co-ops have now started
engaging uh employees who are
working remotely.
A lot of times though, remote
work still has to be within the
service territory, but it could
be in a more desirable part of
the service territory for that
employee. It may be where their
family lives. I mean, we're not
with the exception of a couple
of co-ops, we're talking
covering hundreds and hundreds
of miles of territory, so while
there aren't many large
communities in co op country,
there are still some that have
reasonable sized communities
where a young person might want
to raise his family and, and
That's an issue for us. I mean,
when we go out to recruit
people, and they ask the
questions about schooling and
education. It's often hard to
answer. Some of them we have
Riodos so we can offer them
Riidoso. You can tell Skip
Carson has tows, but a lot of
them aren't interested in the
Springer school system or the
Clayton school system or or they
want to be closer to a big city.
So that becomes an issue. I, I
want to touch on one other thing
and see if we have more
questions. It's uh power supply
contracts.
A lot of the issues that come
up, come from a lack of
appreciation that all the
co-ops, with the exception of
Kit Carson, are locked into very
long term power supply
arrangements with one of the
G&Ts, which makes it hard for
the co-ops to dictate to the GMT
what will happen. So when we get
an ETA requirement for a certain
supply mix. We can't tell.
Tri-state, we can't tell Western
farmers what the supply mix has
been. They, on the other hand,
have been great.
About working with us to satisfy
New Mexico's rules. And so I'm
not so worried about that going
forward, but periodically or
again, I'll use the
interconnection rule as an
example.
Even if we do an interconnection
study on our system to decide
whether somebody can
interconnect. Our requirements
of our agreements with Western
farmers and tri-state required
them to then do an
interconnection study for the
system, and in the case of the
Western farmers' crops, they
then have to go to the SPP.
So there's a lot of upstream.
Considerations that we have to
make as co-ops because of the
arrangements we have with these
large power supply agreements.
I would add though that it's
easy, and I was one of the
people that challenged the
tri-state agreement in the
mid-teens to the it's easy to
criticize him now, but in 1999,
planesle was going bankrupt.
And 12 co-ops in this state were
desperately trying to figure out
how they were going to survive.
Agreements were reached with
Tri-State at the time. Now we're
24 years later, and it's lots of
people have attacked those
agreements and I, I understand
concerns about him, but you have
to put it in his historic
perspective, uh, the cops, I'm
not sure how many could have
survived without the agreement
that was done with Tri-State,
and similarly on the east side,
those coops moved from SPS.
as a power supplier, and, and
now they're a part of Western
farmers.
And I know Mike and SPS are
happy that we're no longer part
of SPS because we were
intervening in all their cases
on a regular basis, but uh, but
it's worked out for us, but yes,
there's positives and negatives
that come with long-term power
supply agreements.
And I thought of one last pomp
and I want to make governance,
uh, we tout ourselves we're
democratically governed,
democratically elected, um,
co-ops.
But we are also multi-million
dollar companies.
And we're run by boards of
directors who recruit the best
people we can get to be CEOs,
but still were run by boards of
directors. It becomes
A challenge to recruit boards of
directors. Not everybody wants
to take the responsibility of
making these decisions that to
run a utility, and I'll tell you
where it's come in most often in
my experience, and it's hurt us.
Our boards of directors are
almost all, all of them, I
shouldn't say almost every one
of them is a residential
consumer of the talk.
So we run into the problem when
it comes to rate relief that
we're asking 8 or 9 people to
increase their rates and their
neighbors' rates or business
reasons related to a cough, and
that's not very easy for them,
and what you end up happening,
and I've been through this
recently with one co op. We've
had multiple cost of service
studies that said you need to
increase your rates
significantly now, and the board
has not been able to do that.
When those things occur, you end
up in situations like we've had
in the last couple of years with
some cops where they've gone 14
years without a rate increase.
Now they come in for an 18% rate
increase, which in co op world
is humongous, and that's the
kind of rate shock that we all
struggle with on a regular
basis. So yes.
Having the democratically
elected boards is, is a good
thing for us because we have
instant feedback, but on the
other hand, it is a challenge
for the people that choose to
serve on these boards to make
the right decisions sometimes
when it comes to the cost
effectiveness of our current
rates.
So.
I can take a break and breathe
and we can see if there's more
questions. Yes, we have a
commission commissioner Ellison.
thank you.
Coroelectric had a, a major
transformer failure.
Last year
Customs
Without power for several days
for that transformer and
Nebraska, uh.
What sort of mutual do your
members have.
So, when I was talking about
earlier, the cooperative among
the cooperation amongst
cooperatives, one of the seven
principles, we have the ability
to contact any of our co-ops
across the country. Um, and we
also work through our NRECA
which is the National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association
to try to uh secure whatever we
need when it comes to supplies.
One of the things um that we've
had a huge issue with now is
Transformers and some of you may
know this have been their
backorder and it's taking about
3 years right now, and they've
also are typically made in other
countries. Um, so that's one of
the initiatives that we have now
to have transformers made here
in the US, but we do have the
ability to go to other
cooperatives across the country.
Our, our supply chain
essentially goes to hell after
every hurricane season in the
southeast because supplies that
we may have been expecting to
get redirected to restore power
to the vast areas in the
southeast that are without power
as a result of the hurricanes
and and that's, I don't know how
we address that on an annual
basis, but I do know several of
the co-ops are now trying to
stockpile at least smaller
transformers, so they can share
them amongst themselves.
Sure
I'm just curious how many people
in the room are members of New
Mexico cooperatives, if any.
To, yeah, that's, and and that
is, you know, another issue that
we always run. People just don't
understand.
Uh, what's, what's happening out
there in rural New Mexico, you
know, that is the other issue we
are, we are losing people in
rural New Mexico.
So we are bringing in
infrastructure in 2024 on the
assumption that we're serving a
certain load and then in 2026,
that load could be decreased
because people are just moving
out of the rural areas and into
the cities, but it ends up being
stranded investment for us.
I'll, I'll just give you some
examples real quick of some of
the upcoming renewable projects
uh that are being worked on now
and this is also with Arizona
G&Ts because uh some of our
associate member cooperatives,
Duncan Valley Navipache, uh,
belonged to our Arizona G&T, um,
he's not a member of ours yet,
but, but will be, but they do
all have numerous wind, solar,
and storage projects plan,
Arizona GNT and Tri-State have
also recently been awarded
federal.
Um,
so they also have some storage
projects planned and um and
funded and they will be coming
online in the next few years,
keeping well ahead of our ETA
and then locally, some of the
things that are happening,
Roosevelt County Electric has a
9 megawatt solar project in the
works now, uh, Southwestern
Electric out in Clayton is
looking at 8 megawatt solar
project and studying how uh to
be able to utilize power locally
from the wind farm that
will be constructed within New
Mexico.
And as far as more funding
becomes available, we're
preparing for expanding solar
and storage statewide.
Yes, Nancy, what are your
larger
It's, I can't give you the exact
loads. I can get it to you, but
it's, it's a little bit uh
skewed, which sold Haus Electric
is the largest co op in the
state, followed by Kit Carson in
terms of pure members. So they
have large loads, but, but not
surprisingly, some of the
largest load co-ops are some of
the smallest co-ops in the
state, Central Valley and
Artesia, Lee County and
Lovington, Springer Electric
Cooperative and Southwestern
Electric in Clayton. Those 4
be near the bottom in terms of
total members, but they're
definitely in the upper half in
terms of loads because the oil
and gas primarily, um, so that's
that, that would be the makeup
there.
But we range from 30,000
customers at the largest co-ops
to under 1000 at the smallest.
I actually have two questions if
I may. So the first, uh, because
we have a lot of new employees
at the PRC. Cheri, you mentioned
that co ops, I think you used
the word partially regulated.
When do you interact with, with
our PRC.
In what cases?
Well, I'll let Dan answer some
of that, but um for us it's
going to be, so when we file a
rape case if there was a
protest, um, uh, with one of our
rape cases, it's currently 1% or
25 members in the PRC becoming
becomes involved there and then
some of the historic, historic
regulatory um compliance, I'll
let Dan answer that.
So putting it in perspective,
there there's 48 states that
that have co-ops.
11 states regulate co-ops fully,
which would include New Mexico,
11 states have a regulatory
scheme that allows co-ops to opt
in to regulation, much like we
do in New Mexico with municipal
utilities. In most of those
states, the co-ops have not
opted in to regulation. Uh, in
New Mexico, we, we deal with all
your rulemakings and deal with
your staff on rulemakings we
deal with whenever a co op here
is filing its new rules or
policies or forms, we file those
with the commission under your
Rule 210 and deal with the
staff, and then even though you
have limited rate regulation in
case only in the event that
there's an adequate number of
protests. We've been encouraging
the co-ops and and your staff
has been kind enough to indulge
us, to come meet with the staff
before you file a rape case.
In most cases because our boards
meet multiple times with the
members before we ever file a
rape case, so they understand
why we're filing it. So there's
almost never a protest, but it's
still helpful for the staff to
understand where we're coming
from. For example, I used Mora.
Maura was in desperate shape.
RUS was sending them letters
saying you will be in default on
this date if you don't find a
way to, you know, meet your tier
ratio requirements. We met with
staff, Staff was just helpful in
understanding the problem, and
we met 6 times with Moa's
members, and then in the end
when we filed the rape case,
there was no protest, but staff,
we interact often and even on
matters we're not required to,
because it's helpful to us, and
because you have the expertise
we don't have.
Thank you.
And.
That's a great question.
Um, so one of the things that
we're working on now and we're,
we
Really studies are underway here
for for us is um is to find a
way for the statewide to help
with that, our statewide
organization, uh, where we could
centralize, uh, so say if there
was an engineer or or some other
um it could be advanced metering
infrastructure with our smart
meters, data analytics,
something like that. Uh, there
are discussions to see which
cooperatives, because again,
they're smaller cooperatives
that can't that.
don't have enough staff and
can't hire them, so it may be
just for 6 of them versus all of
them. So, um, if you look at
larger, um, so maybe even Kit
Carson or somebody like Lee
County who has, you know, more
employees, they may have the
capacity to do that. Um, so
those are some of the things
that we're looking at now to see
how we can find a better way to
work together to get these
economies of scale.
And, and the large tum times
that we've actually urged co-ops
to consider merger, but it
becomes very difficult because
they are so different
demographically. So, for
instance, two cops, I know that
I looked in the past soporo and
continental divide.
Well, Sapporo is is really built
around one community,
continental divide is almost 50%
Native American serving Navajo
reservation, large stretches.
It wasn't a natural fit in terms
of their administration and the
needs of their membership. But
yes, going forward, there, there
should definitely be some effort
to consolidate either formally
through a merger or through at
least contracting as common with
the common.
We still have about 7 minutes.
I'm gonna ask one more question.
Uh, you mentioned your G&T
cooperatives and the source of
your power.
For you, for your member co-ops,
who regulates them if you have
Obligations here under New
Mexico state law, but they
don't. How does that work?
Well I'll let Dan jump in here
too, but for example, Tri-state
is regulated by FERC now, um,
and Western farmers is typical
since they are not um
supplying, uh, they're not
actually doing generation right
now. They're, they purchased all
of that and um they haven't, I
don't think they've interacted
with us much here within New
Mexico. They're members of the
SPP
so.
Uh tri-state became PERC
regulated in the last 5 years, I
believe, before that, we have a
statute on the books that says
if any 3 if 3 members of a GNT
protest, the G&T's rates, then
the commission has jurisdiction
over that rape case.
That was only tested one time,
um, I was actually part of the
group that tested it, uh,
Tri-State went to federal court
saying that that provision in
statute was a violation of
interstate commerce. It was
never resolved because the
co-ops that were protesting
tri-state resolved their
differences with Tri-State. Now
it's moot as regards tri-state
because they're FERC regulated.
Uh, Western farmers, I guess is
still subject to that, but I
would be surprised given the way
Western farmers operates and and
the fact that the New Mexico
co-ops are prominent within
those organizations actually, in
both cases, the president of the
Western Farmers Board of
Directors is from the New Mexico
Co op. The president of
Tri-State's Board of directors
is from a New Mexico co op.
That's a first in my 22 years.
So we actually have a voice.
Uh, in both G&Ts right now that
we didn't in the past.
Yes, sir.
I
Do you want
Do you?
Sure, we have.
I mean,
our
our co op board members are
elected officials, which helps
us, some actually serve in the
New Mexico legislature, some
previously served in the New
Mexico legislature. So we
understand and appreciate that
legislative process because
it's, it's ingrained in our
local boards, uh, what we have
always found effective for us is
to have board members come to
this capital and talk directly
to legislators and because those
are their constituents and
And I can't imagine that the
co-ops are going to become less
engaged going forward, but
that'll be up to Cheri because
uh she'll be in charge of that
effort.
Yes, and I would, I would also
say, um, you know, some of the
things that impacted, as you
well know, uh, the IOUs, um, and
some of the legislation that may
be um good for the IOUs may not
be so great for the cooperative
simply because of who we serve,
um, and as many of you may or
may not know, um, the reason we
were established in the first
place was because.
Nobody was serving the rural
communities, especially the
farmers and ranchers, uh, back
in those days, and that's why uh
the cooperatives were started,
were self uh managed and
democratic, uh, had democratic
control and again because we
serve the majority of the
majority of our members are in
poverty. We have to be careful
about what is going to impact
them, especially when it comes
to compliance regulatory
compliance in our.
ability to do, to do those
things, one, because of staffing
issues too, uh, just because of
how much that can cost for us to
comply with some of the things
that an IOU where shareholders
exist. Um,
So,
so those are some of the things
we take into consideration and
going back to what Dan said, we
just have to be sure that we're
involved in our communities, um,
and that we're talking on a
regular basis to our legislators
and that we're educating folks
about where the cooperatives
live where communities are and
and the challenges that we have.
Just one more. Yes sir.
Well, I, I'll back up and I'll
just, I'll address
transportation in particular.
So, I, I think what has to be
taken into consideration, um,
and this kind of goes back to
the previous question. There are
things that may not be uh
feasible for the rural
communities versus what may be
feasible in Santa Fe or Las
Cruces or Albuquerque. So for
example, when we talk about
electric vehicles. You're
talking about hundreds of miles
that people have to drive.
And we don't have the EV
infrastructure currently out in
those rural areas. Second, when
we talk about something like
electric school buses and you
think about, you know, a school
bus having to drive 300 miles a
day. Are you going to charge
those with, you know, students
on the bus, how, how would we do
that, right? So, so there's all
this balancing that we have to
do and with electrification,
it's the same thing, right? So
what may work in Albuquerque
where you've got almost 50.
You know, me or customers to, to
miles of line and we think about
who's supporting the
infrastructure out in those
rural communities, as you all
drive out in those rural
communities, you see miles and
miles and miles with nothing.
All of those lines are
maintained by those electric
cooperatives. So electrification
there is going to look different
than what it's going to look in
some of our um urban areas.
Dan, do you have anything to
add?
All right, well, we're at time,
so please join me in thanking
our presenters.
The recording stopped.
So we are on break for 15
minutes and we'll start back at
10:45. Thanks everyone.
2-minute warning.
If we could please make our way
to the seats, we'll be starting
in about 2 minutes.
If we could please take our
seats so we can get started with
the next panel.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and get started with our next
panel on distribution planning.
So
in moderated by Commissioner
James Ellison, uh, who really
needs no introduction, but I
will introduce him anyway.
Commissioner Ellison was
appointed to the New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission in
January of 2023 by Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham.
He is serving a two-year term,
which concludes in December of
this year.
He worked for Sandia National
Laboratories for over 10 years,
focusing on power systems
analysis and planning, including
energy storage and renewable
energy integration. Prior to
working at Sandia, he worked at
AES Corporation, where he
managed a power plant and
distribution company.
Thank you, Commissioner Ellison,
for moderating this panel, and
I'll turn it over to you.
Thank you very much, Miss Corey.
Welcome, everyone. It's a
pleasure to be here. Uh, I'm
glad to be here. I made the
mistake this morning of trying
to drive up Highway 14 and
figured out it's not a good idea
to do that when it's snowing,
uh, I, I should have learned
that lesson a long time ago, but
um, I learned it again today.
Uh, I'm glad to be here and have
uh, uh, a, a very distinguished
and capable.
Panel for you here today, 3
members of whom are, are with us
in the room today. Uh, we have
Mr. Shawn Morash on, uh, on
Zoom, uh.
I'll go ahead and introduce our
panelists, uh, Mr. Jim Deserin
is uh
The head of the renewable energy
industries association of New
Mexico. There are uh an
association of, of 60 plus.
Members, Mr. Shawn Morash with
Telos Telus Energy is a small
but very capable consultancy
that uh that does power system
analytics and, and focuses on
power systems with uh a high
level of, of renewable energy,
uh,
Matthew Reno is uh here from
Sandia National Labs. He has a,
a PhD in electrical engineering,
uh, he's a research engineer
focusing on distribution system.
Problems and uh is currently
working on, uh, issues involving
uh artificial intelligence as
well as uh relay protection, uh,
Mr. Adrian Rodriguez is the
president of Southwestern Public
Service, which is a uh division
of Excel Energy, uh, I sometimes
think that uh
Uh
People in Albuquerque and Santa
Fe, uh, may not be aware that we
have 3,
investor-owned utilities in New
Mexico and Xcel Energy
Southwestern Public Service is,
is a major, uh,
Utility in our state, uh, the
objective of this panel is to
have a conversation around
modern challenges to
distribution planning, and by
that what we mean are uh
challenges that have arisen as
we see more and more demand for
uh solar to interconnect to the
distribution system, both at the
residential level as
well as community solar as we're
seeing uh demand from electric
vehicles, pick up and um
The utilities, the distribution
companies.
have, of course, uncertainty as
to how much solar is going to
interconnect and how much, uh,
electric vehicle growth, there
will be and where it will be
located. Nevertheless, they are
faced with the challenge of
planning for, for the future
and, and have to make decisions
on, on planning for their uh for
their systems.
So I'd, I'd like to encourage,
uh, this to be a discussion and
if, uh, panelists have a
question, um, or would like to
add something to something
they've just heard. I would
encourage that if a member of
the audience has uh immediate
reaction after someone has
spoken, I would encourage you to
raise your hand, uh, you know,
there may be times when, um,
I will nudge us to, to move on,
uh, but at the same time, uh, I,
I would like this to be a
conversation where we explore
these
Topics. So, uh, I would like to
start out by asking, uh, Mr.
Morash who's on Zoom to
Tell us, uh,
A bit about what is distribution
planning is integrated
distribution planning different
from your traditional
distribution planning, and how
is modern distribution planning
differ from
Past practices.
Yeah, this will be a good check
of the audio to start us, um, I
guess I saw my, my face pop up
on the TV screen there, can
folks hear me?
We, we can hear you.
Great. OK. Um, and then Jimmy, I
saw you sharing slides from your
end. Are you going to do that or
should I share my screen?
Uh, I will, I, I can share the
slides. Awesome.
Thank you. Yeah, um, I'm Sean
Morash. Thanks for everybody
for, for being in the room and,
and for the opportunity to
present here and, and share some
ideas. Um, this should be a fun
panel for us. We've designed it
to to be a conversation more
than than a one-way, uh,
presentation, right? Or even
four-way presentation. Um,
So, go ahead on to the next one.
I want to lay a foundation here
to make sure we're all speaking
the same language, more or less,
um, and so the first thing to
make sure we're, we're talking
the same language is, you know,
do we all know what the
distribution system is. And so
I've got a little schematic here
that's the power system in in
fun friendly uh icons, but
generally, you know, we've got
our bulk, uh, bulk power system,
which traditionally is is where
our
generation comes from, and, and
there's transmission associated
with that, right? Getting it
from large, uh, traditionally
from large generators to, to
where folks, you know, use that,
use that electric power. Um, and
it goes through substations or,
you know, and, and then through
circuits, ultimately down to to
folks' homes or businesses, uh,
you know, through the
distribution system. So if we
were to draw a line around kind
of what is the distribution
system. It's, it's everything
below the kind of big
towers, uh, or maybe even below
the, the substations, um.
That, that helped make sure that
we, we can get the power, uh,
Reliably and
delivered to the place where we
want to use it. Um,
There's a couple of different
types of distribution circuits,
right? I think we could, we
could actually spend like a
whole hour on different kinds of
distribution circuits, but for
our purposes, uh, there's this
concept of a radial system,
which is really kind of just a
one way, you know, there's a
substation and there's a single
source of power, and then it
gets delivered, uh, wherever it
may, may need to go, um, along a
circuit or sometimes it's called
a feeder, right, where it feeds
electricity to to where those,
those folks want to go. Another
kind of great architecture is
system where uh you've you've
got it set up so that you can
serve power from to the same
premise, but from either of two
substations, um, or two
locations, right? And so this
loop system, uh, helps with
reliability because if you have
an outage in one place, you can,
you can kind of open some
switches and reroute power, uh,
so that fewer folks are affected
by by that outage. Um.
And even further step in that
kind of grid architecture is a
network system, uh, we're kind
of any number of sources can
feed into uh a kind of any
number of of loads, and these
things, um,
Really, are common in kind of
downtown areas, uh, where
reliability is, is really
important, and we're underground
systems may uh may facilitate
kind of better, uh,
Reliability of power delivered
to to the locations. Um.
So there's generally, you know,
The other thing I want to convey
here is distribution systems can
take any kind of numbers, number
of shapes, sizes, they can look
a whole lot different in
different places, even within
the same service territory,
right? So our friends at Excel
uh may have certain areas that
look radial, certain areas that
look looped, uh, other ones that
are maybe even, you know,
flipped.
North or west or sideways or or
anything.
Um
If we go on to the next one, the
way these things are, are
typically planned. There's
typically regular cycles with
distribution planning. Maybe
it's an annual cycle where we
Kind of every year, do a, do an
analysis, we go back and we say,
OK, you know, what?
What changed over the last year?
Um, and, and kind of rethink
things. There can even be kind
of longer term.
Planning cycles where we say,
hey, um, every couple of years,
let's make sure our trajectory
is trending right that we're
kind of thinking about things
holistically and we haven't kind
of put our heads down.
In the, in the details too much.
Um
So I've got on the screen a uh
representation of a, of a
typical cycle. Um, this will
look like most.
Cycles of, of kind of any sort
of planning exercise.
But we're generally capturing
inputs. Uh, we're doing some
engineering analysis and then
we're going to do like a risk
evaluation prioritization of, of
kind of what the engineering
analysis says we should, we
should think about. Um, and then
ultimately we're gonna kind of
budget and and approve and and
execute whatever those plans
might be.
That, that budgeting and
approval that can happen kind of
internally, um, you know, we're
used to utilities thinking about
things, uh, you know, on their
own, and then it can also, there
can be steps.
Where we get external kind of
budgeting and approval, right,
where the commission can weigh
in and, and kind of uh help.
Uh, you know, approve or
disapprove certain projects or
certain uh incentives, right?
So, New Mexico has its own, um,
mechanisms, what I'm describing
here is, is fairly, it's high
level, um, you know, and not
intended to describe New Mexico
generally. Um.
The other thing here that's
that's kind of changed recently
is this kind of capturing of
inputs, um.
Where historically we've our
inputs were kind of the
engineering metrics of choice,
right? Like how much is our
equipment loaded, uh, how
reliable is the system and, and
then we can kind of go from
there and we can say, OK, you
know, we've got a heavily loaded
piece of equipment. We've got a,
we've got to update that, or,
hey, this, this is our worst
performing circuit is or least
reliable circuit. Let's figure
out how we can upgrade that, um,
increasingly though, you know,
we're, we're thinking about
other types of inputs, right,
whether those
are kind of community and
stakeholder needs. We're
thinking about equity or
affordability or, or generally
allowing um customers to be more
active participants in in the
power grid, um, or it could be
other factors like policy
objectives or or supply chain
challenges that have, that are
disrupting things.
Um
And then the last
Last thing I was gonna say there
is around kind of
Security and and system security
and ensuring reliability.
Um, we get into a uh
the kind of last topic here,
last slide if it comes back up
is around um kind of what is
integrated distribution planning
and and the kind of modern grid
elements, right? And so, uh,
I've got a definition here for
you and then a graphic. I, I
I'm a graphics guy. I like to
look at pictures. Um, so this
graphic comes from a Department
of Energy publication about kind
of distribution planning, uh,
it's a reference document, it's
a couple 100 pages. Um, but I
like this graphic out of those
couple 100 pages, because we
show uh kind of traditional
infrastructure here at the
bottom, right? This is our kind
of grid that we've been
building, um.
For, for 100 years.
And then stacked on top of that
are a number of other kind of
grid elements that are needed to
facilitate kind of
reliable, uh, informed
distribution systems, right? So
whether that's kind of the
operation of the distribution
system or even if it's just the
planning of the distribution
system, um, we're gonna need
things like communications,
right, to understand what's
going on out there, and the
sensing and measurement that
that we can, we can have.
A whole bunch of field devices,
uh, they're enabled by kind of
Smart, um,
Smarts, I guess it's kind of the
simplest way to say that.
Um
And we can see the way that this
is kind of represented, like,
gosh, there's, there's a whole
lot of things that can stack on
top of this physical grid
infrastructure.
Um, that maybe allow us to think
through kind of the reliability,
resilience, safety, um, kind of
the integration of, of different
things across uh
Across that system.
Um
So there's
a graphic here, so Jim, can you
click one more? See if this
arrow pops up for us, yeah, um,
so there's this kind of tension
here where our regulatory
constructs and our incentives
have have traditionally been
oriented around this physical
grid infrastructure that that's
been around for a while, right?
And increasingly, um,
There's a need on the, on the
system for
All sorts of other things. And
so understanding kind of what is
the regulatory world look like
for that? What do, what do our
incentives look like, uh, so
that, that folks are kind of
pursuing the
Kind of most efficient or, or
kind of even just the best um
outcome, uh, given kind of 2024
technological capabilities.
Um, and so, you know, buried in
here, uh, is this concept that
like hey, it's no longer just a
one-way power grid, um, we're no
longer really just concerned
about delivering power to end
users, uh, but rather, there's a
capability and a need to, to
enable kind of rooftop solar in
a way that's that's safe, uh,
and reliable and, and kind of
cost effective for, for
everybody. Um, so that's my, my
basic intro, what is
distribution planning, what are
we what are we talking about
even? Looking forward to getting
To, uh, some more details.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Rash for that very uh
Detailed answer.
Sounds like
So I'd like to continue by
asking, uh,
Doctor Matt Reno, if
You think about your, your
average, uh, distribution
system.
Not the
The downtown network that Mr.
Morash was talking about, but
maybe something more, more like
the radial distribution feeder
that would be
From, from the substation to, to
the customers.
What sort of
Technical challenges are there
to integrating uh
Solar integrating residential
solar.
Great, thank you. Um, so, and
we're gonna continue through
slides.
I think. Um, so I, I'm glad that
this is a technical question,
uh, since I'm an electrical
engineer, I can give you a nice
technical answer here. Uh, so as
we look at, I integrating solar
into the distribution system. I
think we've heard a kind of a
couple of times already today
with the challenges that
conventionally this was designed
for power flowing from the large
generators down into the
distribution networks, this
radial flow, one direction, um,
and everything is designed that
way, whether it's your voltage
regulation.
equipment, the size of your line
conductors, uh, your circuit
breakers, all of that is
designed for that in mind, um,
and as we start to integrate uh
distributed energy, so rooftop
solar as an example, this can
have an impact on the grid,
which provides um some new
challenges to the utility
companies to look at those
impacts. Um, so I've listed some
impacts here. Uh, so you don't
want to install solar on your
rooftop, that's going to cause
voltage.
problems for your neighbor or
power quality, or when a tree
hits the line, um, we sure hope
that those circuit breakers
still pop before it starts a
fire. Um, so that was the kind
of things that we need to make
sure that we are not impacting
when we're adding uh distributed
resources out onto the grid. And
um the utility's job to make
sure that that this is still,
uh, uh, a reliable grid.
Everybody has the power quality
that they are that is required,
um, and
So this generally involves some
sort of uh study process that
the utility goes through before
you can, uh, interconnect, um,
and, uh, at Sandi, we get to
work with dozens of utilities
around the US and I have to say
every single one does this a
little bit differently as far
as uh paperwork or their
process, uh, uh, even the tools
and software they use, but kind
of at a rough level here that
interconnection study process,
it's very small system, couple
panels on your rooftop might
just be kind of automatically.
approved, you know, we, we can
allow this and it's not a
problem. Uh, for some other
things, this may require a lot
of detailed simulations, uh, to
make sure that there aren't
going to be those kind of
impacts. And those that study
can be time consuming. So on the
next slide, um, with growing
number of interconnections, uh,
what are we going to do? This
keeps increasing 4 times the
amount each year? Are we
expecting to hire 4 times more
engineers every year to do these
studies, or
um, maybe there's some
alternatives that we can
automate these processes and get
new software tools and, um, and
that's, I think where some of
the innovation has been in the
last couple of years is making
sure that we can do this safe
and reliably, but in a more
automated fashion, um, and so on
the next slide, uh, one of the
ways to do this is with a
hosting capacity analysis. So
instead of just doing a uh
reactive response.
customer comes and says, I want
to interconnect solar at this
location, utility has to go off
and do the study, um, if it's
automated, this could be done
ahead of time, right? You could
set a computer loose and just
say, well, what if somebody
interconnected solar here? How
much could be installed? What if
it was this size instead, would
there be major impacts to the
grid, but if it was over here
and you can just let the
computer run many, probably many
hours, but you can let this run,
where now it's a much more
proactive, uh, idea that
all the studies have been done
when somebody comes in requests
a solar interconnection, um, and
even developers can look at
these maps, um, that you're
seeing kind of some examples
here. So where could solar be
interconnected? How much could
be at that location. Um, so now
developers could target certain
areas of the city, so there is
still a lot of capacity on these
lines for us to um go out and
get more uh rooftop solar in
those locations. Um, and I guess
The last thing that I wanted to
kind of highlight as a challenge
on the next slide is that, uh,
while that hosting capacity map
uh idea is not new, um, in
California started looking at
that 15 years ago, mandated it
almost 10 years ago, so they've
been uh putting those maps up
for 5 years. So the tools are
very well developed. We know how
to do it. We know how to run the
algorithms. They're also pretty
complicated to do. You need to
have really good models of your
power grid, a lot of really good
details on there, um, you need
to have good data from what's
happening on the grid today to
know how it would impact it in
the future. Um, so this is
things like the AMI and smart
meters, um, you, we need all of
that additional sensing and grid
modeling, um, and that is, that
takes some investment. It's not,
even though there is a a tool
that you can push the button
today. That doesn't mean that
you can just walk up and push
that at any utility. Uh, if
there is still
Quite an effort to go into the
modeling and data side as well.
So I think
It would be kind of how I would
answer some of the challenges
there.
Great. Thank you very much. I, I
think this, uh, brings us to Mr.
Desjardin. I'm interested given
that you represent 60+ members
uh in the renewable energy
industry association, uh, what
sort of challenges do your
member companies
Uh, deal with and integrating
more solar and, and what sort of
Solutions, uh,
Do you see as uh as being
applicable here. Thank you,
Commissioner, for that question.
slides as well, so if I could
get that up, that would help,
um, guide me through this.
There you go. OK, thank you. So,
as Commissioner Ellison said,
I'm gonna try to bring the an
industry perspective to this,
and I'm gonna start from just
from the super high level of the
US electrical grid is the
largest and most complex machine
ever built.
And so right now we've got 3
huge things happening that are
going to be affecting the grid.
First of all, for the first time
in a long time.
Um, where the load on the grid,
the electrical usage is going to
be increasing and increasing
dramatically. We've got EV
adoption happening as um as
we're all sitting here. And in
fact, the governor has a mandate
of, of I think 43% new vehicle
sales by 2027, so that's right
around the corner, um, building
electrification is happening, so
people are using heat pumps to
have a cleaner uh ways of
heating their homes and cooling.
And then something new.
Data centers. So data centers
are going to be using a lot of
electricity. So we got that
going on.
We got homes and businesses can
now generate their own energy.
So in our, in the industry we
call that behind the meter cause
it is behind the meter, but just
think of
When people say rooftop solar or
on-site solar, and in New
Mexico, we have approximately
50,000 solar systems right now,
generating energy even though
it's snowing outside.
Now, one thing that's um
important about that is that
only 1% of those can store
energy.
The other 99% just generate and
that energy just goes where it's
gonna go. First it's gonna go to
your home to power your home,
but if your home doesn't need
that power, it's going onto the
grid. And so that's becoming
more and more of a challenge to
deal with that. So we need to
get more energy storage on those
facilities just to put that in
perspective, California now,
about 50% of solar systems sold
homes and businesses have energy
stored, so we need to get to
that point.
Um, also, we have the energy
transition Act, which is
mandating by 2040 that 80% of
our energy from our best
utilities are going to come from
renewable energy sources. So all
this is happening at the same
time and as has been mentioned
already, this is creating some
challenges because our grid was
really designed to have one-way
flow of electricity through
sources where, OK, if it's a
gold fired power plant, we can
kind of turn the dial. It wasn't
quite that easy, but it was
easier to, to adjust, whereas
wind and solar.
gonna work when they're gonna
work. If it's in the middle of
the night, you're not gonna get
much out of your solar system.
So one good news is, is the
inflation, and not that that's
bad news, but one thing that's
really good is that the
inflation reduction Act that the
Biden administration put in
place is in the process of
pumping in $369 billion to help
us address these challenges, and
I got one more slide there.
And
OK, so here's some ideas that we
can actually improve this. And
the first thing is distribution
system planning. And so I
taught, um, I had like um um a
class that was actually about 10
classes in one day for at a job
fair to elementary and high
school students, and I focused
on that third word in that
sentence, planning. So why do we
want planning? Well, planning
allows us to be more cost
effective and have better
outcomes. And by the way, these
students answer that really spot
on.
That's really good answers,
including less stress, um.
So one of the ways that we can
do distribution planning is we
got to find out what we have and
so we've already heard about
hosting capacity analysis, and
it's, it's really complicated,
but also, it's really in a way
kind of simple. You can't fix
what you can't see, and you got
to also do some measuring to
find out what's going on there.
So this is best practice. It was
just mentioned that they've been
starting to look into this in
California 15 years ago. I
didn't know it was that long
ago, so that's really pretty
cool.
Um, a second thing, and I don't
know if this has been talked
about, but there's a model that
is used, has been used in the
utility industry for as long as
that I know, and it's called
cost causation. And what that
says is the person or entity
that causes a cost. So, for
example, you're putting in a
solar system in your house. And
then you find out, oh, guess
what? We got to upgrade that
transformer in your subdivision.
So that's going to add an
additional $10,000 to the cost
of your solar system. But it's
also good cause all your
neighbors are gonna be.
benefit after you put that in,
but you get to pay for it. So
it's kind of a an inefficient
and I would say a not very fair
way of allocating costs, but it
also has real um consequences
because they take that to a
little bigger level, we're
trying to do community solar in
New Mexico. And one of the
things that came out of after
the uh people who won their
bids, some of them found out
they had some really expensive
up
raids that they had to do, and
yes, they were on the hook for
those. Now, in the new
interconnection room, we have a
new interconnection rule in New
Mexico. It does specify that
On a case by case basis, those
costs can be shared. It doesn't
say how, and I think it's
basically like one sentence. So
I would suggest that obviously a
start, but we need to think, we
need to put a process in place
to figure out how we can really
make that happen.
There's other things in here,
non-wires, alternatives. So in
other words, let's look at
alternatives to doing expensive
upgrades to the actual
distribution lines themselves,
and those could be energy
storage systems, um, there's a
number of things we can do
there, flexible interconnection
and uh I think there was a
little um mention here about
advanced inverter smart
inverters would advanced
inverters can do among lots of
things, and I'm not an engineer,
but I know we can.
Curtail that output. And so with
flexible interconnection, let's
say that distribution line is
full, and by the way, up to very
recently P&M had somewhere
around 16 or 18 that were full.
So it's a real issue, if you
have, if you can throttle, if
you could curtail that output at
certain times of the day, maybe
we can get more resources on the
grid. So that's something to
look at, and then finally,
distributed power plant, virtual
power plant, we can't seem to
agree on.
the right name in the industry,
but those are real power plants
and what those are, are those
50,000 solar systems, just
imagine instead of only 1%
attachment rate with stores if
they all had storage. And then
just imagine we network them
together, then we could dispatch
them on demand and so think on a
real hot day at the end of June,
we can dispatch that one, the
grid is in.
great need of energy.
Thank you. And I, is it OK to
answer that gentleman's
question?
OK, please go ahead.
You mentioned the.
of
Well
First of all, I'm not an
engineer. But the way I see it
is that you, you want to build a
plan, so all of these
distributed resources can have
an active part in the grid. So
those 50,000 solar systems, you
would have a plan as to when
they would be most
cost-effective to dispatch. So
they essentially become part of
the grid.
I don't know if that answered
your question, but
It's kind of
Yeah, so I could answer this
too, and I saw a pop up saying
they couldn't hear the question
online. So just do a kind of
repeat it back, and the question
was a little bit was around the
grid forming technologies for
advanced inverters. Um, and so
there's um it's a little bit of
an abstract definition still,
what makes it grid forming, uh,
and so I think it's a little bit
of a hard question to answer,
and I, but a lot of the
technologies are going that way
for inverter-based resources,
um, that, that is how modern
converters are being designed as
with that capability, and in
some ways, uh, a lot of our
current standards, um, the IAEA
standards will list this
capabilities that are similar to
grid forming. So whether it's
providing some sort of uh ride
throughs, some sort of reactive
power support during faults. Um,
a lot of that is there. And I
think that this is something
that we need to kind of keep
thinking about what are our
national state interconnection
standards that we require for
the component
that are going in. So they are
friendly to the grid, um, and
they're actually assisting the
grid during disturbances or
yeah, during some sort of
contingencies. And so grid
forming is one of the nice ways
to do that, I would say, um, I
don't know that it will solve
all of our problems, um, because
it is still not rotating mass,
as he said, like we, we really,
you can fake it, you can try and
have this computer fake it in
the inverter, but it's still not
rotating mass. And so that does
give you a very different
response, um, at a
small time scale, um, you can
only fake it as fast as the
computer is, and so in the
millisecond kind of time scale,
I
You, you don't have that kind of
energy coming from it. So I
think it's still maybe um
beneficial but unanswered.
Let me just quickly interject
how I think about the, the grid
forming inverters is this, uh,
say you take a large battery
system on, let's say the
transmission, uh, the
transmission system, uh,
If, if it
is not grid forming. It cannot,
uh, it cannot
Inject power to the grid if, you
know, there's a blackout. So
there's no power in the grid, it
cannot inject power to the grid.
But if, uh, if it is grid
forming, then it can be
Among the first, you know, to,
to start producing power in that
blackout situation, so it can
form the grid, uh, and, and
that's, uh, my understanding
a pretty easy sort of uh uh
Uh
Inverter configuration on, on
some of these large battery
systems and, you know, FERC is,
is working on requiring that for
transmission level assets,
which, you know, we, we have
difficulty at the PRC dealing
with, with, with the
transmission level asset uh
requirements, but, you know,
certainly that's something I, I
think.
You know, I, I, we, we need to
consider as, as we start to get
more batteries, we just haven't
had that many batteries on, on
the distribution system, uh, you
know, I, I would like to ask uh
Mr. Rodriguez, uh,
Xcel Energy operates across a
very wide footprint, um,
And I, I think it would be
helpful for me to, to put up,
uh,
A map of that footprint.
Uh
And
So you have visibility and
experience into how uh
Different states, uh,
Regulate and, and deal with
distribution of
Could you, uh,
I guess first briefly introduce
your company and also talk about
how
Regulations, uh, is different
for uh, you know, the
distribution assets in, in some
of these different
jurisdictions. No, certainly,
thank you, Commissioner. I
appreciate the chance to be here
and, and join you all again. Uh,
a couple of items that were
raised in conversation that are
key that or impact us in each of
the states in which we operate,
um, involve a couple of key
issues that aside from the
engineering that we're mindful
of. First is safety, and I think
I want
Note that point because as you
discuss the system that was
built to transmit power in one
direction. We have a number of
our line workers who were up on
the system and they have
visibility into the system when
it comes in one direction. Um,
when there is power being back
fed onto the system, and this
occurs irrespective of whether
it's just a solar panel on the
system in some cases, a customer
could have a generator that
they've placed on the system
that's back feeding. We're very
sensitive to the safety
visibility that we have for the
safety of our employees,
especially those, and I think
for all of us here.
We have our, our uh represented
members from the International
Brotherhood of Electric Workers
who are on those lines, so
that's a very key discussion
that happens across all 8 of our
states, especially when it
pertains to the distribution
system. Um, what you're also
operating within, and this goes
to the comment related to um
each utility having some slight
variance in the way that it
operates is we operate in the
construct of our states, which
have very, in some cases strict
and in some cases very
rod statutes or how we deal with
our tariffs. So that construct,
and in some cases it is
historical, uh, impacts those
interconnection studies and
timelines that we do. One of the
last things that we also, uh,
and this is again a conversation
in each of our states. It comes
to the key issue of
affordability.
Um, there are, uh, and I also
appreciate the comment of noting
that there's there's a really
great systems that we have up
there, but they come with
investment. And the question
then becomes, uh, how much of
that is going to be borne by the
specific customer, how much of
it is going to be socialized
across the system. In many
cases, some of our utilities,
even in this state, have moved
toward that last mover, uh, not
necessarily having to bear the
full cost, but it being viewed
as a system resource. So, um,
those are a couple of the, the
factors that I wanted to
highlight, um, based on the
discussion that we have and one
other key item and I know we've
got our lawyers in the room who
are looking for some COE credit.
Our commissioners in this state,
and Chair O'Connell,
Commissioner Ellison,
Commissioner Aguilera are
balancing New Mexico statutes
annotated 62-3-1. Uh, this is
the policy statement that talks
about all the factors that the
state of New Mexico is
evaluating in its in its uh
valuation of the utility as we.
just in reasonable rates as they
are evaluating whether the
actions of the utility were
prudent. And so, um, you can
check that box for the CLE
credit Choya, thanks for doing
it, uh, but I wanted to at least
note that for folks, is that
aside from the technological
aspects that our commissioners
are evaluating and that every
single one of us is a utility is
evaluating, um, there is a
policy construct in each of our
states that policymakers have
set up for our commissioners and
our utilities as we
evaluating our distribution
plans. Um, one thing that's
about key about Xcel Energy is
we've uh have as you saw that
operating footprint in 8
different states, um, each with
again, different regulatory
constructs and statutes. We have
a Minnesota, in Minnesota, there
is a distribution plan that has
to be submitted to the state.
Colorado just recently passed
one, a distribution system plan
that also talks about concurrent
cost recovery, uh, at the time
that this investment is
occurring.
Partially to avoid, uh,
subsequent rate shock that could
occur if those investments occur
and then customers are having to
pay for them in a full blown uh
general rape case proceeding. So
there is some concurrent
recovery mechanisms that are
established in our Colorado
jurisdiction. One thing that I
also want to note though is
Utilities plan for distribution
in some cases we're getting
better at it than we have in the
past. I think you, the key point
of it used to be reactive and it
is much more proactive than it
used to be, um, we have an
integrated system plan at Xcel
Energy and with that SPS where
we are not only just trying to
evaluate our distribution plan
and the work that goes on there
across an entire system, but
we're trying to also assess the
impact that it has on the
transmission system and
generation as well. Um.
As we noted, you're looking at
this map, you can see that we do
have a pretty spread system in
in New Mexico, some of those are
not extremely large metropolitan
areas such as Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, or Las Cruces. Um,
irrespective of that, um, we
also operate in a regional
transmission organization and
the more impact on our
distribution system, the more
impact on our transmission
system requiring even evaluation
and study by the Southwest Power
Pool RTO. So I
That was a lot of information
and that I placed out there, but
I wanted to give everybody an
idea of the context in which a
lot of these technological
innovations are being evaluated
and in which not just we as
utilities at El Paso Electric
PNM and SPS are doing so as well
as our colleagues in the co-ops,
um, but our commissioners and
our policy makers is they are
evaluating many of these
competing factors.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Rodriguez.
Uh
By the way, uh, SPS is
electrically on the eastern
interconnect and so if you want
to impress friends and family,
you can tell them that to can
carry grid is on the eastern
interconnect, and I'm sure
they'll enjoy
hearing that. It's fascinating
cocktail conversation.
Do any questions from the uh
audience here about, uh, yes.
Mr. Brash, would you like to
Answer that one.
I really can't hear OK, could
you, I'm not sure if you heard
that question.
I didn't hear the question was
if, if I, uh,
Please let me know if I'm, I'm
mischaracterizing it, Miss
Lynch, whether, uh, you know,
the power that you store in
energy storage or, you know, a
battery, uh, has to be, uh,
produced at the
At the same time that it's
stored, is, is that your
question?
OK.
Yeah, so there's a fun way to
think about this is like power
transfer from happens really
quickly, right? So
If it, if it worked this way,
uh,
An electron would go from Los
Angeles to New York tight real
quick. We're having some audio
difficulties and we can't hear
you.
Let's try it again, Sean.
Yeah, can you hear me?
Yes. Good. All right. Cool.
Yeah, so the short answer is
that yes.
Power has to be stored or used
basically as it's generated. Um,
the kind of really simple way
that I think about it is that if
an electron was produced in Los
Angeles, uh, it would be
consumed in New York in under a
second, right? So it doesn't
quite work that way. There's,
there's a whole bunch of other,
you know, electrons don't flow
that way, but it's generally
distance wise, like we've got to
constantly be balancing those
things. Um, so that was the
comment that you heard about,
um, it's not
mass anymore, right? We're
constantly um historically we've
put a lot of strain on rotating
mass, right? That, that it's
able to kind of fluctuate
naturally, help balance those
things both kind of with
Inertia from a rotating engine,
uh, but also from stress on like
a a drive train. Um, so I
Yeah, but use it, use it as soon
as you make it.
Well, I was just gonna say I
think that's why we're talking
so much about energy storage is
that right now without energy
storage, everything has to be
used instantly. Like there is no
flexibility in generating it at
different times that you're
using it, um, and so the energy
storage, that is the purpose, is
like you could generate at a
different time than you use it.
So generate during the day with
solar and then use it at
nighttime. Um, that is the,
without energy storage, there's
no way to do that in the grid
today.
And, and I think that's why, uh,
You know, with, with large
Utility scale solar.
We have the issue that is, as
you get more and more on the
grid, you start
You know, needing to, to
actually curtail it to to spill
it and, and not put that energy
on the grid just because you've
got, you've got too much at one
time. You've got a limited, uh,
Customer demand during the
middle of the day, maybe you've
got some, uh, you know, steam
turbine generation that you
can't turn on and off easily,
and so you just can't accept all
that power and uh, you know,
certainly storage is one avenue
for, um, for, for dealing with
that. Uh, I, I would like to
follow up with a, with another
question for Mr.
Mirra and, and that is that, uh,
Forecast for distributed solar
and for EV adoption are, are
probably going to be wrong, yet,
Those forecasts impact
distribution planning and
distribution investments, how
can distribution plans deal with
this uncertainty.
Yeah, it's a, it's a loaded
question. Um,
Just because they're wrong
doesn't mean they're, they're
not informative, right? And so
there's different types of
forecasts that can tell us, tell
us different things. Um, and so
one of the things that we
emphasize or has been emphasized
industries around using
scenarios uh to stress kind of
your forecasts, right? So if you
have multiple scenarios pointing
towards, towards the same thing,
that means like, gosh, um,
that's probably, uh, it's a,
it's a better investment or it's
a better
Path forward than if just one of
those scenarios told you to to
kind of go a certain route. Um,
So scenarios can be used and
then another way to kind of
manage uncertainty.
is in
I guess two other ways. One is
in headroom, and then the second
is in kind of consistently
re-evaluating things. Um, so
headroom is, is just generally,
you know, when you build
something, build in a little bit
of extra margin, um, because the
the cost of capital is only one
or the cost of the piece of
equipment that you're installing
is only one part of the overall
cost of, of installing that
thing, right? There's, there's
labor costs to to to
physically put it in the field.
There's engineering costs to
evaluate if it's if it's, if
it's a good, you know, sizing or
whatever, um, there's cost of
capital, there's cost of
inventory, all sorts of things
that get stacked on top of you
know how much a given piece of
equipment costs. Um.
So upsizing things and then the
other concept that I was just
talking about was around cycles
and kind of
Making sure we're re-evaluating
things, right? So we make
decisions based on um the best
information we have and we kind
of move forward with that and
then as we, as we go, we
reevaluate that and say, gosh,
you know, we're, we're starting
on this trajectory, but it's not
set in stone. It's um
We, we can kind of
Learn as we go, um, but we're
the first couple of steps that
we take are, you know, most
informed by kind of various
scenarios uh across what we,
what we think will happen.
Great, thank you. Uh, mister.
Deiin, I'd like to ask, we have
3 investor owned utilities in
New Mexico from the perspective
of the solar industry, uh,
What challenges, uh, does the
solar energy.
Uh, industry face in, in each of
these areas and
How were they similar?
Or different
Thank you, Commissioner Ellison.
So, as I alluded in my um
Screams that I showed, um,
basically, our biggest challenge
is having a distribution system
that is adequate for solar
systems to be interconnected to,
whether they're, um, you know,
small rooftop systems, whether
they're community solar systems
and I would say that most of our
members are active in the P&M
system, so we're most familiar
with that, and that has
definitely been challenging, so
for the last few years, P&M had
depending upon when
they were reporting and who was
reporting somewhere between 16
and 18 distribution lines were
closed to solar, so you could
not put a solar system on your
house, period.
And that was one of the things
that started the interest in
updating the interconnection
rule because we thought that
would help us to update that and
the interconnection rule is
essentially a document that
basically determines how
utilities will screen solar
systems up to 10 megawatts. So
it can go up to a pretty good
size, and we did make a lot of
improvements there.
And um but still those
distribution lines were closed,
and recently P&M after two
reports, their first report and
I think that was in June of
2024, or maybe it was April, but
some, somewhere in that timeline
said that those lines were
saturated and were closed in
their hosting, I think it was
called hosting capacity
analysis, they then had a report
that came out 3 or 4 months
later from the same company
hosting capacity solutions that
said no actually only.
Two of those need to be closed.
So the ramifications to our
industry is those were literally
hundreds of opportunities that
were lost for our members to
install solar, not to mention
they were hundreds of
opportunities that were lost to
those people to have solar. Now,
a lot of those people can now
have solar, but so that is the
challenge and it basically adds
a lot of uncertainty to our
business. I was recently in Las
Cruces, and I found out that um
according
To I think someone from El Paso
Electric 4 of their lines are
now closed, so again, when
there's a closed line, that's
business that we can't do in
those areas.
Um, SPS I'm not aware of any um
challenges in terms of
interconnecting to their lines,
um, and so that that's kind of
our experience with the four
different investor-owned.
Great, thank you, Mr. Rodriguez,
would you like to, yeah, one
comment on that. I think this is
where the conversation it's
really good that we have the
conversation and the ability to
interact and to have a
discussion about the ability and
what the what the the way in
which we also have to operate.
There's a number of of customers
that are on those lines that do
not have solar and and they
either um it's not something
that that has been part of their
choice, their apartment dweller
and the property owner has a
different view as what they're
willing to put on the property.
So,
There's definitely a sensitivity
from us as an industry, um,
related to the to the safety
room, we would not be the
customers, so I think that
though the time, then you can
find that maybe there are some
lines that are not, we're making
sure that we're also maintaining
that because I think it shows
that the conversations happen
between the solar uh and able to
find a way that we can, we
recognition of really there may
be a safety or a reliability
concern, um, and we are then
able to at least also.
So, uh, have a conversation with
our regulators so that they can
say there's a degree of risk
which we either take on on
behalf of customers or maybe try
one or two more solar systems on
this line and maybe provide some
incentives to upgrade
Then you almost, you can have
it.
There are some instances and
they're not responding territory
in New Mexico, in fact, that
started over the last month,
thanks to the approval of, of
the NMPRC uh and policymakers in
the state. Um, it gives us more
visibility into a particular
area, and so that, uh, and we
talked about studies and
information. That's an
additional area where you'll get
more granular information about
a particular area, and as we
have more information and we
understand customers' usage with
a particular
appliance, it will allow us to
rely more on that type of of
appliance that is in a
customer's household and their
own choice as to how they wish
to have it contribute as part of
a demand response program, or if
they choose not to have their
appliance contribute to a demand
response program.
Great, thank you. Any other, any
engineer check me on any of
that, by the way,
I just, you mentioned the
virtual power plants, so I think
that would be a good thing to
talk about here because uh
controlling a single device
doesn't help a whole lot. It's
like you have to control
thousands of these devices. So,
I, I saw that as one of your
notes, if you wanted to give
more details on why you thought
that was important. Thank you
for that. Um, so I don't really
have a whole lot more to say
other than from my perspective,
and I think for a lot of people
in the in the industry,
That is the future of solar at
homes and businesses is having
storage and having the ability
for them to interact in the
grid, but to do that, we need to
be able to network them and have
a, um, you know, enough to make
it a workable situation.
You know, I'll just briefly add
that that each of our three
investor owned utilities in New
Mexico designs their own
programs, uh.
The, the other side of the coin,
uh, you know, apart from the,
the automation.
possibility is to have time
varying rates and, and that's
something that's really in its
infancy in, in New Mexico, and I
think, you know, that is uh that
is a work in, in progress, uh,
there are, are various uh uh
pilot programs that have started
up or, or will start up. So, uh,
you know, I think.
You know, customers.
I would like to have some
financial incentive for, for
doing the right thing in in
terms of helping out to
Shift their load from when it's
more expensive to produce power,
to win it's cheaper to to
produce power. Uh, you know, I'd
like to
Uh
Follow up by asking Mr.
Rodriguez, uh,
As a result of, of some of these
modern challenges that we're
talking about has uh SPS changed
its uh distribution planning
practices, and if so, how? One
of the things that uh SPS has
done, and this is an Excel
energy endeavor is to have an
integrated system resource plan
where we are actually we've
integrated the planning
functions of our generation
transmission and distribution
functions, uh, traditionally,
they've been separate.
It's just a historical part of
our industry generation would
plan for how much generation was
needed, the transmission system
would do its own transmission
planning and then distribution
in some cases was doing just
very localized distribution
planning, uh, and in some cases
if you go back to the infancy of
some of our companies, they were
doing it based off of the
infrastructure that was part of
a certain
Area of the system, for example,
in New Mexico are two can carry
system might be slightly
different than the development
of the system around our Roswell
community, um, just because of
history. Um, our view now is to
have a full integrated view of
that. So now we have a full
distribution system plan um and
planners that are looking at SPS
from the Texas Oklahoma border
all the way down to Carlsbad,
New Mexico. Uh, that is then fed
into how that interacts with
our.
Transmission planners, um,
because as I noted earlier,
there could be such a point
where the impact on your
distribution system is now
feeding into transmission where
they now have to interact with
the Southwest Power pool in a
way that they haven't
historically had to in the past,
especially in our service
territory where we have a
significant amount of
electrification of the oil and
gas industry, some of which have
served on the distribution
system and not at transmission
voltage. So that now feeds into
the transmission system, and
that's now having to then
interplay with our.
Generation planning group, which
is looking at resource planning
and assessing a true demand on
the system, rather than some of
the historical models that you
used to have in each silo, uh,
they're now looking at what are
industry practices within each
silo and recognizing how you
have to integrate them because
they have not historically been
integrated in our industry, and
we're having the chance to
integrate it now at SPS and
Excel Energy. Does SPS face
different?
Challenges in different parts of
its service territory regarding
distribution.
Absolutely is noted, um, we have
a heavy amount of industrial
load, unlike a lot of utilities
around the state and country, we
are a majority commercial and
industrial load utility, which
impacts our system differently.
Uh, it means that uh you may
have a, a customer that's out in
a remote area that is served on
distribution load that may not
necessarily benefit from the
network system, only because of
the cost threshold may be so
high that uh they may
Actually say that they want that
radial system just because of
the remoteness of it. Um, it
also means that that's different
because we don't have a
significant large metro areas
were having to plan for to
carry, Roswell, Artesia,
Karlsbad Hobbs, and then
distribution service to remote
areas in between. Over time,
A network could be something
that we would look at. It may
happen for us later than it does
for some of our other colleague
utilities who are much more
concentrated, but I think that
that's a, a definitely a way
that we have to, we in SPS are
in or operate in a way that is
different than maybe some of our
colleagues. It's that commercial
and industrial load. It's also
the fact that we operate across
a 52,000 square mile service
territory with 400,000 total
customers just for comparison,
um, El Paso Electric is a part.
approximately 4000 to 450,000
customers, and it's in a 10,000
square mile service territory,
we have a similar amount of
customers across a 52,000 square
mile service territory.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
you know, I'd like to start by
asking this to Mr.
Brash and, and, uh,
Open it up to any of you to, to,
uh, to add your thoughts, uh,
should, so
Now we have traditional
distribution planning, and we
have what uh
Has been termed grid
modernization, uh, things like,
uh, smart meters or
distribution, automation, which
can include things like, uh,
Fault location or uh integrated
va management.
Should
Traditional distribution
planning measures be considered.
Together with these uh more
modern grid modernization.
Measures
So I guess I'm asking you if the
planning should, should
incorporate, uh, considerations
of, of both.
At the same time.
Yeah, um, it's a good question,
it, it, it's almost a softball
because the answer to me is so
clearly yes, right, that we
should be planning our physical
infrastructure alongside our
kind of digital infrastructure
alongside, you know,
Whatever a program
Programs are, right? There was a
question earlier about, hey, how
does demand response fit in
here. And well, you know, demand
response will inform.
How what we do on our kind of
physical infrastructure, right?
We can avoid some of those poles
and wires, if we have good
demand response where folks, you
know, don't all use the power
power at the same time. Um.
The other thing that I've been
thinking about a lot, a lot
lately is in kind of proactive
planning versus reactive
planning and and thinking
through, um,
How to consider traditional
maintenance activities alongside
kind of preparing for expected
EV growth or or photovoltaic
growth, um, and kind of what the
mechanisms for that might look
like, uh, so that we have a
holistic picture of what the
what the grid, you know, plan
is, um,
So I think this all needs to be
integrated.
Together.
Great. Are, are there some, uh,
Objectives that could be solved
with either these more uh
digital solutions or with more
traditional, uh, uh,
Distribution.
Uh, measures such as, you know,
increasing the uh capacity of a,
of a feeder.
Yeah, I
And they both, the, the thing
that makes this challenging is
that they both can achieve the
job, right? We can, we can build
more of the traditional stuff,
and that'll that'll meet the
need, right? We can, we can have
a whole bunch of, a lot more
grid will enable a lot more EV
charging. It will also make room
for, for additional solar, uh,
as we need it, or if we can
design it with solar in Mind
from the beginning, um, but at
the same time, you know, that
may be a more expensive solution
than
trying to use the grid that we
have.
more effectively, more
efficiently. And so that's where
these kind of modern solutions
come in is trying to use what we
have, uh,
More efficiently, more cost
effectively, um, so that we're
not paying for more than, more
than we need.
Any other comments or responses
to that? Well, I, I would just
say I think that's a great
answer because it is a tradeoff,
you can do it either way and and
sometimes it is cheaper to use
the existing hardware, um,
because by adding controls,
communication, so some of the
things we've been talking about
where you could do demand
response or uh use one of these
uh distributed energy resource
management systems, so a derms
that's doing real-time control,
uh, would increase the hosting
capacity. And so maybe those
Controls and that communication
layer is cheaper than actually
building new lines. Um, but, you
know, you can solve the problem
both ways. And um I think they,
they will have to go hand in
hand, the, the softball question
and we will have to do planning
with that, um, real-time piece
and we've been talking a lot
about the generation side of
things, but you also mentioned
like fault location. I think
that's a really easy one to
think about that they have to go
together where, you know, you
could install
A really fancy system out there
that's going to be doing this
self-healing detecting faults,
rerouting power, but you had to
pair that with the planning so
that there is a switch in that
position to isolate the fault or
that there is another redundant
line to send power from another
direction. And so that planning
piece only, like, you can only
do that real-time controls if it
was part of the planning
decisions.
Any other comments on that?
question, uh, any questions from
the, the audience?
Yes.
I'm going to tee up my question
first. Uh, what I'm hearing is
that the distribution grid needs
a lot of investment to run
smoothly, give customers
options, take advantage of
customer owned resources.
But I'm also hearing from Mr.
Rodriguez in particular that
regulators have a duty to only
approve just and reasonable
rates must be mindful of
affordability.
And I was in a rape case hearing
earlier this year. It's closed
now, so there's no problem
talking about a pending case in
front of commissioners and
And I think the company was
asked, well, isn't this the
capital project you requested a
rate recovery for and um your
last rape case. Didn't you do it
then? And the utility basically
said, no, we just did what you
gave us rate recovery for.
So like it or not.
Regulators are kind of we're
putting regulators in the shoes
of the utility and making some
or at least involved in some of
their business decisions. So,
What advice would you give
commissioners, regulators.
Um, guidance, wisdom about how
to prioritize all these projects
and investments that need to be
made in the future to achieve
all these goals.
I'm curious if Jim is willing to
speak up there. I, I can also
speak up if I'm.
Can you folks hear me? Sure, go
ahead.
Yeah, I
Uh, my advice is generally
around, you know,
There's a whole lot of things
that that different folks want
to do and and there's different
levels of homework and different
levels of certainty that have
been achieved.
Right? And so
Uh, ensuring, you know, I don't.
There's no like rule book here
around what is enough homework,
what is enough level of
certainty to to approve a given
project, um, but I think
prioritizing the ones that have
That have those things, that
have more justification and,
and, you know,
are more clearly defined is is a
really good place to start.
Um, the other thing that your
question kind of spurred in me
is, is maybe it's a little um
Controversial.
is that we're putting
You correctly identified the
challenge, right, that the
distribution system needs a lot
of investment, uh, to achieve a
lot of policy goals, but at the
same time we have to maintain
affordability.
And
So we're putting regulators in a
tough position as, you know,
Where they're getting
It's the execution of of policy
that we need to think through
more, right? In terms of
Unintended consequences or maybe
things that weren't fully
thought out when when they were
first passed. And so being able
to have kind of communication
across.
Crusty
Large entities that are all, you
know,
Ostensibly working towards the
same thing, um.
And understanding what those
trade-offs might be, uh, before
we kind of
But these regulators in in a
really hard position. You know,
I think one of the items that
we're also sensitive to is, is
that
Regulators also have to hear the
voices of of consumer advocates,
um, you know, when the New
Mexico Attorney General's
office, the Department of
Justice is present, um,
fulfilling the um and
representing the views of small
commercial and residential
customers. Um, it's at least
lends a voice that may not
necessarily be in a regulatory
proceeding. Um, Ms. Beatles, I
think you, you mentioned, you
know, one of the concerns that a
utility has as well. Uh, and the
rash's comment about
priorities occurs, you know, you
have as a business, different
events that occur, um,
Whether they be weather events,
whether it be a change in
customer behavior, whether it be
new businesses or new
residential areas that show up
in a service territory that
impact how we have to focus on
serving those particular
customers. Um, and I think the
other item that that regulators
are, are, are becoming
increasingly mindful of is that
We as utilities in the industry
have an obligation to serve, but
we also know that we cannot
provide programs that um impact
our customers in such a way that
it, it undermines our ability to
fulfill that obligation that is
in statute and in regulation.
So, I, I get it that some folks
may not necessarily feel that
the utility is the voice of its
customer or at least a small
commercial and residential
customers, but I can tell you,
for those of us that are in this
industry, we are. Um, we are
mindful.
that we have that obligation and
we're recognized that there's
competing interests that we are
also balancing in some cases
with fiduciary obligations, um,
but recognizing that at the end
of the day, we have to fulfill
that obligation, and it is great
when there are people and voices
in the room that can really
specify and represent some of
those interests, especially so
we get the broad spectrum of our
customers represented at the
table. Um, we recognize that our
industrial customers are many
times going to be present.
There's certain interest groups
and and industries that are
going to be present, um, but if,
if, uh, it's great when the
Department of Justice is present
with residential customers and
knowing that we're balancing
those interests too, so my
advice to regulators is
recognizing that we're balancing
those interests, um, and while
we are going to explain the
priorities that may be a
disagreement on the specifics of
it, but that's precisely the the
balancing act that NMSA 62-3-1
says those interests are being
balanced by our
regulators who are setting the
guardrails for us to make those
business judgments, and they may
be within the, they may not
necessarily be the decision that
people would have chosen in
hindsight, but it was the most
prudent decision with the
information we had at the time
that we made it.
I have a related question that
that question for Miss Beetle is
really uh
Brings up to me uh
When
Utilities replace, let's say, an
underground cable that's failed
or has reached us into life.
Do they generally do a like for
like replacement or might they
Take advantage of the
opportunity that, you know,
they've got a, they've got to
dig a trench, they've got to
take it out.
You know,
Maybe that's an appropriate time
to think about upgrading the
capacity or does the utility
think, well, I'm not sure if the
regulators are gonna allow cost
recovery.
On
You know, a replacement that is
of greater capacity and
You know, logically that could
be sort of an organic least cost
way of upgrading the network.
I'm, I'm not suggesting it, but
I am suggesting maybe thinking
about it in, in distribution
planning, uh,
What are your thoughts around?
Whether, you know, the utility
would
May take advantage of, of the
opportunity.
I'll tell you it's a really
exciting time to be in this
industry, whether you are at
Cynthia Labs or in the solar
industry or commissioner or a
policymaker or a utility,
precisely for that type of
evaluation. I would say that
historically, people would and
our customers would say, uh,
dislike for like, I don't want
to think about it, that's just
the historically the way that
we've always done it. You
already know what type of line
you need, but that's not the way
our customers are using our
system anymore.
Our customers have a high degree
amount of elect electrified uh
um appliances in their homes.
Uh, they can now participate and
demand response programs in a
way that they haven't before.
Our industrial customers,
especially at SPS, are
electrifying significant
portions of the oil and gas
industry in the Permian Basin to
decrease carbon emissions in a
way that they haven't before.
The mindset has now changed such
that when there is a trench dug,
it's not just the immediate like
for like, and it's not to say
that it doesn't happen because
you obviously have to be
sensitive to what
The expected customer usages in
an area.
Um, but I would say that the
conversation is much more
thinking about what makes sense
and what can we plan for now and
what can we do now?
That is going to benefit the
distribution system and our
customers, given the way that
they are using the system today
in a way that they haven't over
the last 50 years.
Great, thank you.
Uh
Mr. Dunn, do you have a
So given that it's such a
critical time, and that there's
Issues on perhaps distribution
system planning, there's
possibilities of our investor
owned utilities that aren't SPS
entering into a market, uh, ISO
possibly in the future, energy
markets, um, there's, you know,
new resources in terms of
electrification of
transportation and possibly
virtual power plants, all these
different things that are coming
into play, that might be
beneficial, even the grid
forming um inverter types. What
is missing in our current
policies or in our regulatory
landscape, that will help.
us insure that some of those, I
believe, kind of the no regret
investments that might have been
preferred to either earlier by
Mr. Morash.
Um, are identified and are being
done and positioning us in such
a way that in the future, we
really did capitalize on those
and, you know, we're not going
back and having to re-evaluate
how, how do we integrate this
now that we're entering into an
ISO how do we integrate this now
that um we can use a virtual
power plant because there's an
aggregator out there that's come
to us with an opportunity, or
how do we integrate this such
that we're not having to go back
and
Figure out uh uh energy storage
system, or utility scale storage
system that was designed with a
traditional advanced inverter
now needs to have a grid forming
inverter. How do we, what
policies, what regulatory
actions need to be in place that
aren't currently in place that
help us make sure that we're
having those.
Yeah, thank you uh for that
question. So just, uh, real
quickly, whenever we have
technological advances, there's
always going to be
products that don't make it. I
mean, we can think about, you
know, the video recorder
industry. I, my first job was in
the desktop computer industry
and I can tell you lots of
technologies came and went, but
what, when we went through that
process, we came into
technologies that do work. And
so we all have smartphones and
laptop computers. So there's
going to be a lot of trial and
error that's going to happen.
But I think we still have to
move forward. I think we also
have to think about that there's
gonna be a, in my opinion, a
couple given.
here. One is electrification.
And so I think if we keep that
in mind, that's one thing that,
that's gonna help us. Another
thing is decentralization. The
50,000 solar systems every day
we're adding more and more to
that 5 million, by the way,
nationally. So I think if we
keep that in mind, um, that'll
help us, but yeah, we, we don't
know. No one here has a, a
crystal ball that we can
You know, see the future. Um,
and then one final thing I'll
say is that I think we, we
haven't really brought this into
the conversation, but the
climate change clock keeps
ticking, so we need to keep
working at this.
Yeah, any more thoughts, Mr.
Moresh.
Yeah, I'll hop in. I guess one
of the things I want to on a
clearly articulate here is that
the no regrets concept is, is a
dream, right? Um, and I worry
that sometimes we in the power
sector can can
For ourselves into this kind of
optimization problem that is, is
too optimized, it's too perfect,
right? So we, we sometimes let
the perfect be the enemy of the
good. And in the context of
climate change and in the
context of electrification and
massive technological change.
We're going to get some things
wrong, and, and we need to kind
of understand um the magnitude
of what we're willing to get
wrong, uh, and kind of be honest
about that, right? We, we can't,
we can't get everything
perfectly right.
Um, so that's the first thing.
And the second thing that I was,
I was gonna say, I think your
question was around just
generally like what kind of
regulations, what kind of policy
do we need? Um,
Uh
I, I think it's helpful for
policymakers to establish clear
targets, kind of statewide
targets, um, I've seen in some
areas where they say, hey, by,
you know, I guess it was defined
earlier that the, the governor
is going to have, you know, a
certain amount of new EVs sold
are are electric or new vehicles
sold or electric, um, and so
clearly defining kind of what
that means.
From a great perspective is
really helpful. And then
secondly, you know, metrics and
incentives, right? So you kind
of get the you across any
industry, you get what you
incentivize, right? So ensuring
that our incentives for our
utilities are aligned with the
goals of various policies, um.
I think it is super important.
Um, so, so there's a, it's, it's
a lot easier said than done, um,
but I think moving in that
direction is really helpful.
Add to that, man.
Yeah, I, I think, so there's
certain parts of this that if
you get it wrong, are easier to
leverage for other technologies.
And so if we're talking about
the like communication and
controls, you know, so you get
that demand response program
wrong and it doesn't benefit you
in the way that you thought, you
still have all of that same
infrastructure to redesign the
next program, that next control
to test it out. And so there are
certain pieces of that that I
think um uh on that controls and
communication data sensing kind
of.
said that are going to be used
for other technologies and even
if we get it wrong, or the in
the investment is still
worthwhile. Um, the only maybe
like caveat that I would throw
in there is, uh, if you're
adding all of those controls,
communication, we also need to
think about cybersecurity ahead
of time. Uh, we haven't
mentioned that at all here, but
I, I think that that is one that
you could get really wrong, um,
if you don't plan ahead. So, um.
Uh, just to bring that aspect
in.
Thank you. We've got just about
3 minutes left. I, I did wanna
ask, uh, this has been touched
on before, but I, I'd like to
ask specifically your thoughts,
uh, to everyone on the panel as
to how state regulators and
legislators might assist
utilities in the distribution
planning process.
Sure, I'll start with that one.
I think the the key one is, is
these types of conversations and
understanding the technology,
but also having that mindset of
what scalable, replicable, and
affordable.
Uh, it's great to be the first
mover and to try something that
is new and innovative, but we're
also, as we're balancing those
other factors, it's the risk,
we've talked about risk earlier,
we've talked about what are
essentially making sure that we
don't get ourselves into the
panacea of saying it's a no
regrets decision. I thought Mr.
Morash's comment was, it was
particularly insightful on that,
that we can sometimes let the
perfect be the enemy of the
good, and I think that it's that
balancing act and making sure
that we are representing the
design.
of all of our New Mexico
customers, all of our New Mexico
constituents, all the people
that are at the end of a of an
electric line that they need to
for to plug their appliance
into, um, and having that
mindset and not thinking that
maybe we're going to be find an
innovative technology that is
going to answer. We can totally
do that. We've got Sandia
National Labs and really great
innovative forward thinking, um,
mines in the state that make it
exciting to do energy here. Um.
But I think that what we also
need to recognize is that um
some of those voices cannot be
the only voices in the room as
we are thinking about all New
Mexicans as we were providing
electric service to them.
Thank you.
Any other on what legislators
and, and regulators might do to
help out in the distribution
planning process.
Thank you, Commissioner Ellison.
Um, so I do know there's a
working group of people right
now working on some legislation
called power up and so that, um,
something could come out of
that. Um, I, I do think that
it's very important that the
legislature is possible
communicate with each other to
know, um.
Any other thoughts?
Yeah, we, we've said a few times
integrated um on this on this
panel, and I think um
Talking more about what what
needs to be integrated would be
really helpful from kind of a
legislative and and regulator
perspective, um, I think that
there's opportunity there.
To integrate within the electric
power system, but then also kind
of think about more holistically
our energy systems as a whole,
whether it's kind of gas, uh,
natural gas, or um
You know gasoline, I think we
can.
Integrate some of our thought
processes across commodities in
a way that um will unlock
innovation that that's not
currently possible with kind of
the guard rails we have in
place.
Great. Thank you very much.
We've had a, a fantastic panel
today. Uh, please join me in
thanking our panelists for, for
being here and for this
conversation.
Thank you, panelists. Thank you,
commissioner. Uh, you're all
free for lunch as the agenda
says on your own in this lovely
recording stopped,
and then we'll see you back here
at 1:15. Thank you.
Hey.
This is a 2 minute warning.
OK. Welcome back, everyone.
And thank you for coming back.
I'm
Recording in progress.
So our next speaker is Miss Zoe
Lee from uh Xcel Energy. She is
the New Mexico and Texas
regional vice president of
Planning and Policy.
Prior to that role, Miss Lee's
practiced law in utility
regulatory field for a decade,
most recently as a principal
attorney representing Southwest
Public Service Company for Excel
Energy General Council.
She's a native of Santa Fe, New
Mexico, and graduated cum laude
from Wheaton College in
Massachusetts, and I found this
particularly interesting after
graduation, she spent a year in
Malaysia as a Fulbright scholar.
Um, I'm really excited about
this conversation about Chevron
and or I guess lack of Chevron
now. This is a as if you were
here last year, you may have
remembered her talk on
anticipating what may come. Now,
for those of you who are not
lawyers, uh, this still very
much pertains to what we do. So
even though it sounds like it's
gonna be a lawyer talk, it, it
really is gonna affect every
Day life for many of us, so with
that, I will turn it over to
Miss Lees.
Thank you so much. And thank you
to the New Mexico regulation,
public regulation commission for
inviting me back to give this
talk. I'm happy to report and
you can all hear that I actually
have my voice this year
which is a big improvement, I
think over last year. Um, and
also for letting me live my
dream job of being a law school
professor for just one hour
today, so thank you for that.
Um, but also I have to
say thanks a lot because there's
nothing so intimidating as
presenting one of the most
controversial Supreme Court
opinions to a room full of
attorneys.
So, be kind.
Um, let's see if I
Yes. So we have addressed the
Mike situation for questions. If
you have a question, raise your
hand. We have a PRC volin, he
got volun told. um PRC employees
gonna run the mic to anybody
with questions. So Zoe, I don't
know if you want to hold
questions till the end or
intermittently, it's up to you.
It's up to you guys. We can,
this can be a conversation if
you want it to be. So I wasn't
joking. This is one of the most
controversial Supreme Court
cases that were that came out
of.
Last session, the decision came
June 28th, 2024, and if you look
at some of the news headlines
from that day. It shows you.
Depending on who you are or what
podcast do you listen to. This
is either the worst decision to
come down in the past 40 years
or it's the best decision to
come out of the Supreme Court in
the past 40 years.
So again, thanks a lot. This is
no small task.
Um, you know, this weekend I
drove up to Taos with my husband
and I made him listen to
podcasts about Loper Bright, and
there is really varying degrees
of opinions about this, about
this decision.
Rightfully so, it really changes
the way courts look at
administrative decision making,
um, and interpretation of law.
So it's quite groundbreaking.
Yes.
But I want you all to kind of
take a sigh of relief for a
moment. This is a federal
decision. It does not change,
uh, deference in New Mexico
unless the Supreme Court decides
to change deference in New
Mexico. So remember that right
now for the remainder of the
hour, we're talking about
federal deference.
And um and the Supreme Court's
ability, uh, to, or the Supreme
Court's ability to interpret
law, um, that, uh, and to decide
whether agencies are right or
wrong in their interpretation of
the law.
So let's do
Take you all back to law school
for a moment, actually take you
all back to like 5th grade
civics because I'm going to go
through a couple of concepts
that are really important, um,
to get a refresher on before we
dive into the reasoning behind
Loper Bright. Um, but basics,
you know, we have a separation
of powers in the United States.
The legislature writes the laws,
the executive branch carries out
those laws and the judiciary,
the courts, resolves arguments
about what these laws mean, what
these laws mean, and evaluates
whether they're being enforced.
Properly
There's also this uh concept of
sorry decisis, which you all
remember from one all year, um,
it's the Latin term meaning to
stand by things decided. It's
basically the legal doctrine
that obligates courts to follow
historical cases when making a
ruling on similar cases. There's
different types of sorry
decisis. There's horizontal
stare decisis that refers to a
court adhering to its own
precedent, so it's own historic.
decisions and vertical stare
decisis, which refers to court
adhering to precedent from a
higher court. So when the
Supreme Court makes a decision,
the federal courts of appeals
follow that decision.
So courts very seldomly overrule
precedent. There's a few really
historic examples of this,
particularly, uh, fall in the
decision of Brown v. Board of
Education, where the US Supreme
Court explicitly overturned
lessy versus Ferguson. Um, what
the court does when a when
deciding to overturn, um,
precedent.
Is it looks to see whether prior
decisions are unworkable or are
badly reasoned. So that is kind
of the the construct that the
Supreme Court and other courts
use in order to justify overturn
stare decisis.
So what is this case about?
First, it starts with Chevron,
which 40 years ago, um, came to
the Supreme Court. It the
controversy was around the Clean
Air Act and how the Reagan era
EPA promulgated rules to enact
the Clean Air Act. The EPA was
interpreting uh the terms
stationary source and the way
they interpreted it was.
What they call the bubble
policy, so they were looking at
um one source, one plant, and
that was a stationary source.
They decided not to consider
each individual component in
that source as a separate
emitter. So, the NRDC challenged
this interpretation. It made its
way to the Supreme Court.
And the Supreme Court ruled in
favor of the EPA and thus the
Chevron Chevron deference was
born now, what happened?
In this case, was the court was
considering different expert
opinions about the meaning of
stationary source and after
going round and round on which
expert opinion should be would
be true. The court kind of threw
up its hands and created a rule
that provided guidance on how it
would defer to agency actions.
Um
And it was a two step process
first determines the law is
ambiguous, and if it was
ambiguous, then you go to step
2, which was determine if the
agency's action was permissible,
and it was permissible as long
as the agency's interpretation
was not arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to the law.
So for the past 40 years, this
has been the construct of
deference that the Supreme Court
has followed. Um,
Interestingly, the EPA secretary
at the time of this decision was
Secretary Anne Gorsuch.
And if you're kind of scratching
your head, your right. It is
Justice Gorsuch's mother.
The rule at issue in Chevron was
considered to be very industry
friendly, and this case at the
time was considered a success in
that it was, it upheld the
executive, the Reagan
administration's ability to
promulgate rules.
And, in that it interpreted that
based on the interpretation of
statutes, based on the
interpretation of the Clean Air
Act.
So, things have changed
politically in this country, and
you now see that Justice Gorsuch
is undoing kind of the rule that
his mother and her case really
established in this country,
which is allowing the agencies
to interpret law as long as that
interpretation is not arbitrary
capricious, or manifestly
contrary to the law. Now, I have
2 sons.
And I really hope that they
don't have it in for me like
Justice Gorsuch had in for Anne
Gorsuch. I'm just kidding, but
this is, was a huge landmark
decision at the time that it
passed and lo or Bright
Enterprises is a landmark
decision today.
So let's go to Loper Bright
Enterprises. Um,
Lower bright
Presented the Supreme Court with
an opportunity to overturn this
Chevron doctrine, and this
shouldn't be a surprise. It did
overturn the doctrine.
This at issue in this case is
the is the Magnusson Stevens
Act, which sets catch limits to
prevent overfishing, and it
requires that fishing boats have
a government appointed inspector
on board to make sure that
overfishing is not occurring.
Now
The
national marine Fisheries
Services issues, a regulation
under the Act, and it requires
the industry to pay for the
costs of these observers that
Amount goes to about $700 a day
and the statute is silent on who
pays for the costs of these
observers.
Um,
lower courts uphold the
regulation and the case goes to
the Supreme Court.
The question presented at the
Supreme Court is whether the
Court should overrule Chevron
versus Natural Resources Defense
Council, or at least clarify
that statutory silence
concerning controversial powers
expressly but narrowly granted
elsewhere in the statute does
not constitute an ambiguity
requiring deference to the
agency.
So this is the question
presented.
And the plaintiffs have kind of
their arguments fall into 4
buckets. First,
They argue that um Chevron
Grant's excessive power to
federal executive agencies,
allowing them to create laws
without proper oversight.
Um, they also argue that under
the APA, the administrative
procedures Act, which predates
Chevron. Um, the court is tasked
with deciding relevant questions
of law, interpreting statute
constitutional and statutory
provisions and determining the
meaning or applicability of
terms, um, in an agency action,
and they point out that Chevron
did not even consider the
administrative procedures Act.
in its decision making.
They also argue that starry
decisis does not apply to
Chevron deference because it's a
rule of interpretation rather
than a substantive holding. And
finally, it rules that under the
separation of powers, the
Constitution provides the
judiciary provides that the
judiciary determine what the law
is, cites Marbury versus
Madison, and Chevron gives again
too much deference to the power
of the executive branch and
which undermines the separation.
of powers.
The government defendants argue
Chevron's importance, talks
about 40 years of dependence on
the statute and and the
practical implications that it
allows agencies with the
expertise to interpret ambiguous
statutes.
Argues that the story decisis
argument is that it's important
to adhere to precedent.
And it notes that Chevron has
been a cornerstone of
administrative law for decades.
For as long as I've been alive,
you guys might remember that
joke from last year also.
Finally, um, the government
contended that Chevron respects
the separations of power by
allowing Congress to delegate
interpretive authority to
agencies, um, and again,
practically speaking, agencies
are more equipped with their
expertise to handle complex
regulatory issues. I would just
like to pause and say how cool
it would be to be a courtroom
illustrator.
I really should have worked
harder in art class.
So, if you listen to the oral
arguments, and I know a lot of
you did because you all text
messaged me. I'm looking at you,
Sydney.
Um
You would have seen a stark
divide, uh,
in the court. So there was a
clear divide between the
conservative and liberal
justices. Um,
You see it's a 63 divide with
justices Elena Kagan, Katanji
Brown, Jackson and Sonia
Sotomayor, expressing support
for Chevron, um, you know, I've
really good
Point that Justice Kagan brings
up and she again brings it up,
um, in her, in her opinion is
that uh in her descent is that
You know, Congress can't see
into the future and agencies are
just much more well equipped for
writing rules, um, that can
regulate according to the
statute. Um,
So you can already see when
you're listening to, or you can
already hear when you're
listening to the oral arguments
where this is going to shake
out.
And the court decides 63.
To overturn Chevron. Um,
This is a direct quote from the
opinion, the Chevron is
overruled, courts must exercise
their independent justice
judgment, excuse me, in deciding
whether an agency has acted
within its statutory authority,
as the APA requires.
Careful attention to the
judgment of the executive branch
may help inform that inquiry,
and when a particular statute
delegates authority to an agency
consistent with constitutional
limits, courts must respect this
delegation while ensuring that
the agency acts within it. But
courts need not and under the
APA may not defer an agency
interpretation of the law simply
because the statute is
ambiguous.
It's worth noting.
That
In Justice Roberts.
Opinion and he penned the
opinion of Loper Bright.
He, he states that
The court
Decided in 1984, 1984 by Bear
quorum of 6 justices triggered a
marked departure from the
traditional approach of
interpreting agency action. I
think it's worth noting here
that he characterized that
quorum as a bear quorum, the 6-3
decision. Loper Bright is a 6-3
decision as well.
Any questions so far before I
get into the court's reasoning.
OK
The court found that Chevron
deference and the reasoning
behind it was fundamentally
flawed, uh.
They, the majority opinion
argues that Chevron deference
undermines the judiciary's role
in interpreting the law. The
court emphasizes the separation
of powers and the importance of
maintaining clear, a clear
separation of powers.
The court argues that by
deferring to agencies, the
judiciary was effectively ceding
its power of interpretation to
the executive branch.
The court also argued that it
was the judicial judiciary
responsibility.
Um, to interpret the law and
that it wasn't meeting that
responsibility by executing
Chevron deference, um, the court
argues that judges, not
administrative agencies, should
have the final say in the
meaning of an ambiguous statue.
And then it discusses stare
decisis and states that Chevron
was egregiously wrong. I'll go
into a little bit more details.
Yeah.
Yeah, thank you. I have a
question. Um, so who had to pay
for the inspector.
Did the court interpret the
statute and decide who had to
pay the court just overturned
the the decision of the lower
courts.
Yeah.
So who ended up paying?
I don't know, Nancy. I stumped
her. OK. That's a good question.
It's a 36 page opinion, the um
The descents also 36 pages.
I'm gonna be honest with you
all, it's not that riveting.
And
I, I don't think they say
anything about who gets to pay.
But Nancy, go look. Tell me if
I'm wrong.
If you can stay away for it, so
the separation of powers. I put
you all love Hamilton.
Great rap, great Broadway show,
Hamilton gets quoted in this
majority opinion, um.
For, for, um, the proposition
that the proper that
interpreting laws is within the
proper and peculiar province of
the court, Marbury versus
Madison is used to support that
it is the duty of the judicial
department to stay what the law
is. Nancy, are you, are you
reading the decision yet
Yeah, tell me.
Um,
And then it goes to the APA and
the provisions um within section
7702 of the APA that say that it
is the judiciary's
responsibility to interpret
statutes rather than deferring
to the agencies for those
interpretations. They say
Chevron is inconsistent with the
APA framework, which was passed
in 1946 and um
That the opinion also looks to
what the legislative intent was
of the APA, um, when it was
enacted, suggesting that
legislative history supports a
more active judicial role in
reviewing agency
interpretations. I think it's
worth noting here that the
Roberts Court.
Has
Used Chevron deference before.
This is, it has been chipping
away at Chevron deference, but
Justice Roberts specifically had
applied Chevron deference in the
past. So this is the first kind
of
Wholesale departure from that.
um, and
This opinion does lean heavily
on the APA, um, which was passed
before Chevron was decided, and
Chevron was silent on it.
Finally sorry decisis, um,
Chevron is criticized, the
Chevron decision is criticized
for not considering the
administrative procedures Act
and the court says that it's
unworkable, that the court has
constantly limited the
application and it's had to
repeatedly clarify the doctrine,
uh, the concept of ambiguity has
always been evaded, the court
says, and meaningful definition,
um, there's no meaningful
definition of what ambiguity is
and that it cannot stand as an
everyday test.
allocating interpretive
authority between courts and
agencies.
So, what about the thousands of
cases that relied on Chevron.
The court is pretty clear and
I'll discuss this a little more
later on that those holdings are
still lawful, and still the
subject of statutory stare
decisis despite the change in
interpretive methodology. Um,
reliance on Chevron is not
enough. The opinion says in of
itself, uh, to constitute a
special justification for
overruling a case.
And deference will continue to
play a role.
So
Lower bright.
While it ended Chevron
deference. It didn't eliminate
all forms of deference to agency
action, and it's important to
note that courts are not
required to disagree with agency
interpretations.
Um, the decision only affects
rules or agency action based on
statutory ambiguity or silence.
And the clear, clear grants of
power to the agency remain in
place.
Also, the 80 year old president
of Skidmore v. Swift, it still
applies, uh, that
Um, that
Decision states that agency
interpretations made in
pursuance of official duty and
based upon specialized
experience, provide informed
judgment to which courts can
properly resort for guidance.
Justice Roberts speaks favorably
of this decision in the loper
bright decision and just in
Justice Kagan's descent
expressly notes that Skidmore
still applies in the future.
So
There's a few other limits to
the loper bright decision.
It while the decision empowers
courts to independently
interpret ambiguous statutes, a
power which this Court says it
always had and should not have
seated. It does not grant courts
the authority to override agency
expertise in all contexts. Um,
it doesn't disturb traditional
judicial deference to agency
fact-finding, specifically.
Um, Loper Bright doesn't permit
courts to reject discretionary
determinations when Congress has
conferred the power to make a
determination on the agency.
And the decision acknowledges
again the importance of
precedent saying mere reliance
on Chevron is not enough to
overturn a past decision. Like I
said before, the descent is
exactly the same amount of pages
as the majority opinion, uh, and
you see Justice Kagan really
writing a defense of Chevron and
a defense of keeping Chevron and
keeping Chevron deference in
place. She, uh, the, the scent
emphasis.
Sizes the importance of adhering
to precedent and argues that
Chevron has been a fundamental
principle and administrative law
for decades and overturning it
will create significant legal
instability.
Um, the dissent also argued that
it is administrative agencies
that present possess the
specialized expertise that
courts lack, making them better
suited to interpret ambiguous
statutes within their regulatory
domain.
The dissent says that there's
practical consequences to this
decision and warned that
removing Chevron deference would
lead to increased litigation and
uncertainty.
And then can on the separation
of powers piece contended that
Chevron deference respects the
separation of powers by allowing
Congress to delegate
interpretive authority to
agencies, which are part of the
executive branch.
So, what's happening?
Now that Loper Bright has been
decided.
Um, I will know, and I noted
this in the deck because I think
it's important, but 3 days after
the loper Bright decision came
out, the the Supreme Court held
that the statute of limitations
for challenges to agency
rulemakings begins to run when
the rule injures a plaintiff,
not when the rule was adopted,
so this kind of opens the door
as a plaintiffs can demonstrate
that they have been harmed by an
agency rule, even if that.
Agency rule has been in place
for decades, that they can bring
lawsuits and they can challenge
those rules. The Washington Post
just last week actually did a
very nice job of kind of
reporting on all the increased
lawsuits following, um,
following the loper bright
decision.
They did not discuss Eli Lilly
versus the FDA, which I think is
an interesting case coming into
the Ninth Circuit, that really
demonstrates kind of where the
tension is for
For doing away with Chevron
deference to agency
interpretations. And Eli Lilly
versus the FDA, the FDA was sued
over its classification of a
certain compound as a drug, um,
the plaintiff argued that
Loperbright Enterprises decision
supports its position by
limiting deference to the FDA's
interpretation of terms such as
protein and analogous.
What the agency, the FDA was
doing in this case was looking
at a certain sequence of amino
acids and making the
determination that that sequence
was a protein.
This determination will now go
to the courts to decide whether
they're the FDA is correct in
interpreting the law and
determining whether that
sequence of amino acids is
indeed a protein. I think that
there's, there are probably as
indicated by the Eli Lilly case.
Going to be very practical
difficulties with this, where
you will see the court being in
the very same situation as the
Chevron Court was in.
Reading multiple breaths from
using multiple expert evidence
to argue for a position, and now
it's up to the courts, not the
agencies to decide which one is
right.
Thank you.
Let's talk about it. What
questions do you have?
Yes. Hi, Russell.
Um, I'm wondering how this
interacts with other decisions
of this Court,
because in both, uh, Lopez and
uh Chevron.
It seems like what you had was
the interpretation of a very
specific.
Uh, phrase that's used in uh uh
statue and then uh one of your
slides said that
Um, clear delegations of
authority, which sometimes can
be the general at least if
they're not, sometimes there's a
broad delegation, um, don't fit
within this, aren't barred by
this, but haven't there been,
and I wish I knew the names of
the cases, but it seems like
there have been some cases from
this court that have said that
struck down broad delegations of
authority to agencies as well on
the theory that
Um
Congress was was giving up its
legislative power in a way that
it couldn't. Yeah, and you see
some of that kind of highlighted
and concurrence opinions in this
rustle, so kind of the court.
Signaling to the legislature
that they need to be careful
about what they do in their
statutes because then the
judiciary will find that it's
not a proper delegation of
power.
I do think what you're going to
see is Congress will need to be
much more exact in its
delegation in the statutes that
it writes.
How they will do this.
I don't know. I mean, I, um, I
have a colleague who thinks that
Congress needs to be like
quadrupled the size it is now in
order to put the amount of
detail in statutes.
Um, that needs to go in there in
order for agencies to know how
to do their job. Um,
On the other hand,
Um
These cases always come to the
Supreme Court when there is um
A question of whether an
agency's interpretation of a
statute, when it's ambiguous or
silent.
Um, is arbitrary or capricious,
so some folks argue that this
isn't too much of a
Change
Because if it's ambiguous or
silent, it would have come up to
the court anyway.
Um
Yeah.
I think that I think the courts
are gonna be a lot more busy.
I think that's like the very
practical.
Results of this, and we might,
it might take a few years, maybe
there'll be a new rule at some
point for interpretation, but
it's gonna take a while to see
how this shakes out.
Thank you.
And I will say that I am by no
means an appellate law expert.
But I welcome y'all's opinion.
Yeah, Kara.
Thank you and apologies for
being late. Um, I was wondering
your opinion as to the effect
that
Uh, lo bright my, wait, did I
get that mixed up?
No. OK. Um, might have, um,
um, will it affect, for example,
New Mexico agency
interpretation.
At all.
So that's really up to the New
Mexico Supreme Court, and so far
they haven't changed New the New
Mexico deference, um.
Construct.
Hi, Marco.
So I was just wondering, is
there sort of um
Conversation or idea about like
in the energy sector, um, people
on any side of, of what the
issues might be, but saying, oh
geez, like this issue is gonna
come up for sure because it was,
you know, something that under
the Chevron doctrine was decided
one way and now it's gonna, it's
gonna, there's opportunity to
revisit that, you know,
regardless of whatever side you
might be on and any other
decision, but just in terms of
the energy sector, are there
issues that we should be aware
of that might come up because of
this.
Yes, certainly. I mean, I think.
You know, when you see agencies
interpreting federal statute.
Marco, there's always gonna be a
party that's upset with that
interpretation now, right? So I
think it's just wide open for
any, any plaintiff to challenge,
especially because of the
statute of limitations and when
it starts.
Uh, at the beginning of it runs
with the injury, so we really do
see the door wide open for all
sorts of
All sorts of challenges.
I want you all to get your one
CLE credit. Do you have more
questions? Yes, chairman. Did
you raise your hand? Yeah, OK.
So in the interest of using the
whole hour, what's your opinion
of the fact that the Supreme
Court couldn't tell the
difference between smog and
laughing gas when they wrote
their opinion,
so you all really do need to
listen to podcasts about this
and depending on the podcast you
listen to, again, this is either
the worst thing to ever happen
or the best thing to ever happen
to the administrative state.
Just a couple of days before the
loper Bright decision comes out,
the Supreme Court has to
repeatedly issue um corrections
to an opinion that
Confuses, and I'm going to do it
now because I'm a lawyer and I'm
not a chemist. Um, nitric acid
and what is it, Chairman?
As nitrous oxides, which is
laughing gas or nitrogen oxides,
which is what forms smog,
and I think, you know,
Folks point this out as just
like the very practical, uh,
Difficulty of overthrowing
Chevron that the court cannot be
an expert in all things, right?
So
The reason to defer to an agency
is because it has that
expertise.
Um, and of course the plaintiffs
and Loer Bright are going to
argue that no, like there's
differing opinions on what the
statutory interpretation is, and
you need the judiciary to be
making those calls.
But yes, I know about it. I'm
not gonna give you my opinion
about these individual cases.
I don't know.
Re
Oh, did he with the, OK.
I don't know your name, but yes.
I guess I'll start by
introducing myself then. I'm
Casperott. I am general counsel
for the Office of Broadband
Access and Expansion. And for
us, the loper right decision is
concerning from a funding
perspective, and is anyone, I
guess my question then is, what
concern do we have about the
ability for broad infrastructure
projects and funding to start
coming down to the states now,
because if the if the FCC for
example, cannot decide how to
allocate funding that's been
given to them.
by Congress to share with the
states, then how will?
Money flow down to the states to
actually develop infrastructure,
such as broadband, I'm biased.
No, certainly, and you're right.
I mean, as agencies develop rule
to disseminate federal funding,
those rules can be challenged.
It slows everything down.
Representative, representative,
do you have?
I just, I just have to ask like,
as we're even moving into a 60
day session right now. How, how
we're going to approach some of
the, um, the policies that are,
you know, especially our energy
policies and all these sort of
sort of things of money policies
that will work together with,
with federal funding and those
sorts of all that's kind of
mixing in my head right now. How
are you or cause you're, you
know, from where you work, how
that was a perfect question on
the infrastructure, um.
How, how are we to approach
this, I guess. Any suggestions?
First of all, representative, I
think it's really important to
know like New Mexico deference
has not changed yet. Um, and I
think frankly, our legislatures
across the United States need to
do the best they can with the
information they have, right? So
when, when you're looking at
passing laws to effectuate the
use of federal funding. It's all
going to be kind of the same,
um,
Research and approach you took
before because those laws could
have been challenged already,
right? It just changes what sort
of deference the judiciary takes
when they're interpreting it,
when it comes up to their court,
um, and frankly, it, it says
that it is the judiciary that
interprets laws. They're not
going to be giving as much
deference to agency
interpretation.
So
I don't know that it changes
very much for you because
you know, plaintiffs still have
the ability to challenge these
rules.
Yes. Oh, this is gonna be hard.
You are the expert in appellate
law.
Hi, Zoe. Thanks for that. And
I'm not. I just have it. Yes,
you are.
Um, I'm wondering if in any of
your podcasts that you listen
to, um, or your opinion or
anything that you've heard. If
you have heard a way of like, I
feel like that we, well, because
in New Mexico in particular, we
rely on Chevron or the the New
Mexico version of it so much,
like it's just like fault, like
that's the first argument, like,
well, you have to defer to the
agency.
Um,
has anybody talked about maybe a
way of arguing, changing the
argument, um, so it isn't just
this automatic like.
kick stand that we just rely on,
but it's changing it so that we
don't end up with this smog
versus um laughing gas issue
rather than just, well, you have
to rely on what the agency said,
but shifting it a little to, to
something else. Like, has there
been any strategy about how to
better argue this so that we get
around this. I don't know.
But I know about the strategy,
but I think if you
Look at the opinion.
The opinion says, listen,
courts, it's up to you to
interpret the statue. If it's
ambiguous or if it's silent, but
that doesn't mean you have to
disagree with the agency, so
deference is still there. It's
just not, um,
Arbitrary and capricious
standard that it was under
Chevron. It's really up to the
court to decide if they agree
with the interpretation, uh, you
know, I would like to think when
it's like a highly scientific
question or highly engineered,
you know, that the court will
defer, but that's just going to
be.
Uh, you know, we're just gonna
have to see how it shakes out.
Yes.
And another pellet expert asking
me a question. I, I was just
gonna give an update, um, on the
original case real quick. The
original case that this was
based on the lower court sided
with the agency and said that
the um the private business
should pay and so they
overturned that and now the
agency needs to pay.
So that that's the result of
yes.
I thought they just kicked it
back to the lower court, but
I,
yeah, again, I don't, that's the
next panel.
So, so we, I have two questions,
but we'll start with the first
one. This ruling only applies
one to the federal level, but
does it
Only apply to regulations at the
federal level, or does it apply
to quasi-judicial determinations
at the federal level, so SEC
proceedings or or other
trial-like decisions.
Yeah.
OK.
So findings of fact in formal
agency proceedings, um, can be
set aside only if the court
finds that they're unsupported
by substantial evidence. So the
court really leans on the
administrative procedures Act
for the framework in which a
court will decide whether to set
aside like those determinations
that those
Factual determinations. Um,
loper bright only affects agency
conclusions of laws, so the
deferential standard of review
of agency fact finding. So then
my follow up question is,
Always the initial factfinder
has the determination of
credibility. So when you have
dueling witnesses, this, this or
dueling experts, this expert is
more credible than that expert.
Do you see that, um,
Being a guiding principle for
maybe some of our federal
regulatory agencies now that
we're in this state of affairs.
He
I don't know that it ever
wasn't.
So I don't know that that
changes. I mean, I think I
I mean, you all tell me like as
the agency, credibility of the
evidence.
is important, correct?
I don't know that this decision
changes that, Joya.
Yes.
A lot of cases
There's a lot of cases that are
being argued in the circuit
courts right now. And then uh
the various circuits around the
Country that are
Applying the loafer bright
standard, um, do you think that
with these cases that it's not
gonna be as big a deal as it
felt initially because the
Supreme Court is going to
continue to refine what they
really mean by deference in the
circumstance in which you do or
don't give deference, cuz I I
really think they're gonna be in
a position with some of the.
Cass that I've seen people
briefing.
Um, that, that they're really
not gonna wanna just go
overturned, overturned,
overturned, that just doesn't
feel like what the court's gonna
want to do. So what do you think
the odds are in terms of them
sort of narrowing what this
really means.
I think they're gonna have to if
there's gonna be a practical
application, Stacy. Um, but I
also just want to point out that
you see Justice Roberts saying,
In the majority opinion, like,
look, reliance on Chevron in the
past is not a good enough reason
to overturn.
A case. Um, so that's number
one. And then you also see him
saying,
The court can also agree with
agency interpretation.
Just because a rule is
challenged does not mean the
court is going to overrule it.
So signaling, I think that's
kind of a signal that says we're
not going to be overturning
every, you know, statutory
interpretation that comes to the
court, but I think it's really
you're right, Devil in the
details. I don't see how.
Mhm
The Supreme Court
practically can't refine a
deference rule.
There's a practical application
that needs to be refined still,
but we'll see. Yes, Leslie.
Thanks so much for this. This is
as good as last year, so I
appreciate it. Did you mention
Skidmore in your slides because
I was quickly reading something
else online and there so
Skidmore is a like an earlier
standard of review. I'm not, I
did not know this, or maybe I
did at some point, and, and so
the loper Bright court
repeatedly refers to Skidmore,
and that says I think this
should give us some um some
confidence. It says the Skidmore
Standard Review values
consistency in agencies.
interpretations of statutes and
imposes a duty on every agency
to explain itself in detail. So
there's this previous decision,
yeah, so, so I think we can take
some, just be a little more
confident that courts aren't
just going willy-nilly overturn
things if if this cause they,
they, they expressed confidence
or there's some regard for the
Skidmore standard of review,
yeah, I mean, Justice Roberts
we go is like favors or
favorably mention Skidmore.
many times, Justice Kagan in her
dissent explicitly says Skidmore
still applies and will apply in
future cases.
This is, I mean, it is a huge
shock to the system, 40 years of
precedent. Leslie is overturned,
right? Like.
Putting that aside, I think the
court is also signaling that it
will still defer to agency
decisions and
Uh
In certain cases because it's
Skidmore says reviewing courts
have to give respectful
consideration, quote, to agency
interpretations of the statues
they so that's,
gives me some consistency, yeah.
Interesting.
so
I mean you all sound like me and
my husband driving to Taos this
weekend. We went around and
around on this.
All right, if there's no more
questions, join me in thanking
Zoe for a great presentation.
Thank you.
So we're gonna take 9 minutes to
get ready for our next panel,
which, uh, Nancy gave us a
preview too, and we'll be back
then. Recording stopped.
All right,
All right, we have one more
minute, so if you could find
your seats.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and get started recording in
progress.
This panel on AI comes to us
from uh for special requests
from PRC staff members.
As we were talking about
potential topics for this, uh,
seminar, the request to discuss
AI came up again and again
because of it's emerging even
since the summer. It's grown.
and importance. And so, um, our
panelists today have elected to
introduce themselves, and so
with that I will turn it over to
them. Thank you.
Well, good afternoon. Uh thank
you all for being here with us
for this session on the use of
AI in litigation. Uh, my name is
John Crinkamp. I'm a hearing
examiner with the New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission,
um, been here for about 6 months
now. Before that, I was the
general counsel over at the
state treasurer's office, um,
and I'll turn it over, I guess,
to, to Miss Powell.
Thanks, John. Uh, and thank you
all for being here this
afternoon and I really
appreciate the invitation to
come and speak with you today. I
am Nadia Powell and I work with
uh electric or sorry, El Paso
Electric. I am in their
Enterprise Advanced analytics
Group. I've been with El Paso
Electric for about
15 years now, and in my first
many years at El Paso Electric,
I actually worked in regulatory
for about 3.5 years and we
filed, I think we prepared
probably 5 general rape cases in
those 3.5 years and filed 4 of
them because we are in 3
different jurisdictions, right?
Uh, New Mexico, Texas, and then
FERC also.
So it was a really busy time for
me. Um, I've also been a witness
in, in testimony also for CCN
cases and then, of course, been
on the receiving end of a
multitude of RFIs, so I think I
kind of know a little bit about
uh the regulatory side after a
uh was in regulatory. I went
over to the power generation
side and I was over our interest
in Pal Verde nuclear generating
station in far west of Phoenix,
and now in the Enterprise
Advanced Analytics. I am.
the director there.
Good afternoon. I'm Nick
Rossley. Well, that's a hot mic.
I'm gonna back that up cause I
talk too loud. Um, I'm Nick
Rossi and I'm an attorney in the
legal division uh here at the
PRC. I've been here actually 7
months, so you've been here more
than that, um, cause you got
here about a month before me,
apparently. Um, prior to that, I
was with the Interstate Stream
Commission here in New Mexico,
so water law, um, which actually
I'll have an example which I'll
get to here on that in a minute.
Um, but, and before that it was
a prosecutor in Clovis and
Portal.
uh, here in New Mexico, going
way back, I have an undergrad
degree in computer science and a
minor in math, which I think is
probably what I'm relying on a
lot in this uh presentation. So
looking forward to our
conversation.
Um, so for this session, uh,
we're gonna talk about a few
different topics. We're going to
start out with, uh, Ms. Powell
talking about, um, some of the
potential benefits and
drawbacks, um, of AI, uh, for
utilities, um, particularly in
the adjudicatory process. Um,
and then at that point, then,
um, uh, Mr. Rossi and I will
talk a little bit about, uh,
from the attorney perspective,
um, some of those risks and what
the benefits might be of the use
of AI, um, one of the examples
that I'll talk about is, um, the
Mata Abianca Incorporated case
from uh New York just last year,
um, and we will have, because
this is a CLE, uh, we have
promised that we will talk a
little bit about the rules of
professional conduct, um, and
some guidance that we've seen
from the courts on this. Um, and
then finally, Mr. Rossi will
finish up, uh, finish us off
today by talking a little bit
about how AI might be useful,
um, in discovery. Again,
particularly in um our sort of
utilities world, um, and then
some.
Uh, related issues. The focus of
the presentation overall is to
identify, uh, what issues there
might be with, um, the use of AI
particularly, um, again in, in
litigation before the PRC but
also just litigation more
generally, um, we're not
necessarily providing definitive
answers on all these questions,
the courts themselves are still
grappling with some of these
issues, um, but just trying to
identify what those risks and
considerations are particularly
for attorneys before they would
use um AI.
Um, we talked before we, we
started this, uh, we, we would
encourage questions throughout
the presentation, even if we're
in the middle of the slide,
please do, uh, just raise your
hands. It's always more
entertaining to do these
presentations, uh, in a more
interactive way rather than us
just sort of talking at you.
Uh, and so then with that, I'll
turn over to Ms. Powell for our
first sort of segment.
Thanks and by entertaining you
mean more entertaining for us,
right?
OK. I, I really like audience
participation, so, so please
play along and make me feel
better about this, uh, by show
of hands, how many people know
what AI is.
Fantastic. Keep your hands up if
you have ever used a generative
AI.
OK.
So we got some hands that went
down and then yeah, keep your
hands up if you've ever used or
know what chat GPT is, Gemini,
co-pilot.
Fantastic. OK. So that gives me
a little bit of framework for
what I'm about to say to you
guys here today too. Um, I'm so
I'm gonna kind of lean on my
background in regulatory to
understand how AI might fit into
that realm. And um so if we'll
go to the next slide, please. I
wanted to start a slide with
talking about AI, so right, AI
like boomed onto the scene in 20
in the 2020, 2022s, right, and
everybody's like AI AI AI
throwing their hands up, we got
to use this, whatever the heck.
It is, we've got to use it and
I've been trying to tell
everybody, look, if AI was as
easy to implement as it was to
spell, we'd all be doing it.
So let's back up and figure out
what it is and how are we
talking about it. So if you look
at AI artificial intelligence as
the like the big green bubble
and I think this is a kind of a
good visual for how to think
about AI that artificial
intelligence encompasses things
like machine learning, deep
learning, neural networks, and
this little thing called
generative AI, which was the
huge AI buzz back in 20 in 2020,
2022, right? So AI is not new.
It was, it's been around since
the 50s in terms of machine
learning and stuff and they've
done some really cool things.
And um I, I would tell you that
most utilities, uh, if you ask
people that were involved on
that side, we tell you we've
been doing AI for decades, but
it's the generative AI piece
that's fairly new to us today
and the and what the big buzz
has been about, right?
Um, so,
I, it's interesting because it
doesn't anybody, there's no real
definition for AI.
Right? There's no accepted
worldwide definition for AI and
AI really just is an opportunity
for a machine to do something
that I would typically take
human intelligence to do.
So there's a real distinction
here I wanted to make again
between the what AI is at the
great big bubble and then what
generative AI is today. And so
that for like the rest of this,
at least my portion of the
presentation will talk be
talking but almost exclusively
about generative AI.
Next slide, please.
So 111 thing about AI too, just
so you know what what we have
today, we're typically talking
about 8, when we talk about AI
today's characterizes what we
know is narrow AI and narrow AI
has the ability to to um
Predict what the next word might
be. That's why I'm going to get
a little bit of that in the next
slide about how does an AI AI
work, um, but it doesn't think
it's not creative, it doesn't
reason.
That is not the AI that we have
today. Today was again the
narrow AI what we're, what
scientists and people far
smarter than I are working
towards is what's called
generative AI, and that's when
you have a computer that really
acts and reasons like a person,
and I've talked I, who is the
podcast person here, um, Zoe,
she was talking about podcasts.
I listened to a lot of those
too, and there's experts that
are telling me.
Uh, we're gonna be in general AI
in the next 5 to 7 years, maybe,
maybe 3 years.
And then there's another podcast
that'll tell you like it's gonna
take us 10 years for people to
even adopt AI adopted.
What we have today is generative
AI, right? So it's to this as we
started all of this and we talk
rose our hands about, yeah, I
know what AI is, then I ask
about who used Jeerva saw a lot
of hands go down and then as I
talked about chat GBT, maybe
some hands go up and others go
down. So it's about adoption
too. It's not just about the
technology and it's maybe some
or all of you know adoption can
be hard, change can be hard for
people, and so maybe not, not
necessarily.
Um, a widespread, but I will
tell you in my, and this is my
opinion and not the opinion of
the rest of my panelists nor the
opinion of El Paso.
But, but in my opinion, those
people who are early adopters of
generative AI are going to be
ahead of the game.
So is this a slide here shows
there's been a lot of growing
interest in using AI to do some
things. I wanted to go over some
of the use cases, the early use
cases that utilities and utility
industry had thought about, and
many of them revolved around
regulatory, so I think we can
all appreciate um the burden of
writing, uh, witness testimony
or briefs or replying to RFIs.
What can general today I really
do for you in that.
framework. It can give you a
starting point.
So it can ingest data that you
typically uh chat GPT today if
you just go on to chat GBT
today. What, what you're looking
at or what you're accessing is
like millions and millions of
books that it's been trained on
this, this algorithm, if you
will, has been trained on.
Plus what's in the, what's on
the internet and so today I can
tell you that chat GPT is
probably October 2023, it's been
trained on information of the
Internet up to October of 2023,
but it now this new chat GPT4
has access to the internet, so
it can also give you real life
updates.
So it's think about as you're
putting together some testimony
or something like that. Wouldn't
it be nice to have a starting
point or responding to an RFI,
it'd be nice to have a starting
point.
So the, the early industry, uh,
the early use cases that the
industry was thinking about was,
of course, responding to our
advice, as I said, summarization
of large documents, legal
documents, drafting documents,
so a lot of people would even
draft emails and I am one of
those people. I think it's
awesome. You can even tell chat
TBT like be snarky and it will
be.
In your response. So, um,
document content retrieval. This
is a big one at EPE too. We have
probably 4 or 5 use cases
pending today around document
retrieval and that's both for
like contractual agreements,
supply chains, uh, agreements,
PPAs, those kinds of things, um,
being able to retrieve that
document and even a particular
section in that document because
you can guide a generative AI or
large language model.
To extract just those pieces of
that and then give that back to
you for the response and then an
employee assistance retrieval,
imagine being able to put your
um
Your employee handbook or your
benefits handbook into a uh an
opportunity for a large language
model to extract the information
there and I as an employee, go,
geez, I, I don't know how many
days I have left of PTO and I
just go to my, my assistant, my
chat assistant, and I put that
in there and it retrieves the
information for me and tells me
you got 2 days, right? And then
I cry because I only got 2 days
so.
Clearly, there's some, there's
some good use cases here.
Uh, for AI again.
Imagine being
And this is what I first thought
of when AI first came out. I'm
like this can be glorious.
So, uh, being in, in the
regulatory realm, I thought to
myself.
What if we as a utility or any
utility says nope, you can't use
any kind of generative AI.
But are in uh our interveners
don't have that same
restriction. I can see a
scenario where they're
generating hundreds, maybe
thousands of RFIs and sending
them to the utility, and we've
got 10 days to reply and we're
just overloaded, right? And,
and, and overcome with, with the
questions that are coming up and
so it has to be kind of a a
two-way street. We need to avail
ourselves of the technology
that's gonna make things more
efficient for the electric
utility as well.
Here we go about how do large
language models work, and I know
this even seems black box, very
black box to me, even though I
have uh an economics background,
and I know about algorithms and
stuff like that, even this, this
stuff is pretty cool and way
advanced.
But essentially what it does is
it's a large predictive model
and so it again ingests all of
the information that it's been
trained it, the algorithm has
been trained on for uh for, I
mean, hundreds of thousands of
data points and then it predicts
what the likely next word is, so
you put in your prompt.
You know, please give me um
The Red Sox, um,
how they did for the last 10
years, and then it predicts what
the next words should be that
answer your question. So again,
this is a predictive model, not
a reasoning model, so it doesn't
like if I say something like
that to somebody who knows
something about sports, not me.
They're gonna go, oh, hey, it's
this, this and this, right? So
it doesn't have that kind of
cognitive ability. It's really
predicting what you think should
be the next words, and that's
how it makes its response to
you.
So LLMs are a type. LOM stands
for large language model, of
which chat GPT is, and the
frontier models, what they call
frontier models are really the
the very large models that we
see today and that's chat GBT
and Gemini,
um, and then Claude is another
one too, so those are called the
large frontier models, and those
models are the ones that people
have been working on and
training for a very long time to
bring this like really new
technologies, new, really neat.
technology that can do so much.
And the large language, or I'm
sorry, the frontier models are
um.
Characterized by their large
scale, their generalized ability
to do things across really a lot
of different things, so a lot of
different things you can ask it,
so if, for example, it's not
specific to coding, for example,
although there are language
models that are specific to
coding, or it's not specific to
say marketing, and although
there are ones that are specific
to marketing, there are a lot
more uh generative models out
there today, besides the ones
that you hear about all the
time.
Uh, again, working with the
predictive modeling and I told
you about how through October
2023, chat GPT is up to October
23, but can access um more
recent stuff on the internet. So
what becomes important as you
work with a large generative
model like that is understanding
how to speak to it. And so it
kind of has, if you will, a
language of its own and and
that's called prompt
engineering, and I don't know if
people are too familiar with
that, but, but prompt
engineering is a way.
for you to put in the prompt in
into chat GBT in a way that it
can interpret it and give you
back the most accurate answer
and now I think the rest of our
panelists and I will talk a
little bit about how a large
language model can hallucinate
or have biases, and that's, that
is absolutely true, and I have a
funny example of that here in a
minute, but prompt engineering
is, is the methodology for which
we train we and we get to um
talk to the model and get it to
interpret what.
We're saying and then give us
back a proper response so that
we can get what we want. You can
put in a lot of uh, you know,
fairly high level stuff and
getting a response, but if you
want something far more
detailed, you're gonna have to
learn to do a little bit of
prompt engineering, and I have
like a couple of examples here.
So for example, you could tell
Jap chat GPT asked me clarify,
you put in your prompt, whatever
you want, whatever you want to
hear, and then you say ask me
clarifying questions until
you're 95% confident that you
complete the task.
Successfully.
And then you have a
conversation, if you will, with
this computer that continues to
ask you clarifying questions so
they can give you the right
answer.
Or you can instruct chat GP GPT
in the what's called chain of
thought technique, and that's
guiding the large language model
to use step by step problem
solving, so you tell it, tell
me, here's what I want to know
and tell me the steps that you
went through to analyze that
response and and how to give it
to me.
And then, of course, for chat
GPT now, tell it to look for
the, the most relevant search
the internet for the most
relevant and and up to-date
responses for this.
I want to pause here and tell
you a little story about um uh.
It's New York State, someplace
in New York State, and I, I
think it's uh New York City.
They produced a large language
model for their uh citizens so
that they could research zoning
rules and uh regulation
questions.
You, you stay on that one. Yeah,
that's perfect. Thank you. Um,
and the LLM was essentially
putting out wrong and false
information, essentially telling
people to break the law.
And,
and they quickly found this out,
but training a large language
model and and I think somebody
when I was talking to somebody
earlier, they're like, well,
what about the data centers that
have to support these large
language models. So they, they
got the the connection between
these large language models and
what it really takes in order to
be able to produce a response.
The New York City spent so much
time and effort training models
so that they could do this when
they found out that the mom was
actually telling people to break
the law.
They decided they were not going
to remove that model.
Now, they'll fine tune the
model, don't get me wrong, but
they weren't gonna just take it
down because it was expensive to
do and, you know, for the
majority of of what it told
people to do or how to do
things. It was accurate and
correct.
So I think we can see, did I
skip me one? I did. All right.
So,
think about, I'm thinking about
how, how could a utility best
use a large language model.
Certainly we have a lot of
concerns, the same concerns that
I'm sure the legal profession
does and then many of you out
there do about what about
information that's sensitive.
You're not like I don't want to
put my sensitive information out
on chat GPT because chat GPT
takes that and learns from it,
puts it out for everybody else
too, right? And the response. So
you, you want to limit the um
ability for a large language
model.
to be able to access sensitive
information or or business
information. So the way that I,
and I, I want to give a shout
out to utility Analytics
Institute is a a.
group that I belong to that's
doing a lot of great work here.
Several of the utilities. I just
went to a seminar a few weeks
ago and several of the utilities
are now using what's called a
retrieval augmented generation
along with a frontier model like
a chat GPT. So retrieval
augmented generation or rag.
is an opportunity for the
utility to curate data of their
own in a in a database that
resides either on premises, so,
so the utility has absolute
control over or it can also
reside in the cloud where the
utility also has absolute
control over it. And what's
interesting about this way to do
generative, um, AI is that the
model will first go to the local
or or the the cur.
a data set and look for a
response and then feeds it
through the frontier model, the
large language model, to give
you a response. So your
information is no longer going
out into the ethernet for
everybody else to see and hear
and and learn about.
So it's so there are
opportunities.
Because we are certainly
concerned as a utility and these
utility industry about what gets
out in the in the public domain.
As we all should be, right? And
I am no cybersecurity expert,
but I did check with our
cybersecurity expert before I
had this conversation with you
all, just to make sure that I
was uh accurate in telling you
that uh even in the cloud we
have, we can have certain
security around our data that
allows us to be to avail
ourselves of this new
technology.
So, I gave you an example
earlier about how large language
models and they're trained on
large data sets as I was sitting
here today, I heard information.
I heard data and information in
the very first um presentation
that we had and then later on
when we talked about the grid, I
heard all about algorithms and
feeding those algorithms, right?
And, and what is the underlying
thing that feeds that
information in those algorithms,
data.
So for me as as a person that is
kind of trying to promote and
and launch this kind of thing. I
think one of my primary concerns
is how is the data that we are
putting into these models and
not not only the frontier
models, but the models that we
build in house. How are they
being curated? How are they
being managed and how are they
being governed. And, and
governance of data does not mean
who has just, who has access to
what their governance of data
goes.
Far, far beneath that. I have
another story to tell you about
a utility.
Who hired a consultant to come
in because they were having
these outages on a certain, uh,
let's say transmission line
because I don't remember his
transmission or distribution
line. We have these outages all
the time. We really can't figure
out what it is. We need your
help.
So a consultant company came in
and they started digging through
their data.
And they came back to their
executives and they said bald
eagles.
And the guy goes, what?
Bald eagles, that's your
problem. You have a problem with
bald eagles. That's why your
transmission lines going out. He
goes, that's the craziest thing
I've ever heard. We only have
half bald eagles in this, in
this part of the country. And
he's like, yeah, but that's what
all your people are putting down
is the cause.
So people were going out into
the field, right? The field
personnel, there would be a
downed transmission or
distribution line, they had
their tough books and one of the
first question is, you know,
cause of of outage and there's
a, a drop down menu of, I don't
know, let's say 50 things and
then those people just didn't
want to scroll through all that
and the first one was bald
eagles.
So now that the problem is bald
eagles. So you see where
curating data is should be a
real concern for people and and
it should be concerned for, for
us as we move forward with this
brand new technology. How will
we governing our data? What kind
of, what kind of guardrails are
we putting in place for our
large language models and our
our artificial intelligence like
even our machine learning
models, what kind of guardrails
are we putting into place there?
What are the, what are the
ethical concerns that we should
be looking at as we build.
new models today that will
service our industry for many,
many years.
One more quick example, sorry,
I,
I every time I turn the page,
he's over there. I'm gonna, I'm
gonna move this. So a quick
example about uh a
hallucinations and and biases
that that can happen and um
about.
5 months ago I was asked to do a
presentation in front of our
board of directors, and I
thought, God, this will be,
wouldn't it be cute to put in
the um the bio of R CEO into the
chat GPT model and see what it
comes up with. And so what we
did was we cut and absolutely
cut and paste from our Internet
onto or or our internet page. In
the chat GBT and said,
Excuse me, create an image of
the person that is in this bio.
And it did and it was beautiful.
She was very nicely appointed.
She had on a wonderful suit, and
she was a black lady. Of course,
there's nothing in Kelly's bio
that would have suggested she
was white. So this model said,
OK, we're gonna, she's going to
be a black woman.
Fantastic. Then there was this
really cool option. It's like,
hey, we could even put a power
plant behind her, you know, you
could put a windmill behind her.
That'd be cool. Let's put a
power plant behind her. So I
click on that option and as soon
as I do, it turns her white.
So she grows from being a black
woman in a utility and then in
but in front of a power plant,
she's a white woman.
So there's certainly biases
built into um models that we
need to be careful of. So the
story, more of that story is 6
months later I'm like, I'd like
to try that again and see what
happens this time. And this time
it told me, sorry, we can't do
that. We don't have enough
information to generate a liking
of this person.
Please try again or give us more
information. So the lesson there
is that these models, these
large language models are
constantly being worked on. And
so what is a hallucination or a
bias today.
Next week could not, it, it
could have corrected itself.
So as we move along in this
journey, all of us together kind
of holding hands and hoping that
we're doing the right thing, uh,
know that there are people that
are looking at that and that do
hear us when we say there are
hallucinations. There are
biases, and these are the
reasons why we think maybe we
shouldn't be using these models.
OK. We, we can go to the next
one. Thank you.
So, um,
I talked about companies
focusing a little bit more on
governance as a way for us to be
able to use these models and in
going back to the original kind
of exercise here about how are
these models going to be
utilized in um legislation and
regulation, uh, particularly
here at the NMPRC none of what
I've said to you today takes out
the human person. The, the
promise of AI was that we would
be able to say
direct people for for kind of
simple tasks, so think of maybe
um customer service
representatives that are
answering the phone. If you can
redirect people that are coming
into your call center, let's say
you have 10 people that are
handling 11,000 calls a day.
But you're able to redirect,
let's say, 50% of those people
to other means, so that might be
a chatbot serviced by a large
language model or, or it might
be a FAQ page or anything like
that. But if you're able to
redirect some of those people,
then you need fewer people in
your call center. That's the
promise of AI. Now, it
But it doesn't eliminate the
person. We still, uh, everybody
here that ever uses chat GPT or
that we'll use chat GPT or
Gemini or any of the number
other number of ones that are
coming out, need to be cognizant
that what it, what it's giving
you is a place to start. It is
not the end result in in that
that that responsibility lays
with each and every one of us,
much like it does with any new
technology.
Thank you.
So for this next, uh, whoops,
sorry, uh, for this next
segment, um, of the
presentation, uh, Mr. Rossi and
I are gonna talk a little bit
more specifically about um how
attorneys can, um, think about
AI, uh, in terms of their
practice. Um, and I think that
the best place to start, um, is
the, are the rules of
professional conduct. Um, so,
uh, and one note I want to make
sort of at the outset is, um,
when we talk about AI, uh, when
during this portion of the
presentation, and when we talk
about the guidance so far that
we've received from our courts
or from um our um sort of ethics
advisory opinions, um, a lot of
the time, uh, these decisions
are more or these
recommendations are more
generalized because there's just
a lot of different ways that AI
can materialize itself in terms
of the practice of law. So one
that we've heard, one that we're
certainly going to talk more
about is chat GPT that's
generative AI you can give it a
prompt, it can come up with.
something substantive. Um,
there's also more passive, what,
what could be considered almost
more passive forms of AI where,
um, like for instance, if you go
into uh New Mexico one source
for attorneys, if you look at
statutes that way, you'll notice
that the courts have come up
with an AI generated summary of
new cases from uh the courts,
uh, that's a different type,
obviously a different
application of AI, um.
Another example would be if you
do a Google search now, you're
going to get sort of an AI. A
lot of the time you're going to
get an AI generated sort of
response to that, um, and so
there's different applications
of AI and so what that means is
that when the courts and and
these sort of ethics advisory
bodies are coming out with, um,
opinions at this stage, this
sort of early stage, they're
going to be more generalized and
they're going to be sort of
identifying the considerations,
uh, that attorneys need to have
without, uh
necessarily telling you, you
know, these are the hard and
fast rules that are going to
govern the use of AI because
again, it's, it's relatively
new. Um, so, with respect to
the, to the rules of
professional conduct, um, uh,
the Rule 16 101, uh, talks
about, um, the duty to provide
competent representation to a
client. Um, and what's
interesting is in the committee
commentary, um, the, uh, the
language talks about how
attorneys in order to maintain
contain their requisite
knowledge and skill. They have
to keep abreast of changes in
the law and its practice,
including the benefits and risks
associated with relevant
technology. So this is a mandate
effectively in, um, our ethics
rules that attorneys do to at
least to a degree, have to keep
up with these types of
technological advances,
especially, um, if they're
considering actually using them
in their practice. And so, um,
that means that we need to sort
of, uh, consider what the
benefits would be of the use of
these different.
Uh, applications of AI as well
as what their risks are.
Um, and at least for me, the,
the, uh, my sort of introduction
to this, this concept last year,
um, was this case, uh, from the
Southern District of New York,
uh, uh, a federal case, uh,
Marta v. Abianca Incorporated.
Um, you probably read about
this, or you know someone who
did, this was covered
extensively in the media. It was
in the New York Times, I think
it was in the Washington Post as
well. Um, if you, uh, ever
remember growing up with a
series of unfortunate events.
This case is sort of the
embodiment of that, um, so, uh,
and just sort of, sort of tee up
what happened in this case and
why it got so much media
attention, um, so, uh, this is a
case where, uh, that involved
the use of AI, generative AI
chat, GPT in drafting pleadings
and litigation. So that's what
uh we're gonna talk about, um,
and, uh, sort of just as to
frame our discussion of it, the
facts of this case, this was a
personal injury case. Uh, if
you've been on an airplane, you
know how they serve drinks.
And those little carts. This was
a cart that ended up, I think,
hitting someone's knee. Uh, they
sued the airline, um, and the
airline then files a motion to
dismiss, arguing in relevant
part that the case is
time-barred.
Um, and the plaintiff's counsel
then files a response, uh, to
the motion to dismiss. And this
is where things go off the
rails.
Uh, so plaintiff's counsel, uh,
apparently was running short on
time, um, and there's a lot of
ethical issues in this case. Uh,
I'll just say, and it's totally
worth reading if you, if you are
uh interested, but, um, as sort
of a way to get some of his time
back, uh, plaintiff's counsel
used chat GPT to come up with,
uh, a response to the motion to
dismiss.
Um, the response cited to a lot
of cases, uh, or at least what
the attorney said were cases,
um, and if you read the, uh, you
know, the, if you, if you read
these citations, they look like
they could be plausible. Uh,
they look like they, uh, I mean,
Varhesi the China Southern
Airlines. It's a, you know, 11th
Circuit Court, um,
uh, these uh these different
cases, the way that they were
used in the actual response to
the motion to dismiss.
There were quotes, they had
their own internal citations,
you know, to other cases. Um,
the problem is that, uh, a lot
of these decisions were made up.
They did not exist at all.
Um, the attorney, um, did not
catch that, um, and did not
check to make sure that they
were in fact accurate. Um, and,
uh, what later ended up coming
out is that the attorney at
least said, to the extent that
this is credible, um, he just
could not imagine that the
application like this could give
him incorrect answers. Um,
that's what he said in any
event. And that's that's one of
the biases for um a large
language models and frontier
models is they want.
To respond, they are biased to
respond. They, they're nice.
They wanna, they wanna give you
a response and that's why it
hallucinates like that.
Yeah, and, and I'll give you
some examples of the actual
prompts that this, um, attorney
was using. I mean, the, the long
and the short of it is that when
GBT couldn't find anything to
actually say what the attorney
wanted to argue, Chat GPT
thought the solution to this is
to come up with something, just
essentially just make it up.
Um, so they filed this, uh,
response to the motion to
dismiss. Obviously opposing
counsel then, um, starts looking
at this and um has some
concerns, right? Because
they're, they um they can't find
these cases, they can't find
them anywhere. Um, and they file
a reply to the um plaintiff's
response, and they say that, uh,
and they say it's sort of in a,
in a delicate way. They don't
say, hey, you know, the
plaintiff's counsel has just
completely fabricated these
cases. They say, we cannot find
these cases. We've looked at.
everywhere and we can't find
them. Um, the court then does
its own search, and the court
also cannot find these. It looks
in Westlaw, it looks in uh
Lexis, cannot find these
particular decisions. Um, in
fact, the court goes so far at
one point as to contact the
courts, uh, that are alleged to
have produced these opinions and
see if the courts themselves um
can find them.
When the court's efforts in that
regard fail, uh, the court then
orders plaintiff's counsel, OK,
give us, uh, copies of these
cases.
So, once again, what plaintiff's
counsel does is they go back to
chat GPT.
come up with these, these cases.
And uh the court starts looking
at these, uh, cases. Um, again,
cannot find them, uh, you know,
normally if you can hand an
attorney a case, we can take a
sentence out of that and find it
in a legal database, or at least
hopefully.
Um, and the court also starts
sort of taking a closer look at
the, these, these alleged uh
sort of extracts from these
cases. I noticed that they're
really strange. Uh, they, they
don't make sense, according to
the court, uh, the, one of these
decisions shows quote stylistic
and reasoning flaws that do not
generally appeal appear in
decisions issued by the United
States Court of Appeals. Uh, I
got a kick out of some of these,
uh, the legal analysis is
gibberish.
Uh, the summary of the case's
procedural history is difficult
to follow and borders on
nonsensical. Uh, the decision
abruptly ends without a
conclusion.
Um, again, there are parts of
this that sort of look like it
could be legitimate because chat
GPT was trained, right, on
actual court opinions, but
again, there are details that
aren't quite lining up.
In another case, uh, again cited
another fictitious case, and I,
I, I want to be clear, these are
not real cases, uh, to the
extent that anybody's
photographing, um, anything
other than a citation up on the
top, um, but in one of these
cases, uh, this Miller v. United
States or United Airlines, um,
the case lists Alberto R.
Gonzalez as counsel for, uh, the
defendant. And the court just
notes, well, you, you know, for
those of us who are political
junkies, uh,
Um, Alberto Gonzalez is a former
United States Attorney General.
Uh, but obviously he, um, you
know, uh, was not counsel for
the defendant in a fictitious
case. This case does not exist
again.
And the other interesting thing
about this is, again, when chat
GBT is asked by this attorney to
come up with these excerpts, um,
again, based on the information
that it has, it has the names of
real judges. So it actually
lists the names of real judges
as the author of these
fictitious cases and these,
again, uh, writing that uh is
gibberish, uh, you know, says
it's, it's by a particular by a
particular judge.
Um, so, obviously, the court
ends up conducting a sanctions
hearing in this case, uh, and,
uh, plaintiffs counsels then
asked, you know, to testify, how
in the world did did this, uh,
did this happen?
Um, and counsel explains that,
um, essentially, the initial
prompt was to chat GPT to argue
my case for me, right? Tell me,
tell, tell me exactly what I
need to, uh, what my argument
is, um, and chat GBT at that
point responds without citations
to authority because it can't
find any, right? Um, so then it
continues these prompts continue
and the court finds that when
directed to quote provide case
law.
Or quote, show me specific
holdings, show me more cases or
give me some cases, um, the
chatbot essentially complied by
making them up.
So that's how, that's how this
happened.
The must have been highly
embarrassed. Well, yes, uh, now
keep in mind, as all this is
going on up until the point, I
think of the sanctions hearing,
um, the attorney has not
admitted that this whole these
citations are made up. So, um,
when the court initially, um,
says, you need to provide me
these excerpts. The attorney
doesn't go, hey,
Judge, you know, Your Honor, I,
I messed up. I use chat GPT, um,
the attorney does not
acknowledge anything and insists
that these cases are right
until, um, at the, at the very
end of that case.
Um,
so, obviously the court uh found
uh a number of ethical
violations, uh, in this case, as
well as subjective bad faith,
uh, on the part of plaintiff's
counsel, um, plaintiff's
counsel, obviously the, the
first sin here, uh, was that he
did not read a single case that
was cited in his own brief.
Uh, that's a problem, right? Um,
that's that attorneys in the
room, we don't typically do
that. Um, at least we shouldn't
do that. Um, and then not only,
not only that, but then the
attorney also swore to the truth
of an affidavit submitting those
excerpts as, uh, true.
Also, uh, a real problem, um,
for the attorneys.
So the uh court uh ends up
instituting some sanctions here.
Um, he finds, uh, the, uh,
plaintiff's counsel personally,
$5000 which I actually think is
a little on the low side.
Um, but then the other sanctions
include providing a written
notification to the client, um,
of the sanction, as well as
having to send a written
notification to all of those
judges who were listed as the
authors of these fake opinions.
So
Um
Yeah, not a good day for this
particular attorney, um, the
court's decision, I, I think is
also notable because if you read
it, and again, you should, this
I'm telling you this, this case
is a lot more fun even than I'm,
I'm uh making it out to be, but,
uh, the court also starts out,
um, the, the opinion by
outlining what it saw as all the
harms of this kind of conduct.
Um, essentially saying, you
know, and the court notes, as
far as the court at that time
can tell, there's no other
authority up until this point
considering what a judge is
supposed to do when they get a
filing like this, right? This
was 2023. This is new. These
issues are still new. Um, and so
the court says, OK, these are
the different harms of
plaintiff's conduct, um,
opposing counsel, number one,
waste time and resources, right?
That's obvious. If you file a
response and I'm representing
the other party. I have to go
through that response.
in order to file, you know,
competent reply.
Um, so, essentially by filing
this, um, you know, uh, this.
Response that contained these
fictitious cases, um, it's a
waste of, of opposing counsel's
time and resources, um, and it's
a harm essentially to, to that
opposing um client as well.
Um, and then equally
importantly, it wastes judicial
resources, right? Um, judges,
just like every other attorney,
whether it's the PRC or
otherwise, they're busy. Um, and
the court had to exert a lot of
effort into trying to figure out
if these were real cases, um,
and so by doing this, by
engaging in this type of
conduct, we are abusing that
that process. Um, maybe most
important of all, it deprives
the client of competent legal
representation, right? If this
is what we're doing, if we're
rely
on chat GPT and not, um, sort of
doing our due diligence, which I
think is really what um if you
boil this case down to its
essence, it's the, the lack of
due diligence, um, your client
is not being provided real
representation.
Uh, the court also notes that,
um, there's potential
reputational harm to these
judges, right? These judges that
are claimed to be the authors of
these opinions, if another court
is going to get excerpts of
these cases, uh, that are
gibberish, um, it might make
them think a little bit less of
those judges who ostensibly
wrote them, right?
Um, and then I think, uh, the,
the last note, which is a little
bit, I, I think salient in this
day and age is, um, that this
type of conduct can fuel
cynicism about the law, um, and,
um, essentially taint our
process, um, in that it could
tempt uh future litigants to
essentially engage in this type
of conduct or potentially try to
disregard a judicial ruling
claiming that essentially it's,
it's fake, right? It's not real,
um, because it
agrees with me. Um, these are
all the, the arguments that that
the court is making as far as
what it saw as the damage done
by the plaintiff's counsel in
this case. Yeah.
Please do, please do.
Look
It strikes me as we look at the
harms here that the Court
outlined, that at least the
first several are potential
benefits that it could be
offered by the use of LOM
generative AI or um AI in
general.
Did the court opine on that? No,
uh, so, uh, the court did not
opine on, on, um, yeah, I mean,
I, I think the point is well
taken that um there would be
some potential strategy or, or
there would be a benefit in
wasting people's time. Um, the
court does not think that that,
I mean, the court is looking at
it from the perspective of the
adjudicator, right? Well, I
mean, not that there would be a
benefit to wasting people's
time, but the benefit to a large
utilization of AI is that it
might be time saving and then uh
that would
for better use of judicial
judicial resources, thereby
enabling more clients to get
real legal representation. So
that, so there is, uh, and I am
going to talk about that as a,
as a, as a benefit, a real
benefit, um, of AI. That was not
really at issue in this case,
because again, this, this case
really just involved, um, the
abuse of AI, um, but certainly,
I, I don't want to give off the
impression that, you know, the
courts that have looked at this
issue have said, oh, this is
just a straight, we should never
be using AI. That's not what the
courts are
that's not what our ethics
advisory boards are saying, what
they're saying essentially and
what we'll talk about, um, is
that when attorneys use these
types of products, they need to
do so carefully, um, with due
deliberation for their potential
um risks, um, and, um, again,
with, with a keen eye on the
rules of professional conduct.
What I want to know is did the
guy keep his job? The attorney,
well, the attorney, I think was,
uh, at his own law firm. So I
presume, I presume he was able
to keep it, um, for those who
are interested, uh, that motion
to dismiss ultimately was
granted by the court and so
that, that client ended up
having the case dismissed.
Um,
so, uh, I, I think with this
Abiana case in mind, it it sort
of tease up some of the risks
that we've already talked about
some of the some of the risks
that, uh, again, we're hearing
from our advisory bodies that
have considered this issue.
There is obviously a potential
risk anyway, um, of AI simply
making things up. Now, I, I, I
think one of the items that
we've already heard is that
these uh products are going to
improve over time. They're going
to change over time, so it's
not.
say that um if you were to use
chat GPT today, the same result
would happen. My guess is that
that would not be the case. Um,
but, uh, because there is a
potential risk of this type of
thing happening, um, it
highlights the importance of
attorneys being very careful
when they use it. It's not to
say that you can't, but it's to
say that just like if you have
an associate at a law firm, uh,
draft a pleading, um, generally,
you're not going to file that
under your name without at least
taking a close look at.
and making sure that, um, you
know, the statements of law are
right in the citations are
right. You have a question?
Yeah
So I'm going to talk about some
of the guidance there aren't
specific rules just yet, um, but
we have gotten some guidance
both, um, at the state level and
um from the ABA, um, about these
types of issues. Um, there's no
hard rules as of yet in part
because I think they're
reluctant to do that given how
uh just not high high state of
evolution that these products
are in. If they come out with a
specific rule today in a year it
it might
be less, uh, might be less
valuable.
Hi, one area where I know
there's a hard rule for state
employees, um, oh by my office
works very closely with the
Office of Cybersecurity and no
on AI. In fact, if they find out
you're using AI they will ban
it. um, they blocked from any
state systems, they block them
from our network, and the reason
I can share the example is that
somebody, it was legal, I
believe it was either legal or
HR decided to use one of the AIs
that will record meetings and
generate a transcript, cause
they thought that.
would be incredibly time saving,
and what we discovered is that
AI and all of the elks that have
been tried since then, not only
record that meeting, they get
into your calendar and record
all meetings, and then they will
send an invite out to anybody
who was on the meeting. So if I
was on a meeting with Tati here.
So Tati's behind me. She, uh,
she would get the note and say,
oh, and she's like, oh, thank
you, Cass, thank you for this
transcript. It was beautiful. I
will download it and now it has
infected her system and it is
starting to record her meetings.
So not only are all
these meetings being recorded,
but for the state attorneys in
the room, hello, IPRA nightmare
because now we have all of these
transcripts and recordings that
nobody knows about and nobody
knows where they are, and a
great many of them should never
have been made, like extremely
confidential meetings that no
one would have consented to
recording. We're being recorded,
uh, without the, um, sometimes
with just, um, it was an
assistance calendar that got
input, so it wasn't even her
meetings. She was just
scheduling the meetings for um
the executive.
person, uh, that she was working
for and so a lot of executive
level meetings, like things that
should never have been recorded.
So I, I know as a general rule
from the Office of Cybersecurity
if they find you're using AR
they are going to quickly kill
it, unless you could potentially
persuade them that there are no
IPRA or cybersecurity risks.
Well, yeah, and so I, I know
that there's gonna be a lot of
responses to that, but, uh, one
thing I do want to just
emphasize, um, so there's going
to be a distinction between how
employers.
AI, um, from an employment
standpoint or from, let's say
the state standpoint, and then
how the bar uh is gonna handle
it or how the courts are going
to handle it from a rulemaking
perspective. So, whereas, um
there aren't yet hard and fast
court rules on the subject.
There are firms that will, um,
you know, there are law firms
that will prohibit its use
entirely. There are different
law firms that um have specific
guidelines and guardrails in
place, so one from um uh law
school.
friend of mine, I know that they
use AI, but they can't input any
client information, um, they can
only essentially generate
statements of law.
Um, so there's gonna be a lot of
different um aspects of that,
but yeah.
I think so. I, I forgot to
mention that many utilities have
already promulgated their own um
rules and and restrictions
around AI and it ranges from
free use of AI to what you just
said, no use of AI at all. I
think some of what you had
mentioned can be can be
restricted within a tenant and a
tenant is at is um attached to a
company, if you will, like a
Microsoft Tenant is attached
there, and then you can kind of
turn some of those, those levers
on and off so that it does or
does not do some of those
things, uh, but it's really
important to have.
some kind of policy in place.
Hi.
I want to thank uh uh the PRC
Choa for organizing,
coordinating this amazing city
just as last year, it was
amazing. Thank you for the
participants and everybody. I
just wanted to say that it's too
funny that we have this
conversation today because I
just watched the X-Files, and in
the X files, the lawyer that
committed plagiarism, got killed
by the AI.
So interesting, that's another
type of punishment.
which, by the way, in this case
that you mentioned, John and
Mataviusiana. I'm gonna really
it definitely. I am just
surprised of how lenient the
judges were. I mean, how come
this was not a case of
thisarment or at least some
well, I mean two things. One,
the, the court in that case is
considering sanctions for that
case and so it's entirely
possible that the
uh, New York, uh, disciplinary
Board took further investigation
into it or that that court took
further action on it, but, um,
as far as this particular case,
I, I too thought that the $5000
fine was a little bit light. I
think to the um to the judge's
decision, I mean, I would just
say, again, that um he, he was
the judge in that case, um, was
addressing this as essentially a
case of first impression. They,
he didn't have any guidance to
go on as far as what courts are
supposed to do.
they handle that. Now these
cases are becoming, I think
we'll, we'll see these more,
unfortunately, more on that, it
will be back.
Yeah
Yeah.
Thanks for this, you guys. This
is really interesting. Um, I
attended a something about maybe
a year ago, where Justice Bacon
mentioned that um in a state
like New Mexico, um, using AI
not using AI to generate like
Um, form letters or something
like that, not where you're
putting the client's information
in, but where you're want to
generate something that is
formulaic and can happen
quickly, may very well soon be
considered malpractice, not to
use it. Um, and so I'm wondering
if you've heard, I mean that was
a year ago. I'm wondering if
you've heard anything about, um,
kind of leaning that way away
from legal reasoning and, and
client information but more just
towards saving time, um, for,
for, for New Mexico attorneys.
So that, that.
is something that is being
talked about. I haven't seen
anything definitive yet, um,
from any, any bar um that has
said that definitively that
essentially you have to start
using AI, um, in fact, the
guidance, um, that has come out,
I think from the state, um,
level and then from the ABA is
we are not telling you that you
need to use this, um, but that
is something I think to, to put
a pin in because, um, again,
this is going to evolve, uh,
quickly, and it
very well could be that, um, the
use of AI will be a major time
saver for something routine like
that, um, even in legal
research, um, you know, that
being able to use AI may very
well be a huge time saver for
clients and an industry where
billable hours are how we, uh,
you know, how the
non-government, um, folks out
there, um, Bill, or how the, I,
I guess people in the law firm
world, uh, Bill, um, you know,
uh,
That's a huge, uh, factor, and
they're already is talk about,
um, you know, what a reasonable
bill will be, um, going forward,
um, once these, once these
practices and and these um
You know, these, these functions
are, are a little bit more
widespread.
This is a question for all state
employees, I guess, um, you
know, as a private attorney, I
do have the luxury of using
Westlaw or case text and those
um search.
Retools already have AI
integrated in them. Um, and, and
I don't have a say.
Uh, about that at all. Um, is
the state relying on those
tools? Is there a bright line
between, you know, when AI is
already integrated versus when
it's not, what
What do you have to consider.
Well, so yeah, I mean, I think
that uh that comment, uh again,
perfectly illustrates just this
diversity that exists in terms
of the applications of AI. Chat
GBT is not the same thing as
Westlaw using AI to sort of
supplement, um, you know, search
terms. So as attorneys, we're
used to bullying search terms,
right? We know, hopefully, we
know how to use them, um, AI is
a way to make that process
simpler.
And a way to narrow down your
results. Um, I, you know,
without having to go through,
um, a a lot of iterations. Um,
yes, the state does use Westlaw.
Um, now, Westlaw isn't like
hooked up into the state email
system or anything like that.
Um, but there are absolutely
government attorneys that use um
AI and um or not not AI but but
Westlaw, um, and Lexus, I
imagine, um, in fact, it's, it's
hard for me to contemplate a
government attorney who wouldn't
use one of those applications.
Um, because it's that essential
to our function.
Uh, at the utility industry,
there are several solutions that
also have like built in AI if
you will, and so when dinner to
AI came out, they simply
switched it on and then when the
utility discovered that those
things had been switched on
according to their policy, they
went back to those suppliers and
said, no, you've got to turn
that off.
Hi, uh, so John Kara had a very
good question there. So can you
guarantee that Westlaw is not
making cases up
Well, uh, that would be, I
think, a real risk to their, uh,
business model if, if it came
out that Westlaw was making
stuff up. I, I, uh, I know I can
I guarantee that? No, but I'm,
I'm certainly, um, very
optimistic that that is not
happening. I appreciate that. I
do have a couple of questions
for specifically for Ms. Powell,
though maybe anyone can answer.
To them. Um,
Uh, Ms. Paul, you talked about
how and uh generate, generative
AI is something fairly new, but
that EPE has been using other
forms of AI and your uh slides
also mentioned, um, uh using AI
in modeling, and I would think
that's probably the most
critical place to use it because
modeling is already hugely
complex process of the, uh, you
know, modeling, uh, loads of
resources and creating IRPs, um,
I would think that, that, that's
where AI could, you know,
effectively learn how to do it
better than an algorithm that we
that's just programmed in. And
again, this is my understanding
of what separates AI from, you
know, a computer, uh, ordinary
computer is that is machine
learning. That to me is the
essence of, and that one of the
problems that comes about
because of that is that when it,
when a
learns, we don't know what it,
how it learned. We don't know
what it learned to make it
change the model. Like they
improve upon models as they're
running them and learning, and
that part they say is a black
box problem, and I wonder like
what, what can be done about
that in the context of been
seeing expert witness who's
presenting the model. Does the
expert witness understand the
model? Will there be questions
the expert witness can't answer.
And if other people intervenors
in the case want to run a model.
Uh, what will, you know,
they, they'll have a even less
interpretive capacity unless
they have a very good expert,
and part of it may be a black
box anyway.
Good point.
Um, so you said I, I wrote down
don't know what it learned like
with what the model learned,
right? And so I think I'm gonna
go back harken back to my
discussion about uh governance
around data and so the machine
learns from what you put into
it, the data that you put into
it and so understanding what
that data is and and the
veracity and accuracy of that
data, I think is a really
important in, in terms
of understanding. We, we can
certainly explain how uh
algorithms work, you know,
machine learning algorithms and
neural networks work and stuff
like that and and I would not be
the expert to dive into those
discussions with you, but, but
perhaps, um, this idea of of
black, it is a bit of a black
box, um, bears some merit.
Uh, we witnesses be able to
To
Speak eloquently on that. I
think it probably depends on the
witness, but we certainly should
have people who, who can support
that witness in terms of of what
the algorithm is doing.
Yeah, Russell, I think your,
your question also highlights
what eventually I was going to
get to in the slide, and that is
that um these hallucinations
that, you know, are on display
in that Abiana case, um, that's
not the only type of, of sort of
error that you can get with AI,
um, and, you know, we've, we've,
you can read, um, you know,
different opinions on this
subject, but, you know, we know
that uh just like what we have
been talking about, there is a
potential risk of bias sometimes
with
How these models are trained.
Um, so another example again
that got a lot of media
attention, um, Microsoft
developed a chatbox. I can't
remember what the name of the
Jackbox was, but um the idea was
that it was gonna learn, they
were gonna put it, I think on
Twitter, and it was going to
learn based on interactions with
the public on Twitter, um.
That was not a good idea. And,
um, for obvious reasons, right?
Uh, exactly what you think would
have happened, ended up
happening, um, they ended up, I
think, having to shut that
jackpot chat box down. Um, so
again, depending on how these
models are, are trained, um, the
information that goes into them,
you can get very different
outputs. Um, so, um, this is
all, you know, at the sort of
the forefront of, I think what
attorneys are now talking about,
if you look at Chief Justice
John
Ro ber t s and his um 2023 end
of the year, uh, summary last
year for the judiciary, he
talked about AI. He had a whole,
and that is worth reading, um,
and one of the observations that
he made, and I'll talk about
some of his other, um,
observations in another slide,
but, you know, he, he emphasized
that there are these allegations
of, um, potential bias, um,
especially for judges, um,
potentially using AI.
Um, you can see that, I think
probably most clearly in the
criminal law realm where you,
um, I think have had at least
some, uh, I think district court
judges, there are, I think, some
AI applications that are sort of
predictive in nature and they
can help predict recidivism, um,
and defense attorneys have
raised, I think legitimate
questions about due process
concerns associated with using
models like that. Um, and, you
know, uh, so I, those are all, I
think, considerations that that
Um, uh, you know, an attorney,
whether you're a practicing
attorney in court, whether
you're just advising a client,
whether you're a judge, you
know, before you use these
applications, you need to be
careful about it and think them
through.
And there are other risks as
well that, that we'll talk
about. One that we've heard, um,
uh, that folks have mentioned so
far, um, is client
confidentiality, right? Uh, this
is, uh, you know, less of a
concern for, um, you know, a, a
judge, but much more of a
concern, obviously for a
practicing attorney, um, and
this is something that I think
is well known and relatively
well appreciated among
attorneys, um, where you have,
uh, an AI model that will retain
queries, or will we
retain information that is
inserted into that model by um
by the attorney that does raise
a real question about client
confidentiality. Um, and the
rules of professional conduct,
obviously, we all know they
require an attorney to maintain
that confidentiality, um, you
know, of that information
regarding the client. I
mentioned, um, you know, my, uh,
understanding of the practice at
a, at a private law firm on the
East Coast, um, because the, uh,
you know, in that case, the, the
law firm had said we have a
Uh, a strict rule that attorneys
cannot input any client
information into the AI, um, you
know, functions, and that is
with client confidentiality in
mind.
Um, that this is a real risk,
um, that, um, this client
information at that point would
no longer be um be kept
confidential, um, according to
these ethics rules, um, and that
requires attorneys, I think,
before you use these types of
ethical applications, you need
to actually look at those terms
and conditions of service
because if they are keeping this
information, then we're going to
be potentially on the hook for
that. Um, I, um, another concern
that, that is related and, and I
haven't seen any sort of
guidance.
on this, but I have heard it
brought up at other CLEs again
talking about sort of these
passive AI models, we all carry
around cell phones in our
pockets. Um, we have devices in
our homes now that are listening
to what we are saying, um, they
are, uh, they will respond in
kind. I'm not gonna say the name
of Apple's personal assistant,
cause I don't want her to turn
on, uh, but you know who I'm
talking about and, and Alexa is
the same way. Um, and that again
raises this question about
client confidentiality.
Um, and I don't know that um I'm
at the point myself where I
think that we have to switch
these off before we have this,
these types of discussions
regarding client information. I
think that's a little extreme.
Um, but that again is a
consideration, uh, and a
discussion that I know attorneys
are having right now.
Um, another potential risk uh in
this uh is, is something that
Chief Justice Roberts talked
about in his, uh, and year-end
report last year, um, sort of
this, that there are aspects of
the law that at least right now
it might be hard for AI to
grasp, um, and, um, I, I think
to his point, and I think he has
one here, um, that there is, uh,
a degree of art in the practice
of law. It's not always a cut
and dry, um,
Issue, there's, for instance,
when we draft a legal pleading,
our use of terminology matters,
right? Do you call it the state
or do you call it the
government? Because, um, the
government has a negative
connotation, like it, it, it
does, um, and the way that we,
um, frame our arguments also is
not, again, a mathematical, um,
you know, issue. It's, there,
there is to an extent, some
experience and some some art
that goes into that. Um, Chief
Justice Robertson.
talked about assessing
credibility.
Um, that, you know, when we are
in trial and we're trying to
determine if a witness is
credible, um, AI might not be
great at that, right? Um, might
not be less, might not be super
useful. Um, another example that
he gave was, um, that AI might
be less useful on open questions
about how the law should develop
in new areas. Um, I think at the
PRC in particular, a lot of the
issues that we deal with are
developments in the law. It's
not always, you know, issues
that have been decided.
You know, for the last 20 years
and now, um, we're reconsidering
them.
Um, you know, a lot of these
issues are, are relatively new
and novel and involving new
types of technologies and new
considerations. And so, um, you
know, there is a risk that
over-reliance on AI um might
again lead that attorney sort of
rendering less than competent
representation.
Um, my own personal, uh, and I
haven't seen anybody else talk
about this, so I might be wrong.
Um, but, you know, my, my own
personal concern, one of my
concerns about AI again, this is
over reliance on AI and I think
it's important to clarify that.
Um, is, you know, if, if you're
an attorney who decides to rely
on AI to draft all of your
pleadings for you, um, and
that's essentially your way of
writing. I would worry that in
the long term, um, that you
become less effective.
a writer because you have this
sort of new crutch. Um, if you,
um, you know, don't really
understand what goes into a
legal citation and you're
essentially just using AI to,
you know, generate all of your
citations, um, years later,
you're going to be an effective
um advocate, and I personally
think that, um, skills and
knowledge can atrophy due to
lack of use, um, and so I, I
think that this is a real risk,
um, you know, if, if a lawyer is
using these programs to perform
certain tasks, or you're going
to retain those skills, and I
don't know that the answer is
yes.
And I think, uh, you know, a, a
related question would be, you
know, when we use chat GPT even
for something or again a
different AI platform for
something even maybe as as
generic as simply summarizing a
case for you, my own personal
fear would be if I'm using AI to
summarize this case for me. Do I
understand this case. If I am in
an argument with at the, in
front of the PRC and talking
about one of these cases. Do I
understand it as well, if AI
draft
my pleading for me, and I, I
personally am not very confident
about that. I would want to do
that myself.
Um, but, you know, uh,
Reasonable minds, I think can
clearly disagree about some of
these questions.
Um, another risk that I, I think
is interesting, um, and
something that is, I think,
relatively close to home, um, in
New Mexico, um, we have this
issue of, um, pro se litigants
potentially using AI, um, and
this did come up, um, so, you
know, one of the benefits of AI
would be potentially that
somebody who's pro se, now they
have this sort of boost, right?
They have this, um, tool that
they didn't have before to maybe
help them talk and legalese and,
you know, site.
and whatnot, um, but just like
attorneys can, um, sort of be
let down, um, an unfortunate
path by AI, so too can sort of
an unsuspecting uh pro se
litigant. This did happen in New
Mexico, um, this in federal
district court, um, I won't go
into anywhere near as much
detail. It's not as much fun of
a case, unfortunately, as, as,
uh, the Abiana case, but, um,
this was, um, a memorandum
opinion in order that granted in
part uh
to dismiss, um, filed by the
defendants, the plaintiff in
that case had filed a response
that's cited to non-existent
cases. Again, we, you know, this
case did not go into the type of
detail that they did in Avianca
as far as what happened. There
was no, obviously a sanctions
hearing, anything like that.
Um, but, you know, the, the
court in that case, this
district court emphasized that
although courts will make
allowances, um, for a pro se
litigants failure to site proper
legal authority, um, they do not
make allowances for a plaintiff
who cites to fake non-existent
and misleading authorities.
Um, so, you know, although there
are benefits to prose parties
from using AI, uh, this
obviously is a drawback. And
again, in a, uh, you know, a pro
se party would presumably be
slightly less uh aware and
cognizant of the rules than,
than an attorney would be.
Um, the, uh, district court, uh,
US District Court for the
Eastern District of Texas is one
of the courts that is beginning
to take a little bit more
proactive action on some of
these, they amended their local
rules to caution.
Uh, pro se litigants about the
use of AI, um, and essentially
emphasizing this point that even
if you are pro se, that doesn't
mean that, um, you know, you can
use all these, these AI
applications with no fear of of
potential consequences. Again,
if you're filing something in
court,
Even if you're pro se, you're
gonna need to make sure that
that is in fact.
Uh, accurate
Um, so another consideration
that has been brought up, uh,
again, an ethical consideration,
um, whether there is a need to
discuss AI use with your client
before you actually use it. Um,
when I first read this, I
thought, you know, that's,
that's a little bit, I think
maybe over the top. I don't know
that, you know, we, we really
discuss our use, for instance,
of Westlaw with our client
before we do it. Um, but, uh,
the guidance that we have gotten
from the ABA has suggested that
in certain circumstances, there
would be potential.
a duty to discuss this with a
client, especially when the
attorney is inputting client
information into AI. So if
you're doing that, obviously,
um, you know, you probably would
need some informed consent from
your client before you submit
that information again into um
what is effectively a third
party application.
So all that being said, uh, what
are the benefits of AI, um, uh,
again, I, I don't wanna come
across like AI is, is, is awful
cause I, I think that there's a
clear benefits from it if
they're used correctly. One,
obviously, is, uh, greater speed
and efficiency. Um, AI will
probably make performing legal
research a lot faster, um,
rather than crafting, you know,
the most carefully, uh,
constructed boolean search, if
we can do that a lot simpler,
um, by explaining in, in human
terms.
what it is that we're looking
for. Maybe we can get our, our
legal results faster. Um, some
law firms apparently have some
AI tools to assist them with
contract review, um, so that
they can very quickly sort of go
through a contract and say these
are the, if you want to look at,
let's say, termination, you look
at this particular, um, you
know, this, this particular
language.
Um
I, I personally haven't used
that, but, you know, again, as,
as time goes on, I think it's
very likely that these, these
benefits will grow, especially
with respect to time savings.
Um, another related benefit is,
uh, potentially more thorough,
um, research, um, and maybe less
so in writing, but um, the
question that that I think would
come up is if your opponent, um,
in litigation is using sort of
AI enhanced legal research, and
you are not, is your client at a
disadvantage?
Um, and the answer, I think,
especially in a few years, he's
going to be, yes, you probably
are at a disadvantage, um,
because you might not be aware
of authority that, that your
opponent is. Um.
But again, I, I, the, the
guidance that we've gotten thus
far from courts hasn't said any
of that yet. Um, this is
something that might come up in
the future, but I think it's
something to think about.
Um, and then, you know, to the
question that was raised earlier
from Aaron about, um, you know,
fees, um, these benefits, I
think are going to be even more
important going forward, because
if we are faster in our
representation, then therefore
we might need fewer lawyers or
fewer billable hours. Um, and
again, that would lead
essentially to cost savings to
clients.
Um, and then very quickly, just
to go through some um sort of
opinions, um, and some, some
authority that's out there. Um,
there was an ABA, uh, formal
opinion just issued in July of
this year. Um, uh, and again, I,
I, I think that what that
opinion talked about and what
we've talked about, I think
throughout is that generative AI
is quote a rapidly moving target
as as the ABA phrased it, cause
these features are always going
to be changing, getting better,
improving.
Um, and so it's really
difficult, I think, for, um,
attorneys to say, well, this is
the hard and fast rule. I mean,
maybe there are a few that we
can come up with, but, um, these
are constantly gonna change. And
so, um, what this opinion said
was, again, we're not telling
attorneys at this point that
they need to use this, but there
are, um, some key ethical
considerations that are going to
need to go into it before you
do, um, including the fact that
if you are going to use an AI
application, you need to be at
least reasonably familiar um
with
the risks involved with that
particular uh application.
Um, you don't have to be a tech
expert. Um, we're not all, uh,
at Nadia's level here, but we,
we do need to have some
understanding of it before we
use it. Um, and again, we need
to be very careful before we put
in client information that may
be confidential into AI, um,
they did in this opinion,
suggest that client consultation
regarding the use of AI may be
necessary, so that's something I
think to keep an eye on going
forward.
Um
You know, and, and the other,
the other last, uh, aspect that
they, they emphasized in this
was, um, you know, the
supervisory duties of attorneys
are not new, right? We, we all
have those duties already. Um,
you know, the courts may not
have updated the ethical rules
quite yet, uh, the way that they
eventually will, but, um, if you
are a supervising attorney at a
law firm, um, you have certain
duties as a supervisor, right?
If you are an attorney, um, and
you have, let's say, a law clerk
or uh a legal assistant.
Or even just a staff member
doing basic things for you. Um,
you have ethical duties to
supervise that, um, practice,
um, and the same applies uh
again to AI, you know, we can't
just farm out those duties to
AI, um, as if we're not on the
hook for those.
Um,
and then, so the last, I think
the last slide that I have, um,
just a couple of how ports are
responding um to AI.
Um, the courts are a little bit
slow, um, so far, there's not a
lot of movement, uh, as far as I
can tell, um, the court of
appeals for the Fifth Circuit
did something that I thought was
interesting. They um they
considered, and they proposed a
rule, um, that would have
required, um, an attorney who
makes a filing in front of them,
um, to, um, certify that no
generative AI program was used
in drafting that document.
Um, or to the extent that a
program was used all generated
text has been reviewed, um, by a
human, right? Um, that was
something that they considered.
They ultimately decided that
they were not, um, going to
adopt that as, uh, again, I
think with sort of this idea of
this constantly moving target in
mind, um, but they did say, um,
again, that I think this should
not be new, but, you know,
parties and council are
responsible for ensuring that
their filings with the court.
truthful
Right? And I think the same is
true for any court, um, or any
adjudicatory body, including the
PRC, right? Obviously, you, if
you file something,
It, you know, certainly a
statement of law that you need
to make sure you've checked
that.
Um, and then lastly, again, I
mentioned the US District Court
for the Eastern District of
Texas, um, just like they
cautioned, um, to the extent
that the caution is, is
important, but they, they did
caution prose parties. They also
cautioned lawyers, um, about
being very uh cognizant of the
risks involved with using
generative AI because um
sometimes it, it can be
inaccurate and um that content
and that judgment should never
be a substitute for the lawyers.
It should be, you know,
supplement, it should be.
Tool, um, but it shouldn't
replace what it is that the
attorney is doing.
Um, and with that, I'll turn it
over to Nick.
So I want to start by talking a
little bit about, um, we have a
very recent ethics advisory uh
committee opinion. Uh, this came
from the state bar of, uh, New
Mexico. Um, this was just issued
here September 24th of this
year. Um, and of course, the,
the question that was presented
to them is male lawyer use
generative artificial
intelligence in the practice of
law. Um, so the summary answer
at the start of it is under the
New Mexico rules of professional
conduct. Yes, they may.
However, uh, use of such
technology raises a number of
considerations which they uh get
into within the rest of uh the
opinion. You have the conclusion
here, um, up, up on the screen,
uh, from the very end that
Uh
If they choose to do so, uh,
must do so responsibly, and they
must fully adhere to the ethical
standards of both New Mexico
rules of professional conduct
and the tribunal they're in
front of. Um, some of the
interesting things out out of
that advisory opinion as John
mentioned, uh, the committee is
not suggesting that, and I'm
quoting from it, um, currently
lawyers must use gene or is not
suggesting that currently
lawyers must use generative AI
in the practice of law.
But just before that, they talk
about Rule 16101, uh,
Uh, covering diligence and then
also charging reasonable fees
and costs to the clients, uh,
from 16, 105 and MRA, uh, one of
the comments that they, uh, cite
to there for competence,
specifically provides that to
maintain the requisite knowledge
and skill, a lawyer should keep
abreast of changes in the law
and its practice, and then they
highlight, uh, including the
benefits and risks associated
with relevant technology.
OK, um, next slide, please. So
closer to home, um, I was unable
to find any cases here within
New Mexico that does not have a
peer that has been in any
attorneys disciplined for
mishaps uh using AI but there
definitely is one in Colorado.
Um, it's facts are actually very
similar, so I'm not gonna spend
a lot of time on it. This was,
uh, the, the opinion was it
wasn't actually an opinion they
reached a um a plea deal,
essentially. Um, in November 20.
23, that attorney was suspended
for filing a pleading, uh, in
the motion to in a in a motion
to set it set aside a decision.
Um, of course that fictitious
case sites, um,
That attorney received a 90-day
suspension, uh, with a two-year
probationary period period. They
actually assigned him a one
year, one day suspension with,
he then had to serve 90 days
with 2 years probationary
period. Um, so,
Seems a little steeper than the
earlier $5000 fine, at least to
me. Um, some of the interesting
things about that opinion, um,
is they cite similar, of course,
they have similar rules to
professional conduct that we do
here in New Mexico, a lawyer
must competently represent a
client, a lawyer must act with
reasonable diligence and
promptness when representing a
client, a lawyer must not
knowingly make a false statement
of material fact or law to a
tribunal, and uh it is
professional misconduct for a
lawyer.
engage in conduct involving
dishonity, fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation. This is a
case similar where when asked
about the the the fictitious
sightings. Um, he actually
blamed a paralegal, if I recall
correctly.
Yeah.
Next slide please.
Um, so can AI assist in review
of things like Discovery. One of
the interesting things it can do
is it is able to summarize a
document. So if you have a 200
page document that you need to
know quickly what's this about?
So should I spend any time on
it. Now, to be clear, it doesn't
really summarize it for you. It
doesn't, it condenses it is
probably a better way. I I've
heard it, uh, described. It
shortens it, but it doesn't take
the analytical.
doesn't make the analytical
thought of actually summarizing
it uh very well, so when you
ask, um, say a well-trained
paralegal to summarize a
document, they will summarize it
for you and not just take those
case or take the headings on it.
But of course, can you submit
that document to, say, chat GPT
or something else. Is there
something preventing you too? Do
you own the document? Is it a
public document? Um, are there
other restrictions apply. Now,
most of the time in law, the
answer to everything is it
depends. This is actually not
one of those cases. Next slide.
Have you ever seen one of these?
Does this apply? Is there a
confidentiality agreement about
this document. If so, you can't
submit it to AI.
We'll get into why in a minute.
Um, so let's move, uh, forward a
little bit. You talked a little
bit about the knowledge cutoff
date of when does, um, so AI is
trained on, on a set of
documents, but they stopped the
training when they release it
out to the public so that you're
then able to use it. So that
there's that knowledge cutoff
date, which does move forward.
It used to be uh March of 2023
for uh Chat GPT and now it's um
October 23, 2023. I asked Jat GP
GBT, uh, when it's uh cut off.
date was, um,
But the interesting thing about
that is for anything after
October 2023. I'll need to look
up the current information if
possible. A lot of times it will
try to.
Um, here's an interesting
example from that. I'm gonna
jump back to my days in water
law. There's the Texas v. New
Mexico Supreme Court, um, it's
an original jurisdiction case
number 141, uh, filed, I think
it's 20 2013.
The information that it provided
me was wrong due to the
knowledge cutoff date. I asked
who was the real, the special
master in that case, and it said
that it was Judge Michael
Malloy. He retired.
Mm
So then I asked Chat GPT, well,
first I said, who is the special
master, cause one of the
interesting things is you can
say, please tell me about this
case, and it gives a pretty good
summary. Would I rely on it, you
know, pleading? Nope, but it's a
pretty good summary on a place
to start. So then I said, can
you check to see if the special
master has changed.
Yes, the special master in Texas
v. New Mexico has recently
changed. As of July 2024,
Justice Michael Mloy uh was
discharged because he retired,
um, and Judge uh D. Brooks Smith
from Pennsylvania, um, a retired
federal judge, uh, was appointed
to take his place. So,
While immediately, it will give
you the wrong information
because it's prior to its
knowledge cutoff date.
You can then ask it to update
itself.
So I was curious and I'll let a
couple of days go by, and I
asked it again.
got the question wrong again.
Next slide and that's why it's
important to understand how to
do prompt engineering.
So
I asked Chat GPT.
Do you continue to learn from
documents presented to you. I
was curious to see if it would
what it would say about that.
The interesting part of this
answer, because they, it
mentions the knowledge cutoff
date.
However, I can retain certain
relevant information across our
conversation if it helps improve
our ongoing interaction.
So they're being honest that
they do retain what you tell it.
Back to what we were talking
about discovery.
You don't own it.
Don't send it to them.
Next slide, please. So, how can
this be useful? I've I've talked
a little bit about, um, talking
about um taking a document and
having it uh condense it or
summarize it for me, for you. A
couple of us we recently having
conversation about, um, small
modular reactors, and I didn't
know too much about it, and
someone else put me onto this
idea and uh sent me.
Uh, what chappy chat GPT says
about it. It's a great place to
start when you don't know a lot
about it.
would frankly refer to this as
similar to Wikipedia. I never
sight to it, but it's not a bad
place to start. Um, and then, of
course, double check any
research, uh, you have finished.
Um, that is not all it had to
say about small, uh, modular
reactors. In fact, it's at about
5 pages.
And then you can keep asking
them more, and you could
probably say, give me case
citations, and you don't want to
go down that route.
So,
Can we use AI is the state bar
telling us we have to? Nope, but
As I'll go back to that
committee, um, the, uh, the
ethics opinion. The committee is
not suggesting the current
currently lawyers must use gene
AI in the practices of law, but
for the lawyers who choose to
do, they must do so responsibly.
Do you have any questions?
2 minutes' worth of questions.
He's just kind of a thought and
if you guys have any
Uh, a different opinions or
concurring opinions.
To me from the expert witness
perspective, it seems like we do
almost have that obligation that
you need to have some
foundational capability to be
able to use this. It makes me
think of Nadia's point that you
really need to be good at
becoming an adequate prompt
engineer, uh, to be able to use
it sufficiently, but it's also,
it seems a really careful
balance because on the one hand,
you almost should be using it or
else it's
Uh, a failure on your part to
use all your resources. On the
other hand, you have almost a
survivorship bias that occurs, I
think as well, because it's been
trained on a set of information,
and maybe that information is
going to continue to drive
things in particular direction.
And the conversations of
inventing court cases, kind of
strikes me as, OK, well, AI can
innovate, you know, not
necessarily in useful ways and
so I think that's, well, it can
in useful ways as well, but um
it
the onus on us.
I'll start from the base
position on that of.
As an expert.
You probably already have an
understanding that's better than
AI is going to give you right
off the start, like, my example
of looking up, uh, small modular
reactors. You already are beyond
that level in your area of
expertise, but it can be can be
elsewhere. Now, when it comes to
analyzing data, I'll defer that
question. It can also be handy
in if you are the expert in
SMRs, um, but you speak at a too
high of a level.
you can also say, hey, I, I, I
need, I need to explain what an
SMR is to somebody in the 12th
grade, and it will give you some
dialogue to be able to start
that conversation too.
Or testing your own ideas and.
Yeah, sure, I could do that too.
All right, well, we're out of
time for this panel, so please
join me in thanking them.
So we have a brief 15 minute
break before our final presenter
of the day, Chief Justice Dave
Thompson, uh, please, if you're
a lawyer and you want CLE
credits. I'm just reminding you
to sign in and out and also make
sure your email address is
legible because that's how we're
gonna send you the certificate
of completion. Thanks.
Recording stopped.
This is
All right, everyone, we're gonna
get started here
So, Chief Justice Thompson told
me that he's not big on formal
introductions, so it won't give
a formal introduction, but what
I will say is if you stick
around state government long
enough, everybody trickles
through the Attorney General's
office, and so it was my
pleasure and privilege to get to
clerk for Chief Justice
Thompson, when he was Chief
Deputy Attorney General, uh,
I was just the line attorney,
even a law student, I think, uh
working at the AG's office. So
there's many of you here who
have matriculated through the
AG's office, and Chief Justice
Thompson is also an alum, so
thank you for being here and
talking to us today about the
good work that the PRC is doing.
Recording in progress.
All right, good afternoon,
everybody. I looked at the
schedule. I've done this enough.
I'm like, OK, who put me at 4?
Um, and I was telling the
senator, I'm always really
nervous being in this room, like
the roundhouse. I like my little
ivory tower next door. Um,
thanks for
Uh visiting about an hour, um, I
planned to talk to you a little
bit about the Supreme Court.
Um, and the impact of the ETA.
I'm happy to answer any
questions about what we do
generally. Most folks don't
understand that. Um, it has
certainly been uh made more
interesting by the passage of
this act.
Um, and we're gonna touch on
that a little bit.
And I'm, again, any other
questions you have, uh, please
feel free to, to ask me. I'm
good about dodging ones I don't
want to discuss. Um, let me
introduce uh Jackie and Maddie,
stand up, please. These are my
two law clerks, two-term law
clerks, um.
Very helpful in chambers. We,
uh, most justices have 2.
Term clerks, some are going
towards a permanent clerk. We do
have, um, staff attorneys that
are permanent lawyers in our
office. A lot of them often help
uh with PRC cases because, as
you will see in my slides, um,
it can become very complicated
and cumbersome.
Um,
tell you a little bit about
myself. I do avoid
introductions, but some
background may be helpful to
you. I was, uh, a federal law
clerk.
Um, and then I went to work in
the Attorney General's office
where I litigated cases and then
became a deputy director under
civil division, the way, uh,
Gerry King did it, he, he sort
of carved out the civil
division, the, the regulatory
division was under sort of my
control, but really fairly
autonomous. At that point, it
was PRC and water was kind of
the
The breakout there. When I
became a, then I became a
district judge in the first
judicial.
Um, for about 3 months.
I lost an election, which was
great.
Uh
And being the spiteful person I
am, I put my name back in, and I
came back on the bench, and the
reason why it's helpful in this
conversation is there's very few
districts in which, does anyone
know what a 74, 75 appeal is for
all the nerds. OK. Um, that's an
administrative appeal, right? So
it is a trial court having an
understanding of what an
administrative appeal, what is a
record?
Um
How administrative appeals are
handled, who are the interests
of parties, how does
intervention work? Um,
And most importantly, I
apologize I missed the
conversation on agency
deference, but we, in that
circumstance, apply agency
deference, and there's not many
trial court judges to do it. It
happens a lot in the first,
right? Cause you're the center
of state government. Um, I think
probably judges are the second
hear some, I would guess the
rest of my colleagues on the
bench and maybe the Court of
Appeals have not done any um
Uh, agency cases administrative
review cases.
From there in 2019, I was
governor was kind enough to
appoint me to the Supreme Court.
And um the job as chief is not
voluntary, I guarantee you. Um,
it rotates every 2 years, so
I've started my 2nd year.
First year, uh, halfway through
my term.
So let's talk about PRC and the
Supreme Court. Here are the two
things. I'm glad I have a
legislator here cause I'll make
my pitch. These are the two
things that cause um us.
Really
Um
Why some of these cases are,
are, uh, heavy.
First, any party any proceeding
before the commission may file a
notice of appeal of the Supreme
Court asking for a review of the
commissions. Any party to any
proceeding.
And trust me,
You guys know what that means,
because we hear from every party
in every proceeding.
Right? We do. Um, and it's
Frustrating. Here's why I am a
Single justice with a single
mind. Tomorrow we have oral
argument on
Tort claims waiver and CYFD. OK,
so now I've got all that thing
in my mind now I'm going to
shift to a PRC case, and I'm
gonna review it. I'm gonna go
through, and I'm sure you know,
but I'm gonna go through with
you and give you a couple
examples how voluminous these
are.
I found a lot about this, and I
am considering, and you can all
take it easy. I'm not gonna do
it, but a scheduling order where
we really try and align some
parties and make you all, not
you all, I say you all as if
you're pairing before us, maybe
you are, maybe you aren't. Got
to line your parties, align your
issues and just.
Let's have everything clear, you
know, agree on an appendix to a
record, something that's
digestible. Um,
Because as it is, it's a real
fire hose.
Here's the second one.
Someone with greater
institutional knowledge will
tell us why.
And I'm gonna guess how this
passed. The Supreme Court shall
have no power to modify the
action or order appealed from
the child either a former no and
vacate.
OK. You know what we like to do?
We like to do, we like to say
you're wrong.
Send it back down to correct it.
Uh we like to remand with
specific instructions. That's
the most efficient way to
operate a judicial process.
That's not what this is. We got
one choice.
And that's to a farmer and
vacate.
Um
I think if I give the benefit of
the doubt to the reasoning
behind this language is
Legislature didn't trust we know
what we're talking about, so
they're like, don't you guys
pick and choose, just get rid of
it and send it back to the
agency or back to the parties.
Um, I appreciate that, but
here's what it causes. Can I
have the next slide?
Um, since ETA went into effect
here is some of our published
dispositions, um, and it has
increased every year, 2024, 5
published dispositions. I think.
It's fair to say this is a
consequence of two things.
One is, it's the act itself.
It's a new piece of legislation.
The one thing we are good at, I
think, or equipped to do the
statutory interpretation, and
this act isn't any different
from others. Um, the subject
matter is very technical, but we
can read a statute.
Um
But the statute
Because of the way it was
written and changed and amended.
There were a lot of questions
coming up about how it applies.
Um, and there was some amount of
deference given to the PRC and
promulgating regulations.
Um, to implement it and so
there's a lot of challenges to
whether or not those regulations
are fair in accordance with the
Act. The next slide, please. All
right, here are some examples.
Um, Southwestern Public Service
versus PRC 6 interveners.
OK, I don't get 6 interveners in
the most complicated civil case.
We get amius.
Um, we may not even get a six
amicus.
Um
Polish for clean affordable
Energy 5.
El Paso Electric, the record is
24,000 pages.
Public service company in New
Mexico.
391-5240,000 pages of record.
OK. Did I read 40,000 pages of
record. I did not.
And that's what we're gonna get
to on our practice tips because
can we go back to the
Second slide
One back, uh one on the right.
Shall a firm or vacate, so what
you're gonna do
And I love my public defenders,
but you're doing the same thing
to me, my capital appeal, public
defenders do, which is
I'm gonna throw everything at
it.
Everything in the record. I had
two reasons. One, I'm really
paranoid that I'm gonna leave
something out, which all lawyers
do, so they build the record
full of unneeded things.
And I'm gonna throw everything
at the wall, cause I know if I
get
Supreme Court can reverse and
remand. So I'm they'll vacate
it. They got vacate it.
So if I stick on anything,
that's a win.
If that's how your client is
viewing it. So it, what it
causes is this massive, massive
record coming to us, a lot of
interveners and go on your
leisurely time, read some of
these briefs. They're just not
that
they're not, they're really what
you should look for, do they
bring in something, another
party has not.
Am I bringing anything to the
court that is new or interesting
to my particular client, even
that's OK, but if I'm just
repeating what they say, it's
not helpful.
May make the client happy.
But it's not advancing the
cause.
Um, I can consume and 5 of us
can consume a lot of material,
and we're in a term session now,
so.
We used to have argument every
other month.
So we're getting ready. You have
argument, the next month you're
getting ready for your next
argument. We're compacted
everything into a term, and it's
compacting some of these oral
arguments.
So we're consuming
In the middle of, you know, our
immunity case tomorrow and CYFD,
um, 40,000 pages.
So that's all great. That's just
me complaining. That's OK. How
can we or you as practitioners
or people involved or interested
parties.
Um
Benefit from this.
And let me, I can pause here,
any questions about docket.
any disagreements with any of
this.
Everybody agrees with me? Yes.
And tell me your name and where
your
Nice to meet you.
Mhm
Um, great question. I will go to
my pointers and I'll try and
explain it and if I don't, you
let me know. Let's go to, let's
see if we can skip past your
audience to see.
Let's go to the next one, and
then we'll go back to that. All
right. I will not rely on
factual assertions, um, perfect.
They're not uh readily verified
when citing an order recommend
decision, be sure to provide a
corresponding site to the record
for any lying factual assertions
by the PRC hearing officer. So
that's what we will go to match
up what is in the brief if we
find it to be
A, an important factual
assertion related to the legal
argument.
Um
You basically have what what I
have is my clerks create an
appendix from all your briefing.
So
Um, I'm more interested more
often in the legal argument, if
you're asserting, I assume,
let's say you're asserting error
by the commissioner.
I'm gonna look for
Your citation to the findings of
the hearing officer, and a lot
of times we only get one or the
other, so we're getting your
assertion as an evidentiary.
Question, but you're not citing
where the hearing officer relies
or relies on it incorrectly.
And that is
Because what we're really trying
to do.
Um
is in applying that deference to
the hearing officer.
Decide if they applied that
factual issue incorrectly. So,
it's almost like a survey of
The priests in chief, where the,
where you are sort of convinced
that the most compelling
arguments.
Then the clerks are pulling up,
basically an appendix.
Is that helpful? OK.
We have a question over here?
All right.
Um, let's go back a couple and
I'll go back to the
I think I talked about this a
little bit, um.
We are generalists, um, not PRC
commissioners or utility
lawyers.
Um, I think some of this
obligation falls on us, quite
frankly, you know, we, I think
if there were opportunities for
the court to
Um
Obtain, you know, deeper
education into regulatory law in
general and utilities in
particular, we would take
advantage of it. The hard thing
to do is find out, well, is it
balanced, and is it applicable
to New Mexico when it comes to
this particular statute, it's
kind of hard, right? We're a
little bit unique. I mean,
there's other states that have
versions of this public policy,
um, but
Um, if there are certainly are
recommendations um as a group
that you think we would benefit
from, um, we want to do that.
You're competing with direct
appeals on capital murder
discretionary writs and
disciplinary proceedings. I
talked about that a little bit.
We have a term uh starting,
start a month ago, it's gonna go
into December. But few people
understand about our docket,
which I didn't understand until
I became chief.
Everybody talks about how it's
great, you can pick your cases,
the Supreme Court, you get a
pick, court of appeals doesn't
get to pick anything.
Um, how nice that must be. Well,
when you look at our docket,
half of it, a good half of if we
try to take 56 to 58 a year.
Or non-discretionary.
They're the ones our legislature
tells us we have to take, and
this is one. So,
And to be fair,
PRC cases are not consuming a
huge amount of them. It's mostly
the capital appeals. We do have
an interesting writ system. We
get a lot of rits, um, but
between the capital, uh,
appeals, and our disciplinary,
um,
Proceedings of the 56 or 58, and
it just adds on that we're going
to hear during this term.
Um, half of them are
non-discretionary.
So
This is your world all the time.
And when you're in with that
hearing officer, I think you all
really, it is your world and
that hearing officer is really
in tune with you and you're
getting it, man. You guys are
like, you're not agreeing.
But you're clicking, right? And
then you get to us and it's, we
don't have that level of
expertise, or we don't practice
that area as often as you do.
And so the way to improve that
is through your
Briefing and presentation to us.
Um, provide the context for
technical issues or explain why
the context is unimportant to
the legal or factual question on
appeal. So there'll be a very
technical issue that you're very
interested and you want to take
up an oral argument. I'm hearing
a lot about. OK, I understand
it.
Um
But why is it significant to the
issue you're arguing on appeal.
It may be significant to the
regulatory structure, but what
is it about that?
Um
That, um, bears on your
Challenge to the PRC or if
you're the PRC or you're aligned
with the PRC.
Why does that technical issue,
why is it important to the legal
or factual questions.
Um
It seems really silly. The final
all acronyms and technical terms
you guys love acronym. I've
never met anyone. I mean, it's
like
Love it.
I don't know why. I think it
saves you a lot of time because
if you're saying it 1000 times,
you can use the acronym.
Um, you've got 30 minutes in
front of us, and
Sometimes, so I'm listening to
your argument and then I'm like,
what is that acronym I should
have like maybe even a glossary.
Um, that is how, and you guys, I
mean, it's, it's a different
language for you, right? Boom,
boom, boom. I'm in front of the
hearing officer, they know what
this is.
Uh,
Thompson doesn't see it all the
time.
Um, so define, define those
acronyms and those technical
terms. All right. Next.
OK, we talked about those too,
the, um,
Uh
Of the 40,000 pages I and these
two are not gonna start.
Peck and search.
They're not going to go, like,
if you can't point me to the
record, it is not my job, and
it's not just you guys. I tell
all practitioners, I'm not gonna
go find it for you.
I could
Um, and in some cases we do.
It's very frustrating and um
we're more inclined than not.
Because I'm sort of assuming you
are making an assertion that is
not supported.
So when I go and do that survey
and you make that factual
assertion and it's just broad
lump of record.
What that is communicating to
me.
If you're being vague for a
reason.
But you, you don't have it.
OK, that's how I'm seeing that.
You may be putting it in to be
like, it's in there.
It's in there.
Um, but just remember after us,
you got nowhere to go.
Right? So you're not preserving
it with me.
Right?
Down below, you may be like, oh,
where was it in the record?
Where did you preserve it? Well,
You know, the, the dump can
occur down below when you get to
us.
Giving me a 100-page
Grouping of record and saying
it's in there isn't, isn't gonna
suffice. You need to
As much as you can pinpoint it.
And
Um
At oral argument.
Be ready to refer the best
arguments I see.
Make the factual legal argument
and then say, even though it's
in the brief, and I point you to
RP.
30,520. So I read it all the way
through or whatever, right? Hi,
you know, get, get somewhere in
there, um.
And that will, uh,
I think um improve um your
briefing and your oral advocacy.
Let's see. Um, yeah, next slide,
please.
So
Again, I don't mean, and I hope
this is like helpful, not
critical, right? And this is not
uncommon to you all as
practitioners. Um, I would make
the same statement to
oral appellate advocates in
particular. Um, and so if you
have a practice that is beyond
the regulatory practices may
cross over and help hopefully.
Um
Which is
If you are to have
We have, we have lawyers in
here, right? We have clients in
here?
OK, we have some clients. We
have GCs, probably some general
counsels and some clients.
All right.
Really think about
Whether the individual that is
coming to the our court is has
the same set of skills is the
one that argued in front of the
commission.
Um, they may require two
different set of skills, not
uncommon to the regulatory
practice. I tell trial lawyers
all the time.
You all are awful.
At aella practice, cause, you
know, you're in front of the
judge and I'll just have
travelers in here, I'll go ahead
and pass trawlers, so you're by
the judge and I got a motion to
dismiss, and here's the facts
and my client was harmed here
are the facts and this is what
they said and this is what I
said.
I'm like, I don't, yeah, right?
They
As we say, the lies have been
told. It's in the record.
OK.
We're interested in what is in
the record and how the law
applies.
Um, and if you're gonna spend 30
minutes getting that granular.
With us, um,
It's just gonna consume all your
time.
and objective assessment.
Of issues that should be
appealed.
Um, avoid as I described the
spaghetti appeals. So what is
the incentive to do it? Not
much, right? If you're sitting
on this end of the room, you're
probably like, well, what?
Why should I take an objective
assessment if I, if I can list.
The 10 reasons for error.
Why would I focus on 6 because
number one, you build
credibility, and we actually see
many of you again and again.
Um
I've seen several of you.
Several times.
Which I enjoy.
Uh, but
I will say, um, I have been
frustrated with trifling
arguments. Um,
Because
If I told you
You know, I'm on time, you're
kind enough to start on time. If
I was late here, and I went
through the excuses of why I was
late, and, you know, uh, one of
them was
You know, snowing all the way or
was too far of an uphill walk or
Uh, you know, an elfin
interrupted me in the middle of
the street. There are some
arguments better than others,
and you will lose credibility on
the bat, not just the bad ones.
Not everything is a due process.
Problem, right?
Some are
But not everything. Um,
He, uh, I think the next one is
uh the footnote.
Uh, I dropped into
Um
Because I have a policymaker in
here. This is why I argue not to
have this vacated and remand, I
just think it's a perverse
incentive to this concept that
we're just getting.
If we didn't have that, I think
people would focus.
On
more credible arguments. The
other thing, and same thing at
top public defenders, we are,
these are original actions. The
Supreme Court.
is not
We can do it. We are not built
to be error correcting.
Right, Court of Appeals is very
good at error correcting. They
are an error correcting court.
They are equipped, staffed to
make these evidentiary
questions, small corrections in
the records. That's not really
what we do.
Our design is then take those on
cert and decide matters of
without sounding ridiculous, you
know, public importance,
conflicts, those kinds of
things. This is a, you know,
we're on, we're on, we have
original jurisdiction over this
direct appeal, that is our
obligation.
But it doesn't mean, um, that
the 5 of us have a whole lot of
energy for.
The error correcting stuff.
I will tell you.
Um
I am fascinated by
And I think the court generally
I,
you know, to, to push on, on the
PRC a little bit here. We are
constantly watchful of the
matter in which they conduct
these hearings.
Um
And the way evidence is taken.
And notice that is given to
parties.
That is something that
If you listen to argument, and
these are some of these things
will pop up in the spaghetti
appeal, so it's fair, right?
There are some, um,
I just broadly as due process
concerns that are raised, um, it
is.
Interesting
Um
The way administrative processes
work, and they're designed not
to provide all the protections
of normal civil litigation, they
should be a little more
expedient, but we do keep an eye
out for, let's make sure that
there's notice, um, opportunity,
um, and that the whoever is
charged with making that final
decision is making it on some
form of reliable evidence.
That's why
sort of the practice I was
talking to you before, having
some understanding of
administrative appeals is
helpful in this job is because
you do understand the need for
these administrative processes.
The thing about them and this
act is, um, and I don't think
it's a fault of any party. I
think it's something that kind
of needs to be settled. Is
there's appeals on every order.
Right, so it's
We,
we'll be, we'll have a case and
then they'll be
You know, 3 more appeals in that
same matter.
A different orders, and I think
there's some way we can probably
build in some efficiencies
there.
But we do
We do want you to raise those
concerns you have about the way
the governmental entity.
Certainly is applying the
statute, that's kind of the
easiest, that's our wheelhouse,
um, but if you have some real
due process concerns about or
procedural concerns about the
way it was conducted, um, we are
alert to those.
So I think that is sort of the
That's probably the end of my,
um,
Advice
And uh
Sort of experience.
With regard to the.
Uh, ETA, I will go back and sort
of
Um
Give you my general thoughts and
then.
Stay open for any other
questions you have.
And I would, you know, I would
like your thoughts on how you
believe you are received by the
court, um, either through the
briefing or, or, oral argument.
We are an interesting time under
this particular act in which it
is a new act and a lot of time
was spent just basically, as I
said, the statutory
construction. So a lot of that
stuff had to be
A fixed but figured out, had to
be figured out by us.
And I think the legislatures
also looked at this.
Um
And it's so when I started in
2019, my PRC appeals.
were very
Um, technical in a regulatory
sense, like you're really
looking at
The code and the technical
testimony, and you were really,
even what we did at the EG's
office, it was a classic sort of
rate case.
The CTA something.
Different.
Um, and now that we've sort of
settled into the statutory
process we're kind of very much
now I think into um
Appeals of the commission's
decisions on how to implement
it. Um, and hopefully some of
these through these 5
dispositions or more, and I
think we have 2 on this term.
Um, we'll settle some of those
questions.
So that is our view of this
practice under this statute. Um,
does anyone have
Any questions or would share, we
willing to share with me, sort
of their view of how
These matters proceed.
Yes, sir. Can you tell me your
name, please?
OK.
Yeah, no, that's a good question
and um
Um, I believe what we hear
hearing tomorrow.
If I know on this term or or in
the next few days, we have a
children's court issue that also
has priority.
Um
I remember as a trial court
judge,
Um
It was an eviction from a
Trailer.
I was like, OK, I'll set this.
I'll set it on my dock when I
can. The lawyer calls the
offices, you know, the
legislature said you had to have
that in 5 days. I'm like, OK,
well, all right. Um, here's the
rest of my priorities. He's a
1000 cases I need to hear.
We
Uh, certainly with regard to
these and others have statutory
priority, we will set them now
in the term, um,
You know, those that would be
filed, I would say January or
February would certainly make it
into the next term. I'm not sure
we would hear argument out of
cycle, but that's a good
question.
If, um, you know, that may be
required.
A lot of it
Um, may depend on how the
parties are.
Or performing, are there a lot
of
Requests for extensions, um,
those kind of things. As I
recall early, um, a lot of
motion to intervene, a breezes
coming in very late into the
process, that always for us
causes some concern, OK, is
everyone had the opportunity to
respond. So maybe about a year
ago, you got these little, these
kind of minute orders.
That said, OK, you guys get
together, you know, file one
response because we're trying to
keep our timeline together.
Um
But we do our very best to honor
that.
If I were to say it has more of
a priority over a children's
court case or some of these
capital pills where they're, you
know, facing um life without
parole.
It's hard to say.
Um, but that's a, that's a good
question. I think the
One of the things that's
helpful, and I, I know this has
come up in oral argument, um, in
certain cases, and I, I
But I, you know, I'm not sure I
can remember the particular
case. It's either in your
briefing or
An argument, you know, what is,
we are.
I think it is important for us
to consider, and I can tell you.
We have discussed what is the
impact of the status quo or
What is going to happen if we
wait 6 months tuition opinion.
So our performance measures.
Um
set forth or basically get the
6, get the opinion out 6 months
from the time, um, we hear the
case, it's been submitted. Now
we're under this term, we're
gonna have everything out.
Once the term ends, probably by
June. What I would suggest on
either side of this issue is if
there's something that impacts
That are delaying the decision
would impact.
I would let us know. I and I I
apologize. I, I should think of
the case off the top of my head.
You know, one of them, like, our
decision may have some impact on
a very large capital project,
right? Um, and people and
businesses are preparing for
that.
Customers are preparing for it,
communities are preparing for
it, and maybe that delay is, is
gonna
Um, cause some issues there. So
I would certainly alert us.
To those things.
It's a good question.
To have
Oh, thank you.
You're right. The community
solar case, yeah.
Um
one of mine have 40,000 pages.
Um
Right, so the intervening
I, I, I think it really kind of
depends what the
Interest is of that party, so
let's go to our statute, the
very first slide.
Any party to any proceeding
before the commission. So my
question for you, let me ask
you, who can, who can be a party
to a proceeding?
There's a lot, right?
Um
Normally
Then
You know, as I understand an
appeal would be sort of that
aggrieved party would be the
ones that would be able to argue
on appeal. Here it's kind of any
party. And the interesting thing
about, and I don't.
But casting blame.
The interesting thing about this
particular area of laws, it's
very policy-based.
And there are strong views about
it, as a matter of policy, which
we're not that concerned about
like that's this person's job,
that's these people, but people
want to express.
That policy in litigation.
Um, and so,
Sometimes that's sort of the
lease.
Effective. I mean, they're
interested, they're coming into
the proceeding because they want
to advance.
Um, a policy or make sure that
the government doesn't go
outside the bounds of the
statute and what they're doing.
We literally draw.
Venn diagrams.
Um, so when I read all these
different intervening, um,
And you even have acronyms in
the name of your corporations.
So if I have PRC and SBS, I'm
gonna have a SPS. Here's our PRC
comes in and here's PNM. So
there could be SPSPN and PRC. If
they're in the same little
circle.
Then it helps me understand.
Um, kind of where they're
aligned. Now they're gonna
obviously bring
Different issues to it. Juergen
PRC is gonna bring it as a, a
regulator and then the company
is gonna bring it sort of out of
their own client's interest, but
the arguments sometimes are
aligned enough.
That I think it would be helpful
to identify that early on. I
would be interested in
A real serious conversation
about a rule that would say, OK.
You know, can we just meet and
confer at the beginning of this.
Let's get these interveners. If
you're gonna do this.
And then come in
You got to do it really early.
Like real soon after the appeals
filed, and then try as best you
can line yourself up and
Line those arguments up. And
then if you need more briefing
to do that or you want to say,
you know, we join in 1 through
3, but I'm gonna file.
Almost like a concurring
opinion, I'm gonna file
separately because as PNM I know
PRC is not gonna carry my water
on this. I think that's much
more efficient for us.
I would really, you know, I, I
don't know if anyone thinks
that's helpful at all. Um, it
would be much more efficient and
it would go towards.
I think this question of um
How fast we can
We can expedite some of these
opinions.
Mhm
All right. Yes.
Uh oh, where's my clerks? I
gotta get my clerk.
Just.
Yeah.
Right, or the 15 notices of
hearing.
I love going through the record
and, oh, they noticed that,
that's great. I'll keep
scrolling.
Yes
Is your short answer. And again,
not
And I don't mean to target these
particular proceedings. I
would promote.
Amending and I am going to try
and do this and.
My 1 year and a half.
Amendments to the rules of
appellate procedure.
Where the parties are compelled.
To do that. I don't know whether
it's an appendix or they're
going to certify. Again, I get
it down below cause you're just
really trying to preserve
everything.
It's not necessary with us and
it's not helpful, so I would
encourage.
Um
An agreement on really these are
the
I mean you can even pick your
briefs and highlight them, send
them to each other and be like,
do we need more than this?
And if we do,
OK.
But not much, not that much
more. I think if you did that.
In a conversation, you would
realize quickly.
That
What you have sent over is too
much.
Um, and it would
Assist us in review. I believe
Actually, most appeals should do
that. I think in the civil
world, again, our civil
litigants, they do the exact
same thing and the curse.
I love electronic evidence and
transmission, but the curse is,
it's just pretty much unlimited,
it's as much space as whatever
filing program will allow you to
jam in there. Um,
So
I, you know, in the next year
and a half, I think I'm going to
propose that as a rule of appeal
procedure, but litigants can do
it.
And I would encourage that.
Just
Is that which law firm? Oh,
is that, is that Louis Stelzner?
Oh, there you go, cause Louise
can't end the conversation
shorter than an hour. So I
imagine this briefing is
awesome, OK.
Yeah
Yeah.
Um, great question.
I get that question a lot in
reverse, like, well, if you're
here now you're complaining
about what we said. Why don't
you tell us what you're
interested in?
And that's totally fair.
And on occasion,
We do it here's a.
You know, I think
Not a secret, but I think
practitioners should know.
The Court of Appeals, if you're
arguing in other civil
litigation, and you get 3 panel.
Judges at the Court of Appeals,
they're going to conference that
case.
If they're talking about that
case before you're coming to
argument.
OK. We don't do that.
Some Supreme courts do it. We
don't. So we're taking
Our docket, and we're looking at
cases individually. On occasion,
if there's something that we
think
Needs and there's one in this
term, supplemental briefing.
We're reading it, we're going.
Wait a minute.
You didn't argue this and either
be ready at oral argument on
this point, or brief it.
But because we don't conference,
it's hard to reach that
consensus, um,
As to the particular um
Issues we're interested in.
I think
The
Most effective means at oral
argument.
In order to
Must be hard as a practitioner
too.
To say, OK, now I'm moving this
out with my
You know, client and their GC.
And I am mooting out 10 issues.
Um, and I feel like I have to be
ready for all of them.
The best approach or argument is
Justice, I'm gonna talk about
12, and 3. That's what I think
is at issue here. I don't think
there's
Much else in the other 7. If you
want to talk about the other 7,
please let me know. And so that
will, um, at, at oral argument
at least focus you down. I don't
know.
You know, uh, uh,
I
We are the Supreme Court, so
we're not big into motion
practice, right? And we get a
lot of emotions, and it's like,
well.
It's not really what we do.
Um, but, uh,
Yeah, I probably would not
recommend that. That probably
wouldn't be.
I think a conversation with the
opposing counsel about what, you
know, you really think it's the
scope would be helpful.
Um, but certainly once you get
up there, the finding it
quickly, and then, you know, you
never know. I mean, we're
reading this and I get twisted
around. I really
I will tell you, I just, I'm
very curious about the way the
PRC does these instrative
hearings. It's some of the stuff
and I've asked some questions
about this really make me
uneasy.
Unnotic things. So I may get
into that or another justice
