Senator Charlie.
Senator Doig.
Center Isel.
Santa Figueroa.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Minos.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Souls, Senator
Stephanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Wirth. Senator Woods.
You do not have a quorum, Mister
President.
Senator W to take us to that
first order of business.
moment as we have other members
who are gonna be trickling right
now.
Yeah
You, you, you, you made, you
Cinemaster while we're waiting
for.
tournaments happening as we
speak in the pit, great games
yesterday and today in uh in
women's basketball, Roy Mosqueto
And women defeated Pecos 57-53
in AAA, Navajo Prep took state.
Navajo Prep women defeated West
Las Vegas 5243.
In men's basketball, AA Texaco,
Texaco defeated Mesa Vista 65,
uh 6665 to take state and in
Sandia in women's basketball
later tonight, uh, Highland
Artisia.
For boys basketball, for a
single A. Logan plays Melrose
and then the big game tonight
For the invitation to be led
today by Pastor Larry Toledo the
vineyard Santa Fe.
And please remain standing for
the Pledge of allegiance to be
led today by Senator Brantley.
Good afternoon, everyone, and
thank you so much for the honor
of being, being able to lead the
invocation today, and we bow our
heads as we pray together.
loving Heavenly Father.
We are praying God for your
divine guidance and all the
matters at hand today. We ask
that you would clearly show
every representative here.
Just how to conduct their work
great state of New Mexico. And
yes, Lord, we ask that all
who've come here together in
these moments will encourage
each other to excellence.
We ask that all that are serving
So Precious Lord, thank you for
every seat that has been filled
here today for every mind and
heart that fills the presence of
this room. We thank you, mighty
and the betterment of our city
of Santa Fe and our state of New
Mexico.
So God, we pray for a spirit of
unity to fill this place if
there be any spirit that it's
faithfulness, gentleness and
self-control may reign in all of
our hearts. We do lift up the
poor, the broken, the addicted,
most vulnerable of our
community, our children, the
babies, the unborn, may they
receive the, the help and
encouragement they desperately
need.
legislature and House of
Representatives, our, our
governor, our president, all
governing authorities as they
make laws and decisions to
govern our land and delegate our
to protect our freedoms so that
we can all live peaceful, quiet
lives and all godliness and
dignity, and we pray against the
divisiveness that, that plagues
representatives serving today
would work together in humility
and respect for the good of our
city and state.
And Lord, we do recognize that
in the midst of this time, you
you see the big picture. Thank
you, the year at work in ways
that we cannot even see. And so
Lord, in the prayer of Saint
Francis, we ask for all of us
here today, Lord, would you make
where there is darkness light,
where there is sadness, joy, O
divine master, grant that we may
not so much seek to be consoled
as to console to be understood
in dying that we are born again
to eternal life. So we ask all
of these things in the name of
our Lord and Savior Jesus.
Jesus Christ. Amen.
Invisible.
to have
symbol of perfect friendship.
Among a cultures.
You may be seated.
started on today's order
business, Mr. President, good
afternoon. Unanimous consent, we
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection we're in that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Worth, uh,
certainly it's the time, uh, to
think about.
All that work we're doing and
excellence, unity, they just
wrote down wisdom. Those are
1 week to go and just appreciate
you being here. Uh, just before
we excuse the, do the excusals,
I think we'll wait until we get
ready the 3rd reading just
because we do have a committee
Uh, Mr. President, you consent
to allow cameras on the Senate
floor and in the Senate gallery.
no objection. Cameras are
allowed in the gallery and on
the floor.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
o'clock today. So check in with
him, uh, just let me give
everyone a sense of what we're
gonna do today, um.
25, 26, and 27. We'll do a more
thorough announcement once we
get to that point, but just 1
through 9, and then those four
house bills. uh, Mr. President,
Senator Wirth, I'm happy to
introduce my guest today. First
of all, I have good family
friend Mia Silva. Her, her dad
is Dominic Silva, Grandpa Dom
Silva. She's a great family
State with a business degree.
She's up here with my youngest
daughter, Reese Diamond. Reese
is a freshman at Hot Springs
High School. President of our
FFA club in
Greece is played varsity tennis
I
Thank you, Senator Brownlee.
Senator Tobison.
our service dogs, Stella, but
I'm gonna pick her up because
you won't be able to see her.
Hang on.
And Stella, who is the love of
Thank you, Senator Tobias and
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, first of all,
and, uh, just a lot of work and
I know there's going to be a lot
of memories that all of these
people will be taking back home
with them. So to all of the
players, to their families and
to the fans. It's uh it's been
As we're wearing the bolo ties
today and I've been talking to
various members. I just, uh,
hope that you all get a chance
to share some of the stories in
generation, another one, who's a
spouse insisted that he wear
that tie and of course those
cords when you take a look at
them, uh, they look short on him
and I know that they're very
long, but anyway, that's just
back. One of them, I, uh, made
for my father and the other one
for my father-in-law.
They wore them with a lot of
pride, uh, but before they
passed away, both of them
really important that we share
these stories because that's the
way we not only get to know each
other, but as we go forward, uh,
we get a chance to really share
tortillas, uh, and I'd like to
go ahead and break, if you will,
uh, break tortillas with you
today. Uh, they're gonna, these
packs of tortillas are gonna be
up in your offices, so be sure
and take them home for the
that, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, thank you very much
and again, remember
Today we're breaking tortillas.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Campos.
specifically talk about, uh, the
bolo ties, uh, maybe we'll see
some of the competition that
Senator Gonzalez has and all
that that's prepared, so we do
have a section towards the end
There's some folks in the
gallery I wanna give a shout out
to my cousin Daniel Duran took
the train up here today to get
a, a firsthand look at
democracy. He's here with his
Thank you, Senator Ma says any
further announcements, senators?
just as we wait for Senate
conservation to come down.
Unanimous consent we go without
our business messages from the
house. Hearing no objection.
We're on that order of business
messages from the house the
reader will read.
amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the House in open session and
return same herewith
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
Joint Resolution 2, as amended,
has been read in full and signed
by the office of the House in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
members of the body that the
officers in the Senate have
signed an open session House
Joint Resolution 2 as amended.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
Bill 47 with the emergency
clause has been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
house in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the Senate,
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House government
elections and affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47.
With the emergency clause.
Mr. President, you're just
judiciary Committee to whom has
been referred Senate Bill 250
has had it under consideration
and report the same with the
recommendation that it do not
move do pass, Mr. President.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Committee, to whom has been
referred, Senate Bill 5 as
amended has had it under
consideration and reports that
same has been duly enrolled and
And Bergmans adoption of the
committee reports we have a
motion to adopt the community
port. All those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Those opposing, the ayes have
it. The community report has
Peter Worth, uh, Mr. President,
unanimous consent we go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous on that order of
business, Senator.
Cervantes, Charlie Hamblin, and
Pope until they return to the
chamber except for purposes of a
call. There no objection.
Sarah Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President. I have
had no one asked me to be
Floridaator Peter Worth. So
thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
again, on 3rd reading, we're
gonna do items 1 through 9, with
will be Senator Munoz to finish
up on Senate Bill 226. I think
we were through the debate had
an amendment from Senator
Sanchez, so hopefully,
He's listening so he can come in
456, uh, Senator Padilla got
item number 5, Senate Bill 78.
Senator Duha as number 6 Senate
Bill 259. Senator Trujillo has
mentioned, we will do, uh, the
1st 24, 25, 26, and 27 house
bills and we'll figure out and
I'll make another announcement
about who's gonna do those on
number one, Senate Bill 226. You
no objection when that order of
business, Senator Munoz, Mr.
President. I need to reinduce
and reintroduce the bill again.
Uh, asked me consent to send it
Mr. President, this is where
trucks are fined if they don't
drive 65 in the right-hand lane,
uh, the finest $250 and with
that, I'll stand for questions.
I don't hear anybody, Mr.
President. Let's.
Senator Munoz, we do have an
amendment, um.
We're just getting that.
debate.
Senator Munoz to close on the
bill.
I'm Mr. President, I move that
Senate Bill 226 do now pass and
I asked him as consented. The
records show the role has been
A show of hands or bolo ties
might be better, but hands will
work today. Senators, we're
voting all senators to the seats
Senator Steinborn voting now.
Senator Tobiasson voting no.
Senator Block voting no.
Senators voting now.
Senator Ramos, well, you know.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Buy a vote. 22 in the
affirmative, none in the
negative.
The vote's closed.
I voted 17 in the affirmative,
13 in the negative. Senate Bill
226.
Has passed the Senate Senator
Munoz. I would barely sped by
him, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The records show that all
actions replacing Senate Bill
411 on final passage has been
I've been working with the
Medical Society on and the
doctors to, you know, really try
to bring more doctors to New
Mexico. What we found is we
talked to other states is that
their total loans, uh, most
doctors when they, uh, graduate
from medical school and their
residency, they come out with a.
About $300,000 in debt. This
Mexico. Now it does have to be
in one of our underserved
communities, one of our
underserved areas, um, which
pretty much leaves out
Albuquerque, sorry, uh, at least
the state or population is
getting older, as we all know,
uh, this program will hopefully
help us bring more doctors to
New Mexico.
That's all. Thank you, Sandra
See no debate.
Mr. President, thank you, um,
Senator, so who will, who, who
would be eligible for
include the osteopathic, uh,
pathway to physicianhood uh I
know it's probably not the right
term. Doctor Hickey can get mad
And Mr. President, does, does it
matter if they were, where they
had their training, if they had
it in New Mexico or outside of
New Mexico. Well, Mr. President,
at keeping the ones that went
here first of all, uh, and then
it goes to, you know, those who
are wanting to transfer into
here.
Thank you, Mr. President.
We do have a floor amendment.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Nava.
Send her now to move the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, ma'am. uh, Mr. President,
uh, can the senator, uh, sponsor
Yieldt, please?
Or should I explain the
amendment first? OK, OK.
amendment, um, is on page 2 line
24, um, where on section B where
it says applicants shall be
licensed or certified to
practice in New Mexico as
physicians and shall be bona
924 between citizens and
residents, um, and the proposal,
Mr. President and Senator is
specifically because
may be DACA recipients and maybe
um residents here doing the
residency in New Mexico or may
perhaps have graduated from the
university here as physicians
whenever we present that we'll
go to the sponsor to be able to
have the first say on that, so
Senator Brandt.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
um.
a medical provider in the state
of New Mexico and so that would
be my concern, uh, maybe, uh, I
could yield to Senator Trujillo,
who may have an answer. She used
Thank you, Senator Brant.
Senators, we're debating Senate
floor amendment number one
anyone else wishing to debate on
the amendments.
Senator Trujillo then followed
by Senator Padilla.
licensing um bill and in that
respect, we're just looking at
how do we recognize training
that's outside of the country in
Thank you Senator Trujillo. We
do have further debate, Senator
Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
uh, not on the amendment, uh,
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Wirth until he returns
Medical Society, um, they can be
licensed even if they are not a
citizen, so I have no problem.
Thank you.
Seeing no further debate,
Senator Nava.
To close on the amendment.
For Senate Bill 411 as amended
now be adopted and I ask for a
voice vote. Thank you, senators.
There's been a request for
Senate floor number one to be
adopted to.
411 has now been amended twice.
We are back on the bill,
senators.
See no debate.
on the bill.
Uh
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative, except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Senators, we're voting to your
seats, please, if you wish to
vote no.
By vote of 31 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 4/11 is twice
amended, has passed the Senate,
I don't remember 5 and I'll
yield to Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I ask you to consent
to the of the Senate that the
records show that all actions
much, Mr. President and to the
members of the body that have
been here. It probably sounds
familiar. We passed this piece
of legislation through here in
the 23 session. Uh, Mr.
President, but essentially what
we're attempting to do here is
podiatrists, uh, the bill does
define what independent role
means, which is performing in
any action related to anesthesia
care without supervision, uh,
Mr. President.
this group of professionals here
some of our more rural
communities, rural New Mexico
really needs this legislation.
Rural New Mexico needs these
folks to feel comfortable to
want to stay there, start their
practices, operate independently
expedited licensure. And the
reason we want to do this, Mr.
President, again, is enhanced
care in our rural areas, uh,
cost efficiency, uh,
professional autonomy, and
alignment with national trends.
Ms. Brennan and Senator, I don't
need you to yield. I just want
to stand in support of Senate
Bill 78. A couple of things come
to mind are
really, really excited, David
Shaw is really excited about
this opportunity. We, uh, are
dependent in Lee County on our
CRNAs, and it's one of those
care units prior to the
anesthesia school and they're
gonna be board certified in
anesthesia passing a.
Rigorous sport exam prior to the
practice, Mr. President,
uh, in
In Las Cruces because now she is
excited to become a CRNA, and I
think that this gives us an
state. So I just wanted to stand
in sport. I think that what
these individuals will do is
critical. Uh, we recently had an
issue with my wife had surgery,
the CRNA, uh, took our call.
anesthesia was doing to my wife,
so, uh, there are a lot of
credible individuals out there
that are doing this. I just
think that this is excellent for
the state of New Mexico and I
want to stand and support. Thank
with this spell as I, I did, uh,
two years ago, uh, CRNAs are,
are a critical part of of
medicine in New Mexico,
absolutely, um.
2004 is because that was when,
uh, so Medicare said, hey,
states, if you, if you have
these folks and, and your state
that letter.
Saying in our laws, uh, we
provide for this, but that
wasn't true. We did not provide
outside their scope of practice
ever since then, um, with the
changes made here, it is allowed
saying they can be independent,
but it's still not changing
intraoperative, and
post-operative anesthesia care
and related services.
Miss, Mr. President, if the goal
of this is to give certainty to
of practice, so Mr. President,
I, I have to oppose this bill.
Thank you, Senator Du. Do we
have, we do have further debate.
We have center block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
you, uh, taking the lead on
this. Can you tell me
Uh, New Mexico Hospital
Association is supporting this
bill.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
the uh healthcare and medical
profession in New Mexico are
supporting Mr. President. I do
have about, uh, of the 63, I
think I have over 50 letters
from those associations,
including the hospital
Uh, Mr. President, we have a, a,
a shortage in general in the
healthcare profession, and yes,
we do in this field. We
absolutely cannot afford, uh,
from a health standpoint,
um, allow what we're doing with
this bill.
Uh, Mr. President, I don't have
the exact number, but I know
that it is more than 15.
going to compromise patient
safety. Is, is there uh any
significant risk that they
talked about all those
organizations that endorse this
bill in regards to patient
safety.
and as a result, if they're
gonna practice so they have to
adhere to the standard operating
procedures, quality, compliance,
etc. requirements of those, uh,
uh, free standing health
clinics, what have you, or
supporting the bill.
Thank you Senator Block. We do
have further debate. We have
Senator, uh, Senator Hickey, did
you wish it to be?
they allow the rural hospitals
to undertake surgeries which
they would not otherwise be able
to do and without the revenue
from that, they'd be in so much
worse shape. So that's a
the state. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Seen no further debate, center
for to closing the bill. Uh,
thank you very much, Mr.
I ask you name's consent to the
Senate that the records show
that all those that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
to accept those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Mr. President, explain my vote.
Senna Munoz, are you voting no?
there used to be a rule about
Senator Sanchez and, uh, those
of us that know the rule know
why I voted that way and uh.
We'll explain that later, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Padilla. We're going on
to the next item.
Mr. President, uh, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
259 that's twice amended on
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Bill 259 is a consumer
protection and transparency bill
that ensures that when New
Mexicans donate non-perishable
goods such as clothing,
for-profit resale operation.
Right now, certain for-profit
thrift stores and third-party
solicitors mislead donors into
believing that their
contributions support charitable
causes.
Senate Bill 259 doesn't ban any
business practices or prohibit
partnerships between nonprofits
and for-profit entities. It just
conspicuously whether the
donations support a registered
nonprofit or a for-profit
business and uh second is
third-party solicitors to make
nonprofit. And third is thrift
stores, uh, so that any, uh,
for-profit resale business that
uses charitable branding in its
advertising or donation
level playing field.
businesses and nonprofits, and
similar laws to prevent
deceptive practices in this area
exists in many other states. And
Senate floor Amendment number 1,
the Senate Bill 259 as twice
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Kay M. Duhig.
Center to move the amendment.
number one to Senate Bill 259
for the purposes as twice
smended for the purposes of
discussion. Thank you, Senator.
We'll explain what your
amendment does.
the reports that are created as
a result of this bill to be
available to the public, uh,
through the attorney General's
office. And so that's what this
some other states, they put the
disclosure language on the
inside of the bins where no one
can see it.
Thank you, Senator Senators,
we're debating for number one.
number 1 to Senate Bill 259 is
twice amended, be now adopted
and I ask for a voice vote.
Thank you, Senators. There's
been a request to adopt Senate
floor Amendment number one by
voice vote. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
that's now 3 times demanded. We
are back on the bill, senators.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the senator yield to yield? Yes,
Mr. President. Senator
Steinborn, thank you, Mr.
does this bill do simply and why
do we need it?
So Mr. Mr. President, I'll
answer the second question
are, are going to an
organization, uh, that is, is
actually a nonprofit and is
actually doing things in our
community, um, I want to make
main three things that it does,
uh, is making sure that on those
donation bins that we all see
for big brothers, big sisters or
Goodwill or or any of these
entity, you know that, um, and
it makes sure.
that, uh, when, cause some,
sometimes nonprofits will hire,
arrangements. So if, if goodwill
has hired an outside entity, but
that outside entity is actually
getting 90% of the profits.
That's information that we
adopted, uh, and then it also,
the other main thing that it
does is for thrift stores, um,
if there's some thrift stores
that make themselves themselves
try to get you to give them
their your stuff so they can
make money off of it rather than
giving it.
To say goodwill or Big Brother's
Big Sisters or or other
legitimately legitimate
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
quickly read the bill. Uh,
Which is always a good idea, Mr.
President, we should all read
the bill. So, uh, Mr. President,
General, is that how I'm reading
the current law, Mr. President,
Senator.
So Mr. Senator, I mean, Mr.
President, um.
witness to be allowed into the
chamber.
President, just to restate the
question. So for the senator,
uh, so right now under current
law, we're adding the current
law our nonprofits already
required to report with the
Attorney General.
Mr. President, no. This would
require that these third party
entities, uh, do file with the
Attorney General.
correct, but I, I think I like
it. This presentsenator, so what
I'm asking is right now fund our
entities like your expert behind
you, are they already required
Thank you. Yes, uh, nonprofits
are already required to file
with the AG and this would add
these, those third party folks.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
President, Senator. One thing I
do see that seems new is the
to pay a fee with the Attorney
General right now?
So I guess what I'm wondering,
Mr. President, is, um,
Would this now make it so that
all fundraisers would have a new
$200 fee.
Mr. President, so I think this
is adding a a annual
registration fee for
professional fundraisers, um, I
don't know that there is, I, I
do think this would be a new fee
Mr. President, no, that, that
wasn't put in at the request of
the Attorney General.
Mr. President, Senator, does
Right now.
Mr. President, uh, it would be
all nonprofits in New Mexico
raising money, really, um, get
some grants now and then, but so
it's, I don't think that's
exactly accurate. I think maybe
there's some status that do have
Now, and how many third party
fundraisers we think will fall
under it if we pass this.
Mr. President, so you're right.
So it's, it's all nonprofits
Steinburn. Thank you, Mr.
President. um, well, so a little
unclear on that, but I'll just
close and say, uh, I can
appreciate definitely, you know,
taken advantage of seniors,
others, and I, I see this as
being a little bit of a tool to
have transparency so that if
somebody is not registered or if
they're kind of falling outside
these entities that they have to
do what they say they're doing.
I mean, maybe it's a little bit
of an enforcement tool. So,
But I, but I am curious how many
groups we now have to file a
Senator Dock to close on the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President, I move
that Senate bill 259 is three
times amended, do now pass and
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
My vote of 32 in the affirmative
0 in the negative. Senate bill
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
127 as amended on final passage
New Mexico's film industry is
experid significant growth
contributing to the state's
economic and job creation,
placing unnecessary restrictions
127 seeks to clarify that film
industry makeup artists and hair
stylists are not subject to the
licensing requirements.
of the Barbers and cosmetology
of licensing. This bill seeks to
align New Mexico's regulations
with industry standards. The
scope of work for a makeup
artist and hair stylist in the
industry professionals apply
makeup and style hair to create
characters they may apply makeup
to enhance an actor's own
features or to create wounds,
those characters. Senate Bill
127 seeks to modernize New
Mexico's regulatory framework to
better accommodate.
unique needs of the film
have an amendment that was added
and I just want to explain the
three things that it does.
One, it changes the title to in
because we realized that
individual that organizations
like the Santa Fe Opera, the
Pope Joy local theater
productions could have the same
problems.
adds a comma after navy and
after marine we add in or Air
Force.
On the second page line 5, we
or cinematic and with that, Mr.
President, I stand for
questions. Senators, we're
debating Senate Bill 127 as
amended. I'llie Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. uh, unanimous consent
debate, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I,
I just rise in support of the
legislation, um,
I'm aware that some people
spirit of this law, which is to
beautify people as a health
product, and in fact, they make
people look dead, burn, car
wrecks, I mean, all kinds of
because we have hardworking
people out there like my
constituent trying to make a
living and they're getting
trapped under this, um, under
know others as well. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Steinberg. We do
have further debate. We have
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
this is just a comment. I don't
need the speaker to address
Thank you, Senator Block. Seeing
no further debate.
Senator here to close.
Mr. President, I move that
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators, we are voting all
senators to your seats, please.
Senate. Senator Trujillo, thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
body. We're gonna go on to the
next item that's gonna be item
number 8 on today's calendar,
and I'll yell to Sander Hickey.
Senate Bill Committee substitute
as amended 120 on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution.
Hearing no objection.
Center Hickey.
passed Senate bill 317 in 21.
That bill removes cost sharing
from behavioral health, uh,
treatments, inpatient,
We're putting this bill on now
because the evidence is showing
dramatically that if you treat
healthcare in any year. The, uh,
increase in uptake is found by
the OSI, which has reported on
the bill every year, found
across the state, uh, from 28%
in 23% to 38%, which is what we
really want to see and why we
passed Senate bills 12, and 3
this year.
Work with addiction,
particularly in alcohol since uh
New Mexico leads the nation in
alcohol-related mortality.
bill, uh, 12, and 3 on
behavioral health and that
impact on crime. I submit this
bill for passage.
Thank you Senator Sanders, we're
debating Senate Health Public
Senator Hickey, uh, uh, we've
talked about this bill quite a
little bit. And, uh, and I
understand where you're coming
from about, uh, making
year that we could go before we
did anything about this and we
could get a little bit more
information through the
reporting.
Um
This is not a
And, but I, and you and I have
talked a lot about it, and I
I swing both directions, but I,
You've got to have some value
and sometime even a small copay
makes it something that
Well, I paid for that service.
brain too that recognize if I
pay money to it, it's got to
have value.
So that's kind of my argument
Um, thank you, Mr. President. I
do have a question for the
sponsor of Hu Yield. Senator
Hickey, do you happily yield.
So, Mr. President, we talk about
cost sharing.
defines uh covers copays,
co-insurance and deductibles.
And it's, uh, it was pointed out
just a moment ago, uh.
Things that are free are treated
like things that are free,
things that you've purchased or
talked about this earlier this
morning in a, in a committee,
Mr. President, is.
Nothing is free.
Somebody's gonna pay for it, so
the question now, Mr. President,
that somebody's going to be
either the taxpayer or some
other, uh,
Somebody else with the same
insurance that's who's gonna pay
for it. Their premium is gonna
do, and I don't disagree with
him at all, uh, I, I do want to
point out that nothing is free.
And so everything in this
building that we've given away
as free over the last several
In uh that that troubles me.
I also have one other concern.
And that is, again, we are
compelling an insurance company.
Uh, if this is actually going to
save them money? Well, they'd
probably do it just all on
their own. Uh, and in many
cases, I think they are.
you have serious issues and
And so the insurance companies.
Motivation, natural motivation.
premiums are cheaper as well. So
I, I love the idea that we need
to do this before it becomes
such a big deal. We need to do
this because we have a problem,
but
For those reasons, one, I can't.
whole idea that free is really
free because free is not free.
And along with Senator Woods
here,
A little bit of skin in the game
makes a big difference, doesn't
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
will the sponsor yield for a
question or two. Senator Hickey.
Yes, I yield. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. President. Senator. I'm
one of the sponsors of this
might call the session of
behavioral health, this is the
ultimate behavioral health bill
investing in New Mexican's
behavioral health, but there's a
real urgency for passing this
bill now, Mr. President,
Senator, and I just want to
Center Hickey, Mr. President and
Senator, then in 207, the, uh,
cost sharing goes up, cost
to do, um, and when, and it's
definitely been shown that when
you have those financial
barriers, people don't take up
the services. So it would uh
kind of render all the work
we've been doing this year to
not produce much
care exacerbations is, uh, with
a underlying behavior, active
behavior health condition. It
raises the cost of care by a
factor of 2 to 6.
health, health care, really
would not be able to afford that
$50. It's not trivial what we're
talking about here. This is a
really monumental thing that we
were able to do and, you know,
the premiums.
And because of the um health
affordability fund, um, really,
You know, insurance companies
are actually helping people be
and we definitely need to pass
it. So thank you, Senator, for
carrying it and thank you for
your leadership on this. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Stein. We have Senator
Gaels.
Mr. President, Senator, I've
just, uh, looking through the
FIR I heard this bill in
committee. Uh, one of the things
in thereR talks about is
Association examined New
Mexico's no cost behavioral
health program instituted in
2021, down further, it brings
out the
Of the no cost behavioral health
program. So, Mr. President,
Senator, the first question I
have, understanding that
significant issue if this
program had no effect, and Mr.
JAMA article was uh a
essentially a summary of an
article published in Health
Affairs, uh, health affair that
acknowledged that, uh, this, and
so the bill had
uh, the impact of the bill and
the data they had access to was
only a few months going into it.
services, as I said, from 28 to
38%. So it is having an impact,
and it is saving individuals
millions of dollars out of
NIMSA redo of their FIR, um,
they're projecting maybe only in
the 3rd year out from here,
would it go up, uh, uh, a, a
few years, but the evidence from
the OSI, which has been
following this year to year.
Uh, and the data from it says
definitely there is uptake,
Mr. President, Senator, then can
you explain to me how the, how
it produces the benefits that's
been cited, Mr. President,
Senator.
Center Hickey.
therefore they get exacerbated,
they end up in the emergency
room and being admitted in one
study in 2017 of when health
by up
To 40% and a decrease in
admissions in the hospital. In
fact, it became because of those
cost savings, it became their
apply, uh, does this not apply
to Medicaid, Mr. President,
Senator?
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
no, this does not apply to
just my closing, uh, doesn't
need to have an answer there for
if FIR projects the increased
premium cost for the state
insurance plans by 20 million to
something changes my mind. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Senator
Galgos.
Seeing no further debate.
Uh, committee substitute as
amended 120 do not pass, and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate, that the record show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative, except those
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senator Bratton Bodino.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator Paul voting no.
Settle Lanier voting no.
Senator Brantley, voting no.
In our woods.
Bono?
Senator Scott voting no.
By a vote of 19.
President.
I'm gonna go on to the next
item.
Mr. President, I ask consent at
now subject to amendment and
substitution. Thank you,
senators. We are, uh, Senator
Munoz to explain the bill. Thank
you, Mr. President, uh, the
workers' comp
increased through fees and
providing resources for New
Mexico workers. Additionally, in
this bill is a telecommunication
relay service, uh, through a
fun of the 988 Lifeline Fund and
establishing a non-reverting
fund will save lives in New
Mexicans facing mental health
struggles, alcohol and drug.
It currently is $2 per employee.
$2 per employee in 30 employee
quarter and 255 per employer,
employer per quarter, uh, in
2026, in 2028, I'll raise it
for people that are deaf,
disabled, uh, so they can text
and speech in there because we
are now moving from landlines to
to mobile lines that increment
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 535, and I'll yield
to Senator Woods and Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. If,
uh, Senator Munoz would
Yield to a question.
Seeing no objection, Sergeant
Ars, please escort our expert
witness into the chamber.
I was just a lot.
Log rolling, Mr. President. uh,
we talk about two separate
things altogether here in one
bill. So,
not log rolling when we talk two
subjects in the same bill.
Um, Mr. President, Senator,
because in the emergency bills,
their peace public safety, and I
log growing.
OK.
Um, yeah, it's a little known
fact that, that the worker
actually has to pay in the
working compensation fees, and
most of that money comes in from
the employer.
And that fund is presently being
funded by
988 Lifeline fund.
And that is presently being
getting federal money. Is that
correct, uh, Mr. President and
will disappear.
Mr. President.
Mr. President, Senator, we don't
know what's going to happen with
the federal money, but these are
the people that are deaf and
telecommunicate to that
conversation, uh, so that's what
it is, uh, it.
It currently collected about 4
more people are immobile than
they are on landlines and so
that's the reason for that drop
in the funding.
And Mr. President,
Are both of these fees going
administration so they can
administer it. We currently
subsidize them in the last year
And so as we raise these fees,
then they will not need general
fund. They'll be reliant on the
cost of, of those fees that we
just mentioned.
few minutes ago.
Mr. President, and the workers'
compensation, there is no fun.
That is a general, uh, uh.
GAA account.
That's the, Mr. President,
that's the administration part
of the fund.
And
people that when a claim comes
in, they decide whether that
claim is legitimate and pay it.
Is, is that the part that we're
talking about here, Mr.
President.
Thank you. We do have further
debate. We have Senator Steiner
followed by Senator Dio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't have any questions
anymore. Thank you.
has really suffered a loss of
funds over the last decade or so
because of the, the cost of data
0.033, um, it's just not
sufficient to fund the
of the, the commission and on
top of that, the cost of the.
going to impose a flat fee 0.51
cents or 51 cents per cell
phone.
Which I think would solve the
problem for them in the long
but also the Lifeline fund. Um,
I hope that the funding the
federal funding for the life fun
continues, but we have a lot of
that they are assigned to serve,
um, so with that I stand in
strong support of this bill, and
I think I even signed on as a
co-signer, um, I think
It's a really important thing to
Uh, Senator, I'm, I'm just
looking at the FIR.
And the fiscal implications. I,
I certainly support what you're
Um, I'm more interested in my
questions on the workers'
compensation increases, and if
I'm reading the fiscal
implications here, it reads that
the, the employer and employee,
and then 17.7% and then 23.2%.
So we're, we're going up
ultimately authorized by this a
a total increase of both
employer and employee workers'
much?
Mr. President, yes, those, those
are right. So currently, we're
at $2 for the employee. We're at
$2.50 and $2.80.
So it's a 50 cent increase over.
8 years.
And Mr. President, Senator, and
that, that's per employee per
apply to the, the wages the
employer different. That's a
different rate chart on your
workers' comp, you pay so much
in depending on what your
payroll is. This is a flat fee
for workers' compensation is
what you're saying that, is that
right, Mr. President, Senator?
That's correct. This has no
payroll charges in it. All
right, thank you, Mr. President,
Senator.
Senor Gaos.
Mr. President, Senator, just now
you'd said per employer per
employee. So it's 50 cents per
employer and 50 cents per
the employee. So if my
employees, I have say 10
employees that I pay $2 a
quarter to, to the workers'
compensation fund.
this is just a flat fee for
administration fee, uh, for
workers' comp.
Senatoregos.
Thank you for that, Mr.
President and Senator. So, uh
deficiency in workers' comp, the
98 fund is completely different,
uh, uh, telecommunications
creature in itself, uh, it
doesn't have any effect on
Couple months left to go before
the end of the fiscal year in
June. And so that's how much
money in, and so we need to
right size them and fund them
while gets swept any time they
have excess money, it seems like
the state somehow takes that
back. I'm just wondering if you
remember that, Mr. President,
Senator.
I'm just wondering if that would
resolve the problem instead of
an increase if we looked at that
from that point, Mr. President,
Senator.
A mispresent, Senator, you would
know more than anyone that we
have a huge budget surplus and
I'm just wondering what the kind
We have a surplus, but we don't
have an operational surplus.
Uh, I'll give you, uh, we can go
through the scenarios. If you
get a speeding ticket, it's $25.
That doesn't operate the
environment department.
General fund revenue is not a
revenue source for everybody to
depend on agencies were set up
Not every agency, you know, the,
the judicial, the the judicial
branch got rid of all their
penalties a while back and, and
now are relying on $13 million
flattening of the budget, and
now we have to reconcile the
books and say, OK, at what level
can we stain this at the minimal
cost to the taxpayer.
Senator, Senator Galgos.
federal funds, you know, the
governors brought it up to us
also I see that we, you know,
are anticipating some changes,
but, uh, we continue to pass
See no further debate. Sanunnos.
To close on the bill, Mr.
President, I move that Senate
show of hands. Thank you all
senators to your seats, please.
We are voting.
Center Woods, bono.
Center share
Voting no.
Senator Scott voting no.
Senator Sanchez, Rorino.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator, but you know.
Senator Thornton voting no.
Senator Paul, but you know.
substitute for Senate Bill 535
has passed the Senate Ceria
Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think I'd give Senator Zel my
that bill to carry the rest of
I don't number 4, Senator
Cervantes. Yes, Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate. The records show that
all action replacing Senate Bill
456 as amended on final passage
justice interim committee, but
this is not a creature of
statute. It's not permanently in
our books, and this bill would
simply make that a permanent
committee. It also assures that
that committee would have the
committee, but this would make
it a permanent committee. I'll
stand for question.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Senators, we're debating Senate
Bill 456 as amended and I yield
to Senator Woods.
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, Senator, there are a
number of examples, but
principally, if you all follow
subpoena authority through the
finance committee already. um,
this would simply allow this to
the court's corrections and
Justice Committee as well.
In our woods. Thank you for the
Uh,
Someone.
That was accused of
Of a heinous crime.
And then he went out and killed
a couple of people.
And
I ask you at that time, I think,
What term we use is catch and
release and
And you assure me that the laws
are there, the laws are there.
We don't, we don't need to
to if, if a judge released
someone and
Or the DA didn't make the proper
charge against someone. Would
Um, Mr. President, Senator, I
would say that's highly
unlikely, but I wouldn't say
impossible if I may take the
opportunity, I, I've been, uh,
in several of the debates now
I've suggested is that we're not
going to pass laws to get
ourselves out of our crime
crisis which I recognized well.
We're not gonna, we're not gonna
legislate ourselves out of that
without recognizing the
importance of the court.
and that's part of why I think
this deserves to be a permanent
committee because this is an
oversight of the judicial branch
and we're seeing even this last
session, there's some conflict
from time to time, even between
Senator, uh, with, with that
authority, like, I think the
better example I would suggest
to you is
The fact that we, um, in the
Um, and we can raise penalties
for DWI all we want, we can add
more and more years to that
crime, but if they're going to
the records of all those DWI
cases that were dismissed and
see how many of them were
refiled, that would be an
example of where I think we
would have a meaningful role if
we're providing oversight and
trying to get to the heart of
So
Say we do that.
Say we, say we get that
information.
What are we gonna do with the
information?
going, how are we going to use
the information if we receive
it, Mr. Chair.
As you, uh, as you would see it.
Senator, how would you see us
So I'll give you a good example,
Senator.
For many years.
The courts utilize a tool called
the Arnold tool, the Arnold tool
was a, a
use that data and generally
release individuals. In fact, I
pointed out in our interim and
even here on the floor, many
individuals who were charged
with very heinous crimes and who
were released on the basis of
use of that Arnold tool and
perhaps the flaws in the data
that was being considered and
processed by that tool and I
think rightfully so, the courts
began to re-evaluate the use of
us to do what Congress does
every day, which is
get to the heart of things, uh,
the other example where I've
seen this use in my own
practice, I've been asked twice
to chair impeachment
corporation commissioner and in
that case we needed to get
documents and records to present
an impeachment case and we
needed to get those records from
the Attorney General's office,
the Attorneys general's office
when we're in session. And so
that means that we're limited to
being able to do this kind of
work only when we're in session
and that, that hamstrings us to
trying to get to the heart of
these things. But to answer your
Going back to the DWIs.
That must be something that was
would that
be used to bring forward, uh,
another law to do a better close
the ranks, um,
Punish an elected official, uh,
As a political tool against
someone.
So
Mhm
I can see it if we was going to
a crime because that's what I
think of a subpoena is to
divulge records.
For a case of law to, to, and I,
you want to answer, Mr.
President, if you want to
respond, I'd be happy to have
you respond. I will just
briefly, Mr. President, Senator,
we don't, as the legislature, we
don't charge people with crimes.
kind of a quasi criminal
proceeding, but no, that, that
we wouldn't do that. I, I'll
just tell you, Senator, uh,
first of all, recognize there
are always safeguards. So if we
excessively broad, or does not
have some relevance to something
the court thinks we are entitled
to have. I, I'll just tell you,
Senator,
um, I as an attorney, and boy
I'm always careful when I start
left here can, can, uh, do a
case. My two colleagues here can
serve a subpoena because we're
officers of the court, so we,
interestingly, we're concerned
about giving authority to our
that or or using that
excessively, but you have that
authority, and I'm simply asking
for the same authority for the
court's corrections and Justice
Committee that you have in your
committee. So I, I would
disabuse you of the notion that
compel the attendance of a
witness at a deposition or to
produce documents. And again,
I'm repeating, there are
safeguards. We, we don't have
the.
ultimate authority, ultimately
an individual can oppose a
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 456 as amended.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
proper format is here, but I
ask uh send it to consider for
Senate Bill 456.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
I think uh the sponsor already
answered one of my questions
because I, I really thought I
was asking is are there any
and I was not aware of that. And
but
I was curious because uh I added
this amendment because it seems
like if the if the intent is to
asking agencies for various
documents so that the committee
could do its work. It's so my
amendment here primarily was to
essentially
than that, the committee could
do all of its work through the
normal process, and that's the
intent of the of the uh.
Of the committee itself and so
particular powers. Thank you,
Mr. President. Senator Thornton.
Senators, we're debating.
Senator Thorne number one, and
I'll you to the sponsors Senator
Cervantes. Thank you, Mr.
President. I urge members to
reject this and I'd like to ask
inferred to that, this subpoena
authority already exists with
one of our committees, uh,
senator, and you said you were
not aware of that, but can you
tell us how long this existing
legislative committee has had
this subpoena authority and how
Mr. President, I think the
sponsor of the amendments got an
expert witness whispering in his
ear. So maybe we could just save
the trouble and go directly to
witness says it's been a long
damn time since anybody used
this authority.
Senator Thorn.
Mr. President, by a whisperer
mentioned that it was a long
down time.
me for referring to her by name,
but we've had this discussion
even this morning. We as the
legislature are always
complaining how weak we are,
how, how we're not professional
and how we're not modern, and
the extreme.
of an overthrow of the
government and even back to
Watergate days when I grew up.
Congress has that authority to
legislative committee meeting
and the cabinet secretary would
just say no, we're not, we're
not showing up. Um, and we can't
do anything about it.
Or, or we might ask for records
or documents that we know exist
can still say no, and if we win
an IPRA proceeding, the court
may award us attorneys' fees and
costs for bringing that action,
and that's paid for by the
taxpayers. It comes out of the
agency. So it's really not an
people to proceedings and to um
and to be able to compel
production of documents and, and
I'm repeating, we, the
individuals who receive a
subpoena have protections.
but, uh, senator with the the
sponsor who's yielded, um, I, I
appreciate the fact you're
recognizing this authority
already exists with our
committees and we shouldn't have
to call ourselves into a session
So, so maybe the sponsor, Mr.
President, was sponsor again, he
said that we could get that
information through an IPRA and,
and how would that differ then
from a subpoena?
statutory proceeding, and we can
ask for things and then there's
different timelines entirely in
the NEA proceeding and
very commonly, I'm looking to
some of my colleagues who may do
IPRA requests. I'm seeing
do that. They're allowed to say
we need more time, and, and they
routinely do that, and then that
drags on and then ultimately if
they still don't answer, then
you've got to go to court and
get a judge to enforce it, and
to this too. And, uh, the, the
The point that disturbs me the
most about when that happens is,
I think the city of Las Cruces
related to the, the medical care
in the hospital there, um, when
that, when the court imposes
those penalties, they're paid
for out of the city coffers out
of the county coffers.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. We
do have others who wish to
debate on the.
Law Amendment, we have Senator
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President and
Senate good um good senator
interestingly enough, um, the
legislature has given subpoena
the medical board, social work,
and engineering, in fact, um,
The uniform Licensing Act gives
They can use that subpoena power
to investigate um complaints
that come in, it may not ever
lead to disciplinary action and,
action where someone's license
could be suspended, it could be
revoked, it could be denied, or
it could even have conditions on
it for them to continue their
President, good senators, what
is the concern if the
legislature
grants itself subpoena power to
do investigations and kind of
issue here is there was the
concern about, uh, how this
could be weaponized and and that
it may be used in a criminal,
uh, from a criminal point of
view, but I, I appreciate the,
to do, to search for information
regarding a particular license.
I, I can, I can understand that,
but I think there is a concern
on on this side of the aisle
that this could be weaponized
and that's the concern that it
whatever is necessary.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you Senator
and um I, I, I think, I don't
um.
Being treated poorly or if it is
beginning to be weaponized
because I, I know for the boards
and commissions, they don't just
a complaint. There's been
someone potentially injured, so
I, that's how it is in
administrative law that the
subpoena power cannot be used to
harass someone, but thank you,
of where I stand in the
opposition to the amendment
because subpoena power is used
widely and, and I think that,
um, I thank Senator Dehu for
power, you have the ability to
get all kinds of information.
And what happens in the
legislature that I see.
sometimes we only get half the
modernizing the legislature
professionalizing the
legislature to um.
To empower this committee with
the ability to shine light. I
know I've served on courts and
are unable to gather more
information about a problem, so
we're unable to shine light on
it, so I support no I oppose.
Yeah, I oppose the amendment,
Thank you, Mr. President. So I,
I would also stand in opposition
to the amendment.
We,
our state government is supposed
to be 3 coequal branches. We are
are part time, we are not
professionalized. We can't get
information. We don't have a
functional, we do have a
subpoena process, but not a
get the information that we
need, we can't do.
that oversight, and we continue
to weaken ourselves as a as a
branch of government and and in
co-equal branch as the
legislature, I would urge
members to reject the amendment.
Thank you. We do have further
debate. We have Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
don't need the sponsor of the
amendment to yield.
In various stages, I just wanted
to.
kind of follow up on the court's
corrections committee and the
work that's been happening on
Bipartisan working with outside
counsel, uh, put together the
agenda that I think resulted in
a really important bill we
passed in the 1st 30 days.
And these interim committees are
super important, but if you
don't give them the resources to
be able to do the jobs, then we
just kind of see the same.
round, you know, let's get the
staff to do that. So I, I don't
know why we're so scared about
giving ourselves the ability to
do the job that we're here to
in something that's problematic,
darn right, we're gonna refer it
just like if we get information
right now that's problematic,
we're gonna refer it. I mean, I
get the weaponization concern,
be able to do a better job and
so I, I opposed the amendment. I
appreciate very much the sponsor
bringing the bill, and I think
we're going to see more of these
to just
strengthen our branch of
Seeing of further debate on the
amendments.
Senator Thorn closed on the
amendment.
I guess the, the, the primary
issue here is that suggests that
it might not even be needed if
it hasn't been used.
So that together with the risk
that this power would be used
But with that, Mr. President, I
move Senate floor amendment
number 1 to Senate Bill 456 as
amended.
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you. So we're we're
uh voting on Senate floor
Amendment number 1 is Senate
Bill 456 has amended. It's been
requested to do it by a show of
hands.
Senator worth voting out.
The Shindo voting now.
Ser Padilla what you know.
Senator Hill voting no.
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator Gonzalez voting no.
Senator Stephanics voting no.
Senator Nava Morino.
Center Figueroa, voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
appreciate the spirited debate
Senator Thorn. We are back on
the bill, senators.
We have finished to Panics and
Senator Lopez, if you wish to
speak on the bill. Senator
Seanics.
like to remind the body that we
have requested through bills,
uh, a year round legislative
health and human services
interim committee.
Committee is over 50% of our
state budget and we have a few
months in which to identify the
issues for all of those
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
don't need the sponsor to yield,
but I'd like to say thank you,
Senator Stephanics. She gave a
And as the senator Seanics did
mention, uh, there are many
several departments that the
committee is supposed to
oversee, Mr. President.
I'm giving a plug, um, thank
you, senators Cervantes, you
give us an opportunity to give a
plug for it.
Um, so I do support this one,
but I'd hope I'd also get some
followed by Senator Charlie,
then Senator Figueroa, then
Senator Munoz.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Well, the sponsor yield for a
couple of questions.
Yes, so you.
About the weaponization of this
subpoena power which is
substantial.
What would be the process.
For the issuance of that
Senator Cervantes, Mr. President
and Senator, this bill does not
address that. I'm not sure how
that is currently done by the
legislative Finance Committee,
Dinner Scott. OK, uh, that does
give me some comfort and what
about
Or some
Some public policy being
implemented that did not agree.
With the majority of that.
Mr. President Senator, the way I
understand the, uh, parameters
of your question, I would say
no.
Senator Scott, OK. Well, thank
with the sponsor please yields.
Yes, of course.
Thank you, Mr. President. On
page 3 line 7 of the bill, um,
shall be limited to the
committee's powers and duties
provided in this section.
Mr. President, Senator, would
you give and give me the page
and line number, please.
Page 3 line 7.
the identical authority given to
LFC and naturally the subpoena
power again should be only by a
majority of the committee
members, which is the answer to
Senator Lopez give an example of
the important duties and
responsibilities of other
committees, it, it would be, uh,
by this language, it wouldn't be
within the purview of of courses
with perhaps finance so there
there are some guardrails if you
will, senator, to try and keep
us within the, the scope of our
mission and we set those out at
the beginning of every interim
committee, we set forth our
goals, our mission, and, and.
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, Senator, if, if
you're asking about the legal
implications, so, um, let me,
let me try and give you an
example of where this might be
important on the interim courts
example.
It might very well be within the
purview of the court's
corrections and Justice
Committee to subpoena
information and documents about
the delivery of healthcare at
prison system, individuals who
are maybe perhaps not as secure
or the prevalence of gangs in
our prisons. These are things
within that, that scope of your
question, uh, senator, what what
what is the court's corrections
corrections, but I'll just give
you the, the, as an example the
last administration was not very
forthcoming when it came to
information, data records about
their corrections department,
The bill specifies the subpoena
would be issued by a sheriff or
other law enforcement. That's
commonly the way a subpoena is
served in many cases, and the
individual in that notice of
Mr. President, Senator, thank
you for that. Um, while I do
support this. I do feel like
related to the committee's
Thank you, Mr. President. I want
to thank the sponsor, um, for
bringing this bill forward and
for recognizing that good policy
much mentioned this afternoon
need to modernize our
legislature and our desire to
ensure that we remain or become
depend.
modernization just a little bit,
um, and then explore it with the
sponsor.
We have seen, Mr. President, in
Everything from changing our
session length to make it
shorter, to make it longer.
To allowing compensation.
vetoes.
Uh, from government and election
topics we have bills on changing
our election law.
If good policy requires interim
research and debate and
conversation.
Where do these bills fit?
bill, Mr. President, I'm not
sure where they fit.
So Mr. President, if the sponsor
would yield to a question.
Yes, I you.
share with the chamber, Mr.
President, how the modernization
effort and election and
government bills and the work
that needs to be done during
allows me to expand and give a
little history.
Uh, tragically decades ago we
suffered the infamous state
prison riot.
That, that incident led to the
creation of this what is now an
interim committee.
With the thinking that there was
such a crisis created and
evident from that prison
the interim, and, and speak with
the inmates and the security
personnel there and others and
look at the facilities, the
mission of that committee is
expanded considerably and, and
years ago when I was in the
to me was very narrow there by
that, uh, by that title and that
existence, limited to just
oversight of the courts and of
the corrections department.
But the senator is exactly
And so as you pointed out, for
example, election uh code issues
and and laws, um, any number of
different subjects didn't fit
within other committees and
things that we're looking at
even this session, issues like
immigration, guns, um,
reproductive rights.
Well, all of these many issues
doesn't it doesn't fit within
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, which I've served on.
It may not, these topics may not
work on in the finance or other
committees and so we've kind of
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, sponsor. I would take you
up on that offer, and I hope
that either in the committee
itself or in a subcommittee, we
They, oh sorry, Sannams first
and center C Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. We'll
sponsor you.
Senator.
Hannisandera, it was during the
Martinez administration. It was
way back we did subpoena maybe
the lieutenant governor
remembers who that was. He was
on the committee then.
Um, but we went into executive
session.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, same
question that I answered earlier
to a couple of other senators,
including Senator Woods,
principally Senator Woods, but,
uh, it would depend on what
information we're seeking and
example, but there's any number
of different examples. I'll give
you.
I'll give you the best example,
Senator. You're, your own
committee did an exceptional job
how we attack crime, you should
read this report and study it
carefully.
Because the answers to what ails
us in the area of criminal law
in New Mexico are all in that
report.
people are in our prisons. What
we'll find when you look at that
is as crime has increased, we're
actually doing fewer
prosecutions. We're putting
fewer and fewer people into
jail. Uh, there's the, the
has obtained a lot of that data.
But there's a great deal more
data that I think we could
obtain and would be very useful
to us.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, we
didn't have a need to subpoena
information. I mean, we almost
subpoenaed the Secretary of
Environment for not showing up 4
times when we requested him.
Uh, we, I almost pushed that
direction because cabinet
secretaries need to come and
tell us what's happening as we
what happens in that committee
in executive session under
subpoena unless there's criminal
action.
Should all remain sealed because
it could be used in any way,
And would that be correct, Mr.
President, Senator, if someone
in their subpoena and took the
oath when they're under, under
highly unlikely, uh, but when an
individual is placed under oath
they're subject to penalties for
perjury, and so, um, if an
individual perjured themselves,
but you, you, your example was
line, fine line of, OK, let's,
let's make sure they come and
tell us what's happening. Let's
understand and let's get the
information, but then if
something else gets out in that
that would occur. Um, again,
you're, you're pointing out
something that's pretty
commonplace, which is we
oftentimes meet in executive
session, usually to discuss
threatened impending litigation
so that we can discuss
adversaries, the best examples
Texas v. New Mexico. We don't
want to discuss litigation
strategies against the state of
Texas in a public forum.
So you and I are accustomed to
seeing that or settlement
for, for certain legis I think
LESC has that, if I'm correcting
me if I'm wrong. No, they do
have it.
Uh, I'm getting a yes nodded
has ever used their subpoena
power at all to get anybody
testified to get records from
school districts to get
anything. I mean,
It's different when you go to
courts and corrections.
activity. It could have not been
criminal activity. It could have
been criminal activity. And, and
so that's the worrisome for me
is, is we use it very cautiously
in, in LFC.
we can opt in to subpoena you,
which I don't think should
happen, but sometimes it does,
depends on the administration we
have too.
month and something happens the
next month, but they, they got
to come for you in some time.
They can't just hide, uh, the
whole time from the committee
and the committee process, uh,
for someone to make a profit and
that subpoena power.
is where I get the most nervous.
And so with that, Mr. President,
oh you. Thank you.
Mr. President, why 8 members
because that's a little bit
problematic when you're trying
to get a majority.
And Germontes Mr. President and
Senator, that was changed by an
House and Senate, that's 5 each.
And if you have the majority in
each chamber, you're gonna have
a, a pretty significant
imbalance in terms of
partisanship and numbers. So
Senator Stewart, uh, rightfully,
Um,
yeah, I didn't, I didn't see
that amendment in my, uh.
In my copy probably didn't look
far enough. I think 10 is great,
very important and I support, I
totally support the idea. I'm
just wondering a little bit
about the structure
Madam President, so if you
visualize under the, the makeup,
uh, the President Pro Tem put on
Republicans from each chamber,
whereas we have 8 members and
you have 4 from each chamber,
then you're essentially gonna
have to have
One Republican to 3 Democrats by
bipartisanship. You're, you're
right, Senator, oftentimes we
say we want to have an odd
number so you don't end up with
a tie vote in some cases, but,
but in this case it seems to me
that a tie vote may be actually
You know, that is a good point,
Mr. President, because, um,
yeah, the, the action would be
stopped by a tie vote and
because we are the weaker
branch, um, by far, um, I
totally agree with everything
Senator Figueroa said about
other ways of empowering the
legislature.
an incident in the Los Lunas
prisons, um, we saw some
videotape about it and I thought
it would have been good to
subpoena.
The courts and corrections
left. We didn't, we weren't able
to follow up. Um, some of us did
individually to find out what
happened and, and to make sure,
but I think it would have been
great for transparency.
you know, into confidential
confidential meetings and be as
open as possible, because I
think what we are there for is
this idea. I think, uh, you're
right. I think an even number
may be a better, a better
approach than I was thinking.
Thank you, Mr. President.
We do have a floor amendment.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend to move the
amendment.
Yes, Mr. President, I move the
Senate floor Amendment 2.
What it does is it changes.
Majority to 2/3.
So it is a 2/3 majority instead
related to to limited.
To
And I, I support the initiative,
um, Mr. President, I just think
there's a lot of, um,
Camaraderie that happens on
interim committees and I think
if you had 2/3, then the body
Cervantes. Mr. President and
colleagues, I appreciate the
desire to perhaps raise the bar
on a subpoena, but again, we
don't have the same applicable
where we have my other
colleagues who want to have
perhaps the authority on their
committees and are we going to
start getting into.
well, you need 3 4s on 1 and 2/3
on another simple majority on
another, I think that will lead
require that. And Senator, if I,
if I can ask you to yield to a
question.
Um, Senator, with a 2 with your
So that the, the membership
would be 10, so what is 2/3 of
10 to require the subpoena be
issued.
Leonard Townsend.
the room, senator, so we've got
a bunch of smart folks over on
our side. Look at all those
hands up there.
Senator Cervantes and I do hear
the correct answer from this
right, 2, 2/3 of a 10 member
committee would require 7
members to approve the subpoena.
I think that's too high a
burden.
Thank you
want to round it, but I, I, my
point is, you will, you know as
well as I do what 2/3 of the
whole body is.
Mr. Mr. President, Senator, you
We do have further debates on
the amendments are yelled to
Senator Doig, then Senator
share.
Thank you, Mr. President. So I
upon to do a 2/3 require, in
fact, the, the general rule is,
if it doesn't say something
requires a 2/3 vote in our
Constitution, it is probably
Thank you Senator can send her
share.
We are in the amendment centers.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
First, I want to start with the,
7, what that really means is
that at least one Republican has
to be convinced that this is
done because according to the
sponsor of the Bills perspective
weaponized just by one party,
even if the numbers were
reversed.
Um, but with the 2/3.
Because the, the, the big
It's just one more vote, which
would require at least one
person from the minority party
to say yes, and I think that
that by itself.
person is such a problem. Um,
but then,
The, uh
Well, I'm not gonna, I'll, I'll
let, I'll let Senator Charlie
talk about her portion of it.
Senator, do you yield? Yes, Mr.
President.
So, Mr. President, we in our
Constitution does it say you
can't do 2/3.
principle of parliamentary law
that the deliberate will and
judgment of the majority shall
prevail in the decision of such
questions as can properly come
before the legislative body, the
So, Mr. President and Senator,
how many votes does it take in
this chamber to override a
governor's veto?
don't see any place in our
Constitution that says we can't.
We can't make a decision on what
anything is. So Mason's has a
guide.
to the Senate Finance.
So Mr. President, so there is a
layer of when, when we are
look at and in, in this context
would be the, the rules that
would apply to our chamber.
And if they and if both the
Constitution and our rules don't
address something, then we look
have to just do a, a, a simple
majority for all other votes,
um, and so then we look to our
rules, and then we look to make
given that we have not spoken on
this otherwise in our
constitution or our rules.
So Mr. President,
Certainly, uh, I could bring a
that in certain circumstances,
it could be 2/3, and then the
rule would be.
2/3. Is that correct, Mr.
President? Senator
think Franklin or Mason's are in
our constitution, they're
probably improper, but yes, in
those very specific
circumstances where we have have
context. So that resolution
would, I think, have to come
first before we could adopt the
amendment that is being
proposed. sure. Mr. President,
I'm stunned to learn that
is, it is.
Under this amendment.
At least one member of the
minority has to be involved.
Without it, it is a weapon.
Because
They don't need even a single
whisper to use this.
Fearsome power.
Of the subpoena
And so just because of that,
And so that's why I support this
amendment, but I will, if
Senator Charlie wants to, let
her explain her part of it.
Thank you.
They're trying do you wish to
yield.
our original argument, Mr.
President, we do not empower
ourselves to use our power. And
when it comes to power, we must
I don't think a lot of native
languages have a word for power.
It's a concept that is so
foreign to the ways in which we
support of this amendment, Mr.
President, because when it comes
to power, we have to be fair. We
have to be insightful, and we
have to be intentional and in
this committee. Thank you, Mr.
President,
you still have the floor.
Um, thank you, Mr. President. I
just, I would like to point out
think about it, uh, they're
working together to do the right
thing.
So
I think this is a great
amendment, Mr. President. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator Senator
Munoz.
close on the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think within the rules there are
several places where more than a
simple majority is outlined.
and
And um
Make sure that regardless of
what party may be in control at
a given time on on this
committee that 2/3.
how to the Senate that they have
uh a real reason and it's not
politically motivated. With
that, Mr. President.
Be adopted and I ask for a roll
call vote.
Thank you, Senators. There's
been a request for a roll call
vote and Senate floor Amendment
#2 to be adopted the Senate Bill
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Berman's votes no.
Signature block.
Santo Cervantes Center Cervantes
votes no.
Senator Charlie. Senator Charlie
Center Figueroa votes no.
Centrica echos.
Centro Gallegos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez.
Santa Gonzalez votes yes.
Center Hickey passes Center her
meal center to her meal votes
no. Senator Lanier
Central linear votes, yeah,
Central Lopez.
Centrinava votes no. Center
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes no.
Senator Padilla.
No.
Center Padilla votes no. Senator
Paul.
Senator Pope votes no, sent to
Ramos. Santa Ramos votes yes,
Santo Sanchez.
Senator Scott
Center souls.
So Center souls votes no San
Sanchez. Yes.
Senator Sanchez votes, yes.
Stephonics. Senator Stefaniks
votes no. Senator Steinborn
Santer Steinburn votes no.
Stewart.
Senator Stewart boats no. Center
Thornton.
Senator Trujillo.
Center Trujillo votes no.
Senator Worth.
Center Worth votes no. Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes.
Buy a vote.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thanks
for the body for consideration.
Thank you. We are back on the
bill, senators we're back on the
bill. I have Senator Steinborn
followed by senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, I know we have only a
few interim committees that are
actually rooted in statute, but
yet they all exist and they're
created by the Legislative
has its jurisdiction.
Mr. President, Senator, we have,
yes, almost, of course,
corrections and Justice
Committee.
Right. And Mr. President,
Senator, I mean, I realize this
committee. It's an existing
committee. This would simply
make it a permanent committee
and it does not have that
authority right now.
Got you, Mr. President. And uh
interim committee days of
legislators to be meeting.
Mr. President, Senator, no.
to the current committee in
terms of its time and
Work product Mr. President and
Senator No, uh, we're stopping
this, we'll be staffing this as
interim committee that we need
to put it in statute if we're
not really doing anything to it.
Cervantes Mr. President,
Senator, uh, no, I wouldn't say
there's a threat to the existing
we're doing this to, uh, to give
the legislative branch more kind
of
Accountability of the executive
branch, is that why we're doing
this?
as an interim committee. It was
created in response to problems
we were having very serious, uh,
tragic problems we were having
in our corrections department.
And so it was, it was intended
court system.
And also we recognize, as has
been pointed out here tonight, a
number of issues, most recently,
issues related to crime. This,
this community is always going
is empowered, for example, to uh
meet between sessions to
consider rule changes and things
that we will be dealing with in
the session. Is it
Is it
committee already exists and
I'll be honest, Mr. President,
where I would love more capacity
is in being accountable to
ourselves.
And I, you know,
rape to a minor for a statute of
limitations, it's very limited.
One of the most limited in the
country and I think we talk
about capacity of that
and considering legislation.
Or are we creating more power at
the behest of kind of an
individual.
Who might be wielding that
pass this bill and give this
authority,
Can we, uh, get an assurance
that this committee will
actually use its authority to
consider proposals that come
Cervantes, Mr. President,
Senator, this, this would not
give any additional power to the
chair of the interim committee.
No
Well, Mr. Mr. President, with
amendment because I think in
fact, we do have multi different
branches of government. We do
see that power can be abused. It
is important to have a check,
but we also need to recognize we
I'm just gonna call that out and
I, I think we need to also focus
on creating capacity for dealing
with judicial issues during the
session, and maybe this
committee can be a constructive
Senator Cervantes to close on
the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
the Senate Bill 456 as amended
do not pass and IS unanimous
I'll send it to your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Center block votes? No. Senator
Boone.
Senator Brown.
Senator Campos, Senator
Cervantes Center Cervantes votes
yes. Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie votes yes.
Senator Do Hick Center do Hi
Santa Gallego's votes no.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Sent Hamlin
Center Hamlin votes yes. Senator
Lopez.
San Lopez votes yes. In
Maestasen Maest votes yes
Padilla. Senator Padilla votes
yes. Senator Paul.
Center Paul votes no. Senator
Pinto.
Center Pinto votes yes, Senator
Pope.
No. Senator Scott votes no.
Centered Lopez. Yes. Centeredia
Lopez votes yes, Senator share.
yesent Stephonics. Senator
Stefanis votes yes, enter
Steinborn.
Senator Steinburn votes Center
Stewart.
Center Stewart votes, yes,
Santer Townsend votes no San
Trujillo
Trujillo votes, yes, Senator
Worth Centeror votes, yes,
I voted 24 in the affirmative,
16 in the negative. Senate Bill
honestly, I would have supported
this if that amendment had been
put on because I think that gets
a little protections. I am
concerned that we continue to
become more and more like
for political purposes.
Instead of just hold people
accountable, so I'm hoping I'm
wrong.
But, uh, I'm afraid I won't be.
can do things with 3 2/3
majority, so it's in our rules.
It's not a weird freaked out
thing that we've never done
before. It's in our rules
already. Uh, the question now
is, are we going to give this
And I think the vote today
proved you couldn't even get one
Republican.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think uh Senator Brant and
I felt that the 2nd Amendment
offered by Senator Townsend.
Wrington would have collected my
vote had that been gone through.
So I have the same concerns that
that the webcast has just gone
down.
Let's do the BOLO Awards.
We have been informed that the
webcast is back up so you to
Senate majority floor leader.
Peterworth, you're welcome,
everybody.
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Worth. So Mr. President,
we're gonna, I've, I've
mentioned this to the sponsors
of the House bills, we're gonna
go ahead and do those tomorrow,
uh, just given the hour we've
business committee reports.
No objection we're in that order
of business committee reports.
the recommendation and then
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted.
Without recommendation.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
Committee substitute for House
Bill 137 as amended do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Elizabeth Liz Stefani's chair,
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report. We have
a motion to adopt the community
reports. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
public affairs Committee, to
whom has been referred, Senate
Bill 171 has had it under
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the community
reports that we vote on them
with one motion at the journal
reflect they were acted upon
individually no objection, the
reader will read.
substitute for Senate Bill 254
do pass.
Senate Bill 414 do pass and
House Bill 9 do pass and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
substitute for House Bill 49 do
pass and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Linda M. Lopez,
chair
motion to adopt the committee
upon individually.
Senate majority leader Peter
Worth, uh, Mr. President,
unanimous consent. We go to that
order business introduction of
legislation. There are no
objection. We are in that order
and Sypansky, an act related to
consumer rights, creating the
commission on reduction of
grocery costs requiring a study
of the cost of groceries,
emergency. House Bill 1717
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate Rules
Committee House Bill 17.
Authorizing local and county
elected authorities to allow
off-highway motor vehicles to
operate on paved streets and
highways within the political
boundaries of the authorizing
entity. House Bill 371.
improving as well.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth takes the next order
of business unanimous consent.
We go out our business
announcement.
