for the members and those
listening, we're not gonna do a
3rd reading of legislation
today. I will be sure to give
everyone plenty of notice when
we start hearing bills on the
floor just so everyone knows
to make it this direction. Uh,
so with that, Mr. President, uh,
unanimous consent. We go without
our business.
Committe reports. There are no
objection. We're in that order
of business committee reports.
The reader will read.
Bill 59 has had it under
consideration and reports the
same in the recommendation that
it do not pass, but the Senate
tax business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports.
That we vote on them with 11
motion and that the journal
reflect that they were acted
amended and thence referred to
judiciary.
Senate Bill 65 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
judiciary.
Senate Bill 72 do pass and
thence referred to judiciary.
Senate Bill 73 do pass.
And thence referred to
judiciary.
Senate Bill 81 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
the Finance Committee,
respectfully submitted, Senator
Carrie Hamblin chair.
port has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acting upon individually.
Mr. President, your rules
committee to whom has been
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig, chair. Senator, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
Mr. President, I move adoption
the committee report. Senators,
we have a motion to adopt the
committee reports. All those in
favor signify by saying a.
committee to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 23 has had
it under consideration and
reports, reports the same with
the recommendation that it do
consent that the records show
the world has been called and
all those present.
I'm on the wrong thing.
Sorry.
objection. The reader will read.
Senate Bill 60 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 86 do pass and then
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Those opposing, the eyes have
it. The community report has
been adopted a journal reflect
they were acted upon
Bill 17 has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
Hearing no objection, the reader
chair. Lopez.
Mr. President, I move the
adoption of the committee
report. Senator, we have a
motion to the community report.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
That was a supposed name, the
referred, Senate Bill 133 has
had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and the referred to
the finance committee.
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
Hearing no objection. The reader
will read.
Senate Bill 242.
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
That was a close, the eyes have
with the report has been adopted
in the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
unanimous consent. We go without
our business introduction of
legislation. no objection on
Senator Stefaniks,
representative Supanski, Senator
Stewart, and Senator Hamblin.
An act relating to insurance
protocols Senate Bill 39 Senate
Bill 39 haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business, transportation
Committee, then Senate Health,
Public Affairs Committee that
Native American AMA Act
establishing the office of the
Native American Abud.
Providing duties require an
investigation and resolution of
concerns.
Senate Bill 308308 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Indian rule on Cultural Affairs
An act relating to criminal
procedure, adding notification
requirements for violations of
pretrial conditions of release.
Providing the pretrial
to law enforcement officers upon
request. Senate Bill 309 Senate
Bill 309 having been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the Senate Health
restrictions except in historic
districts, allowing development
of duplexes and townhouses,
except in historic districts,
Health Public Affairs Committee,
the Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Bill 310.
Senate Bill 3011, introduced by
Senator Maestas.
redevelopment code. Senate bill
311311 having been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
An act relating to zoning.
Restricting appeals of decisions
of zoning and planning
authorities to people who have
an ownership interest in the
haven't been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 312.
accessible parking.
Center be 313313 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
purpose do you eyes? Uh, did
that particular bill have an
appropriation on it? Let me
review that, uh, Senator Woods,
and I'll.
It doesn't appear that there was
an appropriation.
It, it does appear there's not
an appropriation. There's not an
appropriation so it's accessible
parking.
Mr. President I yield to Senate
Majority Leader Peter Worth and
I certainly can yield to the
sponsor. I think it's local
governments, so it had nothing
Thank you, Senator.
remove restrictions on parking
requirements with the exception
of any necessary handicapped
parking spaces.
And the parking spaces are
normally.
private business.
We're not talking about state.
We're, we're putting a
restriction on private business.
So it's not a cost to the state.
The reader Senate Bill 314
introduced by Senator Stefaniks.
Representatives Anita Gonzalez
and Stephanie Lord.
focused on the settlement of the
Lower Estancia Valley from
pre-Columbian times through the
Senate Bill 315 introduced by
Senator Sanchez, an act relating
to state symbols, declaring a
state bread.
Public Affairs Committee that
Senate Bill 315 Senate Bill 3016
introduced by Senator Munoz, an
act relating to hazardous
materials.
federally managed underground
hazardous waste depositories.
Cent of about 316316 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senator Brant.
An act relating to workforce
development, creating the youth
internship opportunity program
providing for the payment of
Senate Bill 317 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
Including firearms and
destructive devices in the
unfair Practices Act.
Expanding private remedies for
unfair, deceptive, and
and referred to the Senate tax
business, Transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 318.
motorists.
Center belt 319.
Centerville 319 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate Rules
Central New Mexico economic
development district to support
mobile home replacement
initiatives by the non-metro New
Mexico Area Agency on aging.
Bill 320.
Senate Bill 321, introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to law enforcement requiring
Senate Bill 321 321 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee Senate Bill 321.
An act relating to children.
Limiting when a strip or cavity
search may be performed in a
detention facility prohibiting
cameras or filming in certain
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 322.
Senate Bill 323.
providing that the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association is the
Horseman's Group required by the
Federal Interstate Horseracing
Act of 1978.
Providing that certain wagering
and gaming machines are
bill 323323 having been read
twice by title is order printed.
And referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee, then Senate Judiciary
Prohibiting nondisclosure and
non-disparagement agreements
amending a section of the NMSA
1978.
The Senate bill number 41.
Introduced by
Senators Charlie.
An act relating to endangered
endangered persons mandating
that the Department of Public
Safety create and maintain a
turquoise alert system for the
and referred to the Senate
Indian Rule and Cultural Affairs
Committee, then Senate tax
business, Transportation
Committee, Senate Bill 41.
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So that's it for
today. uh, we'll be coming in
Monday at 11 o'clock on the
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senate Conservation Committee
agenda and uh we're going to try
to power through them because
we're not moving very fast in
committee and we have several,
several more bills to go
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to make an
announcement. no objection
proceed, Senator.
Wednesday's meeting, and I look
forward to seeing committee
there. Thank you. Thank you
Senator Lopez. Senator, uh,
Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President, your Senate tax and
business and Transportation
record for Senator Scherer.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Hamblin. Sener share.
Touche.
Mr. President, as we, as we come
to the end of this week, which
I'm kind of grateful for. I do
want to make sure that we're
any of this, and certainly that
includes the legislative, uh,
council service.
Way upstairs that rarely shows
up down here, but none of this
happens without them, uh,
front office, the rostrum people
who try to pay attention to what
we're doing.
Calendar, copy room, enrolling
in a grossing IT.
Uh, the sergeant at arms,
including the floor folks that
are here, the committee and the
hall attendance, uh, the
committee, the committee's.
pro tem's office secretaries and
analysts and communication
staff, all of our legislative
assistance Bill room staff, the
state police, and the print shop
Thank you for that
acknowledgement, Senator Sher.
Senator Doig, followed by
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
New Mexico, we might be hearing
three regions from northern New
Mexico College, uh, and if we
don't hear those, uh, northern
regions, we have a couple of
Tomorrow is the 5th annual
Indigenous Women's Day. They
will be out in uh with Pray walk
starting at 11 a.m. and then
Schendo, so on your desk you
have the infamous bread and also
to our um our also uh Mexico
thank you all today for American
Indian Day and to our brothers
and sisters, show it in uh
Shanai.
Um, have a great rest of your
day. Thank you, Mr. President.
meeting this afternoon. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Bergens.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to say.
Go Eagles.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
someone mentioned that it feels
like we're doing 2 30-day
sessions, uh, and that does feel
that way, but it's good. I think
the citizens in New Mexico
really want us to be up here,
safety package. So with that,
uh, Mr. President, I'm not going
to introduce this landmark piece
of legislation we'll wait and
have a discussion about that.
But with that, Mr. President,
