Senator Campos.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Doheck.
Senator Gonzalez
Senator Hamlin.
Center Hickey.
Santamio
Senator Lanier.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Senator share.
Senator Sendo.
Senator Souls.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
For the invitation to that today
my father Vincent Chavez.
Of the shrine of the little
flower Saint Therese of the
infant Jesus parish and Catholic
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator Lopez. Esteemed ladies
and gentlemen of our great state
of New Mexico in the Senate
chambers.
of a procession of women saints.
When our artist Rosa de Aragon
was painting it. She asked why I
didn't have any male saints in
That it has always been the
daughters of Eve who have had
the heavier burden to bear in
this world.
I am New Mexico proud that our
United States.
Our vision statement at Saint
Therese is from the prophet
Jeremiah.
This text.
From religious traditions.
Applies to your most vital work.
well-being and contentment.
Dear Lord, guide these senators
steps.
In this horrible time in our
country.
Senators, may you all be brave,
Please hear and help pass into
law HB 9 to not let I use our
private prisons to lock up
immigrants.
Thank you
And bless New Mexico. I pledge
allegiance to the flag.
Once again we'd like to welcome
each of you to the New Mexico
Senate.
And I would yield to Senate
Majority Floor Leader Peter
Worth to take us to that first
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Good morning
President, thank you, Father
Chavez, for being here, for your
words, I assure you we have lots
of brave shepherdesses in this
chamber. It's a very exciting
the final time, so I appreciate
your words this morning. Uh, let
me yield to Senator Padilla for
some unanimous consent and
excusals and then to Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Senator Michael
Padilla. Uh, good morning, Mr.
consent to uh
Uh
Allow a relaxed dress code for
our special guests on the dais
today.
Saying no objection.
Bergmann's.
And the rest of the gang, Mr.
President. No, um, thank you
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
and I want to thank the good
Pastor for the kind words, uh,
we're not really used to
He will help us make our
decisions, as you say.
And Mr. President, uh, I asked
for no United consent. I think
all my, my team members are hard
the first order of business
today, and then I'll yell to
members. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, just a roadmap for
today, it's grandparents and kin
raising Children Day at the
legislature, and Senator
then do those confirmations. Uh,
Doctor Nuzzo is back in the
Senate lounge from 1:30 to 4
o'clock, uh, and we'll also be
in the Senate land.
a good thing to have him here.
We appreciate that very much. So
Mr. President, let me yield
first to Senator Paul who's got
some guests and then other
members, and then we can have
Senator Padilla.
introducing some very special
guests, uh, that reside in my
district down in District 33,
specifically in the Lincoln
County area. So, uh, did you
you'll please stand. Hayden is
Miss Reidoso 2025.
and is gonna be competing for
Miss New Mexico a little bit
later this year, correct? This
was Miss New Mexico back in 2011
and so when Hayden reached out,
um, I felt honored because it,
it's, it's a program that does a
graduate degrees completely, um,
but that aside, Hayden's
dedicated over the last 4 years,
uh, to developing her community
service initiative, which is
called Helping those Who Help
Hayden was integral in making
sure
that she recognized the first
responders, the veterans, the
everyday people that took heroic
so she put on a community hero
ceremony that recognized those
folks and she's doing it because
she cares about our community
and she loves helping folks and
Mexico State University to get a
degree in elementary education
and is currently employed by the
Riodoso Municipal School
District, and when she has free
time, if she isn't busy enough,
in Carrizozo and he's doing
amazing work for that community.
down there. We also have Holly
Hill, Hayden's mother, if you'll
please stand, she's retired with
Kerry Pribble. So,
If the members of the Senate
will please join me in welcoming
my guest today. We greatly
appreciate it.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. It really does, uh,
give me great honor and
privilege, Mr. President, to
recognize some folks this
today yourself, uh, the Lannel
Foundation in partnership with
the Anchorham Health Foundation
and the McCune Foundation are
proud to host the first ever
grandparents and kin raising
Children Day.
thing and I want to thank, uh,
look at all of them right now
and saying thank you to all of
you, uh, Mr. Perez, I think
you're already aware of this,
but I was actually fostered by
my grandparents also. Uh, my
parents couldn't, our parents
from
my grandparents and being raised
by them. But with that, Mr.
President, unfortunately these
families are often left out of
existing support programs and
guardianship structures. These
Susan Herrera to expand services
and financial supports for these
families, that's a House Bill
252. And I know that
Representative Hereta, myself
and many of us really are very
thankful and I just, uh
to have them in my life. They
really didn't have to do that.
They were ready to go to Vegas
and have all sorts of other
things going on in their lives,
Mr. President, but instead they
decided to take their time to do
And, and you have all the
challenges with that. So, with
that, Mr. President, I'm gonna
ask all of our, uh, grandparents
and grandchildren and other
children that are being that are
here today to please stand and
be recognized by the New Mexico
State Senate.
And, uh, Mr. President, I, I did
recognize the folks on the
daisies, but I know that there
are a few in the gallery as
Mr. President, I stand for a
point of personal privilege.
Please state your point,
Senator.
Mr. President, I was wanting to
refer to the floor leader, um, I
just wanted to visit about the
prayer we had just here. This is
the first time, Mr. President,
that I ever saw a prayer go
political.
And I know that the.
Father's not listening.
I believe.
In having the power of God here.
In the the father's still not
listening, but Mr. President,
Senator, I just want to talk
guys know we all met with
Governor Leon Grisham in the
fears that she has in losing
federal money because of
immigration issues and I am
are in this time with that all
yield with disappointment I
would ask Mr. President, and if
the floor leader would explain
to me if we do have guidelines
any official guidelines, but I
certainly share, uh, your
concern, and again, we do not
want to turn this moment, which
really needs to be a moment for
make sure, you know, moving
forward, that it's very clearly
stated to all coming in, uh,
that that's not the opportunity
even though.
Under Wood said, we're all doing
that down here, but that's not
you, Senator for bringing that
to our attention.
Thank you, Senator Senator
Garros, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you.
Miss Floor leader, I just want
to remind the body what happens
to this state.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President, uh
with great honor I'd like to I'd
And she attends Cottonwood
Classical Preparatory School in
the she's in the 8th grade.
In the child for and in El
Nino's dance Company. She has
performed in La Estria at the
Rodney Theater at UNM.
other colleges, she's interested
in becoming a lawyer but hasn't
fully decided members, uh, let's
give a big welcome to our
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez. We
have Senator Souls followed by
Senator Maestas.
souls. Thank you, Mr. President.
That we celebrate the ratio of
the diameter of a circle to the
ratio of the circumference of
the circle, that magic 3.14
on this day around the world
there are numerous places have
contests where they have people
going through trying to recite.
up all kinds of places besides
in circles, and for those of you
that keep wanting to know where
the pie is, this is spelled PI,
not P I E. It's not a
number that goes on forever,
they have not yet found that
there's an end to it.
Mathematicians have tried to uh
prove that it goes on forever,
but that has proved elusive as
Beverly Hillbillies, uh, Jethro
came home from school one day
and said and uh Jed asked him
what did you learn in school?
And Jethho said, I learned PR
square.
you never start talking to pie
at a party.
Because it goes on forever.
Why is pie so lucky in love?
Uh, did you know that there are
3.14% of all sailors are
pirates.
And the irrational decision.
Thank you members.
Thank you Senator, Senator
Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to introduce
uh.
leader in our community, very
involved in aerospace and
aviation. I noticed that Mr. Eli
Swao has joined us today.
Welcome, Mr. Swan.
to discuss some of the, the
political environment that we
have that's affecting us here in
the roundhouse.
Many of you might know there's
been death threats against at
Lawmakers in AIDS.
With their cars vandalized.
Whether they threw coffee on
their cars or put stickers on
their cars or have been
recently in my county of
Sandoval.
On tribal grounds Santa Ana.
The Tesla dealership.
was attacked
The US Patriot Act, Mr.
President, defines domestic
terrorism as activities
involving acts dangerous to
human life.
That are a violation of criminal
laws.
Or affect government conduct by
mass destruction, assassination,
or kidnapping.
Mr. President, this is
unacceptable for New Mexicans to
The respectful debate.
That we have in this chamber and
I've appreciated that in this
chamber.
But outside these walls, Mr.
President, fellow senators.
We're better than that.
We all need to cool off a little
bit.
Because these people.
We got to cool off and tone it
down.
Respect each other's opinions.
And never ever turned to
have Senator Jaraone, Mr.
President, I like seeing my name
up on the screen because it's
Senator had a meal and so just
so you know I'm senator had a
meal.
And here's why I want that
picture to be brought up. That's
me with that Letterman jacket
you were sporting, but 30 years
ago, my family couldn't afford
30 years ago, took my headshot
for the New Mexico Senate, and
he remembered that I couldn't
afford the, the, the package of
senior photos that I wanted.
And I purchased those photos and
told my family that 30 years
after graduation, they were
getting the 8 by 10. I wish they
could have had a 1995 and in
and images by David of Santa Fe
for ensuring that I could
purchase those photos for saving
them for me and for making that
18 year old's dreams come.
Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
just want to give the, the
Class A, and I might say on top
of that,
Just saying that we do pretty
good in basketball. My district
will bring home the boys.
Logan
Playing for a state
championship.
So, 11 way or another we're
Mr. President, thank you. uh, I
just wanted in, uh, a Center
souls back in the, in the uh
involved or uh excited about the
prayer, but I do like the con
and Apple. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator,
pie up in the education
committee. You all are always
invited to come to education and
if you weren't didn't get there
today.
So sorry.
Thank you, Senator so just
wanted the clarification.
announcements, Senator, did you
wish to make an announcement?
See none, I'll yield to Senator
Peter Wortz to take us to that
next order of business.
Thank you, Mr. President. We are
uh, and then plan on 3rd reading
is to work our way down the list
starting at number one.
Um, and we'll see how we do and
Uh, figure out where we go once
as what's it shaping up for
tomorrow's state championship
with the boys.
Senator Masters, well, we'll
come back to announcing's
miscellaneous. We do have the
reports ready and we'll come
back to that because I know that
you know, I think Gal girls are
playing in a championship game,
right? That's correct, Senator
Munoz Gallup, who is seated #2
will be playing Curtain Centra
who's seeded number 1 tonight at
7 in the pit. Congratulations,
Settle in there. I believe he
wants you to yield.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Munoz, um, I know that,
that, uh, Senator Sher, that is
they don't put a call on, uh, we
could probably drag down
together like we did last
weekend to a basketball game.
And then the loser could buy
the.
I'm very confident. Thank you.
So you're also guaranteeing that
there's not gonna be a call call
this evening, correct?
That's, that's what I heard, Mr.
President.
Mr. President, out of my hands.
play. They beat Kansas, uh, New
Mexico won. They play tomorrow,
I believe, or today, right? The
Lobos play today at what time,
Mr. President?
7:30, Senator.
Well, Mr. President, I'll buy
you a water burger, maybe cold
when we get back, but if the
lobos win tonight, I'll buy that
water burger or I'll charge it
on Sannier's credit card.
Will you be at the game, Mr.
President, because I know that
you and the good senator from
Espanola, we're at the game the
other night, and, and he was
victorious and you weren't.
Yeah, Mr. President, I'm looking
at some of the brackets look,
Farmington is playing, uh,
Farmington. Oh no, Roswell plays
volcano Vista. That's good
He's got his hands, Scott went
over there, um,
Espanola Valley and the senator
plays oops.
And I lose it.
Espaniola Valley plays artisia.
basketball game championships.
Who do you think's gonna take it
all, Mr. President, the boys
class for a Highland Artesia.
So Senator, my job is to
I already paid my dues for that
senator, you know that.
OK. I, I just think, you know,
there's nothing better than
March Madness basketball season,
in tune, it keeps them intact,
uh, uh, so uh it's, it's some of
the great basketball you're
gonna see on the high school
courts and in the college
courts. I'd rather watch college
engagement opportunity, whether
it's FFA 4H, uh, culinary, uh,
the skills, uh, all the work the
students do, anything that keeps
students engaged lead to higher
student achievement. So I, I
appreciate it all.
enter you at the next rodeo at
the Silver City PRCA rodeo.
We'll put you in the mutton
busting and that's the first
weekend of June. I have that on
my calendar. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. President.
shout out, uh, send those extra
energies to all those schools
who are participating in the
state championship games today
and tomorrow. Senator Maestas,
thank you, Mr. President, and
I'll do the 384-858 and then in
playing the winner of Robertson
Santa Fe Indian. They play at
1:15 in 4a Albuquerque Highland
plays Artesia in the
championship game tomorrow and
girls 38 Navajo Prep took state
Navajo Prep defeated Robertson
60 to 50, so novo prep state
champs in a foray it's the same
matchup, uh.
Oregon Mountains 4734. So small
schools here in a few. Thank
you, Mr. President. Senator for
the update. I believe that we do
have the reports ready, so I'll
you to Senate majority floor
leader Peter Worth.
To take us to that next order of
So no objection. The reader will
read.
the following reappointment.
Agnes Josephine Vallejos as a
member of the Mexico School for
the Blind and visually impaired
border regions for a term
chair.
Senator do here, Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they are
12, 2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Jamie and Simpson as a member of
the Mexico School for the Blind
and Visually Impaired Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring.
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
message number 9, dated March
13, 2025, in which the
government makes the following
appointment. Stephen Paul
Neville as a member of the
the Senate confirm this
appointment, respectfully
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Center dig adoption of the
Individually.
Senator, Mr. President, just
before we go to confirmations,
unanimous consent. We go without
our business messages from the
governor.
president pro tempore, and
members of the Mexico State
Senate.
Dear President pro tempore
Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
Article 44 section 42 of the New
reappointment to the Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring on
expiring on December 31st, 2030.
Respectfully submitted Michelle
Lujan Grisham, governor.
The Journal show the message
from the governor has been
the lowrider king of the Senate,
Senator Howardil.
There ain't no objection. We are
on that order of business.
Confirmation, Senator Jameo.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
Regents. I now yield to Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Pursuant to Senate executive
letter.
of Jamie N Simpson to the New
Mexico School for the Blind
visually impaired board of
objections.
Senator Townsend, if you'll
honor to present to rules
committee.
Miss Simpson, she was, uh, was
joined by
Mr. President,
Miss Simpson is an alumni alumni
of the school of blind.
She currently is the director of
orientation for the center in
Almogordo.
She is a former employee of
Chris Cole and
It was interesting, Mr.
President, listening this
morning to
Um, not only Mississippson, but
um.
But the benefits that the school
brings to many families across
New Mexico.
I think uh this appointment, um,
is absolutely spot on.
Mr. President, I will yield to
those that may want to say a few
words.
Thank you senators, we're
debating.
from northern New Mexico, found
her way down south, and she's
truly invested in the New Mexico
School for the Blind and
visually impaired as a former
student and a proud alumnus, I'm
excuse senators, uh, Bergmans
and Stewart until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call no objection.
Thank you, Senator but yeah.
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by the
show of hands. Thank you all
senators. We are voting.
I'll send it to your seats,
please.
By a vote of 34 in the
Of Jamie Anne Simpson as a
member of the New Mexico School
for the Blind and visually
impaired Border regions for term
commencing on confirmation
expiring December 31st, 2030 has
uh, a new board of regent to New
Mexico School of the Blind,
Jamie Anne Simpson.
Senator had a meal
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Agnes Josephine
Thank you, Mr. President.
Pursuant to Senate executive
message number 8 dated March 12,
See no objections. Senator
Charlie, if you'll explain.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
shared this morning that I met
Agnes while knocking on doors in
family, including her daughter,
which I'll share a little bit
more about in a couple of
minutes, but Agnes began telling
me about the school for the
let an opportunity passed her by
to share.
and talk and advocate about um a
school that she loves so dearly.
the school itself and its
mission, and I walked away
really knowing that the New
Mexico School for the Blind and
visually impaired, had such a
Um, when her daughter was just 4
months old, she experienced a
traumatic brain injury that, um,
impaired her daughter's vision.
And this morning she shared Mr.
President that when she came
across the New Mexico School for
The fierce love of a mama and um
I know that the school could not
be more lucky to have you, and
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. President, I
apologize. I was not here from
Miss Simpson, but, uh, I, I did
probably be the most talented in
impressive Gallegos we have in
the family, uh, but Mr.
President, Senator, I, uh,
senators, I want to talk to you
about what they do, uh, in our
they're ours, so not only are
they working in Algordo in, in
Albuquerque, but they touch any
child with visually impaired
areas, uh, but then I had told
them and and.
I love, uh, what the, um,
School for the blind and
visually impaired do versus
survivor and everything Irma
Frederich did, she talked in
first person. I was here. I was
there. This happened. I saw
this, and it was really
because of the tragedy that the
mother had gone through in the
Holocaust and I'd sent it to her
synagogue because, uh,
visually impaired, they went
ahead and put it out, and I know
we all see it as they send us
information here in Braille, but
this young lady, uh, was reading
ever.
Put a letter in braille for her
to read.
I did not do that on my own. It
It was very emotional for but
what they do, it's not just for
Uh, earned Fred and Rich's
daughter, but they do this for
our kids.
important that those that have
these needs get fed and and
educated in a way that they can,
uh, understand and so I stand in
And the Mexico School for the
blind to have them on their
board of regents and with that
I'll yield. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator,
for presenting to us. Thank you,
morning to hear these two,
individuals that are so
dedicated to a school that
Has uh personally impacted both
in it and Miss Baels as
As her testimony, um, about the
impacts of the school and her
family with her child. It's, uh,
confirmation or her confirmation
as well. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. We have further debate
in or had a meal.
Mr. President, I stand in full
support of this conferee. She's
and how she sees every student
at that school as a child that
she's responsible for and that
was touching, but offline, Mr.
President, I need to ask Miss
See no further debate. Senator
charter to close on the
confirmation.
Thank you, Mr. President. A
blessing to the school indeed. I
Thank you all senators to your
seats, please. We are voting.
I'll send this to your seats.
If you wish to vote no, please
The appointment, the
reappointment of Agnes,
Josephine Vallejos as a member
of the New Mexico School for the
Blind and visually impaired
border regions for a term
commencing upon confirmation
Mr. President, thank you, um,
Ms. Vallejos, if you would
please rise and if the body
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Senator Steven
Paul Neville be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
Senate executive letter or
executive message 9 dated March
13, 2025, I moved that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
there if you'll explain.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
this one, this one's kind of
cool for me because he was my
senator and I don't know how
many people get to come back and
lieutenant governor and Senator
Ramos and myself all attended
Western and so it, it's a little
special for, for, I think the
of accomplishments that this man
has has made and has done, but
how do you introduce somebody
that everybody in the chamber
already knows.
So I want to skip some of that
He ended up going right up to
the leadership level, and I
think that's what we're going to
need and at Western. So I think
that's very important.
Um, he was also the president of
New Mexico counties.
And I can go on and on and on.
But the most important part, it
was he's my mentor.
I watched him.
And that's why I wanted to be.
And so, thank you, sir.
Um, his private life though.
Continue to serve our community.
He was a big, uh,
promoter of our leadership San
Juan program which I later
Ever faltered and I can see him
doing that now at Western.
Um, his family, I wanna make
sure and mention them. They've
kind of adopted me a little.
and a son. His son is a, um,
contractor, very successful, and
his two daughters, uh, I got to
have in class and if anybody
wants to know anything about
Manipulative, and I let them, I
guess.
So, um.
The only other thing that I want
to add to this nomination.
So with that, with that.
Uh, Mr. President, I will stand.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
several who would like to speak.
We have Senator Ramos, followed
so glad we're getting some
border regions to Western New
Mexico University. Number 2.
We couldn't have picked a better
man.
Um, Senator Neville, to me,
Counties where you were a mentor
then and uh you mean a lot to
me, so I'm so glad that we are
appointing you to the Dublin NMU
Board of Regents.
Go Mustangs. I'm looking forward
to working with you. God bless
you, sir. Thank you, Senator
Ramos. I apologize, Senators on
the list, but I didn't see him
at the chair center. Uh, thank
strategy, and yet here he is.
So, uh, again, appreciate him
stepping up. I just, over the
years in this chamber, we've
the narrowest of narrow windows,
uh, to get that done with folks
on either side trying to shut
that down and you always did it
way. It was all about.
doing the right thing and I just
think, again, I know Senator
Ramos has been talking about the
need to have these appointments,
and I just would concur with him
us Senator Lanier, and that he
has been a tremendous addition
in this chamber. You said that
was gonna happen and now that
we're what, 7 weeks into this
thing, uh, Senator, we
follow and finding someone and
you found a great person to
follow you. So thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
We're Senator Campos followed by
Senator Padilla. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, and, uh,
you continue to, uh, not only
help us all so that we're able
to uh keep, if you will, the
fiscal prowess in terms of
everything that we did, but
And then secondly, because uh
with the solutions that you
always brought forward.
It was never about one party or
the other. It was always about
leadership, particularly in many
times we attended LFC meetings
there at Western.
Definitely is going to be best
served by not only the, uh,
And just a couple of little
things. I have a little piece of
paper over here for you to sign
and that's kind of an inside
joke between the two of us been
trying to go ahead and convince
this, this is the individual
that is gonna go ahead and bring
stability to Western New Mexico
University. Thank you very much,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Campos. We have Senator
Scher next.
say I echo every single thing
we've heard so far, um, you
know, coming up in the world,
my, my grandparents, I mentioned
them earlier when the
grandparents raising
grandchildren were here, and a
lot of times my grandparents
if you build a house with the
right timber, it's going to be
there for, you know, 234, 500
years. And, and I would have to
say that every interaction,
every time I, I don't think he
was ever excited about just
also say on the Spanish side of
our family, obviously it would
be.
Esenna gente and buena gente is
just good people, Mr. President.
I know you used that phrase
periodically, I know I do, and
he is just buena gente. He's
will bring and I'm just very
proud of him and thank you for
agreeing to do even more public
service, uh, Senator Neville,
and with that, Mr. President, I
ask you to consent to, uh,
excuse Senator Pope until he
returns to the chamber, except
long time, and of course, he was
here as Senator Deville and Mr.
President, I am just thrilled
that he finally got himself a
real job.
So,
although we have to put up with
some that aren't occasionally,
but that's made a big difference
in, in this caucus here, uh,
and, and I think that it's that
his way down there. But either
way, he's going to do a great
job, but I did just learn from
Senator Padilla that he's 20 or
3 or 400 years old and I, that
explains a lot.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
and also to.
My good friend,
next to each other and and
legislative finance committee
and camaradie that we just built
and our discussions and uh the
you're gonna do great because I
know you are. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you and good
luck.
Thank you Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I also
rise in support and, and, and I
spent their money, uh, we've
heard that.
Reports in the newspaper, um,
but you got yourself another
job. You thought you're gonna
retire and go to Vallecito and
a task ahead of you in, in these
new regions have a task ahead of
figuring out where that school
is and where it really is. The
state police were up above the
window up there. I was gonna
have them tasting it or sheer
your shoes, uh, he, he's very
insightful. He's got a 300
bowling handicap, I think, no
telling how many beers he's
drank and golf, he drinks a lot
of beers like you do. Um, but,
And that's something that has to
happen in our in our college
institutions, so I appreciate
that and you and your wife and
your granddaughter will enjoy
those trips down through the
short time of the rules
committee voting on this
confirmation and coming down to
this, the floor, there was a
concern raised about the
constitutionality of this
is not a constitutional problem
here. Uh, Article 4, Section 28
of the New Mexico Constitution.
says that no member of the
legislature shall during the
say, nor shall he within one
year after being appointed or
with no no nor shall he within
one year thereafter, be
appointed to any civil office
So I think we're good on that
one. and I don't think there are
any emollients that come with
constitutional issue here and we
are very lucky to have him, uh,
be willing to continue his, his,
uh, public service for our
state.
Thank you, Senator Hicks Senator
Woods.
And, you know, that was
Was not Texas A&M or New Mexico
A&M. It was New Mexico State at
that point in time too.
But, uh, Steve is really a, a
good man. He'll do a good job
down there. He's got a, a real
good mind for seeking out
The many good things there.
There's just so many things
that, that he has experience in
that will help it at uh New
Mexico Western and sides that
Thank you, Senator Woods. We do
have further debate. We have
Cenbrandt.
Thank you, Mr. President and uh.
Yeah, I got served with Steve
appreciate it. It's, it's the
best seat in the house.
And uh thank you for for
recommending, uh, Senator
Lanier, um, at least right now
So
I don't know which one of us is
the worst influence on the
other, but, uh, you know, we're
having a good time and, and
Western's a great uh college
and, and, uh, you, you'll be
able to help put it back on you,
Senator.
been called and that all of
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative be shown by
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
The appointment of Stephen Paul
Neville as a member of the
Western New Mexico University
Board of Regs for a term
commencing upon confirmation and
And welcome Steve Paul Neville,
Western New Mexico universities
only board of Region.
to Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Wz to take us to that next
order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous objection we're on
uh, Senator Doig, Senate Bill 66
is number one. Senator Isel is
#2, Senate Bill 383, the tax and
transportation substitutes, uh,
Senator Munoz, Senate Bill 226,
item number 5, Senator Brandt,
item number 6, Senate Bill 411
as amended, and then we'll see
where we go from there.
emergency clause. Senators, we
are on that order of business
3rd reading the legislation.
And I'll yell too.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
substitution.
See, no objection. Senator
Gabriel explain your bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Bill 66 protects children and
PED to consider certain
misdemeanor convictions, such as
enticement of a child, stalking,
battery of a household member,
etc. when conducting background
going to be working with
vulnerable populations, uh, that
they be able to look at any
relevant criminal history,
including misdemeanors. Thank
you.
Thank you.
President, with the, uh, Senator
Ye for one question.
Yes, Mr. President.
Senator, did they not do this
today and does this legislation
enable that? I mean,
2021 when we had the special
session, uh, legalizing
recreational use of cannabis. We
also passed some legislation
that dealt with expungement of
could not be considered and we
included an exception for law
enforcement hiring, but we
really should have included this
exception.
For, for all these other folks
as well, and so this is
Unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Cervantes until he
returned to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
Seeing no objection.
Any further debate, senators
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
do have a just a clarification
question if sponsor will yield.
Energy. Yes, Mr. President.
So Mr. President, uh,
correct? CYFD and PED or my
misunderstanding that Senator
Mr. President, so this would,
would allow those departments to
OK, so Mr. President, then if
there were if there were felony
convictions that that that could
disqualify them, OK, uh, Mr.
President, uh, are there other
and long-term Services, the
Healthcare Authority, CYFD and
PED were specifically looking at
at folks who work with
vulnerable populations.
Um, so regulation and licensing
licenses bank presidents and
well, everything from alcohol
servers to bank presidents and
everything in between.
Um
Uh, in while DWI or whatever
might not bother me if that
person is looking at stuff,
there could be crimes where this
Uh, if there was somebody that
had a, a conviction, an identity
theft kind of conviction. That's
what I'm trying to get at, Mr.
President. Senator.
So, so if it was related in some
way to the job, uh, it, it could
be considered, um, kind of
outside of the context of, of
this bill.
we're on the same page. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. Do we have any further
debate?
Seeing no further debate,
Senator Dick to close on the
bill.
the affirmative, except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you all
senators. We are voting to your
seats, please.
I'll send it to your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Buy a vote.
I was 35 in the affirmative.
0 on the negative. Senate bill
66 has passed with an emergency
clause, Senator Dock.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record
showed that all action for
placing Senate, Senate tax and
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Senator, if you'll please
explain what your bill does.
Yes sir, I can, Mr. President,
Mayor Timothy Z. Jennings and
Mr. Hiss, I.
I.
I was waiting for that senator.
You could see no tall objection,
a short objection, but maybe.
I would draw that objection.
Senator, uh, uh, Sergeant Ars,
much. On October the 21st, 2024,
Roswell experienced serious
flooding with substantial
property damage and 2
fatalities. The area was
average October rainfall, and it
broke the previous record of 5.6
inches.
1901.
The Spring River Channel
flooding inundated road swept
away cars and damaged bridges
and buildings, the flooding left
much of the city under a total
layer of silt. The governor
a federal disaster area made it
eligible for federal disaster
relief.
There was over $370 million in
losses during that episode.
financial tool, flood recovery,
revenue bonds funded by a
dedicated local grocery seats
tax to help Umunicipal
municipalities recover from
recovery period.
Mr. President, with that we will
stand for Chris Christians.
Thank you Senators senators,
we're debating Senate tax
President, I don't need the
sponsor to you. I just want to
give a little bit of history
about this bill because we
witnessed this and this is where
I feel, Mr. President, that this
is the purpose of why we are
here.
discussions and, and an
amendment and an amendment being
pulled and then conversation uh
with um uh Izzy up in LFC. This
it can help the entire state and
that's where the conversations
and the amendments uh for this
bill so we heard the bill in
Senate tax, uh, the sponsor went
fighting for her community and
it wound up being something.
that every single community in
New Mexico can now benefit from
because of this idea, so I wanna
thank the sponsor for doing that
thank you, sponsor. Thank you,
Senator Hamlin. We have Senator
Padilla followed by Senator
Woods.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Uh, I don't need the
sponsor to yield either. I, I do
would see anything like this in
our state, and I am very proud
of Senator Reel for, for
stepping up and trying to work
on, on the issue for her
community and then being open to
making sure because this could
Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think
I think most of my bunch is back
I don't ask for any debate or
any comments from the last for a
year.
I just, I appreciate you
bringing this forward. It's,
Doing that local government is
going to tax its residents to
buy bonds.
Thank you Mr. President. Will
the senator yield?
Mr. Preston, I yield to Senator
Steinborn. Thank you, Mr.
government can impose a tax for
a flood damaged.
Infrastructure, but as we know,
Mr. President, Senator, a lot of
our communities have very
all in need of more money to
repair and up, you know,
modernize these dams. So I'm
just wondering, uh, Mr.
President.
Senator, did you all consider
Mr. President, Senator
Steinborn.
In Chervis County, I cannot
speak for all the other
commission to for the protection
of Roswell out west of Roswell,
there are two dams in place. One
is the Diamond AD and the other
one is the Rocky Dam, and uh
whenever all this flooding
Unfortunately, the Rocky dam
does not have a, a gate on it,
so all that water did end up
going into the munic to the
town, city of Rossville.
was Mr. Speaker, so good, and
here I had to go screw you owe
me 4 cookies for that, just so
you know, Senator, you have the
floor.
see that any other municipality
entity wouldn't be able to take
what we have done with this bill
because what this bill does is
question, and I know about flood
commissions and I know they have
a certain amount of, I think
they have a certain amount of
taxing authority, but I also
know, at least in my county,
which is my kind of experience
flood commission authority
taxing authorities, so maybe it
wouldn't be appropriate, but
anyway, I understand certainly
why you're doing this and
support.
it and uh
You know, commend the, the mayor
stepping up first to do it,
which is pretty commendable, and
I know that, uh, the flooding
there was truly catastrophic.
So, wish you all a good
recovery. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Steiner.
us, well, we had emergency
floods or we had emergency
damage and now they have a
revenue stream to, to fend for
themselves. I, I just, I think
it works for everybody. Will,
long, you know, she shake.
in her head, but I mean, uh, I,
I don't have anything, I don't,
Mr. President, with the sponsor
yield for a question LD yield.
Mr. President, Senator, do you
think their city council will
pass this because it just
requires the city council
doesn't require taking it to the
voters if I'm correct. Is that
Mr. President, yes, I will be
glad to answer that question in
light of everything that did
was, was originally we have lost
our museum we have lost the
convention center. We have lost
Bridges Street, sewer lines, you
name it, and it was affected.
is closed today along with our
tissue Carl's bed and I believe
Hobbs because of all the dirt
that is in the air right now,
with wind gusts up to 80 miles
As far as the town council goes
there were meetings right off
the start to start helping
people.
Recover to make sure that they
had a home to go to. The city
There's several of them that are
working to get it it's, it's
just mind blowing whenever you
see what has happened to that
It's much needed and yes the
city council has approved this.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Munoz, Mr. President, well,
that's good to know that, that,
that even in really conservative
your cities and counties. We had
flooding and grants last year we
had flooding in Gallup just
microbursts that happened and,
and people are caught off guard.
I mean, now they have the
Chavez County will in in the
good mayor sitting back there. I
mean, he's laughing, but I mean,
I think it washed away a
mountain lion, and so there
should be no more mountain lion
wrecks, uh, because the floods
this, this will just help them,
just remember cities and
counties, next time you come to
us and say, oh we need emergency
money for flooding. You have the
ability to take care of yourself
hard.
Thank you Mr. President, we do
have further debate with Senator
Campos, followed by Senator
Jarami.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Well, the sponsor
yield,
ongoing efforts as you continue
to not only take the resources
to the Roswell area, but also
with your compassion and
passion.
That you deliver, if you will,
that is needed and I, uh, we've
dealt with this there in, uh,
the Riodoso area. We've dealt
with it in uh the Moral Las
Vegas area for different
reasons, but in terms of the
into to effect what we're going
to be looking at would be
another 66 million, but my
question, um, is centered
around.
and the health of people. How is
this been implemented and again
I'm gonna go back to this part,
how can the state continue to go
ahead and help because we want
we are looking at with as well
as you know, and the whole body
knows the cost of construction
has skyrocketed the, the need
for goods has.
this particular area where it
was hit the worst is about.
375 to $400 million Mr.
President.
FEMA before they will step up
and be able to help us out.
Thank you, Mr. President.
So Mr. President, and that's the
point that I'm trying to get to
because here we are, we're
uh, again, here we need the
additional resources, but in, in
dealing with this, then if
there's going to be a need for
$400 million in order to go and
better understand and to tell
the story because the, the
aftermath or, if you will, the
follow up is very important to
the people of New Mexico so they
understand uh where we're at
that has to be done, and if you
can uh elaborate a little bit
more and, and tell us.
that story where you're at today
with the resources that are
available, the problems that
you're having.
Thank you, Senator Campos. We do
have.
The centers out
I'm glad you brought that up,
Senator Campos.
That are more than willing to
pitch in to make somebody's
life, try to put it back whole
again.
It does more than
6 ft of mud whenever that river
did breach.
The contents of that museum was
worth over $300 million it has
of everything there.
The, uh, community, the
convention center that was in
downtown Rossville whenever this
event hit. There was a
responders fell in there helping
people get down and get to
safety in a hurry like I said,
there was over 300 incidences
that are first responders did
was a
a lot across the street from
that area and the cars washed
out of the parking lot into the
river and ended up down at the
area to impose that 3/8 of the
3/8% of tax.
We have to come up with the 25%
local share that is required.
of federal assistance. We have
to put our towns back.
And this is a good tool, as was
stated earlier for other
municipalities to be able to use
information to be shared, and I
hope that that the media is
paying attention to your story.
I know that they have all along,
but it's always important for
taken care of because in often
and oftentimes in a year or 2
years later, there's still so
much of the upheaval, so many of
the things that still have to be
as we go forward that the lives
are returned to the
best level of normalcy that we
can, so, uh, with that, Mr.
President and to Senator Iziel,
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. We have Senator
Jaramillo followed by Senator
Gallegos and Senator O'Malley.
Mr. President, I don't need the
senator to yield, but I want to
thank the sponsor. Her
commitment to her community and
went out to them, this is the
solution that's gonna help them
pick up the pieces they're gonna
have so many people,
international people come to
Roswell for the air show that
that she made onto her bill is
gonna help people.
Like myself in northern New
Mexico, the landscape around
Espanola has changed due to
fires to the east and the west
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Sinner egos.
Senator O'Malley
tell a little bit of uh some
history, um the in Bernaleo
County in 2016 because of a
pretty awful incident, we
decided to, um,
know, because of the need that
does pay for some things, but it
doesn't cover the the need uh in
Berlio County, so I just wanted
to say I do commend
So that should not preclude them
from asking for state funding,
um, because it, it's our money,
uh, it's all of our money, so,
Mr. President, I'm afraid to ask
the my great center of the left
of me to yield, so Mr.
President, I was going to say
that, uh, her and I officed in
and 1/8 now, uh, but Mr.
President, Senator, what I want
to tell the body is the Monday
after the flood in Roswell.
I've, I stand in full support of
of the bridge and, uh, Mr.
President, senators, I was
talking to the county.
Dispatch
piles, I would say piles, we do
dirt work.
And I was impressed with the
piles.
Of mud that had been pushed up
in Roswell as you would go
We can pass anything and I think
they proved that in Roswell by
pushing for their own means of
President. uh, UNES consent to
excuse Senator Nava until she
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
no further debate.
much, Mr. President, I move that
Senate tax business and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended with the emergency
clause.
Do now pass.
affirmative. Thank you, Senator.
I appreciate the opportunity to
vote with you but because it is
a bill with substantive
information we do have to go
through the regular process.
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you, Senators.
Senators, we're voting all
senators to your seats, please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 383 as amended has passed
with the emergency clause and is
out. Congratulations.
Mr. President, I thank you in
miscellaneous no objection.
We're in that order business
announces a miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. I understand Senator
Pope has some special guests
he'd like to introduce ideal to
Senator Pope. Thank you,
Capitol and all the state
capitals around the United
States. It was a veterans rally.
Um, we have veterans that are
really concerned about the
layoffs to the VA and a lot of
We have concerns about cuts to
housing assistance.
Job training.
Mental health
The crisis hotline.
Many of our veterans are dealing
with so much we have to also
consider the families who are
already stepping up we're gonna
have to step up more.
If I could in the gallery.
about.
They swore an oath.
They followed through.
And it's our role to make sure
President.
Thank you, Mr. President. If I
could have our veterans stay
standing.
Uh, Mr. President, I'd like to
thank Senator Pope for his words
and to let our veterans know
others, and myself as a retired
Air Force Lieutenant colonel and
combat veteran. I want to thank
Thank you. Thank you. I yield to
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Wortz to take us to the next
order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Just before we go to that next
Nava. So let's just welcome her.
Always good to see her.
And then in the back on the
Senator, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. I consent we go back
to that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation. I yield
Thank you, Mr.
I asked unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Bill 375.
unanimous consent to invite a uh
uh my expert guest on the floor.
Senator, if you'll identify who
your who your expert witnesses.
Thank you so much, uh, secretary
our expert witness into the
chamber.
So myster says she's getting
situated. If you'll go ahead and
explain your bill.
Thank you very much Mr.
President, members Senate Bill
similar to many other states to
lower recidivism and hold people
accountable in real time, uh, it
does us the following it, uh,
removes parole costs and
outdated policy, uh, studies
uh, it installs an early release
program for very low risk, uh, a
long time probationers it
clarifies the conditions for
meritorious deductions which
lowering recidivism and having a
smoother and safer prison system
with that, I'll stand for
questions. Thank you, senators.
We're debating Senate Bill 375.
uh, when I first met the uh
secretary.
When I first met the secretary,
we, we had a discussion and, and
hoping to get this uh bill on
the gov's desk by next week and
we're very grateful for her
leadership and the director of
probation and parole Director
Martinez with that, um.
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and that those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you, Senator Maa.
Senator Ramos voting no.
And the guy goes, voting no.
And there's Scott Rodino.
By a vote of 25 in the
affirmative, 11 in the negative
Senate bill 375 has passed the
Senate. Senator Mas us. Thank
you, Mr. President.
that's next on there, but I
wanted to other Cervantes.
Are you able to send vans for
the next bill on the calendar.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, we were in the middle
of debating 318.
As amended, there was a call,
uh, put on, I think, Mr.
So, Ms. Brin, that's certainly
correct. I think the only
question is whether you want him
to put the bill back on first, I
think probably put it back on
for passage and then we'll check
in and
all action for placing Senate
bill 318 as amended on final
passage has been taken and now
again remains subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
See no objection.
of the call. We do have an
update, Senator Sher I I'll
yield to the sergeant of arms to
give us that update.
Center share. So.
Mr. President, I've got a, uh.
Kind of two questions here.
First, when the call was made,
now we're asking for, at least I
think that we heard, uh, that
one of the members that was not
here now be excused, except that
she was not excused when the
call was made.
That is done. It is not done.
The center share and I don't, I
don't believe I heard that there
was an excusal for the senator
who's not here, but I'll yell to
Senator Worth.
So Mr. President, I think there
this, but absolutely today she
was excused and I sent her
Padilla just to confirm Senator,
yes, Mr. President, she was
excused except for the purposes
But the call was put on
yesterday when she was not
excused, so I would submit, Mr.
President, that for the next
call, she is excused, but for
was excused yesterday except for
the purposes of a call.
So Mr. President, the call is
not complete. Is that what we're
agreeing to? OK, so we're
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Worth, uh, so Mr. President,
again, pursuant to Rule 7-4
we're gonna do some other
Seeing no objection.
We're going to Senate Bill 226,
Mr. President. Just let him to
Senate Bill 226 on final passage
is now subject to debate
amendment and substitution.
You're no objection. Senator
explained the bill.
Mr. President, what this bill
increases the penalty, uh, for
A right-hand lane violation to
$250 Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
Mr. President, Senator, yes, any
four-lane highways interstates,
uh,
They will have to be in the
right hand lane at 65 MPH.
So, uh
me just double check, but I
believe that is correct.
Mr. President, on any highway.
have parallel 66 running next to
it. Are we gonna force
Truck traffic off of.
40
Onto a two lane where they can
frontage roads are not designed
for heavy truck traffic. There
are only 2 lanes, uh, so they
wouldn't be able to stay in the
left hand lane, and so they
wouldn't force them off those
deals. I mean, they'd probably
I completely understand. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator.
We do have further debate with
Senator share.
Oh, thank you, Mr. President.
are on par.
Uh, with what they were 40 years
ago.
But, uh, this does not provide a
realistic deterrent to dangerous
It was a good idea. And in fact,
they come down here and say, we
do believe the increased amounts
will help serve as a deterrent
to dangerous driving and it was
just the increased penalties
um.
You know, Mr. President, I will
ask the sponsor if he agrees
with that, if, if he will yield.
Mr. President, Senator, let me
clarify something that I
to clarify that, I apologize to
the good senator. I want to
clarify that that's correct. And
then, uh, yeah, I mean,
penalties do deter, uh, traffic
Well, there was construction
work going on and just shocked
me.
That no nobody's slow down for
anything, Mr. President,
Senator.
Senator.
But I understand what's going on
there, but, you know, we, we, we
hear a lot in here that, uh,
increased penalties don't change
behavior at all. And yet in this
particular case, we've changed,
you, Senator Sher. We do have
further debate.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the senator yield?
is this bill just for tractor
trailers on I-40.
Mr. President, Senator, yes, it
is very simple bill, semis,
can.
Do whatever you want to do in
any other direction, but
eastbound, east and westbound
I-40 from the Texas line to the
Is truck tractor defined in your
bill, Mr. President, Senator?
Mr. President, Senator, I think
truck tractors divided in
statute, uh, and so it's not
and then you said it's defined
somewhere. Are you 100% sure
that it is defined or you're
maybe not 100% sure, Mr.
President, Senator,
Senator, if you want to be a
lawyer, then we can figure out
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think it's a really important
question, Mr. President, because
what we're asking is, we're
asking law enforcement to
actually enforce a law that
I'm not sure. I mean, is that a
John Deere tractor?
Is that a trailer, Mr.
President, I'm just, I'm being
quite serious and saying we're,
we're creating a legal standard
that if it's not defined,
this, maybe the Secretary of
Transportation is listening.
Otherwise that would be a
definition I would recommend
putting into the bill, but a
problem if it is not. Mr.
not on other roads or other
interstates, but just literally
on one in the state. This
president, Senator.
Well, Mr. President, let me
answer your other question. It
defined in the law somewhere in
large commercial trucks. It does
not involve a John Deere
tractor. Those are not truck
tractors. Those are just
tractors.
tractor is defined in law or
truck tractor is defined in law.
What exactly is defined in law
as presents center.
Mr. President, I think they're
both defined in law.
Thank you, Mr. President. Yeah,
well, there are 2 certainly
distinct words, a truck and a
tractor.
And then you have truck tractor.
So I'm, I'm not sure what kind
question I was asking is this
bill seeks to make a new legal
requirement on one interstate in
New Mexico.
This present Senator. Well, Mr.
President, to answer your first
question, yes, we're only doing
it on one road. Um, you know, I
think on I-25, I could probably
read the paper and drive with my
traffic picks up. If you head to
the north, it picks up from
Albuquerque to Santa Fe and then
it drops off quite a bit, uh,
but it is only one road, um, Mr.
President.
Requirements that are limited to
one road in the state like this.
present senator.
clarify something. This includes
every interstate.
In New Mexico. The amendment did
not go on in judiciary, which I
to I-40. So let me clarify that
back again. I was right in my
first statements, uh, I got
confused because another senator
came by and said the amendment
Senator. Yeah, there might,
we're getting kind of differing
piece of information about
whether or not that amendment
went on in the judiciary, but
maybe we can also, uh,
Keep getting to the bottom of
FIR says DOT would need, I think
it says in the FIR 700 new
signs, Mr. President, Senator.
Do you know, do we have money in
the budget to do this if this
law were to go into effect, Mr.
right-hand lane, uh, they
already pre-exist on I-40 and
some other interstates a few
years ago when it was already
statute for vehicles to drive in
the right-hand lane, uh, those
doesn't want to cut their main.
money, uh, for them to play
signs in the, in, in the right
of way for, for truck traffic.
Sinner Steinborn, Mr. President,
Senator.
we believe that it's safe for
all tractors.
To not drive faster than 65 or
maybe the one that you saw that
day was someone's feed out
through a window.
S truck tractor means a motor
vehicle designed primarily for
drawing other vehicles and
Constructed to carry part of the
calling a U-Haul? Could that be
considered that too?
No, that's not a commercial
truck tractor.
Mr. President, Senator, I, I
that day. What I'm really
wondering though, is it, is it
really a one size fits all
situation that all truck
tractors are unsafe over the,
create your own unique hazards
by doing that, uh, do we believe
that all truck tractors are not
safe going over 65.
Mr. President, Senator, we know
At 72 miles an hour and I'll
show you pictures of, I don't
know how to send them, maybe
send R Mijo knows how to send
them to the screen where 10
semis are lined up at 57 miles
trailer at all in your life,
you'll understand the definition
between what a semi truck and
what a tractor trailer is and
those definitions are, are in
that code that I can find them.
But you will create safety.
California, once you get the
California border, it's in the
right hand lane at 55 miles an
hour.
Once you hit the Oklahoma line
there is truck traffic at 65
trying to get there at 75. And
when you come across semis that
are doing 72, 73 and decided to
pass the next semi and you're
stuck there for 10 miles. Uh,
truck traffic is at a different
rate. One semi is equal to 240
cars going down the road. That's
how much weight they're
carrying.
Mr. President, Senator.
So I, I won't ask that, Mr.
President, Senator, I know
you've been trying to pass this
bill for a number of years just
because I've heard it in
committee several times. I'm
just curious why it hasn't
Can you share why it hasn't gone
all the way through up till
today, and don't worry, I'm
someone who's been working on
some bills for 10 years, so it
doesn't mean that something's
flawed. I'm just truly curious
why the bill hasn't gone all the
Senator Steinborn, I see, Mr.
President, OK, um, I'll listen
to further the debate. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thanks,
Senator.
I I think that Senator Steinborn
actually asked several of my
questions because I was also
concerned about the uh I-40, uh.
Um, and so this does apply in
all roads. I'm wondering if
maybe we should hold this, get
that amendment down here so we
can put it on, um, because I, I
have a lot of concerns with the
I, I will tell you the most
annoying thing for me and I, and
I understand the right lane, but
are you telling me, um, that a
truck driver is never going to
Are the trucks not gonna be able
to pass me?
Uh, with the, with the sponsor
yield to, to answer that
question, are they not going to
be allowed to pass anyone?
have course trailers to our
motor homes or, or total homes
or toters those are all
recreational vehicles. Those are
you know this, and when an
officer,
See you passing the vehicle, uh,
and you got to get around them
to get back in the other lane.
They're not gonna sign him for,
for passing and then slowing
the right-hand lane at 65. You
can name roads from Roswell to,
to Carlsbad. They're all 4 lane
roads. You can name four lane
roads from, uh, Highway 491 or
the Colorado line is 4 lanes in
mainly 4 lanes except when you
go through town and so those
will all be in the right hand
lane at 65 miles an hour.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President and
pass me.
Because I'm slower than they
want to go up a hill.
If they have to drive in the
right lane, how are they going
to pass?
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, maybe I should have
asked how are they gonna legally
pass because you're saying they
have to stay in the right lane.
overcome the vehicle, I believe
is allowable in law, and then
you overcome the vehicle and
move back into the lane. Well,
thank you, Mr. President. Thank
will tell you every time I go
visit California, it drives me
crazy, um, because, and, and I
don't tell my RV out there, but
it's.
You know, the trucks are
Um, so, so it concerns me. I
know this is something we've
looked at several times.
Um
You know, it sounds like we just
need to put some more money in
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, um,
just want to confirm that this
would
This law would happen on I-25,
I-40, and I-10, is that correct?
Mr. President, Senator, yes.
doing this, um, but just have a
a question about.
Why we're doing this and
reducing the speed, um, what I.
Seemed to what seems to happen
to me especially driving from
little bit about what's going on
in I-40 and kind of the nexus of
this bill.
Well, Mr. President, when
you're, I call it the Santa Fe
Audubon from Albuquerque to
Santa Fe. You don't know that
me and you're shaking your head,
it happens to you. So the, the
current law is the limit is,
right? That's what the law says
a limit you can drive, but when
you're in flow with traffic,
cities or for other interstates
across the state. They're gonna
drive at 65 in the right-hand
lane until they come into
Albuquerque. They come into
Albuquerque at the top of 9 Mile
system within the, the area.
They can drive any lane they
want there. The number the
safety factories, I mean, there
was 14,000 traffic citations
issued this year.
were on speeding and issued uh
and speeding about 10% of the
stations would be about
consistent with the number, uh,
let's see, that really doesn't
matter, but the national traffic
truck drivers would go 110 miles
an hour, and you couldn't even
catch them. You just want to get
behind them and, and they, they
know where the police were and,
and you could drive whatever
speed you want, but now it's
I guess my question is with the
reduction in speed, it, it's
sounding like this is a safety
issue with
Uh, our large semi trucks and
transport trucks, um.
But
we're reducing it to 65. What
was the problem with them going
75 and.
Driving in the right lane when
everyone else is passing in the
left lane.
power to go up the hill at 75
and the other truck behind him
moves out behind him, and he
doesn't have enough power to go
up the hill and pass that guy.
And so they're, they're
up. I mean, it's really a safety
issue because they all want to
run as fast as they can go, but
now trucks have governors on
them and they're limited by
speed, so they're only gonna
drive.
the max that they can out of
backs up. I, I don't know how to
get this picture to you, but
maybe Senator Armijo ran off,
but I'll show you a picture on
my phone of 10 semis in the
block it on every interstate,
uh, Santa Fe's, you have to play
each incident a little bit
different, but
It is a safety issue. It will
fix the safety issue. I'll I'll
lane they should be in, and it
helps them maintain a speed that
they can achieve in their
vehicles.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, that
I'm sorry, Mr. President.
Senator, can you repeat that for
me, Mr. President, Senator, you
mentioned the issue of going 75
and they get backed up or they
hit a hill and it's gonna drop
know they can't maintain 75 and
so at 65, they're gonna be able
to maintain that speed and not
try to pass anybody while
they're going up a hill, so 65,
uh, every car truck can pretty
Uh, thank you for that answer,
Mr. President. um, just had
these questions, I'll listen a
little more. I have the Amazon
fulfillment Center in my
district right off 540. You
of let the cars pass, but, uh,
thank you for answering my
questions, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pope. We have
further debate. We have Senator
Charlie followed by Senator
Riel.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
Why didn't we do this by, by toe
weight.
Or by the weight of the
commercial vehicle or truck
trailer.
their maximum load is 50,000
pounds, but you can't tell what
a semi-weight load is, uh, they
could be loaded with forms, foam
forms or foam and the weight of
other things, uh, if we look at
the wind turbines in New Mexico,
those are based off on a number
of axles that they have and so
genuine question. What, what a
way stations do.
Well, Mr. President, weigh
stations weigh vehicles that
aren't cleared through way
through the ports.
they have an automatic checking
system on there says, OK, I'm
carrying 50,000 pounds. That's
what I'm gonna pay the state of
New Mexico as a enter and leave
the state.
And so those check automatically
what the taxes are for that
truck tru truck to go through.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
live in in New Mexico, uh, but,
um.
We do have adequate police,
state police, uh, sometimes you
live where I, I kind of live and
travel through. Sometimes it's,
jurisdiction they have and so as
you do that, uh, we do have
adequate police force. Uh, we
always need more police
officers, but on the interstate,
I believe there's plenty.
talking about.
Not daily, but definitely weekly
enough to know about the issue
that you're trying to address,
which is, which is an issue, um,
ones responding along the
interstate.
Um, and of those conversations
that you had, how many tribal
police departments are
on interstate laws and, and
they, they have the authority
to, to enforce the laws if
they're cross-jurisdictional,
but we don't really quote or get
information from tribal police
on interstates because those
tribal police can pull over
non-tribal citizens along those
interstates for speeding. Is
that correct?
Mr. President, Senator, repeat
that question again. Can tribal
And how many tribes, uh, tribal
police departments have crossed
tribal jurisdiction to enforce
the state law, Mr. President.
consult with tribal police
departments because we don't
have a full adequate picture of
the, the um entities available
or even the courtesy of a
conversation, um, Mr. President,
think any of the unions are even
aware of road restrictions or
would even weigh in on what a
road restriction is or what it
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
thank you. I'm actually
following and tracking a
driverless semi, um, piece of
legislation that I hope comes
over from the house, um, the,
something does need to be done
across our innerstates, and I,
it's a, there's a
disproportionate impact of this
because
On the stretch of road where I
before, and they do not they
simply by the volume on the
road, they do not experience,
um, what this bill is seeking to
Mr. President, thank you very
much. Well, Senator Munozy,
please.
Um, Mr. President, yes.
Uh, whenever we would haul
cotton seed either down to
loving or over to Las Cruces
whenever we would help bales of
pretty good hand also at pulling
a stock trailer, whether it's
filled with cattle or filled
with horses. It doesn't matter
which either one.
And Mr. President and Senator
point out to the members of the
Senate.
Is whenever you are rolling down
the road and Senator Munoz's
bill was wanting them to drop
tendency to think I can beat
that truck. They pull out in
front of a semi truck and then
they dropped their top speed
Need to keep in mind that what
they are doing, they are putting
that truck driver's life at risk
whenever they do pull out in
front of them.
for getting a ticket, I guess my
question is, senator Munoz, they
do stand to lose that driver's
license, isn't that correct?
Mr.
the CDL, I think you're allowed
less points than you are. And so
then they, they have the time to
not speed and, and do that, but
you don't lose your license on
the first ticket with a CDL
driving for a another uh for a
company that could be a
deterrent for the rehiring of
that particular driver and
Do the people here understand
that the semi truck drivers do
have to keep a logbook they have
to record in the times that they
Well,
Mr. President and Senator,
welcome to the 21st century. We
have electronic logbooks and and
those automatically track how
many hours your semis on, you
going over the speed limit, uh,
and the electronically track you
of what time you started the
semi, what time the semi went in
motion if it stopped at a stop
sign, if it didn't stop at a
stop sign.
Now we can tell when the truck's
in motion when the truck's not
in motion and how many actual
hours they are behind the wheel.
And that's exactly right, Mr.
totally. Mr. President and
Senator Munoz uh I do know that
certain trucks do have I I don't
know what they're called. It
measures the wind speed, and if
Mr. President, I, I don't know
about a truck that tells you the
wind speed. I, we have trucks
that tell us the weights of our
loads, uh, on our trailers and
Mr. President, yes, Senator
Munoz, there is. I have a friend
that has, he, uh, runs semis in.
combines, big machinery and they
do have wind or I, I can't
remember what they're called,
but it does gauge the wind
Senator Munoz, I know that the
weight of the semi does make a
big difference whether they can
pull a hill or whether they
cannot pull a hill.
Via rail or via boat, but
whenever those goods are
delivered it's by a semi truck.
We do have.
A problem with some of our roads
because if there are two lane
road and the amount of traffic
Agricultural goods or whether
they're hauling for.
The oil field industry, whether
they're just hauling groceries
hurry and they will get right up
behind him. So therefore it
lines up where there might be up
to 12 semi trucks in a row
whenever we have an issue like
that, Mr. President and Senator
one truck will slow down and
that slows down the rest of the
line behind him with a two-lane
road like that, even though it
is a US highway. It is a mess
sometimes.
With DOT because I see that
there's going to be $560,000 for
a new signage. Is that correct?
Is that only along the stretch
highways, but only 4 lane roads,
not 2 lane roads. So let me
clarify that, but there is, uh,
they just asked in the prior
question. I don't know if you
were dealing with the floods,
they generate their own money.
Through car registrations and
that so they have the ability to
do this.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
Mr. President, Senator, I
haven't driven that way in a
while. I mean, I'll give you my
best guess, but maybe 75, but
then when you hit this other
Texas, so we've got varying
speed limits through the
different states that most of
these truckers are traversing.
lot harder to stop that truck
that is loaded.
Than it is with an empty semi
truck. Is that correct, Mr.
President? And, uh, Senator
Munoz.
and how many pounds of air you
have in the truck and how quick
it'll stop.
And Mr. President, I understand
what you're saying there,
especially whenever you're
talking about the number of
Quite fun to watch and how
exasperated some automobile
drivers get trying to pass those
things. Mr. President, I just
livelihood of these truckers.
But I also want to point out
folks be aware of where you're
pulling out on the road and
Senator Munoz are very
conscientious.
And I will stand up for
truckers, but if this bill
Thank you, Senator. We do have
Senator Scott next.
Mr. President, let's, I'm gonna,
I'm gonna get some information
on this bill and let's roll over
this bill for just a minute, uh,
and no sooner Scott's gonna ask
some additional answers when we
come back for clarification
center Scott, when we do come
back to the bill, you will be
first to to have the floor on
that.
Senator Worth, thank you, Mr.
President, while we're waiting
Senator Sheriff, for which
purpose do you arise?
Doing 3rd reading on Senate bill
far.
Mr. President, Senator Woods
came over and checked with me as
analysts wanted to know if we
were going to potentially do
starting legislation I yield to
Senator Cervantes to present the
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate, the uh uh records show
that all action necessary for
the mandate. Senator Cervantes
you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, after many years, a
great deal of effort and
consideration by this chamber in
the house. The legislature is
acting.
finally on some effort to try
you excuse me, to the office of
the Attorney General, the
Department of Justice to provide
independent oversight of CYFD
and to provide with assistance
would have this, a child office
of the child advocacy and
provides various provisions for
confidentiality of the records,
the responsibilities and duties
some of those to be coming over.
Uh, we have one or one or two
that are up there and I want to
go through those with the body
these amendments.
follow the work of Senator Doig,
about where we've been with
CYFD, what we've done to try and
make some progress in the
inescapable reality that, um, we
are not making progress.
The Kevin S case in turn led to
a settlement of the litigation
with CYF and D by which CYFD
agreed to make certain.
those milestones and in fact
CYFD did not.
There was a um a action taken
for an arbitration under that
settlement agreement that
principally that CYFD was not
reaching the agreed milestones,
was not making the progress and
it failed under many of the
requirements of the caves
settlement.
And so, uh, Mr. President and
questions. Thank you, Senator
Samantaenators, we're debating
Hospital 5 is 33 times a mandate
Um, the, I do have a, a, a
question or concern here, Mr.
President, if, uh, the responses
would yield.
Senator Cervantes do you? Yes,
I.
Does this bill put the oversight
in the Attorney General or the
Department of Justice's hand
now?
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
You know, I'm asking for consent
of the Senate for experts
Senators identify who your
expert was. I probably, I didn't
catch that Senator Cervantes
were told they had to leave
because we're under a call
because they said only senators
can be in the chamber when we're
on call. So if we're going to
stay with that, which isn't in
be allowed on the floor
pertaining to other bills that
we're gonna be presenting, so
it's both staff and expert
witnesses that would be allowed
other than that, no guests
coming in, no house members
coming in.
our staff, we have Rebecca
Propper who's gonna be joining
me and the house, uh, may have
one or two people to think
they're still trying to decide
between the two of them is
present.
think Senator Sheer was in the
middle of asking me a question.
I think I had answered his last
question and so I imagine he
still has the floor.
I know sure, uh, uh, thank you,
Mr. President.
general is is the.
Oversight
Mr. President and Senator, I
find you the, the role of the
Attorney general.
Um
Which you'll find Senator, it
says the office of the Child
Advocate has created an
administratively attached to the
to the section 9-1-7 under
section 3, that's the area of
the law that describes what it
means to be administratively
attached, uh, generally for all
All right, thank you, uh, thank
you, Mr. President. I really was
trying to get to the right place
and so I could follow along
because I knew, I knew what I
was looking for, Mr. President,
Uh, CYFD while statutorily.
Required to defend CYFD.
Um, Mr. President, Senator,
and what they will do is create
what lawyers, God.
Careful when I say lawyers um
what what lawyers will call a
Chinese wall, which means they
They'll create these barriers in
the sharing of information and
the duties and responsibilities,
but, uh, there shouldn't there,
I, I think there'll be less of
an issue here with the conflict
by the Attorney general, um, and
so the appointment is made by
the governor, so there's some,
there's some pretty clear
divisions between
responsibilities and duties of
the different branches.
I
One of the, one of the attorney
general's primary jobs is to
defend the state of New Mexico.
Yes, it also can do other
the, I, I, I agree we have to do
something, but we've got this,
this, uh, situation where the
attorney general.
I then in a position.
It seems
having a hard time wrapping my
mind around, around that. And,
and while uh oversight is
clearly an important part of
this.
so the, the authority of the
attorney General in this statute
does give the attorney general
authority to bring a civil
action for injunctive relief,
but does not compel the attorney
Mr. President, the second part
is there some other agency that
can provide this oversight
outside the Attorney General is
pill for some time considered a
number of different ways to
provide the oversight that we're
really seeking here that there
seems to be no disagreement that
CYF and D at this stage, and
public at large that they're not
doing it. And so there have been
a number of
Suggestions about who could
provide the proper oversight,
the sponsors of the bill and
those who have worked on it
ultimately settled on the
right now that creates its own
conflicts as well too to have
the courts overseeing this and
uh it seems to be clear that
we're looking for some way to
take this out of the existing
This agency has, has had
problems now for a couple of
decades.
And there's been a variety of,
of secretaries that have come
through and
And uh
That CYFD needs something more
than just oversight.
Um
I think there needs to be
disassembled and reassembled.
Gets where we wanna go, so one
of the things that I'm concerned
about because of the Attorney
General's position here.
Is
morale problem today.
And I think that comes from.
It doesn't matter what they do.
If they do, they get in trouble.
If they do B, they get in
trouble. If they do nothing,
that's.
That seems to be the default.
Uh, not that these, not that
these people don't care.
Um, it just.
In many cases, they've just been
there's uh
Um
I'm gonna call it a morale
problem. It may not be the right
word, but
But they're just kind of afraid
to do anything.
that at all.
I'm just concerned that the
Attorney general.
Then
I put in a position.
To
which just generates even less,
um.
Trust in the system from the
from the person that's actually
doing the work on the ground,
and I think that just
exacerbates the problem.
I'm having my, my trouble is I
believe that the Attorney
General's office, just in
general, not in, not any
particular attorney general or
particular, uh, attorney in the
office.
And there's certainly a time for
that, but there's also a time
for, how do we fix it?
And, and I'm, I'm just afraid
that what we have right now is
not a how do we fix it, it's a
And what, what do you expect the
attorney General to do Mr.
President and Senator, your
concerns are, are, um, resonate
strongly with me.
And for the last.
I responded to those concerns
very frankly by trying to have
um an open ear for the concerns
of the secretaries in this
Adverse consequences as you
pointed out.
To read negative stories in the
press to hear negative criticism
by the legislature, and, and you
and I both agree that that does
more time and for some greater
consideration, and I, and I
wanna, I wanna repeat what I
said in committee. I want to
respect the present secretary.
She's been good about
courageously coming to our
demoralizing effect and yet
Senator,
In response to that for the last
several years, I held my tongue.
And I did not advance bills to
I've, I've listened to the
secretaries, they've asked for
more time. They've asked for
less criticism. They've asked
for uh less legislative uh
critique if you will, from all
It, it is hard to believe that
either one of us hold our tongue
very often, but I will accept
that both of us have in this
particular case.
And
Too often is that the, the
person on the ground didn't do
their job. But then of course
that goes all the way up to the
That tells me that there's
something fundamentally broken.
Because
You can change the commander of
Uh, the oversight part of this,
I've absolutely.
Absolutely agree there has to be
something.
The entity of the oversight,
which is, you know, big, they do
a lot of things.
Um, that's why I'd like to find
somebody else that could do
that.
And create additional problems
by creating additional morale
issues because somebody didn't
do something and now they're
facing.
Whatever consequences that the
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I
would.
I would really begin.
Responding to your question by
referring you to the express
Through it looks like all, all
the way we get to the next
section of the bill to be
section 7.
And you'll see all of those
review the departments is CYFD's
services to review complaints to
provide a hotline to provide
online access to resources for
is somewhat of a successive
effort to what I've seen over
the last several years.
which was in the last several
years the proposed legislation
was to create an ombudsman
position. You all probably
government to tell the layer of
government that's not
functioning, that it's not
functioning.
And that seems to be just
building bureaucracy on top of
bureaucracy and report upon
Didn't seem to me like a very
viable and effective solution
and so again for that reason and
the reasons you and I have
talked about, I resisted this,
this notion of creating more
government.
was the Kevins resolution, which
provides for an arbitration
proceeding and so this was just
completed this last year.
And a full arbitration
proceeding meant there was an
appointed arbitrator and the
arbitrator heard sworn testimony
uh settlement and the agency
itself, CYFD.
The arbitrator made a number of
findings as a result of
receiving all that testimony
that's, that's in the
arbitrator's report and
arbitration, uh, and Kevin as
settlement.
The code neutrals issued a
report in February 24.
That of the 364 individuals CYF
19% of those individuals had
caseloads over 200% of the
standard.
The co-neutrals reported that
And there was no record of them
having even completed the new
employee training.
Mr. President, Senator, I can go
through pages of reports from
the code neutrals. These are
individual specialists at a
And they in turn made their
findings and report to the
arbitrator who made these
findings, all of which paint a
very bleak picture at CYFD.
Proportionately, uh, cases are
actually where they're supposed
to be at whatever level they're
supposed to be on. But I think
you made my concern. You made my
concern.
Perfect.
That they're failing to do what
the government wants.
And and that's, I think that's
the root of my, of my concern
here, and I'm not sure that I've
got the right answer for that at
all.
But when you talk about the,
the, the Kevin S and uh the
other things that have happened.
Those are absolute proof, Mr.
President.
That something needs to happen.
Whatever, another child was lost
in the, in the hands of CYFD.
That is
other bill, but not on this one.
But I just can't get my mind
wrapped around the layer of
government.
Overseeing another layer of
Truly rebuilt CYFD maybe in the,
in two different, maybe 3
different organizations, so that
we had, uh,
part to just took care of the
safety of children and uh.
You just told me where to go and
I just moved it.
OK, so, uh, Office of Child
Advocate Powers shall.
of the child of a child in
custody receiving services under
the supervision of the
department, subject to a
referral to the department whose
parent guardian or custodian is
under investigation by the
advocate.
is going to investigate.
On behalf of the child.
So that's where I, I think that
paragraph is what I'm most
confused by, because now the
Attorney General.
is investigating.
Uh, issues under investigation
by the department.
And that's, I think that
paragraph is the one that's just
got me so confused because
they're investigating
themselves.
the section you're referring to
are not going to be the powers
of the Attorney general. These
are the powers of the office of
the child advocate. This is an
individual appointed by the
governor nominated by a
although they're
administratively attached. This
is an independent appointee.
Who by this bill would serve 6
years, that would assure that
the individual serves not
high levels of misconduct and so
the the powers that you're
referring to are not those of
the Attorney general, but to
this child advocate.
So
Mr. President and Senator,
Mr. President, Senator, well,
the appointment is by the
governor, but based on names
submitted to the governor by the
circumstances under which the
person can be removed from
office.
But it, it is, this is an
independent office and an
independent appointee again by
the governor.
So
duties. And so one member of
the, of the selection committee,
uh, one member shall be selected
by the president pro tem. One
member shall be selected by the
Um, and then this one from the
governor, one member who shall
be selected by the governor who
shall have specialized expertise
justice system.
That
That member might be a unicorn,
Mr. President. Hard to find.
Mr. President, this group of
people.
Then hires.
The advocate
Is that, is that right?
Cervantes, Mr. President, no,
includes uh an appointee by the
president of this chamber, but
also an appointee selected by uh
the minority floor leader.
From this chamber and then the
Uh, to the extent that that
those appointees are, are equal
among the two parties, and
again, it shows the legislative
role, continuing legislative
role in the process, then you're
that they also are appointees
not only by the Attorney
general, but two appointees by
the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court.
And that these individuals then
select a chair, so it's a
there's two things in here, yes,
so this particular group.
They don't actually hire.
The advocate, they come up with
Gray. So then the governor is
gonna hire somebody to be the
advocate.
Who will work administratively
appointed by the governor just
as the secretary is.
Except that we get to confirm
the secretary.
So there's gonna be this, this.
I've overlooked one other
factor, which is the, the
appointment is subject to advice
and consent of the Senate, uh,
with the amendments that we're
going to be seeing. So taking
that into full context, there's
that process and um we're
familiar with that here too. And
then once that's done, there
would be no need for the
nominating committee unless
there's a.
va c an c y or the term ends. I
the committee shall convene and,
uh, submit to the governor and
the attorney general the names
of persons who are recommended
for the appointment.
Uh
You might just not finding it,
or is it, did you say it's
coming in an amendment?
contained in the proposed floor
amendment when you write.
OK, Mr. Brown, OK.
So I still not sure, Mr.
President, that I see the
difference. If the governor is
going to appoint the cabinet
How's the child advocate going
to do anything different than
the secretary.
with the resources they have
with the limitations they have
with the oversight and authority
they've been given, they've been
unable to accomplish meaningful
progress. In fact, according to
President, I, I, I can't
disagree with that at all.
So Mr. President and Senator,
Is this an effort to get to
Are, are we in a roundabout way
getting to where I thought we
needed to go all along.
Mr. President, Senator, no, this
doesn't attempt to break up CYFD
Obviously I still have a, an
issue with the Department of
Justice.
Playing both sides of the the
coin in this in, in, I'm not
sure that now having two bosses,
the Department of Justice.
Sort of
So we've added a layer of
government with the child
advocate.
We've added a layer of
And so with both of these I and
again, it's hard for me to argue
against this, Mr. President,
because I know that things are
President, that too often we
look at things and say something
has to change, and so we do
something.
In in fact, in my time here,
we've done a lot of something.
And
President, but for now, since I
see other things happening, I
will take a break, Mr.
President. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator. We do have a floor
amendment.
Senate
floor amendment number one to
House Bill 5 as amended. Amended
Thank you, Mr. President. I do
move Senate floor amendment
number of things, uh, again I
had credited earlier the work of
Senator Doig, um, and Senator
Trujillo and others working hard
as the bill came before the
house, so the proposed amendment
does a number of things. First
of all, it provides some
consistency in the language.
I don't wanna get too far off in
the weeds on this, but we have
We have the Attorney general
their agency and actually based
on our research, he's right. Uh,
the office itself is, you know,
our statutes referred to as the
statute, but the individual who
holds the position is the
attorney general.
And so it's easy for us to get
those two things conflated and
mixed up from time to time. So
one of the things the amendment
discussing previously, it
provides for the names to be
submitted to the governor.
Then it includes the language
you were asking for Senator,
about the advice and consent of
the Senate. So you'll find that
potential individuals uh coming
over in terms of their
qualifications. So as the bill
came over from the house, the
child advocate appointee
appointee could be or could have
number of qualifications, so we
tightened the qualifications.
The amendment also does what I
described for you earlier, which
is it, it limits the service of
the child advocate to 2 6-year
the 90 days for a report on
progress when there's a
complaint received by the child
advocate.
And then the amendment also
specifically authorized the
child of advocate to refer
inspection of Public Records Act
to assure that documents, um,
from the child of uh Office of
Child Advocate remained
confidential to the extent they
relate to.
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senators just for clarification,
you do have two amendments that
are at your desk. There's a blue
sheet and the white sheet. We're
going off of the white sheet.
Mr. President, if we can hold
just, I mean, he went through
the first page of this
amendment, but.
And I was tracking all that, but
amendment to give you time to do
that, Senator Pinto. Thank you,
Mr. President, and if the
senator would yields.
With these amendments being
proposed, Senator, uh, Mr.
President.
The governor would still
appoint.
This person
This child advocate.
missed the president. Senator
Pinto.
I'm just giving a moment for
members to review.
Center share
So right now it says the number
of children placed.
All the things we're supposed to
be looking at.
And now we're gonna put in there
In a juvenile justice facility.
I don't think I understand the
differences. The number of
children removed from a
household subsequent to being
that were put back in a home.
Is that
I know I'm struggling trying to
understand this bill.
So on this, this would be on
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, Senator, I'm with
you. I, I see where you're at.
So in there among all of the,
the things that are supposed to
happen each year, the office
shall submit to the legislative
Finance Committee, the
department, the Supreme Court,
the governor, honored before
September 1 to report addressing
being returned to a household
from which they were removed. So
just in my mind, so we.
If we keep it simple, so we took
Subsequent to being returned to
the household.
That's some big
aggregate number which.
would mean
40 kids were taken away and 20
were, were sent back home.
experts don't have it on their
fingertips either to describe
the circumstance here. This is
what this is intended to do is
to report circumstances where
children are removed from the
to the home.
Which is always one of the
fundamental goals and then
having to be taken from the from
the household the second time,
so that's why you, you see the
That, that Mr. President, is
distinct from the preceding
paragraph. I think that's maybe
why you were, uh, having the
question you did is why is that
any different from the preceding
Mr. President, I, I think you've
cleared that up for me now
because I was, I really did not
understand that.
As I go through this, I think
most of this makes sense, Mr.
We do have further debate.
On the amendment, Senator Scott.
On the amendment
amended 3 times, uh, be accepted
by the Senate, approved on a
voice vote.
Centers has been requested to
adopt Senate Floor Amendment
number 1 to House Bill 5 is 3
We do have another floor
amendment.
As 4 times amended.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Cervantes.
all clear about this, this, uh,
proposes to add language on page
6, line 2, it's on a blue sheet
in front of us and you all
should see the reference page 6,
line 2.
date by which it is to uh gather
nominations or applications for
the position of child advocate
has a deadline by which they
will then meet and nominate.
What's not clear is the
circumstance that which might
occur if a governor fails to
meet that deadline. In other
words, if the governor fails to
make an appointment from the 30
the most part in the incoming
and future governors.
And although the bill says the
governor is required by law if
this is adopted to make an
I'll give you an example right
now when we have judges.
Judges are appointed at the
district court level when a
nominating commission meets and
And, and the appointment is made
by the Supreme Court.
In, in this case if the governor
failed to make an appointment,
there's nothing in the law
without this amendment that
would then by a majority vote,
appoint the child advocate.
Thank you Senator Cervantes.
Senators are debating Senate
floor. Amendment #2.
Thank you, Mr. President. So Mr.
President, I would oppose this
amendment. We don't anywhere
else in our law, say that if the
The governor is an elected
official who is
Who answers to, to everyone in
New Mexico, this would have
who serves in this incredibly
important role. And so I think
this is a bad idea. I would urge
members to vote against this
amendment. Thank you, Senator
Haig. Do we have other debate on
the amendment?
Yes, so you.
So Mr. President, this, this
just looks so different from all
the other amendments.
I'm having a little cognitive
And so I know that many of these
amendments that we just adopted
were offered last night.
And at first
They were friendly and then they
I'm just so curious as to how it
is that we had a chance to amend
a bill and we didn't do it. So
now we have to do it on the
floor, just having that
asked yesterday to present this
bill on the floor and in doing
so, began to read and study
through last night after we had
all the fun on unfair trade
practices act in the lawyer
eventualities, and one
eventuality here is that we
would have a nominating
committee.
make nominations to the governor
and the the bills and the
the offense could effectively be
vacant and the entire purpose of
the bill could be thwarted.
By the governor simply failing
to make the appointment. So in
reading the bill last night, I
worked this morning in trying to
craft language that would, that
would provide for some
consequence and of course that's
what we, we try to do in the
law. We try to make sure that
there's a clear consequence. You
memorial, so this, this has a
consequence, and we're looking
for, um, um, a make sure my, my
understanding.
a lot on this is clear, but I,
a governor fails or refuses to
make an appointment.
Uh, from the nominees that are
submitted to her from a
nominating commission. I believe
that there is a way of filling
the vacancy around the governor.
we'll confirm that, so I'm
leading you right, but Senator
Stewart, you're right, um.
We try to send bills out of the
judiciary with the work done
There, there's a shortcoming in
the bill without this amendment.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't think my questions were
answered. I understand the
amendment. I can read.
Uh, it's really unlike the
judiciary to do this to the
Senate, bring down pages of
amendments that they could have
put on in the committee itself
judiciary Committee I'm used to
and I'm a little embarrassed
about what we're doing today.
Thank you, Mr.
President further debate on the
if a governor felt like they
weren't that the governor was
just not going to appoint
somebody from the list and just
sat on it. This office would be
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment, Senator Cervantes to
close.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, again, without this
amendment, the, the bill could
the legislature or someone to
sue the governor to compel her
to fulfill that legislative
responsibility, um, or the
statutory responsibility and so
to avoid litigation, to avoid
Thank you, Senator Senators,
we're voting on Senate floor
amendment number 2. There's been
a request for a show of hands,
so I'll need all senators to
your seats.
Senator Stephanics, but you
know.
Senator Hill, you know.
Center is loading now.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Center Maestas voting now.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Townsend voting now.
Senator, are you voting now?
In their compost, but you know.
Senator Shindo voting no and
Senator Lopez voting now.
Senator Nava voting no.
Senator Hate me.
No.
Senator Gonzalez.
To pass the Senate.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number 3
to House Bill.
Thank you Mr. President. I move
the amendment.
So no objection Center Celia
Lopez, if you can please explain
your amendment.
called, um, I, I didn't know we
were gonna be, um, working on it
today, um, but I, I, I, I hope
these are friendly amendments,
Was Health and Public Affairs
Committee back, um, so and uh
the chair liked the amendment
and this is basically to insert
on page 10 line.
interim gets much information
about CYFD gets reports about
the Kevin S case, um, has
The purpose of the purpose of
the provisions right before
this.
On page, um,
On page
uh.
To allow allow a systemic look.
At the, at the
And what's going on in the
a child and so the line unless
the information is already known
to the public. I worry about
this because this is just piling
it on. If somehow the media
pile it on and then continue to
provide information about the
case, um, when on page 15.
patterns and conduct conduct
repeated efforts, I do not know
why they would ever uh reveal.
policy decision but I think it's
a policy decision in favor of
protecting the child, um, so I
ask the senator if they are
friendly.
Lopez. I'll yell to the sponsor,
Senator Cervantes.
have others who may have
questions. Any further questions
on the amendment. Senator Lopez
on the amendment.
amendment and I think it's very
important that the issues that
she does bring to our attention
and Mr. Chair, just to get and
support the legislative Health
and Human Services Interim
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment, Senator C Lopez to
Wait, what is this? 3 Senate
Senate Amendment number 3.
To House Bill 5.
Has 4 times amended.
Request to adopt Senate floor
and #3.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
That was a post.
Hello
President. Thank you, thank you,
uh, senator.
Senators, we are back on the
bill. Senator Cervantes, we're
back on the bill, so you'll need
to rise.
Senator, we have Senator Scott
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, I'm going to
start by saying that in no
With this piece of legislation
ever makes it out of the mail
room.
Let alone to the executive
suite.
What is the prime directive.
Of the current organization
CYFD.
CYFD in front of me, but that's
where I would go to look up and
be able to read you a very clear
answer if you'd give me the time
and we want to look that up, I
can have that done, but we have
that statute and I could look it
up and tell you what that
directive of CYFD ought to be
the welfare of New Mexico's
children.
And Senator that CYFD is
that's maybe that's what you're
asking for because you're asking
me whether it's substantially
true so. So you're asking for an
opinion, and I guess I would
defer to that word you're saying
dysfunctional. I, I've heard the
branches of my businesses if I
was to describe it a certain
way, I'd have a hard time then
having.
somebody else say I'm inaccurate
about my own business, so I,
again, you're asking for my
let me ask the question in
another way. Would you agree?
That you believe that CYFD is
broken. Would you agree that
gonna, you're gonna fault me for
being a lawyer, uh, you're using
the word broken. I would just
say it this way. I would say
that.
Years ago, uh, there were
certain things to meet certain
standards.
They by their own admission have
failed to meet those standards
and conditions of that
settlement agreement.
The parties to that settlement
code neutrals national experts
brought in to evaluate CAFD. All
of them have reached the same
conclusion to the extent that
they're saying CYFD has not
broken.
Senator Scott.
I thought we were never going to
get there, Mr. President.
Additional agency this
additional organization that we
are now proposing to stand up.
Is now the it has a prime
directive.
Mr. President and senator of
what?
contemplated. I think that
really if you walk it back a
little bit, you'll recognize
that the very nature and the
appointment of the process.
Takes
Some role of the legislature in
the appointment of the child
admittedly we do have already
with the Secretary of CYFD.
Um, and then there are the
powers that are enumerated here
and very specific requirements
things in here that are very uh
specific that we would be
directing the child advocate to
do and granted,
The CYFD has certain obligations
and requirements that were
do so. Senator.
Mr. President, let me, uh, I'm
gonna ask the question again.
This child advocate, this
a child in New Mexico. Is that
an accurate statement?
Cervantes, I would agree with
that, yes.
So
So Mr. President.
Nominating a child advocate that
also reports to the governor.
Now you've got CYFD looking over
their shoulder at the child
advocate as well as the
responsible for what is a
confused mess.
Mr. President and Senator,
I'm going to postulate that a
better solution to the problem.
fix CYFD is that asking too
much?
Senor Cervantes Mr. President
and Senator, I think that's a
On the creation of something
similar an ombudsman because
I've shared your same concerns
and I've, I've got to tell you
when I read the arbitrator's
report.
When I read the code neutral's
report.
horrific
Crimes against children only to
learn that they've many times
been touched by CYFD
unsuccessfully or there's been
no follow up.
concerns and those of your
colleague. I, I didn't see a
point to government on top of
government, but
I can't sleep well at night.
Knowing that children
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Senator Scott.
Mr. President and Senator, I'll
submit that maybe you should
have resisted one more year and,
and helped.
The
To solve.
CYFD's problems. We've got 50
states in this country.
the best brightest people that
there are in the country that
engage in these activities.
Hiram train them.
pay them
is standing up another
organization that will now share
the blame when things don't
work.
Thank you, Mr. President.
And center style, we do have
President. I do have a couple of
questions, uh, for the sponsor
if you'd yield. Senator
Cervantes do yield. Yes, yeah.
Uh, Mr. President, I just want
to make sure I understood
word handicap, but did, did you
say that?
I probably said words to that
effect, Senator, that's correct
because again, if you had a
That was the purpose of my
earlier amendment which failed.
So what would happen now is
someone would have to sue the
governor and I'm sure some
Senator Doig had asked, um,
rightfully so about whether we
she had suggested we don't do
this in law, we actually did. We
do.
Uh, she was inaccurate in that.
I found the language in the
is made by the Supreme Court.
And this is um, sorry.
Article 6, section 35, so we, we
do do this, but Mr. President,
to avoid this law.
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President. So I just want to
underscore what I'm, I know I
heard you say, Mr. President. I
know I heard you confirm just
have now.
Would that be an accurate
description of what you said
when we were on that amendment
and if it failed and it did
fail.
to the child office advocate,
advocate of child office the law
would require the governor to
make that appointment within 30
days of receiving the nominees.
And, and I would like to believe
there should be such a
consequence, but in the absence
of consequence, there is always
a remedy, and there are lawsuits
that can be brought against an
executive who's not following
Uh, thank you, Mr. Perez. I just
wanna make sure I'd heard that
correctly and that's, I was not
necessarily going to stand up
and debate the bill, but I felt
like I had to at this point
percentage, but on this one
matter we do. I'm also a
business owner, Mr. President. I
am having a really hard time
trying to figure out how this
really bifurcated approach and,
I, I believe that this is now
going to create even more
division, more confusion. I, I
feel bad even I feel even worse
for the employees that work
there now because they're gonna
many times about many of the
various business interests that
you have, please, please help
the body understand how the
management of this, this very
critical function is now gonna.
Mr. President, the CYFD Office
of Child Advocacy, the employees
that work there, the children,
how is all of this going to
function now because
No, Mr. President, so, uh, uh,
let me try and, and understand
and be clear about your answers.
So the Office of Child Advocate
would be created by this bill.
It would be not, uh, run by or
appointed, uh, advocate, the
appointee by the governor and
then in addition to that
appointee would hire staff, have
employees, have its own budget.
hope I'm, I hope I'm asking your
you're answering your questions.
I, I appreciate the debate, and
again, I'm repeating.
You said it, Senator. I, I, this
job. I fire the employee or I
replace him or I retrain him.
Um, and that would be, I think,
the more logical construct.
That's what I've been hoping
would happen for the last 7
years it hasn't happened.
different folks that are gonna
need to be answered to and I
just, I'm very worried about
that. So I'll I'll, I'll leave
that alone now for Mr.
President, Mr. President, but so
this Office of Child Advocate,
piece of legislation that had
Pretty significant reforms for
CYFD. We had a cabinets, uh,
several cabinet secretaries
fully involved in the
development of those multiple
adding this whole other layer is
what this looks like to me, but
with that, Mr. President, um,
how is this office gonna help
with enhancing, you know, things
like foster care, foster care
prevention, management, and
additional resources, additional
people involved trying to.
Accomplish the ultimate goal,
which you pointed out, we all
accomplish here that, that there
could be benefit from that, um,
receiving complaints. It would
provide a mechanism for
referrals of those complaints.
It would determine which of the
department's policies and
procedures are in fact working.
investigating and attempting to
resolve complaints made by a
child on behalf of a child. All
of these are in the enumerated
powers and these presumably
would be things that CMYFD is
we, we in the interim committee
process and even in this session
we hear from people who
repeatedly even the judiciary
talked about the complaints they
make and the fact that their
complaints do not receive a
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
just, I once again heard all of
these that you just mentioned,
Mr. President. I.
feel like the duplication, so,
so we don't eliminate in this
this group or this new office is
going to usurp their
responsibilities in a lot of
ways, or it's maybe going to
minimize their authority. Can
you talk a little bit more about
that?
Um, perhaps as a resource,
presumably they would work in
tandem and work cooperatively
and provide ideally that that
additional assistance and
complaints to be received and to
see those complaints have some
action taken right now that,
that is not happening.
I appreciate that, Mr.
President. Once again, I'll just
say that I'm, I'm very concerned
be good in some cases if there's
a clear line of leadership
delineation. I just think that
this really confuses that, but
I'll go on to another topic, uh,
in order to continue receiving
first Prevention Services Act.
How is the office of, of, um,
Child advocate gonna help the
department in this particular
area because there are very
specific requirements there.
which would again provide that,
that place, the portal, the
hotlines, the all of the
specified procedures and
expectations of this child
advocacy and presumably by
CYFD and to make those uh make
those things happen.
So then, Mr. President, thank
you for that response. So when
there is an issue or a
system-wide issue, if you will,
work? Is it gonna be lawsuits?
Is it gonna be, uh, how, how,
how are, how is change going to
happen as a result of this
office?
Mr. President, Senator, well, 11
Senator, again, I, I don't want
to keep repeating what the
powers of the child advocate
would be, but among those
enumerated powers here would be
to review the department's
Um, to operate, as I said, I'm
just reading right out of the
powers again a toll-free hotline
electronic communication to
establish a portal to
Senate, um, it's, I've not made
it a secret that, you know,
I've, I've, uh, kind of grew up
in the system, uh, I did in a
couple of different counties and
the Allfaiths home in
Albuquerque and so I sort of
became the repository for calls
to do a great job for the
children that it serves, Mr.
President. uh, but when a call
does come in, when something
does are we now?
Expecting folks to call this
office to file a complaint and
responsibility areas that that
CYFD has.
Mr President, my expectation is
they would uh reach and start
with the Office of Child
Advocacy.
uh, receipt and commun uh way of
receiving communications and
then by this law would be
charged to respond to that.
Ideally, CYFD would be doing
that today.
And be receiving these
And so, Mr. President, thank
you. Mr. President, uh, how do
we maintain the privacy of the
folks that do make those calls
because I found that I have
found that 49%, 50% of the calls
we make sure that that is
handled in the right way. I
don't know that I saw that in
the legislation.
Um, Mr. President, Senator, it
is in the legislation. You'll
confidentiality of all case
records, third party records,
court records, as well as the
information gathered in the
course of investigations and
system monitoring duties, and it
goes on to say the records are
confidentiality, for example, to
prevent imminent harm to a child
or is ordered by a court.
Well, thank you, Mr. President.
I, I was gonna just continue to
know, but Mr. President, I, I am
very, very concerned about how
this department is going to
respond to something like this.
These are real people who do
very difficult work and I'm
if the sponsor, is this your,
what's a house bill, but did you
have other specific legislation
this time on reform of CYFD or
turning CYFD performance around?
and happily doing so for the
speaker. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, but I just want to
make sure you didn't have any
other CYFD reform legislation
under your own name.
Mr. President said no.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, so question number one,
Mr. President, Senator, and I
think I might have heard an
answer from a colleague.
money in the budget to create
this office, Mr. President,
Senator?
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
my expert advised me that
there's not been an additional
appropriation for this because
at Senator Munoz and he's giving
me a different answer, so he may
have a different answer than my
expert, Mr. President, if
Senator Steinborn, if you
wouldn't mind me, um, yielding
There's no I see no objections,
jackets may be removed.
Munoz Munoz and to the good
senator asking the question.
There's about $3000 for this
Steinborn.
So, Mr. President, colleagues,
The budget's not done, but if we
do this, that's inadequate.
Um, Mr. Mr. President, um,
We've had this conversation
multiple years, Mr. President.
But
It's an office can get a lot of
calls and they're gonna need a
lot of people. Manning those
calls actively liaising with the
department.
To my colleague behind me,
Senator, that we need to stick
through with the chairman, you
know, so if this bill passes
today,
just heard. Well, Mr. President,
I'm, I'm not sure what the
senators asking me. He's on the
uh finance committee, so I, I'll
trust you to do what's needed to
make this work and not just be
for show. Hope you're not asking
Well, Mr. President, I know what
I'm saying is, which is a common
question here, we usually don't
advance legislation that's gonna
have a big fiscal impact if it's
not right now, and so we'll just
leave that be. I mean, obviously
if we're gonna do it, I am
advocating that we fund it, so.
To the chair and all of us on
President, Senator, um, I guess
you have looked over this bill
and of course, you had an
amendment that didn't happen,
but it sounds like you're very
comfortable with the bill and
you've kind of scrutinized it
looking at the FIR and what it
indicates for fiscal year 25 is
there's no fiscal impact of this
bill. That's I, again, uh, I'm
having to rely on what I have
has had a lot of work, uh, by a
lot of people, including a lot
of people in this chamber and in
the other chamber.
Um, I will be frank with you,
um, I was not involved with the
House sponsors to do so, and I,
I think this is important, as
I've told you before.
For many years now, 7 years,
going on 7 years, I've had all
of the same concerns that
colleagues have expressed here
But I've got the reports right
in front of me. These are
national experts co-neutrals who
were appointed by agreement.
They're called co-neutral for a
reason. They're supposed to be
Mr. President, um, I hear you. I
hear you on that. My question is
about the bill itself, I know,
um,
nominating commission.
You know where I'm going, Mr.
President. Senator, what's up
with that?
Senator Cervantes Mr. President,
Senator, I do know where you're
it entirely to the governor. We
have a screening committee that
meets, uh, that reviews resumes
that looks at ethics complaints,
that looks at financial records
that looks at the history of
with the PRC. We have very clear
criteria that the nominating
committee looks through as well
too, so in this particular case,
um, we have very little that's
apparently our boards of Regents
of our universities will be the
last batch in the state
government to adopt the concept
that we should be interviewing
people to pick the best and
committee and so I'd say let's,
uh, let's, let's, let's cross
the great last divide here for
nominating commissions to state
government, but Mr. President,
Senator, but
I want to just say in
And that can help a kid who's in
crisis.
From falling through the cracks.
And that's what this is. This is
another opportunity to help be
President, Senator.
So I don't think we should look
at this as a silver bullet.
Just another tool.
For that kid. So if we do this,
I hope we fund it well.
And I, and I hope uh.
I hope it's helpful and I hope
it's viewed as additive.
it's about the kid. It's not
about turf. They come as
President Senator.
Nathan Steinburn, we do have
several who would like to
debate, but before we do that,
we do have a floor amendment.
The reader will read
the amendment.
Um, Mr. President, I move that
already.
There's been a motion to adopt.
Senator for remember number one
to Hospital 5 as 5 times a
mandatesenator charity, please
explain what your amendment
does. Thank you, Mr. President.
receive the report. I have added
nation, tribes and Pueblos as
they as extensive, um,
on page 11 line 18. I have added
tribal affiliation as um
Another, um,
Thank you, senators. Any further
debate on Senate floor amendment
number 4, Senator Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President, uh, they
ought to look at this because
this may conflict with the
On the amendment
Senator Lopez, Mr. President, I
don't think it conflicts because
Gallegos on the amendment.
Mr. President, would, uh, Ser
Charlie Yield for one question
Senator Charney, Mr. President,
I am adding to the list of, um,
groups who will receive the
report on September 1st to
I apologize if I made a mistake.
Did you also have ICA?
Senator Charlie.
No, Mr. President,
I must have heard wrong. Oh
just rise in support of Senator
Charlie's amendment, um, we had
a similar discussion in Spack
just, you know, time goes by so
quickly. I think last week on
tribal communities and making
sure that information is shared
with them, so I rise and
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Any
further debate on the amendment?
See no further debate on the
amendment. Senator Charlie to
amended, how would you like that
vote, Senator Charlie? And I
call for a vote.s been requested
to adopt Senate form at #4. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
We are back on the bill
senators. I'll yell to Senator
Trujillo, followed by Senator
Lopez. We are on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
will the senator yield?
we've had conversations and we
discussed in Senate Judiciary
that this uh new child advocate
actually does duplicate some
Thank you Mr. President and
Senator, so I just want to point
out to this body that um there
will be two entities that COYFD
Now the child advocate will
provide something that the
substitute care advisory council
doesn't, which is they'll help
resolve um complaints, but the
vetoed and then he carried again
in 2016, and the entire body on
both sides of the aisle and um
both chambers.
and licensing department, which
might not be the best place for
it to be, but that's where it
was put.
So in the course of that
happening.
council was getting $644,000 for
operations.
In 2021, it was dropped down to
430. Now, this is for oversight
In 2022, it went up $1000 to
431,000.
And then in 2023 for the FY 2023
budget.
And to make recommendations for
corrective actions.
Was reduced down to $31.1,000.
employee.
$200,000 was put in the AOC
administrative office of the
courts that same year to oversee
the $200,000 that goes to AOC
which left regulation and
licensing department to have
And this year when the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee budget came over to
the Senate Finance Committee.
Unfortunately, they provided the
AOC with $550,000.
To oversee that.
It's housed at the regulation
and licensing department.
And $33.1,000 does not even pay
department overhead.
Because we felt, and this is
when I was there and the
superintendent currently now
there.
Believed in the mission that
did not.
And so when the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee budget came over.
Yeah
There are 650,000.
Not completely, but a
duplication of services of what
substitute care advisory counsel
is supposed to do.
I also want to point out to the
And neglect prevention and
treatment programs.
That's a plan that we have
approved by the federal
government under the CAPTA
program.
thing that they adhere to under
that plan, we get federal
reimbursement. The state gets
federal reimbursement for but
Wouldn't you agree with me that
it's important that the
legislature not just set up
programs.
To do things like oversight.
But that they fund them too.
Thank you, Mr. President and
thank you, senator and I am too
because I wanna say um
wholeheartedly that I appreciate
Chairman Senator Munoz.
And I just hope that this body
supports that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Lopez.
First of all, Mr. President.
I'm saddened that the bill
didn't come to the Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee.
Um
concerns that exist and I
appreciate Senator Trujillo's
mentioning.
Uh, the advisory.
The substitute care advisory
council.
Reviewing along with the
secretary and other persons who
are part of the task force,
appointed by both sides of the
aisle, other interested parties
President, with regards to their
foster care system.
And there are models out there,
Mr. President, that.
Artwork, there are some changes
I think what we're looking at
today.
Without spending much more time
and talking because I have
plenty of stuff to read, Mr.
President.
But my simple statement will be.
for.
is
not appropriate.
And I actually went over to
Senator Scott and told him, oh
my gosh, we're kind of like on
Force is that we have to invest
in our employees with training.
There's a whole list of what we
have to do, Mr. President,
because no matter what we do
with an oversight entity.
support, um, counseling with
PTSD for what they see when they
go out. I mean, Mr. President,
there's a full list of what
needs to happen.
There are states across this
country actually who have gone
come under a state department
overseen by the governor.
And they actually have adopted
what we have in New Mexico.
But what they're doing is
actually Mr. President,
investing in their employees
Can actually improve and work
with our employees, Mr.
President, and the Children,
Youth and Families department.
President, that is actually
supposed to oversee a
coordination between all the
different departments associated
with our children.
If we were to work with, and of
course, Miss Padilla, who's now
a secretary of Public Education.
It did not work. It did not do
its job.
Mr. President, we are still
catching up with some of the
Mr. President, I, I know that
we're trying to find a way.
But I think Mr. President, we
also need to look internally and
strengthen and value our
employees, those who are on the
days ago, what is the mission,
right? And it is, it's the
welfare of the child.
Mr. President, in order for us
to do this job right, continuing
have Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President. We'll
sponsor yield. Senator Cervantes
do you.
Uh, this bill, uh, has been
percolating for several years
now, there's tremendous
advocates out there in the
community and and just
tremendous love for the children
President, but this one, this
one, is administratively
attached. I learned a lot about
administrativeity attached
agencies this past year, Mr.
President, and learning about
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
President, and so, um.
Just a couple, couple things to
caution. I don't.
Know if there's another agency
These independent agencies DFA
has about 7 or 8,
I think, uh, the administrative
office of the courts, you know,
has several, including the
public defender department.
administratively attached to it
and I don't know if the attorney
general currently has an agency
administratively attached to it
and it is kind of a weird
relationship and if it's not.
Uh
Apparently right now we have
$3000 appropriated for this
purpose that's.
I don't know if that gets us to
2 meetings in the summertime if
know if 3000 even even gives
them two full full days to meet.
Also, uh, the whole point of an
independent agency, uh, uh, Mr.
President, is it's independence.
secretary or whoever this one
explicit the that this plan
explicitly contradicts that. The
plan is that the staff.
Of the Attorney general's office
with regards to that.
And, and Mr. uh President I I
enjoy the the debate because
we're really talking about, uh,
get the structure right, you
structure correct the secretary
is hired by the governor.
Governor's appointed, uh,
accountable, uh, I'm sorry,
secretary is then accountable to
the governor. Governor is
elected by the voters and
We're talking about uh what's
been described as a
dysfunctional agency, a
dysfunctional department rather.
Um, and I just wanna let folks
workers, um, you know, the, the
HR folks, they're doing as best
as they can every single day
under tremendous difficulties we
have to acknowledge the
dysfunction of our
dysfunctional families that
these children find themselves
in, uh, that leads to the CYFD
referrals and they CYFD
investigations and these
as as as as a thea or aela or
whoever and that's not happening
right now.
That's not happening right now
where children being taken into
custody.
can get it going, uh, we just
have to work together, I think,
uh, what set us back, Mr.
President, was, uh, you know,
every other year we have to have
a, we can't introduce any
concretely about the policy.
I know there's a policy that
prioritizes uh family
reunification.
Well, when you're in a divorce
proceeding or a child custody
Uh, would, would tip the scales,
uh, toward that child. Also, we
need a we need a a Marshall Plan
the chairman's leadership, uh,
and crafting this bill, uh, on
the Senate side. It's a tough
ask to do something like this
because whoever is the child
AG that staffs the office, uh,
you know, pretty soon they're
gonna, when they first, when
they get a fistful of money,
they first appropriation,
they're gonna hire a PIO.
They're gonna hire a press
Persons or or or entities within
the entire state government and
we had asked ourselves, do we
as, uh, as to whether we want to
do that or not.
Um
In light of the overwhelming
circumstances facing us today,
so I'm, I'm struggling with this
bill. I know it's intent is
out to the members, so just give
us a moment please.
We have a floor amendment.
The reader to read.
Doig.
Center dude to move the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that Senate floor amendment
6 times amended, senator do if
you'll please explain what your
amendment does.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
so.
people on the nominating
commission, it would reduce that
to 7. It would take away the an
appointment of someone to the
nominee commission by the
Attorney General and it would
Ah, there was language in the
bill specific to the governor's
appointment that originally said
that the person had to have
specialized expertise in ICA and
an and this, this amendment
would just take all those
qualification take those out,
period. And so she would just
have
an unqualified appointment.
I think the probably the most
controversial thing that this
amendment would do would be to,
any other ombuds in this state,
um, I think that if we find
after this goes into effect,
that subpoena power is
necessary. We could always come
Um, this takes out language.
That is on page 9 that would
have the, the advocate making
advocate. So it would take that
language out. They would still
be able to investigate whatever
they needed to investigate.
This would also take out some
something that exists otherwise
in our law, I don't know what
that means. I, I don't think.
I don't think those working
under this would know what that
means, so it's, it's taking that
Develops and implements
procedures to deal with
conflicts of interest. Uh, the
Attorney General is who would
Who might be uh creating, doing
the investigations for those
cases and in a way that would be
adversarial to them, so they're,
I think there's no question
there is a conflict of interest
And that is all, Mister, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator.
And
