Yes.
Senator Armio.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
Yeah. Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope
Senator Sheer.
Here sorry Santo Shando.
Senator Souls.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Thornton, Senator
Tobiasson.
Senator Townsend.
Santa Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Schreiner Interfaith Leadership
Alliance here in Santa Fe, New
Mexico.
Please remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance to be led
today by Senator Tobiasson.
Pledge of allegiance in Spanish
It's Black History Month and
the.
Holiday of Doctor King is not
that far in the past.
God of all people, Creator and
shiver in the cold.
And too many these days to die
an early death.
The words of Doctor Martin
Luther King Jr. penned in the
same year of his death.
Even more poignantly, his
subtitle rang out, Will it be
chaos or community?
He went on to say.
We have inherited a world house.
In which we have to live
together.
We must learn somehow to live
together with each other in
peace.
God of everything, of everyone,
of every race, religion.
County, city, and neighborhood.
Of our beloved state.
We turn to you and pray.
Break into to the recesses of
our hearts this morning.
Dissolve the barriers that have
the power to divide us.
A self-serving way of life
instead of a noble service.
Too often at the cost of their
dignity.
And our integrity.
Turn us around and turn our
hearts to one another.
We are a people living in an
inescapable network.
A single garment of destiny.
What affects one directly
affects all indirectly.
And thereby serving the many who
look to us with hope this day.
If we cannot or will not embrace
the world house because our arms
Step by step.
Decision after decision.
In the spirit of our shared
vision and mission.
To grow as we grow.
Trusting that you are hearing
us.
As we hear one another.
We pray all of this in your holy
names.
He may be seated.
Once again we'd like to welcome
you to the Mexico Senate to
start things off, I yield to
Senate majority floor leader
Peter wants to take us to that
first order of business.
Mr. President, and thank you,
Father Shiner, for being here
for your words, uh, I thought
about something Senator Block
said this morning in the rules
this morning in the rules
committee and I thought of that
when you shared Doctor King's
King's words and just thank you
for, for being here and it's
always good to pause and
committee is just down, so
they're, they've been up there,
so you had the Senator Padil and
then Senator Sheer to excuse on
each side, and then I'll do the
announcements. Senator Michael
Padilla, uh, good morning, Mr.
President, and thank you Father
the Senate gallery and on the
Senate floor, Senator Padilla,
thank you, Mr. President. uh,
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Charlie until she
returns to the chamber.
Hearing no objection.
And
Hearing no objection.
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
just some announcements today is
condolence for Senator Tom
Rutherford, that Senator Campos
is gonna present, uh, and I'll
yield back to him at the right
time after we get our guests
workshops, uh, tomorrow in room
307 from 7 to 8, uh, the topic
is state pensions and investment
issues, investment performance,
actuarial conditions,
current members are welcome, uh,
well, we're all current members,
but senior members are welcome
to attend as well.
Uh, tonight at 5 o'clock, the
National Hispanic Culture Center
Hotel from 5:30 to 8 by
invitation. Uh, the New Mexico
Restaurant Association, the New
Mexico Retail Association, NFIB,
legislative receptions tonight,
Santa Fe Room, uh, at La Fonda
Hotel by invitation only. New
Mexico Restaurant Association in
the home hospice care folks, the
New Mexico IDEA. Tomorrow, the
asphalt.
ment Association is having a
breakfast for legislators at
Cultural Day luncheon, uh, which
will be at the inn and Spa
Loretto at 12:30 by invitation
only, uh, with that, Mr.
President, I yield to other
members to introduce guests, and
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
like to uh introduce my guest
this morning. I have Uriah King.
Rudy Zamora, and so if you could
please welcome Uriah King to the
Senate floor.
today, a little gift bag from
the Balloon museum. It's
appropriate that we are honoring
Senator Rutherford today, the
co-founder of the Bloom Fiesta,
uh, but the Albuquerque Balloon
ballooning capital of the world,
uh, and members, I hope you
enjoy your, uh, gifts from the
Bloom.
Museum. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Steinborn.
to stand up. My, uh, my cousin
Sharon Donner and her friend
Mark Klein.
I will just tell you Sharon is
one of the funniest people you
and uh Sharon's family is kind
of their claim to fame in our
family that my mother just, we
all love to talk about as her
father helped create sunscreen,
believe it or not, so when you
Senate. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you Mr. President. Allow
me to introduce my guest today,
today.
Center share.
Mr. President, I just, uh,
unanimous consent to have the
Mr. President
Um
Has a majority leader announced
the proclamation on the floor
and introduce my guests who are
right up front and when I call
your name, please stand. Um, so
the proclamation from the
executive office in Santa Fe,
as well as the credentials and
skills necessary to succeed in
postsecondary education and
whereas 29% of New Mexico's
adults have low literacy or
educational attainment levels
attained a high school diploma
or equivalency credentials and
where is the need for a highly
literate citizenry increases as
New Mexico.
moves toward a skill-based 21st
So I'll, I'll skip a little bit,
but then just say uh where is
the New Mexico Higher Education
department the New Mexico Adult
state and so with that I would
like to introduce my guest
Deborah Glaus de Lima.
Victoria Garcia Montoya from the
CCRI Luna Community College.
Paloma Trujillo, uh, from the
Shelly Park from the Albuquerque
Albuquerque Adult Learning
Center.
Brazil and an ESL student at CNM
Matoya campus. Arthur is an
outstanding student who
represents many of the
population groups we serve
justice involved, uh, recovering
addict and many others, Victoria
continues to persevere. She's a
mom, an excellent student, and
celebrating 6 years of sobriety.
Um, Athena Valdez is the type of
student that embodies resilience
she's always been driven and has
always known she was destined
for something big. She comes
with a big personality and an
even bigger heart and Shelly
Park is an amazing student that
has had to overcome both the
understanding and learning the
technical aspects of the solar
industry, um, and I believe
there are, uh, I believe, do you
want to be, you want me to yield
to you?
Do their own introductions, Mr.
President, thank you very much
and happy adult literacy Day.
Senator Gallegos.
Yeah, Mr. President,
which me on your desk today, you
will find um branded mug from
sustainable energy solutions,
driving innovation in energy
headquartered in Chicago in
Benergy is an American-led
company successfully developing
projects in New Mexico across
it to the Four Corners region
delivering clean affordable
energy to New Mexico's grid and
the region. Dur spinneret wind
Energy Center project in Union
for our communities for decades
to come.
Bringing increased revenue into
local communities and creating
permanent operation jobs Innergy
Please welcome my guests. Thank
you, Mr. President. Senator
Hamblin.
my guests, uh, they are here
from the J. Paul Taylor Academy,
which is a high performing
public charter school in Las
Cruces named after the late Mr.
Paul Taylor, an educator of 34
They served 200 K through 8
students in Las Cruces and have
done so since 2011, and if I can
have all of my JPTA people up
there in the gallery stand up.
They came all the way up from
governing council for a couple
of years before I got elected to
Senate. I have some incredible
guests with me today. First and
foremost here to my right I have
Emma Sotelo, who is an 8th
wants to be a mechanical
engineer when she gets older,
and that can always change, but
right now she loves that
process. So we have Emma Sotelo.
Then we also have Riley Branau
Jayner who is the great
granddaughter of Representative
J. Paul Taylor. And if she, if
she is going to go to the
Arrowhead Early College High
School. She loves drawing,
so if you will, please welcome
my guests here to the, to the
chamber.
And secondly, Mr. President and
to the chamber, um, I feel that
there is a history that I have
with, with this brick cheese is
that my great great grandfather
John Josse invented brick
And so this makes for easy
packing and shipping, and so he
and Wayne County, Wisconsin
decided to try a new way of
processing cheese and shaped it
told I am cheese royalty.
So thank you Senators Wood and
Boone for bringing the cheese to
the chamber. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Mr. President, it's always nice
to welcome friends from the
beautiful Espanilla Valley who
are joining me and today I want
to welcome Claudia Chacon, who
is from Espanola. She's here to
a disqualifier to vote and a
prohibition of slavery and
indentured servitude and Claudia
also wants to bring awareness to
individuals targeted within
their communities and
representing McCurdy Charter
School in Espanola, were you,
Mr. President, can't hide my
bobcat pride. Thank you, Mr.
with me a couple of students
from the J. Paul Taylor Academy,
uh, Senator Hamblin very aptly
described what a wonderful
school this is in our community
at J. Paul Taylor Academy and is
planning on being a vet when she
uh reaches, um.
Higher education areas, so, uh,
planning on taking care of our
animals and pets, or is it large
at J. Paul Taylor Academy is
planning on going into
healthcare areas. We need lots
hurry up.
Uh, and last I have Ephraim
Settles. Uh, he is in 4H, uh,
in recognizing our wonderful
students from J. Paul Taylor
Academy.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Gallegos.
William Patterson. I want to
give you a little bit of
background. I met with him in
standing, uh, met with him and,
um, at a meeting last year and
had 40 years in, in health.
insurance industry as an HR
consulting business and he has
expertise working with fully
Stephonics in order to have a
meeting with superintendent of
insurance. I'd like the body to
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
I'd like to introduce my guest
today, if you could raise.
I'd like to introduce everyone
the mission of cotton classical
preparatory school, which is to
serve the whole child for the
whole world, um, both of these
students, uh, share a lot of
Commonalities, but I think their
Student Union where she's found
a strong sense of community with
others who share similar
cultural experiences. She's
interested uh in studying
criminology with particular
the Marines she's deeply
inspired by her immigrant
grandparents parents and two
younger brothers who have always
encouraged her to pursue her
goals and reminded her that
anything is possible with
And along with Xiomara we have
Juan Sanchez. Juan Sanchez is
also in 10th grade, and he
really enjoys teaching the
teaching style at the at at his
school because it encourages
other's success in the future he
hopes to pursue a career in
government, law, or
environmental science, and he's
interested in public policy and
learning how laws can.
very pleased to have these folks
joining me today, um, and to
amplify the work and dedication
that their immigrant families
brought to New Mexico. So if you
could please help me welcome to
any more announcements? Anyone
wishing to make?
Seeing no further announcements.
You also send a majority floor
leader Peter War to take us to
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. At
know that, uh, there's a lot of
activity and discussion going on
if we can just please have our
attention to the reader and to
the certificate center compos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
uh.
a very beloved.
New Mexico state senator who
Taught us all.
this certificate.
Hearing no objection.
The reader will read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
does hereby extend its sincere
heartfelt condolence and
sympathy to the bereaved family
and friends of the deceased.
And whereas Tom Rutherford, as
1954 and whereas Tom attended
Highland High School in
Albuquerque and graduated from
the Albuquerque High Night
legislature when he was elected
to the Senate in 1972
representing Senate District 16
in Albuquerque and served until
Leader in 1996 and whereas Tom
served on the on several Senate
and interim.
Committee's serving as chair of
the Senate Rules Committee and
consisted of reading aloud from
Jornada del Muerto and whereas
Tom was elected to the Berneo
County Board of County
And whereas Tom was a hot air
balloon enthusiast, a co-founder
of the Albuquerque International
Balloon Fiesta and one of the
in 1999, and whereas Tom also
served on the board of directors
of the Mexico Association of
Counties and the board of
directors of the National
1997. His brother James and his
sister Anne.
Now therefore be resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that condolences be
extended to the family and
city of Santa Fe, Senator Pete
Campos, Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stefaniks, Mimi Stewart,
President Pro Tem, Sherry De
Center to Panic.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
stand to honor, uh Tom
Rutherford. He in his last term
gay and lesbian rights for
people here in the state of New
Mexico.
And there were several
legislators at that time who
he also taught me how to do
things in a correct way here in
the Senate.
He taught me I had to learn the
rules. He taught me that you
elbow or in my heart telling us
that we are here to do the right
thing. We might differ on what
the right things are for our
me and I am so glad that we are
recognizing him today. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Stephanics.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. President, and I, uh,
of years that I was here,
because I came in with a class
of one. I was the only
individual that was a member of
that class.
And Senator Rutherford in his
with fairness at the same time
you have your voice, you
continue to express it.
But then as
That first couple of years went
by.
indicated we've been having
discussions and we believe that
you would make a good caucus
chair.
If you can imagine after the
first couple of years of being
Republican, regardless, he was
looking out after who we were.
He always tapped our talents.
He ensured that whatever we were
able to do that we did it well.
Whether it be sitting here along
the back row and standing up and
calling on the attention of Mr.
President.
happened to have this book with
me, and I'm going to share a few
stories with members of the
Senate.
We knew then that he was going
He always had this congenial
approach to everything that he
did.
So you can never get mad or
upset with Senator Rutherford.
And he insured with his voice
that there was going to be the
calming effect.
All the way across whether it be
debate, talking about
legislation.
that really made Senator
Rutherford, one of the top
senators over a period of time
that continued to ensure that
Senator Rutherford,
Really depended on the will of
the Senate.
to be a very sacred place.
each other.
So there was that ultimate
respect.
From Senator Tom Rutherford.
Senator, just a reminder, we are
in the certificate. We can just
keep the conversations down to a
minimum, please.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
chair, is the majority leader of
this chamber, and so, uh again,
I think it's an interesting
chair in this body and certainly
something that he and I related
Realize, which is the 1% for the
arts.
And
Of the capital outlay that gets
passed 1% of that goes for
different art projects, which
the art, but also really to the
whole state to leave behind and
to realize that here's something
that this state is got this arts
tourism cultural economy that
different legacies, that's one
that really resonates uh with me
and so, again, to the assenator
Campo said to the, to the
did, were you on the list?
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I,
I rise to support this
certificate, you know, I, Tom
Senate and then he just
continued to be a friend. He was
a bigger than life person in
Albuquerque. I mean, he was on
TV every time there was anything
for every 10 days of the balloon
fiesta, but
You know, I miss him because of
his friendship. He was just a
kind and loving person, funny,
Kelly's was actually a um.
A gas station and then it opened
up and was just a room that
people could use. We had a big
meeting there and Tom came in
with a group of school teachers,
uh, he later apologized to me
and everybody else for saying
that, but, you know, I said,
well, you're right. No, it's
not. It's, it's not fun and
wonderful person. I'm glad that
we were friends after he was a
senator, um, in, in Albuquerque,
so I miss him and appreciate
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, and, uh, with us
today are family members and
friends and I'd like to
introduce these people and if
have that opportunity to
recognize all of them, uh, after
I go ahead and I read through
who the guests are there at the
rostrum to your right, Mr. uh,
Mr. President.
and then after we'll uh accept,
if you will, the condolence and
the applause of the New Mexico
State Senate.
So with us today we have Jeremy
Rutherford, who is Tom's son.
Jeremy has over 30 years of
experience in political
campaigns and government
relations.
He's inspired by his father and
Jeremy has led the Rutherford
Group, uh, lobbying and
governmental affairs firm
founded by Tom in addition.
Jeremy continues to honor Tom's
memory with his contributions to
the political and business
landscapes of New Mexico and if
I may say a couple of other
things.
It was always positive. He's
doing OK.
So please keep that in mind
because this is the way Tom
would want that.
It wasn't that, gosh, I'm not
For Senator Tom Rutherford, and
I believe that Jeremy's wearing
it today.
And uh with that I just.
Want you to know it was made
The next is James Rutherford and
James, of course, I know that
you, as all the Rutherfords have
that uh special voice and
special way about you.
James Rutherford is Tom's
gallerist, museum specialist and
art administrator.
He serves as director of the
Governor's gallery at the New
Mexico State Capitol under
At the age of 17, James traveled
New Mexico flying the Rutherford
balloon for Tom's lieutenant
governor campaign.
people have a very special and
deep place in what Tom became,
but more importantly, what they
have become.
Miss Kendernine is the longest
influential people in energy
policy in 2014.
In 2020, Miss Kindernine was
named by ally as one of the top
Went to Monzano High School,
Roosevelt Junior High, and the
San Antonito Elementary School.
She was the commencement speaker
Mexico Tech University and her
husband is a registered engineer
in the state.
While at UNM Senator Tom
Miss Kindernine was deeply
impressed with his presentation,
volunteered in his next state
Senate campaign.
And was the northern counties's
In touch with him over the next
several decades, including
during his time setting up and
running the Albuquerque
International Balloon Fiesta.
uh you all will know as you meet
some of these people, uh, so
many people have grown up here
in the legislature.
And would go up to the senator's
offices, make sure that those
bills are filed there.
And we continued with so many
things, so many other things
Philip Larigoa was raised in the
shadow of the capital.
A phrase coined by Senator
Rutherford.
Felipe started here as a very
Like a moth drawn to a flame,
Philip Felipe has continued with
the New Mexico legislature.
Having served as a bill drafter.
He rejoined our Senate session
staff several years later. And
of course, years ago and
continues as the chief of staff
Senate that he garnered from
Senate Rutherford remains and it
continues to be with us, but
again, so many individuals
started in the New Mexico state
uh, many years, decades to help
the state of New Mexico
understand what voters are
looking for.
He seeks their input. He
vividly.
And so as you think about those
issues, it helps us all to
become better at who we are and
what we do.
legislative redistricting every
10 years.
Brian helped Tom in his 1978
Democratic primary election for
lieutenant Governor and remained
Raised in Albuquerque in a
graduate of Albuquerque Academy
and UNM.
Both undergraduate and law
degrees, that's where they came
from.
Judge Lang served as a
uh judicial district judge 5 as
chief judge.
He then conducted mediation and
arbitration practice for 14
classmates at the UNM School of
Law graduating in 1982.
Linda Clark.
Mhm
You know, she did
There is no other individual
that has more information.
About Senator Tom Rutherford and
Linda.
Or Lydia, I'm sorry.
Lydia continued to gather that
information, share it with a
senator, but deeper than that,
She ensured that she kept that
But I talked to him this
morning.
And that was uh former state
senator.
And our pro tempore Man Aragon.
A couple of weeks ago.
Manny kept up with this every
single day, and he said, when is
that day that you're going to
recognize Tom.
What would it be? and he says,
oh, there's a whole bunch of
things and you all know, Manny's
approach to things. Uh, there
could be all kinds of things,
right? You could go and talk
about anything that you want.
And this became very emotional
to him.
He said, we lost a golden voice.
That will always ring true in
Senate.
If you'll please join me in
recognizing this esteemed family
and friends.
Any senators wishing to make an
announcement.
And I'm sorry that I have been
absent in the
From the chamber, but I
guarantee you I've been doing
good work while I've been gone.
Uh
He was previously previously
served as a senior executive
director, uh, concurrent
Uh, he has spent the majority of
his career in K-12 education.
And he served as a CTE business
in Houston, Texas.
And also,
I have
Joshua, David McKerby.
As faculty web specialists,
director of public relations and
chief marketing officer, and he
earned his MDA in communications
executive director of
operations.
Uh, prior to his job at
Masonins, uh,
He served as in the community of
And Mr. President, uh, uh, while
these people are standing, uh, I
would like to tell you a little
something about uh Mesa lands.
Mesalands is, is quite a
community college there in Teen
Carry, and, uh,
And, uh, to the finance
committee,
And we didn't know whether
they're gonna make it or not,
Mr. President.
brought this community college
back into shape for us and, and
we just thank you gentlemen,
very much for doing that. It is
so important, uh, to do that in
And, uh, we would invite you to
come over and climb that turbine
sometime when, when you get a
little bit of time, uh, we did
would welcome any of the
senators present that would like
to do that. Uh,
The day that I was going to do
it, Mr. President, there was a
But I would dislike the, the
Body to recognize these three
men stand up and clap for them
if you would. These are 3 fine
Senator floor leader Peteror to
take us to that next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So just for the
members, um, we're not gonna do
ready for that, uh, and, and
again, we'll make sure to let
everyone know, kind of as we
move forward, what the next day
looks like, but, uh, we'll do
3rd reading of bills on the
unanimous consent we go that our
business committee reports.
Hearing no objection, we are in
that order of business committee
reports, the reader will read
Mr. President, your rules
committee has had under
appointment Christina Campos as
a member.
of the University of New Mexico
Board of Regents for a term
commencing upon confirmation
chair.
And they do.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
one dated February 3, 2025, in
which the governor makes the
following appointment. Dolores
Lila Gurue as a student member
of the Northern Mexico College
Amended Senate executive letter
number 55 dated January 16,
2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment.
Senate executive message number
one dated February 3rd.
term commencing on January 1st,
2025, expiring December 31st,
2026.
Committee recommends that the
makes the following
reappointment. Erica Rita
Velarde as a member of the
Northern Mexico College Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring
number 55, dated January 16,
2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Patricia Williams as a member of
Senate Bill 3237 recommendations
do pass that referred to the
finance committee.
aye.
That was oppose.
The eyes have it, the reports
have been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
Senate majority floor leader
that order of business
confirmations send had a Mr.
President, I ask that the
credentials of Victor R. Reyes
Jr. be presented to the full
Senate for consideration as
Executive message number one
dated February 3, 2025. I moved
the Senate to hereby confirm the
reappointment of Victor R. Reyes
am honored to bring a Mr. Reyes
back to the Senate for
confirmation. Uh, he was
confirmed to this position as a
student regent last year and has
this morning and, and rules, um.
Just getting into all the
diverse things that he's done.
So I'll go through some of them,
and then certainly yield to some
other members, um.
district court in Western Texas,
Judge Kathleen Cardone as a
legal intern, and I can tell
you, having clerk for the
federal judiciary, that is a
great way to get a feel for the
Director for Governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham, uh, and then he
worked for the New Mexico Senate
Democratic caucus and in my
Board, uh, and he also serves in
the public school capital outlay
council as a member, uh, during
the conversation this morning. I
also someone who we know and
we've worked with on both sides
of the aisle. He's very fair,
he's got an open door and he
said something this morning
is an excellent appointment.
Uh, he has stepped up. I want to
address one other issue because
it's something we've all been
talking about, which is the
fiduciary duty of a regent, uh,
and again in the rules committee
spot on, indicating it's
something that he takes
extremely serious, uh, and in
fact he because of his
experience working on budgets
went out of his way to get
So again, um, he was very clear
that, you know, his reviews got
to be thorough and competence,
and I think is a set of eyes
that we are lucky to have on
byenator Cervantes and Senator
Trujillo, Center Celia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I stand in
strong support of this
nomination, of course, I've,
I've known him, uh, for quite a
He hasn't been shy about um.
About expressing it for the
needs of the students and the
people we serve in the state of
New Mexico and I really
appreciate that. I think for a
things and what I really hope, I
just want to stand up and say
that UNM continues to serve the
people of the state of New
Mexico and doesn't forget that
do that and I stand in strong
support. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Cervantes, thank you,
Mr. President. Mr. President, I
want to rise and support the
nomination as well too, Victor
Congress was in the blood,
right? And Victor grew up around
politics kind of the El Paso
style.
He's very close to my law
partner Jim Shu and his daughter
Maxie and has worked with them
law from my colleagues in the El
Paso office in Maxie.
What's interesting to me is when
I talked to him most recently a
couple of days ago, I said,
well, what is it, politics or
law? and I gotta tell you, it's
both and I want to maybe impress
on him. There's an opportunity
to do both. I think, uh, being a
lawyer makes you a much better
legislator and I think being a
legislator makes you much better
lawyer, but I, I, he's a
from, and, and we see it in his
work ethic and those of us that
worked with them and the
governor who had the advantage
of having him on her staff
during her campaign and in the
early years of her
administration though having
in here because I'd like to, I'd
like to, oh there he is in her
sign word so.
He's got a bill that, that would
require a screening of all of
you all before you can get
appointed by the governor, and I
got to tell you, there's no
Thank you Senator Cervantes. We
have Senator Trujillo followed
by Senator Townsend. Senator
Trujillo, thank you, Mr.
President, and I too stand in
very strong support for this
variety of things and what I can
say about Victor is that he
rises to the occasion. It
doesn't matter what the subject
is, what the event is, what it,
whatever.
the responsibility of
implementing adult use cannabis
and the fact that we still
remain friends after that is a
testament to Victor so thank you
rise, uh, in support of Victor
today. Uh,
Not because of his political
beliefs or his political
affiliation.
support him because in my time
working with him when I was the
minority floor leader in the
house, uh, I had a good working
could be.
And, and he always, um, was
respectful to work with and I
appreciated him. I consider him
confirmation. Victor worked with
me closely when I was on the Ria
Riva County Commission and
understood the issues of rural
New Mexicans and always tried to
help to find solutions to the
on everything he does, which is
what the students need at the
University of New Mexico,
somebody who's gonna take
immediate action.
This morning, Mr. President, he
talked about hosting office
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
just wanted to take a moment to
rise and support as well of uh
Regent Reyes' confirmation, you
know, the, uh, the student
member.
which I'm sure uh Regent Reyes
has done and will do, but in
addition to advocating for
students, he is a fool I'm sure
as the board knows a
for essentially volunteering on
this duty because he has he's
gonna be in the thick of law
school the next year or two so
anyway I standing strong support
of the confirmation, uh, you
Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
do stand in strong support of
this appointment. I know it's
been a.
and very well rounded. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Pinto, seeing
no further debate.
Senator word to close. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you. All senators,
we're voting all senators your
seats, please.
Reyes Junior as a student member
of the University of New Mexico
border regions for a term
commencing on January 1st, 2025,
expiring December 31st, 2026 has
Senator had a meal
Senator Campos. Thank you,
Senator Jarameo. Senator Campos,
thank you very much, Mr.
President, pursuant to amended
Senate executive letter that
in Mexico Board of Regents.
Hearing no objection, Senator
compass to explain. Thank you
very much, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, uh, this
Guadalupe, and of course the
entire state of New Mexico and
at the national level as well.
Christina over the last 40 years
Guadalupe County General
Hospital in Santa Rosa.
She continues to be, if you
will, an excellent leader, a
of course, always with their
staff at, at her side, and they
wanted to ensure that every
member in the community of Santa
Rosa in the county of Guadalupe
elderly to ensure that they were
doing OK. So it was a
combination of so many.
things, but again, the point
that I'm trying to make with
this example.
importantly, her ability to
continue to give back to others,
and that's what she continues to
do.
So within that there are a
couple of things, of course, we
always talk about the
credentials.
uh uh from Regis University and
along with that as she continued
to go ahead and show that there
were things that she could do in
maintain to ensure that there
were doctors and residents and
that uh there were nurses and
that there was the healthcare,
uh, the ambulance, the type of
thing that she did was she
ensured that there was going to
be a healthy reserve.
So that would be available at
any time for any of the
foresight, most importantly, she
has the drive.
To continue to go ahead and
serve in a graduate as a
graduate of the University of
New Mexico, one of the things
from Christina, particularly in
the area of UNM Health.
As they continue to build, if
you will, their buildings and
build their programs and seek
And one of those continues to be
the outreach from rural New
Mexico to ensure that our
students are going to be in a
indication is we can all get
along and we can all support
each other in a very healthy
environment. So if you're for
term friendships by being a part
of New Mexico's higher education
system.
So with that, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, we stand
Sanders. We're debating the
appointment of Cristina Campos
as a member of the University of
New Mexico border regions and
we'll have Senator Cervantes.
Thank you Mr. President,
got to know Christina as, uh,
Joe Campos's wife, and so many
of us have come in here and we
know people as that's so and
so's wife or that's so and so's
husband or whatever it may be.
incredible supporter you realize
right away what a support she
was and how instrumental she was
and and what it took me not more
than a couple of hours to
realize is like many of our
who's dedicated herself to
really the delivery of
healthcare in a, in an area of
the state that's hard to get
health care in rural areas and,
and in my
and I see Senator Hickey, uh,
uh parties at times, but
certainly appreciating when you
do so, the work, the complexity,
the stress, uh, keeping doctors
testament to who she is apart
from that.
We miss Jose because uh he was
our star in the basketball team,
uh, in the house and uh he was
together and a well-deserved
retirement and I'm, I'm
particularly glad to know that
you're going to be joining the
board of the Regents for, you
know, UNM where I have my
Miss Chair, I, I, I can't say.
A whole lot but this.
Thank you, Senator Woods. We
have further debate. We have
Senator Hickey, followed by
Senator Celia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I also
we're facing so many crises in
health care and the ability of
rural hospitals in particular to
be able to survive and, and
who's there day in and day out
and understanding them will.
be great because I look at the
University of New Mexico,
particularly the Health Sciences
often wondered why they didn't
have someone on the Regents when
it's like 3 quarter of the
budget of the university and is
so complex. Who really knows the
Mexico, but also be able to get
that sharp financial eye on
what's happening at the
university, not that anything
forward to your tenure and your
contribution to both the
university and the state in this
role. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senator Celia Lopez.
and Human Services over
intercession and every time
she's risen to to speak or
testifies I've really found her
knowledge just invaluable and to
with this appointment and um
happy that the governor selected
her again strong support thank
you. Thank you Senator Lopez.
Any further debate, senators?
that the records show the role
has been called and that all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, senators, to
your seats, please.
We're voting
Buy a vote
31st, 2030 has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate, Senator Campos, thank
you, Mr. President. At this
time, I'd like to present to you
our newest regent, Christina
Senator had a meal, Mr.
President, I ask that the
Yeah, Mr. President.
Pursuant to amended Senate
executive letter message number
55 dated January 16, 2025. I
Hearing no objection, Senator
Pinto to explain.
Thank you Mr. President.
Patricia G. Williams, also known
as Patty Williams to me.
All from the University of New
Mexico, a degree in law.
A degree in gifted education and
also a cum laude double major in
anthropology and psychology.
associate.
An assistant city attorney for
the city of Albuquerque.
But currently
She's a lawyer practicing as a
School Districts.
defending chapters and also uh
with employment matters.
Familiar with traditional and
the United States District
Court, District of New Mexico,
the United States 10th Circuit
Court of Appeals and all courts
in the Navajo Nation.
Or with the New Mexico Bio a
Park Society board of directors.
cannot compadres, board of
directors, New Mexico Celtic
Athletic Association board
member.
It has been my pleasure to.
Have her as an advocate and uh.
strong supporter of our Navajo
our administrations have changed
many things have happened that
were unprecedented and she's
been a constant that really
Especially um with last week,
that was a very
Uh, they were all here and it
was a very busy, busy time for
me, um, and I always thank you
And I yield to anybody else who
would like to support this.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Pinto. Senators, we're debating
the appointment of Patricia
Green Williams, and we'll start
with Senator Celia Lopez,
the first year that I started
teaching at the University of
New Mexico and um one of the
things that impressed me was she
got honors in clinical legal
education and.
look at their career, it's
always been uh a career full of
heart and a career in a very
successful career and I see that
again with with Patty. I think
Thank you Senator C Lopez.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. President. I also
rise in strong support of Patty
Williams. Uh, she has been
American communities, so
commendable, it's just amazing.
And that's what we need at UNM.
Uh, we've heard from students
here, uh, Native American
studying Dana and what Miss
Williams told our committee this
morning was that UNM is looking
at other at other languages that
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Stewart see no further
debate.
Senator Pinto to close.
But you have, Mr. President.
hands. Thank you Senators, all
senators to your seats, please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Green Williams as a member of
the University of New Mexico
border regions for a term
commencing upon confirmation
expiring December 31st, 2030 has
been duly confirmed by the New
member of the Northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents.
I now yield to Senator Campos.
Thank you, Senator Jarami.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Pursuant to
of Dolores Lila Groule to the
northern New Mexico.
College Board of Regents.
Hearing no objections. Senator
compass to explain. Thank you
very much, Mr. President,
Practical approaches to how she
can help students, but more than
that, she is gaining experience
the area because she's she's
been very much involved as a uh
student rep uh representative
she ties all these gifts
together and so, uh, again,
going back.
Northern New Mexico College. Uh,
she has served Northern New
Mexico College in various
capacities, including 4 terms on
the student senate.
And two of those terms as
surrounded, uh, and of course in
the surrounding area of the
Espinola Valley.
Uh, Dolores' professional career
includes working in banking for
local community center, uh, of
the board of directors for
Ojoarco Community Center board
member of the uh Del Norte Love
Foundation board of directors,
volunteer Fire Department. She's
married to her husband of 7
years Edward, and they have 1
son.
Dante, if I may, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, the, uh,
I go into that because within uh
two things when you hear her
speak, and you hear her passion
about people and about how she
grounded in her hometown and the
home area. We know that she
continues to go ahead and be, if
you will, a strong legacy for
student representation.
Spanish and that was AIA una
persona
de la comunida.
She is a person of the community
indicate who she is and what she
represents. And so with that,
Mr. President, uh, we stand in
case there is anyone else who
Coola being appointed as the
student regent. She has her ear
close to the ground in Espanilla
Valley to know the issues that
we face as a community which
then relate to issues that
And so I wanna thank her for
that. She's always been an
amazing light in Espanola, uh,
mother who's in school.
Taking this on and doing
roundhouse, including those
regents can be an influencer
that we don't have to look at
social media or our device to
find the next person to look up
want to do what's best for their
communities. And for that, Mr.
President, I rise in full
support of this country.
Senator Jarami. Any further
debate, senators?
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. All senators to your
seats again, please.
By a vote of 33 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The appointment to Dolores Lila
Guria as a student member of the
Northern New Mexico College
Border regions for a term.
thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
it's an honor for me at this
time to go ahead and present to
you Lores Gurule, the newest
member of the Northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents.
Senator Jara, Mr. President, I
ask that the credentials of
Erica Rita Delarde be presented
to the full Senate for
consideration as member of the
Pursuant to amended Senate
executive letter message number
55, dated January 16, 2025, I
Hearing no objection, Senator
Tru here to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President, I am
really honored to stand here
today and be the sponsor for
and um I just wanted to make
sure that I mentioned that name,
um, Ms. Velarde holds an
associates of arts degree in
business administration from
She earned both of these degrees
as a single mother of two. She
began her career at the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation where she
describes in kind of funny terms
found her calling at Mnerd and
um as the.
Conservation management division
as a mechanical engineer where
this role, Miss Velarde
initiated the state's first
energy project saving taxpayers
more than a million dollars a
year in utility savings. She's
the year twice and young energy
professional of the year once.
Miss Philarde.
It's just an incredible person.
back as long as 2009, and it has
just been a shining, a shining
glow of opportunity for the
Thank you Mr. President, and I
stand in full support of the
reappointment of Ms. Velarde, a
woman who spoke so powerfully
this morning with her words
New Mexico College and she's the
woman who is always looking at
motivating the next leaders on
telling them si se puede and
encouraging them to do all that
they can. She's the first
generation.
over a dozen years. And so for
that, Mr. President, I stand in
full support of this
confirmation. Thank you, Senator
had a meal. We do have further
debate, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. It is
when Erica was first appointed
and I have to tell you I was
blown away and I took some notes
about that experience that, uh,
Um, an innovative, she is fired
up. She is passionate, she has
gas in the tank to innovate. Um,
she has fought for a better life
for herself, for her community,
make it better, and this is why
I keep advocating that we create
these nominating commissions.
What was so impressive, frankly,
not just about Erica, but that
initial crop of
dynamos at a more grassroots
level, and I was those
confirmation hearings were not
just confirmation hearings, they
were events like life events,
for these jobs, we'll find more
Erika others Velardes and we
will create more dynamic, um,
institutions that meet the needs
of our community and our state.
So kudos to you. She also, you
something we still need to do a
lot more of, but Erica was a
leader in that space and helped
advise me. I was trying to work
on that issue and so she's she's
she's making a difference in
lots of ways, and I'm glad
See no further debate. Senator
to close.
I asked Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
Tier seats, if you wish to vote
no, please raise your hand.
By a vote of 35 of the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
the reappointment of Erica Rita
Velarde as a member of the
Thank you, Mr. President and
members of the Senate, please
join me and Ms. Vilarte's family
in congratulating her on this
appointment.
Center had a meal.
Mr. President, pursuant to
amended Senate executive letter
number 55, dated January 16,
Governor Lovato serves as a
community leader for not only
the Pueblo but the communities
in and around the Espanola
regents is crucial for northern
New Mexico College, being that
we're uh primarily serving
native and Hispanic communities,
uh, he has extensive experience.
serves as a pipeline for
individuals in northern New
Mexico to work with the federal
government and to ensure that
they stay within their
community. Thank you, Mr.
President. With that, if anyone
See no debate. Send her how to
me to close, Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the
record show that the role has
been called and that those
If you wish to vote no.
the negative. The appointment of
Ronald Joseph Lovato is a member
of the Northern New Mexico
College Border regions for a
term commencing on confirmation
you can help me in
congratulating Ron Lovato on
this appointment.
We're in that order of business
announce its miscellaneous
senator. Thank you, Mr.
President. Just before we read
in the committee reports, I do
want to make a unanimous consent
that, so I'll do two separate
just so that we got the record
straight. Uh, Senate Bill 81 as
demanded unanimous consent that
we expunge, uh, the committee
report on Senate Bill 81 as
President, and same thing
unanimous consent that we
expunge the uh tax business and
transportation Committee report
on Senate Bill 65 as amended.
We're in that order of business
committee reports.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your education
committee, to whom has been
submitted.
Senator William P. Souls, chair.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Senate Bill 245 do pass and
thence referred.
To the finance committee,
respectfully submitted, Senator
William P. So's chair Lopez.
We're gonna do that again,
senators. All those visioning
new.
I kind of got caught up there a
little bit there as well. All
reader to read.
President, you're tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 65.
I moved the adoption of the
committee report. Senators
I think there might be one more.
2 more? OK.
Senate Bill 81 do pass as
amended and the referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Carrie Hamblin
been adopted and the journal
will show that they were acted
upon individually.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your conservation
committee, to whom has been
do pass as amended.
And thence referred to the
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually no objection.
The reader will read.
Senate Bill 49 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stefanik's chairanics,
The community port has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
The reader to read, Mr.
President, your health and
public affairs Committee, to
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Linda Lopez, chair.
Lopez,
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
Senate Bill 45 do pass as
amended.
And then referred to the tax
business and transportation
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Linda Lopez, chair.
at the committee report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go without
our business introduction of
legislation. Hearing no
objection, we're on that order
of business introduction to
legislation. The reader will
Senate Bill 50 introduced by
Senator Maestas.
An act relating to law
enforcement.
retention fund changing and
adding definitions in the law
enforcement Training Act.
Consolidating training within
the law enforcement Training
Act, providing additional
definitions, providing the New
Removing the requirement for
consent of the Senate for
certain appointees, changing the
term law enforcement officer to
police officer in the law
enforcement Training Act.
Providing an accreditation
requirement to the Mexico law
enforcement Academy and
satellite academies, amending
repealing and enacting sections
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee,
the Senate Finance Committee
drug abuse counseling for
qualified inmates in all
correctional facilities,
providing that lunarun College
grant the associate degree and
that New Mexico Highlands
University.
order printed and referred to
the Senate Education Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 325.
Senate Bill 326 introduced by
youthful offender, providing for
transport of a serious youthful
offender to a district court
when ordered and for that
offender to be segregated from
adults, removing the requirement
detention risk assessment be
completed before a child is
placed in detention.
Providing that a detained child
be transferred to an adult
facility if the child reaches 18
age or older may waive the
serious youthful offender's
right and a and amenability
hearing providing the children,
youth and families.
types of commitment, a court may
order.
Providing that a court may not
weigh 11 amenability factor more
heavily than another for
exclusive jurisdiction and
authority to release an
adjudicated delinquent child.
Providing that the standard of
records for the purposes of a
hearing regarding pretrial
detention conditions of release
or sentencing, repealing section
amendmentsen about 326.
Senate Bill 326.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Mr. President, I, I rise to
question the, the uh committee
assignments, um, I don't
disagree with where they're
going, but something that
comprehensive certainly has to
Senate Finance Committee
assignment as well. There's 3
committee assignments to this
bill. All right, thank you. I
missed the 3rd 1. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sheer, Mr.
President.
Senator Lopez
then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 326. Thank you. And
who is the sponsor, pleases of
that bill is Senator Campos.
Thank you.
Reader to read.
of the motor vehicle code to
create a low rider capital of
the world special registration
plate for cars, trucks,
motorcycles, and tow trailers
327 having been read twice by
title is order print and
referred to the Senate Tax
Business Transportation
Committee, the.
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 327.
operator licenses providing for
confidentiality of certain
documents revising license
terms. Senate bill 328.
Center bill 328 having been read
Senate be 329 introduced by
Senator Paul.
An act relating to crime,
creating the crime of
solicitation or recruitment of a
child into a criminal street
Senate Judiciary Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 329.
That about 330 introduced by
Senator Paul, an act relating to
criminal sentencing.
Senate Bill 3:30 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
An act relating to domestic
violence, criminal offenses,
amending sections 303-12 through
221, sections 3 through 5 laws
2008 chapter 16, section 4, and
laws 2009 chapter 255 section 2,
and subsect.
1987, chapter 286, section 6 as
amended.
Providing that a person
convicted of and sentenced for
criminal offenses provided in
Providing that a person who
violates a condition of
probation ordered pursuant to a
suspended or deferred sentence
may subject to be subject to any
Making, conforming amendments.
Senate Bill 331. Senate Bill 331
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred.
To the Senate Health Public
Senate Bill 332 introduced by
Senator Sanchez an act making an
appropriation to the local
measures sent about 332 Senate
Bill 332 having been read twice
by title is order print and
referred to the Senate Indian
Rural and Cultural Affairs
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 332.
Providing for the children,
Youth and Families department to
be appointed as the
representative payee to manage
and maintain the retirement
survivors and disability
manage benefits accounts on
behalf of beneficiaries,
providing definitions, providing
for account closures and
disbursements, providing for
confidentiality.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Bill 333.
Senator Bill 334 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
An act related to crime.
Senate Bill 334 having been read
twice by title is ordered Prince
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee.
The Senate Judiciary Committee,
to taxation, creating the foster
parent and guardian income tax
credit.
Senate Bill 335335 having been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
Senator Hickey, an act relating
to public assistance requiring
Medicaid managed care
organizations to have a
proportional amount of Medicaid
Senate Bill 337.
Introduced by Senator Gonzalez.
An act relating to public
survivor pensions, providing an
exemption to the procurement
code for the collection of
overpayments, clarifying the
amount of pension earned by
certain public regulation
Clarifying certain provisions
relating to gifts.
Clarifying the requirements for
a retired member who files an
about 337 337 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 337.
and retention of healthcare
providers who treat rural or
underserved populations or
patients of federally qualified
Senate bill 339 introduced by
Senator Woods.
An act making an appropriation
to the Department of Environment
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Conservation
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 339.
Senate Bill 340.
emergency and orders or rules
restricting commerce, public
assembly, and personal conduct
after 30 days.
Authorizing limited
gubernatorial extensions of
Amending sections of chapter 12
NMSA 1978.
Senate bill 340,340 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee.
An act relating to criminal
sentencing.
Providing for the death penalty
in certain circumstances,
providing a process providing
then Senate Judiciary Committee,
the Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 341.
Center belt 342 introduced by
senators Munoz and Stephanics.
office of the state engineer for
brackish water use exploration,
treatment, and aquifer
characterization for water
projects.
Making appropriations to the
of technology for projects
related to brackish water use.
Senate Bill 342 342 having been
read twice by title is order
Senate Bill 342 Senate Bill 343
introduced by Senator Souls.
An act relating to education.
Removing exceptions to level
And 22-108-11 NMSA 1978.
Being lost 2003 chapter 153
referred to the Senate Education
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 343.
Sen bill 344 introduced by
Senator Soles an act making an
studentsen about 344 344 having
been read twice my title is
order printed and referred to
the Senate Education Committee,
the Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 344.
licensure allowing reciprocity
for levels 2 and 3 New Mexico
license or for instructional
support providers who are
licensed in other states. Senate
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 345.
Senate Memorial 3 introduced by
Senator Wirth.
A memorial recognizing the
watershed health benefits of
Centerorial 3 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee, followed
by Senator or Senate
Reader will read. Send a
memorial for introduced by
senators Jaramillo Maest Maestas
Steinbor and Padilla.
Memorial for having been read
twice by title is order print is
order not printed, not referred
to committee to be placed at the
president's table that set a
memorial for.
Mexico to provide for the
creation of an independent
redistricting commission to
develop and adopt redistricting
plans for state legislative
Haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Rules Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Joint resolution 9.
the Constitution of New Mexico
to provide a 50% property tax
exemption for active emergency
final average salary as an
emergency first responder if the
active or retired emergency
first responders.
occupies the property as the
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Rules Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate joint resolution 10.
that order business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Just for the members, uh, that's
it for today. Uh, we're gonna
come in at 11:30 tomorrow
morning. And just a reminder, we
announce afternoon committees
and morning committees tomorrow
morning. Thank you. We do have
announcements. We have Senator
Woods followed by Senator Souls,
then Senator Lopez, Senator
Woods.
in the select milk producers in
the state of New Mexico, and I
think
Of the Southwest Cheese Company,
as you know, produces 5.1
pounds of cheese a year, plus
36.8 million pounds of whey
that acknowledgement. Center
souls, thank you, Mr. President.
I actually have two
announcements. First, uh, the
Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Department is meeting
three on for Indian rural and
cultural affairs. Also, those of
you planning on playing
basketball.
Tomorrow morning 6 o'clock, Fort
Mercy, Jim, uh, you're gonna
for staff, lobbyists, others,
it's an open game. It's a great
time to get to know other people
outside of our official roles up
here. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Lopez.
Committee will be meeting um say
about20 minutes of 3 today in
room 311 on our agenda we have a
presentation on the children's
code and then we'll be
will meet tomorrow morning at
9:00 a.m. in room 311, and we
have 5 carryover bills and 5 new
bills, and since the floor won't
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
wonder if Senator Woods would
yield for a questions. Senator
Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
uh, first of all, I just wanna
thank you for the blocks of
cheese, uh, we've been getting
cheese last if you don't open it
and you put it in your
refrigerator.
Good question, Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods.
You know, I think it would last.
electricity stays on, but let me
tell you, around my house, it,
it doesn't have a problem with
lasting. It has a problem with
just wondering if you think I
can still eat that.
Mr. President, I guarantee you
it's still good. The fact is,
Senator Doctor Hickey would like
to give an opinion.
Yes, thank you for letting me
bring my official doctor opinion
downstairs and finally my wife
brought it up and it was gone in
a week. It was so good. And what
am I speaking from? I, I don't
forth. And my wife, who, who had
a lot of that cheese, uh, said,
this is as good if not better,
than that Wisconsin cheese. So
I just so proud to bring this to
you from our dairy farmers in
the state of New Mexico. Uh, one
of our very good agriculture
further announcements. Senator
Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senate Judiciary Committee will
meet this afternoon at 2:30, so
this afternoon at 2:30, uh,
Finance is going to go in today
at 2:30. For those of you that
haven't filled out the iPad
information, uh, make sure you
get it done. We want to get that
kind of wrapped up, it may
disappear from your iPad late by
shy of 35 more will be in good
shape.
Um
I thought, Mr. President, I
thought they were going to talk
about Mayor McCheese.
Do you remember who Mary
from McDonald's and the Happy
Lands, and I, I, Senator Woods
should we elect him Mayor
McCheese of the floor.
If you ask for unanimous
Uh, congratulations Mayor, on
your new appointment as Mayor
McCheese we'll be expecting our
cheese Happy Meals almost every
day.
Thank you Sandy Munoz.
your chair, um, that you are
adhering to all the decorum of
the Senate. I think it's been a
a smooth process so far. I wanna
thank our minority and majority
floor leaders and our whips for
assistance with that and and
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
just guessing I'm supposed to
say.
Yes, eagles. I was assuming
that, yeah.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Unanimous consent
to Senate stand a recess until
11:30 tomorrow morning. Hearing
no objection, the Senate will
