A you also to Senator Peter
Worth to get us started.
you, Mr. President. So certainly
if any members have any
additional announcements, they
can do them now. What we're
doing is waiting for the
committee report on House Bill 1
So I'd yield to any other
members for announcements if
there are announcements.
Thank you, Senator senators
we're on that order of business
legislation. Hearing no
objection, we're in that order
of business introduction
legislation.
The reader to read.
the ingen Hospital and County
Health Care Act to allow
additional authorized uses of
county health care assistance
funds. Senate Bill 45. Senate
Senate Bill 46 introduced by
Senator Trujillo, an act
relating to licensure enacting
the interstate medical licensure
compact providing for the
Senate Bill 46, Senate Bill 46,
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
Committee, that Senate Bill 46.
section of Chapter 49, Article
1, NMSA 1978 to include the
Santa Cruz de la Cannada land
grant Merced as a land grant
governed pursuant to Chapter 49,
Judiciary Committee, that's
Senate Bill 47.
Senate Bill 48, introduced by
Senator Stewart, an act relating
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Conservation
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 48
Senate Bill 49 introduced by
on enactment of the fund during
the first session of the
fifty-seventh legislature and
the provision of funding for the
fund. Senate Bill 49. Senate
Bill 49 having been read twice
Senate Bill 51, introduced by
Senator Bradley, an act making
an appropriation to the local
government division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration for communication
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax, Business,
Transportation Committee, the.
Senate Finance Committee that
owned airplane. Senate Bill 52
Senate Bill 52 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
to professional psychologists,
amending the professional
psychologist Act, adding certain
prescribing psychologists with
independent experience in
Bill 53 Senate Bill 53 having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public.
Affairs Committee the Senate
Judiciary Committee that Senate
Bill 53.
instruction and practical
training for a county detention
officer coordinating reentry
efforts, efforts for a person
released from prison requiring
correctional facilities to track
and report data on medication.
assisted treatment, providing
for the expansion of the
criminal justice workforce,
a judicial district to establish
a treatment court program
providing for a magistrate
metropolitan or district court
to impose standard probation
Crime data to interpret the or
deter violence, providing for
continuing judicial education on
substance use disorder, mental
health conditions, and
Creating the forensic laboratory
bureau fund creating the jail
reentry fund, creating the
clinical supervision fund
providing a temporary provision
5454, having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
The Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 54.
of depreciation. Senate Bill 55
Senate Bill 55 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
to livestock, enacting a new
section of the livestock code
restricting access to certain
information during an epidemic.
Senate Bill 56 Senate Bill 56
Senate Bill 57 introduced by
Senator Wirth, an act relating
to public records, amending the
inspection of public Records Act
to accept from disclosure any
Senate Bill 57 Senate Bill 57
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health.
Public Affairs Committee, the
Senate Judiciary Committee, that
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to early childhood.
An act relating to early
childhood enacting the child
care facility licensing Act,
providing duties and powers to
Allowing license exempt
childcare facilities to register
with the department, providing
for revocation or suspension of
licenses, sanctions, and
penalties for facilities that
families eligible for childcare
assistance, amending sections of
the pre-kindergarten Act.
Adding application requirements
and priorities for early
pre-kindergarten and pre
references in the early
childhood care Accountability
Act.
Mr. President
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Worth. Thank you, Mr. Perezi.
You name as consent. We go that
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 1 has had it
under consideration and reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Those pone, the eyes have it,
the report has been adopted.
Senate Majoritylo Leader Peter
Wortz to take us to the next
order of business.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go out of
business. Announcements and
Wirth. Mr. President, now being
11:59 a.m. I move we adjourn
until 12:01 p.m. The Senate will
come to order.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
consent that the rules be
consent that the Senate of the
Senate that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the judiciary Committee and
House Bill 1.
See no objection. We're in that
order of business senators.
Just a, just a notice to all
records show that all action for
placing House Bill 1 and the
emergency with the emergency
clauses on final passage and is
now subject to make amendment
and substitution.
the 2025 legislative session and
appropriates permanent
legislative committees and the
legislative departments. Section
1 and 2 of House Bill 1
switchboard, uh.
In sections 3 and 4 of House
Bill 1.
It adds an additional annual
appropriation for permanent
legislative committees and the
legislative expenses, 4 million
and for next year's session
preparation, 510,000, um,
A new legislative information
system, uh, to update what we
have is about $3 million and,
uh, for Senate interim
and is being navigated, uh, 14
million, uh, upgrades for the
Capitol.
That needs to happen. Some of
the new chairs that were bought
last year in committee meetings
were capital upgrades, um.
NCSL conference and so as we
are, our chief clerks host them.
We want to make sure that they
have the funds to do that
correctly in New Mexico puts on
tangled up last year, 750,000.
And for LFC to purchase uh
economic software analysis,
which we're missing because we
million, um, the house and chief
clerk staff, and, uh, the Senate
leadership staff, uh, in Section
8 and for the department share
uh share of legislative.
Commission. Uh, that's about
400,000. With that, Mr.
President, I'll stand for
questions. Oops, uh,
allowed to introduce my guest on
Thank you, Senator Felix, uh,
expressing your witnesses. Uh, I
have Charlotte Bailey from
council, Legislative council
services.
Thank you, Senators. There's
been a unanimous request
unanimous consent request for an
expert witness see no objection.
uh, I do have a question for the
speaker if you will yield.
Mr. uh, Senator Munoz, do you
yield?
Yes, I do.
interim, uh, so first question
is that did I get that part
right?
Semios. Mr. President, yes, you
did.
For sure, Mr. President, the
set up and, and the chair's
request, um, needs for the
interim committee, whether it's
travel to go to a longer place,
whatever that is, if they need
support, um, and so that's what
that money is. And the request
will have to go back to the
council, uh, the council will
have to
approve the chair's request and
then, uh, go from there.
Thank you Senator Senator.
place in there where the
minority party can say, hey, we,
we want to bring in an expert
witness as well. I will that be
available to us?
Senorminos, Mr. President,
Senator, they'll have to work
they'll point the interim chairs
and it'll go through the process
and then, uh, so the, uh,
Republicans or the opposite of
the aisle, we'll coordinate with
the chairs if they want to see
President, I just want to make
sure that, that it wasn't a
one-sided thing, but I also just
want to clarify for some of the
new, uh, folks, uh, legislative
council services is the staff.
legislative council is going to
be voted on.
By members of the legislature
just so they know where to go
and what to do and why that
See no uh Senator Woods.
Mr. President, I hate to let
this thing go. This is a lot of
In this bill,
is where the money is designated
for your legislative district
aid.
me that that was something that
was going to have to be
determined in the future. So
it's, it's kind of like this,
Mr. President, and, and if the,
legislative council, so I will
have a voice on how this money
is determined to be spent on
travel and whether we're going
district 8, and I just want the
group to know that
Even though we're going to pass
a bill here.
This particular one,
either we turn the lights off or
we pass it. So we're gonna have
to pass it.
But I just want it to be known
Don't, don't, don't let any bill
go out of here that you're not
happy with.
Ask her questions, uh, identify
the your problems that you have,
So, Mr. President, thank you,
Mr. uh, sponsor. I appreciate
the, the answers that we do get
and thank you for the
opportunity, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
actually very well, and one
thing that I asked while we were
up in Senate Finance, which was
answered and I thought it was a
really great response was, uh,
we have probably the most number
of drafters and trained, well
needs to be done between now and
and the last day that we can
file and things of that nature.
So I just think that was a very
positive.
move and I just wanted to
highlight that for the members
that you're gonna have plenty of
help here to get your work done,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
usually have questions about
these bills, but I don't, I
haven't seen it. Um, I don't
have a copy of the bill. It does
everybody?
I believe they're gonna, uh,
pass that out so we'll just, uh,
hold in place for a moment.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, while we're holding
in place, I mean, I tried to
navigate my iPad to get the
clerk, is, is that bill already
inside our iPads.
That's OK, that's good to know
they're not on our iPads,
they're online, so we have to go
into the legislative website,
Thank you, Senator Munoz. Well,
we're just getting those that
bill handed out. I'm gonna take
a moment.
Senator Celia Lopez, when you're
ready, you still have the floor.
I'll yield the floor now thank
Any senators wishing to debate?
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
the House Bill 1 with emergency
clause, do now pass. I asked
Nan's consent of the Senate that
the records show the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Just reminding senators that it
does have an emergency clause
attached to it, so you need 2/3
of the members.
by a vote of 41 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
House Bill 1 with the emergency
clause has passed the Senate.
legislation. Hearing no
objection, we are in that order
of business introduction
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate Bill 59 introduced by
59. Senate Bill 59 have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate text business
transportation committee, the
Senate Finance, that Senate Bill
59.
conservation project as a six
year pilot project administered
by the public education
department requiring the public
education department to develop
in the pilot project award
financial assistance grants to
participate.
In school districts and collect
data, allowing for potential
collaboration with the
Department of Environment
appropriation. Senate Bill 60
Senate Bill 60 haven't been read
twice my title is order printed
and referred to the Senate.
Education committee, the Senate
Conservation Committee.
An act relating to licensure
amending the land landscape
architects Act.
Lowering the required minimum
years of experience for a
licensed applicant without a
applicant with or without a
degree to bring New Mexico's
license requirements in accord
with national model legislation
or accreditation standards by
rule, Senate Bill 61.
Transportation Committee that
Senate Bill 61.
Zenabel 62 introduced by Senator
Stephanics for the legislative
Health and Human Services
pharmacy benefits managers can
collect, declaring certain
actions made by pharmacy
benefits managers as unfair or
deceptive trade practices.
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 62 Senate Bill 63
introduced by Senator Eel and
others, and act relating to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 63.
Senate Bill 64 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
project in the public education
department, providing for
financial incentives to school
districts that promote and
encourage student enrollment in
Haring
Creating the career development
success pilot project fund
making an appropriation. Senate
Senate Bill 65 introduced by
Senator Doig, an act relating to
consumer protection, enacting
the consumer Solar Protection
to the Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, the
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 65.
Senate Bill 66 introduced by
agencies to promulgate rules
related to criminal history
screening, declaring an
emergency. Senate Bill 66 Senate
Senate Bill 67 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
An act relating to
information regarding a device
used to make a 911 service
communication for the purpose of
responding to the communication
or a situation that involves the
risk of death or serious
physical harm.
providers and disseminate that
information to internet service
and wireless service providers.
Senate Bill 67.
Senate Bill 67 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed.
Senator Pope.
And act relating to higher
education, amending the graduate
scholarship.
Amending the graduate
a permanent resident visa
lowering the enrollment
requirement to provide that a
recipient be enrolled in at
least 6 credit hours including a
Increasing the amount of an
award in an amount not to exceed
100% of tuition and fees for an
The Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 68.
Senate Bill 69 introduced by
Senator Pope.
An act relating to unfair trade
specifying repair provider
duties.
Establishing procedures for
determining violations of the
right to repair consumer
electronics Act prescribing
penalties. Senate Bill 69.
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 69.
Senate Bill 70 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
An act relating to crime,
penalties. Senate Bill 7070
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Thence Senate Finance Committee
automa automatic license plate
reader Act permitting license
plate data to be used for law
enforcement investigations,
limiting the retention of
Committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 71.
Senate Bill 72 introduced by
7272 haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
Committee that sent a bill 72.
relating to the operation of
bicycles requiring a person
riding a bicycle and approaching
a stop sign or a yield sign to
stop when required for safety.
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 73.
commencing prosecution of human
trafficking.
Increasing the age for sexual
exploitation of children by
definition of harm, prohibiting
certain defenses in a
prosecution for human
trafficking.
Adding victims of human
trafficking and sexual
sentence. Senate Bill 747 having
been read twice by title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate bill 74.
act relating to educational
retirement, making changes to
the educational retirement Act.
Clarifying restrictions on
receipt of gifts.
disability status who is over 60
and who receives an annuity
adjustment to continue receiving
the annuity adjustment.
employees retirement Board to
administer Senate Bill 75 Senate
75 having been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee,
An act relating to taxation,
changing the date of the back to
school sales gross receipts tax
deduction to the last weekend in
Senate tax business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 76.
Senate Bill 77 introduced by
Senator Pope.
single family residential
property. Senate Bill 7777
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered, printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee.
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to nursing, providing for an
independent role for certified
registered nurse.
And that's the anesthetists.
Senate Bill 79 introduced by
Senator Soles, an act relating
to aviation, creating the
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
Committee.
Vince Senate Finance Committee
that Senate bill 79.
open enrollment periods. Senate
Bill 80 Senate Bill 80 having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee.
Then Senate
An act relating to insurance,
creating the New Mexico property
insurance Program Association
board to administer the fair
Plan Act establishing board
fees, making an appropriation
declaring an emergency. Senate
Bill 81 Senate Bill 81, having
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the Senate tax business.
Transportation Committee.
For the public school capital
outlay oversight task force and
the legislative education Study
Committee.
An act relating to the public
school capital outlay extend
eliminating some of the criteria
of the public school capital
Oley Council is required to
consider before making an
adjustment to a school
The Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 82.
Senate Bill 83 introduced by
Senator Stewart.
An act relating to public funds.
implement climate change policy
making a transfer from the
general fund to the innovation
and state government fund.
Committee.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Bill 83.
Mr. President,
Senator Sheriff, for what
purpose do you rise, Mr.
Committee.
Uh, Mr. President.
Uh, would the floor leader.
Yield for a question Senator, do
fiscal impact on the state of
New Mexico. Can we give it
another, the 3rd committee
assignment?
And Mr. President, that
oversight on our part, it
definitely needs to go to
finance, but let's just pull it
reconsidered.
The reader to read.
Senate Bill 84 introduced by
Senator Doig.
An act
that pertains to child abuse and
neglect may be shared, requiring
that information be provided
about child fatalities or near
is is appealable.
Requiring reports on the
department's website prescribing
Senate Bill 85 introduced by
senators Worth and Bergmans.
An act relating to campaign
for expenditures and
contributions, standardizing the
supplemental report reporting
requirements for all elections
to include any contribution or
clarifying and changing
requirements relating to
contributions and donations,
amending certain require
reporting requirements.
prohibiting using campaign funds
sessions.
Senate Bill 85. Senate Bill 85
having been read twice by title
Senator Stewart, an act relating
to public funds, creating the
innovation in state government
fund for state agencies to
Making appropriations from the
innovation in state government
fund, Senate Bill 8383 having
been read twice by title.
Senator Campos.
And act making an appropriation
to the Department of Finance and
Administration to contract for
training and outreach services
Senate Conservation Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 86.
Zen a Bill 87 introduced by
Senator Bradley, and act
relating to government
or resources to assist in the
enforcement of federal
immigration law or that
interferes with the enforcement
of federal immigration law.
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, the Senate
Judiciary Committee that sent a
bill 87.
Senate Bill 88.
and Senator Woods, an act
relating to public funds,
creating the Medicaid Trust Fund
and the state-supported Medicaid
fund requiring the legislature
limited time, requiring certain
investment income credited to
the general fund to be credited
to the Medicaid.
Trust fund for a limited time.
Amending certain sections of
making a transfer from the
general fund to the Medicaid
trust fund. Senate Bill 8888,
having been read twice by title
introduced by Senator Soles, a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 12 of the
of the Constitution in New
Mexico by repealing section 6
direction, including the
financial direction of the
distribution of school funds and
financial accounting for all
public.
schools as provided by law and
Senate joint resolution 3 having
been read twice by titles or
printed and referred to Senate
Rules Committee, then Senate
Education Committee, then Senate
proposing to amend the
Constitution of New Mexico by
adding a new section of Article
2 that provides the people of
the state with environmental
rights, including the right to
the preservation of the natural
cultural scenic.
And helpful qualities of the
environment and directs the
state, counties, and
Senate Joint Resolution 4 Senate
Joint Resolution 4 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate joint resolution 4.
Mr. President, thank you,
Senator. So the assignments are
a Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee and
the title of that is gonna be a
joint resolution proposing to
healthy native flora, fauna and
ecosystems, a safe climate and
the preservation of the natural
cultural, scenic and health.
qualities of the environment and
So Mr. President, again, that
potentially has a significant
impact on the finances of the
state of New Mexico potentially.
what you yield? Uh thank you,
Mr. President. I do, uh, so
we've had this bill for the last
number of years and this is
where we've sent it to these two
committees. I think we've had
this debate on the floor, um,
a potential impact, but again, I
think
We've had the debate, we've been
taking the vote on an extra
referral on this, on this piece
of legislation. So just to be
my people what to do.
Because some of them don't know
yet.
But thank you
Thank you, Senator Cher.
consumption of alcohol. Senate
resolution 1. Resolution 1
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Rules Committee.
door to the business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President, unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection, we are in that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Worth.
think we'll come in at 10
o'clock tomorrow. I don't think
there's committees that are
meeting Senator Pinto, your
committee is not meeting, is
that correct tomorrow?
The last of the bills that we
have for this week, uh, and
then.
Basically, we're not going to
meet on Friday. So just to give
a heads up on that, so now's the
announcing some miscellaneous.
Any senators wishing to make an
announcement.
See no announcements.
