Senators about this
Center hamlin center hampile.
Senator hickey.
Santa mckenna nowhere send a to
morris.
Same term in yours
senator neval
Senator pantel.
Senator pertal.
Senator poe.
Senator rodriguez.
center share
center shandow.
Santa sauls
santa step barnex
You do have a core amount i'm
president.
Please stand for the indication
this morning to be given by our
spanish to be led by center or
two pino and the sloop to the
new mexico flag by senator
brenda mckenna.
your god with all your heart
with all your soul with all your
mind this is the first and
greatest commandment and the
second is like it love your
neighbor as yourself.
and do the work of the state a
work lord that you have given to
us to deal.
Or you have put every forty in
place and every government in
place.
everything you provided for us
especially for your sign who
came and gave his life for us so
we could have a relationship
with you.
each other with respect even
though we may disagree
that we would be able to.
Honor.
forgiveness.
Even when our debates get
heated.
Ings name operating amount.
Good afternoon every one will
first go to senator peter worth
for that first order of business
thank you madame president good
thank you center brand for your
invocation and for your words
and your prayers for this
chamber and how we conduct
business here the decorum I just
appreciate what you said this
health is holding a pop up
vaccination clinic tomorrow for
legislators and staff to re-
receive flu and or the updated
coverage shots in room three o
going to do we do have a
committee reports I believe down
from the senate rules committee
so we're going to get those read
in and we'll do that
confirmations up front or four
to pretty reasonable hour so
with that madam president you
know since I would just ye old
let me just before we go there
may yield other members in case
there's any guests and senator
I see no objection we will do so
thank you madame president you
know it's consent to excuse
senator gonzalez until they
return to the chamber except for
the purposes of a call.
concert to take her coats off
single objection the general can
remove their coats
senator brown madame president
sender sanchez except for the
purpose of a call.
Seeing no objection we will do
all of those excuses any other
announcements
Ting no objection were on that
order of business committee
reports the reader shall read
matter president your rules
appointment william whistler as
chief of the metro state police
department of public safety for
a term commencing on june twenty
fourth twenty twenty three and
to be served at the pleasure of
the governor.
appointment respectly submitted
senator katy do have chair
do it man president I ask in
animals consent of the senate
that the reader really treat all
the committee reports that we
message number sixty one date of
february eighth twenty twenty
four in which the governor makes
the following appointment jamies
and a errera as secretary of the
veterans services department for
senate confirmed this
appointment
senate executive letter number
twenty two dated november
twentieth twenty twenty three in
which the governor makes the
foreign appointment carry army
recommends that the senate
confirmed this appointment.
Amended senate executive message
number one date of february
eighth twenty twenty four and
expiring december thirty first
twenty twenty four year
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment respectfully
submitted senator katy do hig
those opposed to
the committee report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator benny shendo
when right now okay i'm sorry
move adoption committee report
round adoption of a committee
report all those in a agreement
The.
Thank you madame president in
amazon said we go that are
business confirmations of the
the credentials a victor ard
raised junior presented to the
fourth and for consideration as
the student member to the
university of new mexico board
of regions I know yield to
victor are raise as the student
member of the new mexico
university board of regions.
Senator worth two discussed the
comfortation thank you misman
victor is a one el first year
law student at the university of
new mexico school of law he
someone we know well in this
chamber having worked with him
represent all the students are
undergrad and graduate level and
he had both the heads of the
undergraduate students as u and
of us in positions of like like
these he's gonna be out holding
office hours and reaching out to
his quote on court constituents
and making sure he is a voice
center nibert noted his work
with victor when victor was
working for the governor just as
someone who was always willing
to meet with a minority and had
a commitment to listen to all
about him being patience with a
general desire I think he said
this to make the university of
better place so we are very
lucky and I think the governor
for this appointment I think
votes good as any other vote on
there and so I think everyone's
going to have to work hard to
earn his vote.
And it's then again I think
you'll be a terrific addition so
thank you madame president are
many of us are no victor rays
from his passwork in the
executive office but he also has
that the law library at the unam
law school had been closed to
the public I think it concerned
many of us so we have
immediately given him a task to
because of what senator worth
said about his having office
hours for the students I hope
that every student will take
advantage of bringing their
complaints and issues to the
student region thank you.
go along mister victoria as an
individual who over the years is
not only work with the governor
and for the governor but she he
their knees were were constantly
met uh the last thing that I
would indicate is this
individual has been doing work
all over the state so in this
be a lot of things that are
going to be brought to his
attention and again he has a
very strong respected can't do
it to us as we continue to do
the work not going on behalf of
senator city alopes.
Thank you thank you mister
president when I was a matter
madam president of course thank
whizzingly designed because you
you always got action on on what
you were working on and that was
really important and I also when
that's really true i'm very
happy that ah victor is at the
law school I hope he's enjoying
it and I also think that the
leadership he's been a leader
good for the university I also
ran against victor
for congress and learned a lot
about his values and that was
thank you thank you madame
president and members of the
body and thank you I support
this appointment the first time
I met big deal was probably
and then but he was also there I
think in my first parade and
ship um the next time and that
was a very very enthusiastic
there in on the reservation
seeing the community.
It was a very ea it was a great
parade I thought was a great
people for those the indigenous
nations and then the tar
tribesations are published
throughout new mexico so it
really appreciate that as you
advocated
don't you and m is really been
that responsive to our students
but so I hope you are able to
elevate that that response of
you madame president as a proud
of loveness of the university of
your mexico I stand in full
support of this country and i've
had the pleasure of working with
victor both as a county
commissioner when I was the
chairman of the reary but county
rented a propane tank to obtain
propane from every any other
company that didn't rent out
that tank that's a major problem
in northern riorie but county
company to fill those tanks that
saved our voluntarily population
in northern riori county and I
will forever be thankful for
that because of his work with me
he truly understands that rural
professors and I think he's
going to be a strong voice on
the board of regions thank you
madame president thank you next
to all here from senator o neal.
basketball star so he'll be a
welcome addition to the regions
thank you so much madame chair.
Thank you any further debate.
student regent takes the
students maybe a semester and
have to get to get you know wind
under their wings this regional
hit the ground running he's at
his natural leader he loves new
stand and full support very
happy before you thank you and
don't forget to to study
thank you any other debate.
The.
Since you're surrounded as to
debate.
The.
for those of us from southern
new mexico and i'll pass so and
he's worked very closely with my
partners in a law firm before
has a lot of history with the
active in campaigning against me
thanks a lot
in the good editorial campaign
but was you know something some
source of jealousy at all the
time when i'm watching a
governor
good liaison he was a terrific
liaison for the governor built a
strong relation but I think all
of that time he was there he was
in our office and judiciary
daily if not hourly and we
us what he told us that that's
what he was going to do that he
got accepted and now of course
he's excelling their too so I
wanted to take a couple more
minutes for us to have a look
more perspective on where he's
a pitch for him in our law firm
but I know that's a few years
off so for now I know it'll be a
great reason that you and them
and i'm happy to see him up
there thank you madame
president.
victoria was when he was the
legislative layers on in the
governor's office and I must say
he of all the people i've dealt
with up there he was by far the
Thank you any other debate.
Center moon yours.
we've got tailored bullet no I
also write support I know in
victor for quite a while great
guy
always hard working.
vision of where we want to go in
what we want achievement
sometimes you fail with the
vision and sometimes you succeed
but for these universities now
A saying nonsense are worth to
close
thank you madame president and I
just want to think the governor
for this selection the president
of you and am for kind of being
voting affirmative except I was
voting in negative by show of
hands.
Sellers where are voting on the
confirmation of the terrace to
your seats if you wish to vote
The.
By a phone of thirty three and
they firm in a sierra in the
negative the confirmation of
twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the senate
center worth and I thank you
madame president laser
gentleman's senate let's stand
and give victor rays a big round
Man present.
So worth are you name is to say
we go that are business
announcements misleading single
objections were on that order of
house bill too just got red
downs we need to get that read
in some members can get.
Copies of that probably do that
tomorrow also the tax bill came
Madame president your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
referred house tax and revenue
committee substitute four house
submitted senator benny schendo
junior chair center schendel my
president I moved to adoption of
the committee report for an
adoption of a committee report
president your finance committee
to whom has been referred house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute four house
bill two as amended has had it
adoption community report rather
doction of a committee report
all those in favor signified by
saying I
those personal committee report
is adopted
on that order of business
confirmations senator had a meal
madame president I asked that
the credentials of william troy
weeser be presented to the full
senate for consideration as
two day to january twenty second
twenty twenty four I moved to
senator to here by confirm the
appointment of william try
weeseller to be chief of the new
mexico state police department.
confirming this is another one
of them
william troy whistler has spent
his entire life as part of the
state police he literally
da and alba kirki who worked as
chief council in in state agency
said he's a smart account as I
have ever met tremendous
completely selfless someone who
was there really to work for the
whole agency and again this is a
this is a big job and he has
he's hit the ground running and
I just think it's going to be a
terrific and is a terrific
achieve for the state police and
when I stand for questions.
bit of perspective we didn't
know each other very well until
just recently he became the
chief but is a been credible
asset to us even during the
interim he's been to our interim
with what he's trying to do and
I I you know I read the paper I
read the headlines and I see a
very aggressive change with his
efforts at the state police
level I think that's important
directed at the legislature from
the mayor to the council to the
chamber of commerce everybody
there says we need more laws in
santa fe we've been heard that
in the debate and last couple of
all the laws we can increase
penalties all day long but the
real action happens on the
street and the guys in the car
that the guys work in the beat
and and I think there's chief
i'm seeing your sweeps i'm
seeing your very aggressive
efforts and that's what it's
going to take it's going to take
a strong presence of law
enforcement and and a
willingness to embrace the job
last cruise is frequently
sometimes running into your your
officers frequently sometimes it
feels like we run into them
bit cloud more honest with the
speed limits in the state so I I
think that it's probably a good
thing for everyone concerned but
kept me a break once in awhile
we thank you madame president
responsive very meticulous and
approach in terms of how he is
going to include and support his
officers as they move forward so
we see a great compensation for
interstates and roads and
highways
he insurers working directly
with the people that are in his
department that they're helping
year he has reached out to make
a more included in what he does
participated in a right along
participated in working as an
is becoming a safer place so
again thank you very much chief
for all it should do for us
thank you very much madame
president thank you senator next
wealth here from senator city a
lot person thank you madame
work with to get information
from to try to understand and to
really work to ensure that
that we can bring back that we
can prob insure that law
enforcement is respected in the
for a long enforcement in the
state so i'm i'm proud to stand
in in strong support i've also
enjoyed seeing him in courts and
corrections just just just being
responsibility and and that is
really important so I stand in
strong support thank you madame
president thank you next well
here from cynical ecos
with him earlier this session
when we got the drove monies I
wanted to try to get a human
trafficking training state are
police officers and state the
different departments there
different needs and the
different are desired from all
these departments but as we are
talking to people back home in
letting him know that I haven't
new pride for what we do in one
fortune i've always appreciated
really really impressed with the
option is he's been get been
given and I just want to
congratulate him and let him
know that lee carry southeast
Thank you madame president I
also rise in support one reason
because he's never given me a
speeding ticket but he doesn't
work that district so that's
almost impossible for him you
for the agency and how what kind
of leader do you want rang and
in his name always came up
ten johnson was leaving who who
tim johnson and and there was a
lot of start talking to the
retirees even and even the
currency policeman who do want
it was troy bank and I think I
supported troy through that i'd
like to see him give a lot more
tickets on I forty for those
semi trucks there's a count on
my board that says one seventy
seven in the last deal I think
i'll will be headed home this
aggramations to the sectarian
and it's going to be our new
deep dps but they would not be
where their word if they didn't
give me good advice about how to
help them.
other family rodeo so there's a
lot of conversation that happens
with that in so i'm supporting
new troy
lot more tickets and I forty
and please don't give me a
ticket thank you.
Oh thank you senator next will
start me in my first year here
in the senate twelve years ago
and law behind the hill and well
that was a great coaching and
counseling event if I ever had
one but so this state police
chief has never stopped me
president you know a true
indicator of someone in such a
very senior law enforcement role
a two indicator of a real leader
and someone who
is collaborative and brings
police cheap for anything like
that it was always a very
collaborative great discussion
smart thoughtful and genuine and
so I just that's why i'm rising
to support this because I think
that's the kind of nature that I
rise madame president for units
consent to excuse senator duhig
until the return to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call.
A single single objection with
different when it comes to a
state police department chief
and department of a public
safety secretaries I I don't
usually meet with them and and
and there's a reason for that
it's real simple to get in room
and and glowed over yourself and
tell somebody what you do what
you've done and how well you've
done it's a whole different
story to have somebody else to
saying that I know a lot of
police officers down in valencia
county which is my neck of the
woods and I certainly made the
phone calls that I always make
for this type of appointment and
debate on the confree senator
diamond brantley thank you
madame charity when a rise and
support chief you started your
career down and diming if you
may have seen in our local
Thank you said it or anyone
else.
Saying no further debate center
worth to close thank you madame
president I really appreciate
the
gave me a message on and I don't
not sure the chief was involved
in the front end of that message
but he definitely communicated
with me and there's some issues
and we're going to work through
those and it's just that's the
the roles been called all those
president voting informative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands.
Senators we are voting on the
confirmation of william troy
william choysler as cheaper than
a mexico state police department
of public safety for term
commencing on june twenty four
I would ask the chief to stand
with his family if they could
all stand up in his both his
kids and his wife who were in
the committee let's give them a
huge round of applause and
congratulate him on this
appointment.
Center had a meal madame
president I answered the
credentials of carry our meho be
presented to the fourth and up
president pursuing to a senate
executive letter number twenty
two dated november twentieth
twenty twenty three I moved the
senate to here by confirm the
appointment of carry army hole
as cabinet secretary of the
honor to present this individual
for confirmation to want to the
most important and challenging
jobs we have in state
governments like the chief of
she stayed and she's work
through each different agency
and seen medicaid director all
these different positions this
employees that are part of this
agency it's got a budget of ten
and a half billion dollars so
right around where the total
state budget is and it serves
secretary to manage things
forward
again the testimony this morning
was really compelling about her
work ethic what she's done her
that's something that's kind of
been pulled into this new agency
and it's something they're
working on and i'm gonna
convinced that this is the right
person to work through that and
Thank you senator is their
debate on the cover senator
woods.
Thank you matter madam president
thank you.
This is nearly an impossible job
to do.
This has gotta take such
management skills to accomplish
this.
I met we have had quality step
but we're going to have to have
even more staff were putting
things together here
that's an umbelievable feet.
To manage a twelve billion
dollars deal here.
It is huge I want to I want you
this secretary to accomplish a
whole broad spectrum of things
from managing things that have
been upside down for several
years.
I plead and beg you to get
actually sim there to health uh
to to get these funds off it we
have to have.
we're gonna demand more and more
from the agencies we're going to
expect more from you if we give
more money we expect more and
important to let things fall
through the correction you've
always been very responsive to
me and I thank you very much for
Thank you very much thank you
next we'll hear from senator
compos thank you very much
madame president over the period
of time where we've listened to
way we provide health care she's
putting together not only that
huge budget working directly
with the staff the employees and
of course those people that
now says we continue to provide
what those deficiencies are that
the weaknesses are that we see
in our various communities how
she's doing it I really don't
have our full support in not
only helping to create into
strengthen this particular
service but more importantly to
serve those people that are the
Thank you madame president I
also stand in very strong
support for misermeso this
position I have had the
but as I worked with her to
suggest ideas and I found her to
going to be huge uh seven of
those challenges just to point
out too that that uh that's
taken some states twelve years
to get to where we're getting to
one is so that we have the
other states have done I mean
that is that the uh that that
methodology it's going to be
complex getting the data
together but I have all the
confidence in her that show get
through medicaid getting that
from HSD through the mco's
through the systems and into the
conditions pay jacks is going to
you're saying you know one where
the other will figure it out so
I can't imagine a better
individual with her experience
or temperament for growing
management skills to take on
And again I urge all my
colleagues to vote in favor were
very lucky to have this kind of
leadership in our state thank
you madame president thank you
working on updating the child
support statutes and she was a
pleasure to work with and we
were successful in doing that
and i'm i'm really I think she's
a really good communicator I
texting her about the brain
injury test uh trust find so
ignore the tax will talk I
I apologize so thank you mister
president I think she's going to
do a terrific job madam
Thank you mister president you
know mr mister i'm sorry i'm I
did seem to see
i'm sorry I
others you know I also write and
support and I I think I kind of
said this early on in september
lfc meaning rate this is a
twelve billion dollars agency
now and I supported her then
billion dollars there's a lot
there you have a lot to handle
this year let's try to be
successful we're going to hear
be here to help you with less
saying in the medication they
still mean how that conversation
you know people put somebody's
name wrong and it was wrong
certain person and the system
know it's happening to others
that don't have that real
ability so keep that open mind
in this keep an eye on the small
stuff in people's lifes in
health care as we move over and
think you'll handle it and
you'll do a very good job for
the state so thank you.
Thank you senator is there a
other debate sooner stephanics.
department will do besides the
health care authority it will
continue to do a supplemental
nutrition programs food funding
save money
there are other issues and
problems that were still going
to have to deal with some of
those were disgusted senate
rules this morning I know that
A single non center worth close
thank you madame president and I
really appreciate the comments
of my colleagues this is an
those present voters the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers we are voting on
the confirmation of carry army
hole to your seats if you wish
on october twelfth twenty twenty
three and to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
duly been confirmed by the
senate center worth madame
The.
presented to the force that it
for consideration as cabinet
secretary of veteran services
department I know yield to
senator pope senator pope madame
president pursuing the senate
secretary of vection services.
Sinner pope to discuss the
conferry.
Thank you madame president our
thirty five years and our us
military starting from the rank
of e one
rising to the ranker brigader
general
he is a new mexican.
he is a highly decorated
military service men as well.
But i.
And I think that's always
important I think it's that way
with all of us what we do in
this chamber what people do in
their careers.
that you could lose your life.
It's really the ultimate
sacrifice
at this time the general is
luckily he's going to retire
soon and make that transition
the civilian life
become the actual secretary he's
already been doing a great job
And we've been talking about
that
even more than last night when
we talk about our veterans we
talk about transportation issues
how we leverage what's going on
in our state and what's
governor on this appointment
we have the right man to leave
to lead the department and with
that I open up debate madame
Thank you madame president I it
is a pleasure to stand arises
support this nominee we've had
some discussions within some of
the committees around and and
the state we talked earlier I
think so the pope talked about
transportation issues for
veterans in its interesting man
president.
that there's always people
within
veteran services who act as
can't do it from these folks to
the veterans administration
maybe doing a little marketing
or or presentations to get the
word out a little bit more we
often time is going turn on but
but there's an external process
very very important critical
department in the state of new
mexico it helps so many people
in the house they have access to
in in contacts within not only
the state of the nation two
resolved issues that are
veterans have him the state
mexico that makes this a better
place for veterans to come to
making sure that our veterans
are always getting the best of
services in the state new mexico
thank you matter president thank
you senator next will hear from
sinner pale.
really second and I have seen
him advocate like there's no
tomorrow for for the people that
he represents in his department
he's gotten a lot of things done
already even before he's
actually been confirmed into the
think it's also important madame
president to just demonstrate
for the for the team that you
can rise all the way up to
brigader general and you can
rise all the way up to be a
here and outside of our day to
day is he's a very good and kind
and loving new mexican which you
don't know about him one of the
things you don't know of the
many things is he's actually
very close to one of my cousins
stephen mollesse holder and they
have a daughter and her name is
alex I don't want to put tears
hugged her and lifted her up and
and when she sees him in the
family she literally jumps off
off the off the ground and she
does that with my sons as well
relationship with and just get
to know them and really loves
them and and shows them how
important they are I can't see
all the over there and get
little bit older but I I think I
might see a couple of times
coming down over the.
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from senator brand
thank you madame president and
yeah
Is like to do we have a lot of
better internet stake and your
certain issues at the federal
level
but you have a good team I know
you'll even build that team more
and make them even better.
I started to one did not ever
make it into the officer core
so really appreciate that and
that's that's really impressive
your service your time of
and the needs of the military
here you're great advocate forum
and I look forward to working
with you in your new role in
your new post thank you.
not only support the brigader
journal but uh general but as we
move forward to also mention a
few things there he has already
done his reached out immensely
the hospital and then from their
programs within regions he's
also continued to reach out when
it comes to mental health power
weakeners support and take care
going to be fully filled the
point that i'm getting too
whether it be the national guard
where there be the veteran
services this individual is
maximizing all of his
work that you continue to do but
the devotion that your family
continues to offer in terms of
the support to help us so that
you can continue to do an
excellent jibe for all our
members of the body and I raised
in support of are generally here
and they went very much
appreciate seeing you out
networking wouldn't when I see
not knowing some of the
appointees data up here that
come back for us but I
appreciate you don't display of
honor and integrity to as you
hear from senator had a meal
thank you madame president that
I rise in full support of this
confirmation the brigadier
general is a proud native son of
northern new mexico and when one
so a number of veterans do reach
out to me in my district so
you'll be hearing from me a lot
when I reach out for help from
you but I know that you have a
servited leader's heart and
because of that when you lead
Thank you senator next tool here
from center monus
thank you madame president
elsewhere right is important and
mental health
burial help
and more people to help service
our veterans in sell it was to
shoulder but if we need help
need to help veterans or you in
any way we're there to help you
think man president.
Thank you in a further debate on
the country.
leader here someone that you
know in the air first we call
them must staying someone that
starts from you know the e one
ranks and becomes an officer and
do that to be a great leader and
him transitioning right now off
of you know his guard duty and
active duty and retiring he's
going to be able to understand
I ask unanimously consent that
the record shows that the record
show that the role has been
called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
the appointment of james and a
data secretary of the veteran
services department for term
commencing on september fifth
twenty twenty three to be served
secretary her and if it's
families could stand up as well
thank you.
Senator worst I think you madam
presidentian animals that we got
our business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Seeing no objection were on that
order of business announcements
plan today is just to do three
senate bills one two and three I
do know I understand more and on
senate on the third item a lot
of folks are asking about the
and I see a committee report
being brought up that's a good
thing so with that man impressed
madame president unanimous
concept we go to that business
committee reports.
as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
senator george monos chair
center minute we've adoption the
community reports and we vote on
them with one motion I think
that's a complete strip
and that the reflect they were
vote on it visibly.
House appropriations in finance
committee substitute for house
bill to as amended
recommendation that it do pass.
significant saying I
was supposed need committee
reporters adopted thank you
madame president so just
everybody knows there's a
forgot to take one step on that
so we are going to step it back
a moment you know since then we
go that are business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no protection were on
am on announcements in
miscellaneous what we're gonna
do unanimous consent that we
expand the earlier committee
consent just a clean up that's a
little transaction on that first
committee report.
Okay seeing no objection we have
exponent the first committee
unanimous consent we got a lot
of business committee reports
seeing no objection we're back
on that
committee reports
center minus for what purpose do
Occasionally we make mistakes
fix them as quickly as we find
them.
has been reformed be referred
house appropriations and finance
mideast substitute for house
bills two and three has under
consideration and same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted senator george minors
chair center minus move adoption
of the community report on
adoption committee report all
those in favor of significant
say no
there was a personal the eyes
of introduction of legislation
seeing no objection were on that
order of bins's introduction of
legislation senator share for
what purpose not
the reader to read.
rate on future oil and gas
development leases on state
trust lands to enhance revenues
for beneficiaries house bill
forty eight.
House bill two thirty six
introduced by representative
chassis and senator stewart and
activating the public employees
Click affairs committee house
built two thirty six.
accountability act creating the
public finance accountability
fund establishing funding
criteria and grant management
and oversight requirements in
numerating duties of the
her to refer to the senate
health and public affairs
committee house built to seventy
one.
House bill to ninety eight
better and suicide prevention
act within the veterans services
department act providing
department responsibilities to
raise awareness regarding
suicide within the population of
appropriation house bill to
ninety eight a spelled two
ninety eight have been read
twice by tires ordered referred
to the senate health and public
madame president that that one
was that one of signed to
finance.
Cause I did I didn't hear the
referral to finance.
So madame president can a asking
animals consent that that uh.
The second referral be to find
Hey so will pull back house bill
to ninety eight.
The.
We're still unintroduction of
legislation the reader to read.
Send a memorial seventeen
relating to the direct care
workers work force and
requesting adjustments the
payments to personal care
service and personal care
affairs committee senate
memorial seventeen.
name as consent we go to that
our business announcements in
missus lanes seeing an objection
were on announcements in
miscellaneous senator worth I
thank you madame president so
again we're gonna do three
yield to senator rodriguez for
item number one a sing no
objection were on that order
of business third reading of
legislation senator biggest
or substitution seeing no
objection the senator to explain
the bill thank you madame
president you may recall that in
two thousand and nineteen and
another bill very similar to
those and using general fund for
capital outlay as we're doing
this year rather than bonding
with several of severance tax
seventeen well insure that the
benefit is realized by requiring
an annual transfer for ten years
of approximately eighty two
senate by not bonding and having
to excuse me and have my my
learn giant us here by not
binding and having to pay out a
Tax permanent funds and it's
approximately eighty two million
and it'll be invested and
generate more funds into the
general fund for ten years at
the end of a ten year period we
would have generated
Seeing no debate senator
rodriguez to close thank you
negative by show of hands we are
voting senators on sent by two
seventeen as amended to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
The.
The.
The.
seventeen as amended has duly
passed the senate center record
thank you madame president
members of a senate.
Thank you moving on don't sit
down senator
action for place and senate bill
to sixteen and final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
But is there a debate on senate
the bill thank you madame
president
senate bill to sixteen amanda
the new mexico finance authority
act to add housing as an
public projects for example
currently
the there is a list of eligible
projects that qualify for it to
and and it also allows them
going along with that it allows
nonprofit house and developers
for example home ways or
neighborhood housing trust or
there so that they can get some
apply for a grants and qualify
through this grants to be able
to to just a help with a
clearances with the soil and
water conservation districts to
be able to get federal funds so
it's all within the spectrum of
affordable housing and grants to
help with with plants.
Seeing no debate senator
rodriguez to close
thank you madame president I
moved the senate bill to sixteen
do not pass and I ask unanimous
Senators we are voting on senate
bill two sixteen as amended to
your seats if you wish to vote
no police raise your hands.
By voda thirty four in the
affirmative zero in the
negative.
Thank you next we'll move to
item number three
singer steinborne thank you
madame president um I ask you
them as soon as the senate the
set passage on all actives been
taken on subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Sir steinborn to explain the
Sirstein born itself too thank
you while now present one only
give you so won minute preface
on the bill and then we'll move
the amendment so colleagues is
this bill in its simplest form
have to accept essentially all
insurance on the exchange or
they have to where if they're
not then they have to pay a
contracted rate that is now
as it says that if you were the
only provider in your community
of a life saving treatment
and actually amendments his life
threatening tremendous think
about how narrow that is the
plan to somebody who who is
uninsured and we define in this
amendment affordability so
that's what the bill does and
through the process of obviously
chair as i've met with both
sanities and you know getting
everybody basically to where
they feel okay with it i'm not
saying that they're excited but
they understand that they should
debates on in the last few days
so with that I would move the
floor amendment and then talk
about what that us.
We do have the floor amendment
spounded by senator jeff
steinboard
sitters time born to explain the
tip first to explain the amount
but on mount president okay so
bill for purposes of billing
patience and role than a
qualified health plan qualified
health plan is the definition of
a plan on an exchange.
Ah number two on the amendment
just one carrier is kind of
meant to be ploral but it's just
clarifying language
number number two on the
amendment well it's actually
um
amendment is language that blue
cross blue shield had requested
that we worked out that
basically says if you are a
provider fear one of these
insurance companies who is not
uh provider so that you are
getting paid the same rates as
if it was an in provider
hospital.
affordable payment plan has to
do with life threatening
conditions before it said
serious conditions and so we're
strengthening that to life
threatening conditions so
section said in the bill that
they would have to provide an
affordable payment plan to
somebody was uninsured if they
have a life threatening well
what is affordable mean that's
kind of important to define that
right well this amendment
payment pursuit to not to exceed
five percent of a patience
monthly household adjusted gross
income finally we took something
out of the balance billing this
so with that again just kind of
clarifying for their
adding specificity to the bill
and a happy to answer questions
i'm out of present and you know
i'd like to if I can start off
because I know there are some
i'd like to ask for you know
it's consent to invite up to
expert witnesses with the
offices a superintendent of
insurance if you can name those
experts absolutely madame
president it is a colin belleo
single no objections search of
arms please escort the expert
witnesses into the chamber.
to talk about the men and I have
to talk about the bill a little
bit
essentially what this bill does
it looks really complicated and
back and forth are even more
complicated but a sense this are
boils down to three very simple
thanks number one
They got admitted uhm then they
were potentially subject to
balance billing uh their fee
sometimes so this bill has a
mechanism for that hospital to
get paid by that individuals
health insurance on a medicare
already on the exchange then
those co insurance is apply to
that individual and that uh in
the in there than a very if you
don't have any insurance a very
technical so I would urge my
colleagues
what will be here to midnight if
we have to work through all the
pieces of the language in the
new answers and so forth but
with that hospital or patience
to have no insurance at all and
it's workable to the plans to
the hospitals and I would urge
everyone to
amendment first but thank you
madame chair man president
excuse me.
Weird on debate of the amendment
center pater.
same no objection we will do
that sitter or teasy pinot to
debate the amendment.
bill I mean when when we saw
this bill in senate
health and public affairs it was
a page and a half
then it went to tax committee
do this before we break for the
super ball and all the rest of
the the pressure we're under
right now this I I just think
changes like this need to be
really evaluated and I got to
hospital association who say
this is not worked out they they
they have serious objections and
and I I just that's what the
committees are for that's where
we hear those kind of objections
heard in on the floor which they
won't be really because you know
we don't give him a chest to
speak they certainly were good
are going to try this up in
nights and the house so we don't
gain anything by this I would
table because some of them said
they weren't on the table they
thought that the version we were
going to be dealing with today
was the one that was passed out
no we need to be able to really
understand what we're voting on
and I would say that we do that
by working out of during the
internet that's my suggestion
until the interim but I think
there's enough new things
happening here that we're not
going to get this done in the
time for the house is not even
in session we came in I
appreciate everyone coming in we
administrative absorb your
amendment I know senator moores
wanted to visit with you about
the bill you know he's has some
personal issues he's dealing
with and we're just not going to
force something I think that's a
amendments with everyone tonight
and and we'll try and put it on
tomorrow I think you'll have a
much better chance getting this
bill through the house if you
can figure something out then
you will try to force it with a
Certain i've sort of run purpose
to you right simply a technical
question that is is it possible
or have we already put the
amendment on the website i'll
with this bill at this point.
that chief clerk and i'm getting
a yes not for the chief clerk so
I guess that's the answer my
questions that we have so thank
you very much now that's that
that was I just want to make
sure that we have that out there
for everybody thank you very
and don't force it at this point
so are without matter president
you know this is that we go that
business introduction
legislation.
Singing no objection were on
that order business introduction
act related to veterans and
acting the service members and
better and suicide prevention
act within the veteran services
department act providing
department responsibilities to
raise awareness regarding
suicide prevention resources
providing definitions making an
appropriation house bill to
eighty eight i'll spell two
president unamix is that we're
going to business announcements
and miscellaneous seeing no
objection were on announcements
and miscellaneous senator worth
chairs to make their
announcements for tomorrow I
will say for the public again we
did read in the budget and we're
going to do the budget tomorrow
so I just encourage members as
well take a look at that tonight
we'll have that debate tomorrow
on the floor so ideal other
members.
K were on announcement
caucus meeting tomorrow morning
ten am in the senate launch.
Thank you senator center hotel
mail madame president the rules
committee will be meeting
from set reps they're narrowed
and then senate memorial for
we're going to try to get to you
madame president the others more
than likely will be rolled over
thank you.
get to it well before the caucus
if people are on time please be
on time room three eleven for
education other announcements
sender or teasy pino thank you
madame president the senate
have three well we picked up two
more we will probably be a a
relatively short meeting half
hour following the floor
session.
any other announcements.
A single non senator worth
thank you madam president with
that unanimous consent the
