Santerbergins.
Senator Block.
Senator Boone,
Senator Brandt.
Senator Do Hick.
Center is.
Center Figueroa.
Santera echos.
Center Lanai.
Santa Lopez.
Caeest.
Saint Paul.
Santa Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Santa Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sendo.
Center souls.
Senator Stephonics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Santa Trujillo
Senator Wirth. Senator Woods.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you. I'd like
to ask everyone to please rise
allegiance and espanol to be led
today by Senator Jaramillo and
the salute to the Mexico flag to
be led today by President Protem
Stewart.
low.
We
of
Be a shield around us, removing
adversity and sorrow, shelter us
with your protecting love, O
source of grace and compassion,
Guard are going out and are
who have devoted their lives to
our welfare.
Bless them with the capacity to
hear and listen.
promote justice, clarity,
ethical living and acts of
kindness, a fountain of
blessings are you holy ones
spreading your succa of peace,
Sha.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
You may be seated
I'd like to welcome you to
today's session of the New
Mexico State Senate and to start
things off, I'll kick off to our
announcements and miscellaneous.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Just before I go
to my little road map. Let me
yield to our two whips on both
chamber and in the Senate
gallery. no objection. Cameras
are allowed both in the gallery
and in the chamber. Thank you.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Unanimous
First of all, thank you for the
beautiful prayer.
Thank you for inviting God into
our chamber today.
And Mr. President, I ask for
for the purpose of a call.
Seeing no objection, so ordered.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Uh, we certainly appreciate your
blessings to this chamber and
just guidance as we start off as
Senator Lopez always likes to
blessings certainly help us. So
thank you for being here. Uh, a
couple of announcements today is
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Day
in Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce day at the legislature.
O'Malley, and Maestus have that
certificate. It's also national
Laboratory Day at the
legislature. That'll be Senator
Jaramillo, uh, that will also be
red, and you'll have 2 guests,
Assistances day at the
legislation.
and there's a certificate that's
not going to be read. Senator
Hickey will have some guests on
that one.
In terms of events, the New
120, I'm sorry, 128 palace at
the Green Room, um, 128 Palace
Street, Suite C, 5:30 to 7:30
p.m. So it's not the Palace
Tomorrow there will be a joint
session for Asian American
Pacific Islander and Hawaiian
Yamada and smattered by Senator
Sidillo Lopez. We appreciate
that. And just one final
reminder for new members, the
legislative Finance Committee
and really for all members is
continuing its workshops
programs and funding. I see
Senator Padilla shaking his
head. I bet he'll be there at
that. So just again, really
appreciate legislative finance
committee doing these training
do the certificates. I
understand we've got some
confirmations.
So, uh, once those committee
reports come down, they're here,
I'm told. So after we get done
with the certificates, we'll go
OK, thank you, Mr. President and
thank you Senate body for this
Las Cruces in 2016, uh, with her
husband Bill. The community
welcomed her with open arms and
hearts, and it wasn't difficult
for Debbie to immediately get
involved and not only helping
herself in our community and our
generosity of spirit is seen in
many aspects in our city and as
the CEO of the Las Cruces Green
Chamber of Commerce, I get to
work.
With Debbie a lot and it's
in Oklahoma a couple of years
ago I was able to serve as her
Senate sponsor for her to be on
the New Mexico military base
commission, um, and she
demonstrates her knowledge and
regulation regulatory advisory
committee, and if you will,
please welcome my guest and
friend Debbie Moore.
Mhm
the honorable Mayor, uh, Enrica
Eric Enriquez from Las Cruces.
And also Miguel Acosta, who
Mr. President and Senate body
for indulging me and letting me
introduce my guests.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Center souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
escape room down in Las Cruces
is a small business. It's been
there for about 7 or 8 years
now. Uh, you may remember him
during the COVID.
and around Las Cruces. He is a
board member of the
International jet port in Donana
County Airport down at Santa
Teresa. He is also a board
member of the Soul Zero
Thank you Center Souls. Senator
Jaramil.
championship this weekend. And I
also want to congratulate the
Espanola Valley High School Mesa
students who are the New Mexico
Governor STEM challenge
champions, and to all of them
Thank you Mr. President. I'm
honored to have 3 guests from
Rio Rancho here. uh, Doctor
Carol Chapman, she's a retired
Parr, and last but not least,
Mr. President, another Rio
Rancho, uh, friend is Adam De
Groot, as they say in Holland.
And just want to welcome him
into the chamber. Thank you, Mr.
Senator Tobiasson, thank you,
Mr. President. I actually have
guests that are coming over from
the House chamber, so if I could
have your permission, Mr.
morning prayer as one of the
Jewish members of the chamber,
it's always kind of special we
have a Jewish, um, morning
prayer, but very unusual words,
guest, um, Andrew Hara, who is
the director of the film office
in Las Cruces.
Andrew is a and he works for an
he's a kind of a cult, I don't,
I don't want to use the wrong
word here. He's not in a cult.
He's a.
But he's a beloved figure and
like horror movie reviews, and
he's got his own kind of thing
the 3rd year in a row in the top
10 film towns in America. So
give it up for Las Cruces.
big film town in America by
Movie Maker magazine.
And give it up for Albuquerque.
And like I always say, if Las
Cruces can, you can too.
Because all of your towns want
to be film towns. And, uh, you
public service for us and
growing the film industry in Las
Cruces, so appreciate Andrew
being here today. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Steinborg.
I was
seeing no further announcements
we'll come back to uh once we go
to announce this miscellaneous
County folks to come over, so
we'll get that when we, when
we're at that point and it's
National Lab Day will do that in
just a sec. I, I did wanna just
follow up and I really
appreciate Sander Steinbon
kind of figured this out is just
the breadth of the impact of the
film industry. It's not just
about film, it's about all these
small businesses, hotels, all
Las Cruces is there on the list
is doing in large part to a lot
of your advocacy, you know, for
that film credit going across
the state, which really it was
designed to do so.
just also wanted to say a few
we, we do have, uh, Senator
Brantly was gonna do an
announcement, um, before we get
certificates if, if
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Lieutenant
Demming. She is in the 8th
grade, where she loves playing
volleyball and arts and crafts
when she graduates high school,
she plans to go on to law school
or perhaps medicine. Thank you,
Chelsea, for being here today
Thank you Senator Brantley.
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
yield to Senator Padilla for
Bernalillo County Day.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature, first session 2025,
the New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
with nearly 690,000 residents,
or one third of the state's
population living within its
borders, including 100.
vested in an elected 5 member
board of county commissioners
who share executive functions
with 5 elected county officials,
oversees a staff of more than
3000 full-time employees in 41
departments with a fiscal year
2025 budget of more than $762
housing options for central
regions residents within the
establishment of the Middle Rio
Grande housing collaborative and
whereas the county clerk
operated.
whereas the county treasurer has
collected property taxes and
main maintains a portfolio of
successful investments and
whereas Bernao County operates a
37,000 calls for service each
year in the Burnley County
Sheriff's Department has taken
the lead in creating a
behavioral health support team
within the department whereas
state.
And whereas Bernardino County
operates the Metropolitan
Detention Center, the state's
largest jail with a bed count
whereas Berlio County provides
funding and staff support to the
2nd judicial district's Criminal
Justice Coordinating counsel,
which brings together numerous
partners to spearhead innovative
initiatives such as DW.
$132 million in federal American
rescue Plan Act of 2021 funds,
more than 300 private, state,
and federal grant awards that
run through 2028, and more than
that have received capital
outlay funds to further their
initiatives in the central
region and whereas Berlio County
health grocer seats taxes for
programs to aid the most
vulnerable, including money that
supports crisis triage services
at the University of New Mexico
collaborates with the city of
Alerque as a critical supporter
of the Gateway Center and is
working jointly with the city to
develop a strategic and focused
open space department stewards
more than 17 properties and
nearly 1150 acres and maintains.
of the region and the state, the
innovative financing programs
that benefit companies,
taxpayers, small businesses, the
film industry and special
events. Now, therefore, be it
For the county in their vital
contributions to the central
region and the state.
Signed and sealed that the
capital in the city of Santa Fe,
Well thank you very much uh Mr.
President. This is a joyous,
wonderful, powerful day for New
Mexico when our largest county
comes to the state capital to
the beautiful historic
want to recognize senators
O'Malley and Maestas for joining
me in this effort, Senator
Cedillo Lopez and all the other
Bernalo County contingency, um,
that are joining us for this
effort and I do.
things for Central New Mexico,
and we should be very proud of
all of the work that they're
doing. I do want to yield to my
two specific co-hosts here for
the day, Mr. President. I'll
yield first to Senator O'Malley,
county to the, to the Senate.
um, as many of you know, um,
like many communities in New
Mexico, Bernalillo County has a
and uh I think uh what's unique
about I think Berno County is
that it is the, you know, has a
very urban, very urban core.
And it's surrounded by historic
it's very diverse. The, in the
neighborhoods within uh the
county are also very diverse.
Um, I just want to applaud the
constituency and a good example
is the behavioral health
program, um, that they
administer.
It is not stagnant. It's, it's,
uh, they look at, they're always
trying to improve that, um,
that's a very needed, uh,
County.
So, um, I'm very glad to see
some swag, and I do see that we
have the sheep.
And uh this represents the seal,
also, you know, know a lot of
folks here or colleagues who are
also from Burn Leo County and um
thank you all for coming up.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Lopez.
There's Stewart.
Thank you Mr. President and of
course living in Burnleyo County
commissioners up on the DS is
actually 5? Oh my gosh, you've
got a quorum. watch out.
They're gonna make decisions up
there right now.
international district, uh,
previously, of course, our mayor
was a senator, Senator Tim
Keller, and he and
Representative Al Park then, um,
uh, we could use more as you
drive down.
control it
That business is gone, that
So housing is our biggest
problem. I think it's a problem
all over the state, but it's
issue, so, uh thank you to
Burnley Oak I see our, our brand
new manager up there, very happy
to have her, so, uh, go burnco.
yield to Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Senator Lopez, thank you, Mr.
President. I stand in honor of
the certificate because I'm very
proud to be from Valencia
County. Of course, my area is
what Bernallio County government
has done. I mean, they bought a
new building and then
refurbished it and made it so.
stunningly beautiful. That was
into uh are just really making a
difference in Albuquerque and
Bernalillo County and of course
our elected officials um I know
echo, um, our president Go burn
Co.
Thank you, Senor C Lopez.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Mr. President. I'll yield
have our leadership here from
Bernalillo County with us today.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Bernalillo
County Rocks.
But the response that I have
always received from a phone
call that I've made looking for
information, whatever it may be
to help a constituent. The
response has always been
county manager and it's just,
uh,
When I talk to constituents, um,
looking to see when we can get
something taken care of and I
loves these, um.
Little sheep, she still has some
from a few years back that have
kind of yellowed a little bit,
shows you how long I've been
around, but these are really
Senator Michael Padilla, thank
you very much, Mr. President. So
you have heard the very rich
tapestry that is Bernalillo
County and again, you know, all
of the wonderful things that
were, were read in this
uh, senator then then
commissioner O'Malley is Senator
O'Malley now. She's sitting
right up there next to you, Mr.
President, and I took Burn Co
Bernie and I was interviewed.
family, you know, we live in,
in, uh, and are from a little
tiny hamlet called Los Padillas.
Yeah, I know you've been there
many times, uh, Mr. President,
and, uh, the largest
unincorporated portion of
like many of our families did
and uh organizations like
Bernalo County and we had the
one Bernalo County ran its own
schools. We donated land, our
family did, so we would have the
after the family name, as you
can imagine, Mr. President. So,
um, you know, with that I do
have a lot of guests if you're
OK with that, Mr. President, I'd
like to introduce quite a few of
them now.
up and I'm gonna call out
specific folks, but I do want to
let you know that we have a lot
of very hardworking Bernalillo
County staff all over the
building. I see many of them in
give our staff up there a hand,
please, and joining us on the
dais next to you, Mr. President.
We have County commission chair
Eric Olivas. I'm gonna get
through everybody and then we
can have, I'm just gonna have
Commissioner Baca. Um, we have
commissioner Walt Benson as
well, and I'm gonna dote on one
of the commissioners because
I've known him, Mr. President,
since I was about yeah high and
he's always been a great advisor
on about this, this New Mexican
here. He's outstanding. We also
have assessor Damien Latta.
We also have county clerk
Michelle Kavanagh.
Uh, Sheriff John Allen is unable
to be with us, so we have
undersheriff Holly Anderson.
We also have uh a treasurer Tim
Eichenberg was not able to be
with us. We have deputy county
Deputy Treasurer Linda Stover
also want to highlight that we
have some of the key uh C-suite
folk with us this morning, uh,
county manager Cindy Chavez. We
County, Mr. President.
Senator Tovison
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
honored today to introduce my
guests first, um.
today. Um, I have Mrs. Dana
Covington, the USA swimming
national official chair and in
this position she volunteers and
deck referee for the 2024
Olympic trials in Indianapolis
and this event was the largest
attended swim event in history
taking place in the Lucas Oil
Vetterlein, a USA swimming
official that is actually she
was one of 2, right? One of only
2 swimming starters for the 2024
collegiate, and of course the
Olympics. She also works as an
accounting bookkeeper in
Fallbrook, California, and
together they've been providing
um educational opportunities in
A lot of them have caps and
goggles.
And they're all here visiting us
in in the capital because we
swimming pool in New Mexico and
give swimmer of all ages and
competencies just amazing
opportunities, so I'd like you
to please welcome my guests.
Thank you so much for being
Tobiasson Senator Woods.
Mr. President, I, I just want to
note
A quick note of, uh, my good
friend Linda Stover.
about, and I did that on an
election bill one time and I
spent much time with Linda.
me on how things were done in
election process in Berlio
County and she is absolutely a
gem, and I'm going to
yours, and, uh, uh, I saw him
not too long ago, so they're
doing well. And also, Mr.
President, if I could say
something about my other good
chamber and uh actually passed
one over there. Unbelievable,
Mr. President.
uh, and he was always kind to me
and, and even
Let me sit close to him once in
Um, today we gather in a
celebration of Black History
Month.
The time to reflect on the
immeasurable contributions of
And it must be honored not just
in February.
But every single day.
Yet despite this profound impact
of black leaders, artists,
Will you see your attacks on
diversity, equity inclusion
initiatives.
Attempts to silence
conversations about racial
But let me be clear, we will not
allow history to be rewritten.
Nor will we allow progress to be
reversed.
We will stand firm. We will
speak the truth and we will
celebrate black history today.
From the abolition of slavery to
the civil rights movement from
the Harlem Renaissance to the
modern day social justice
movements, our contributions
cannot and will not be ignored.
These attempts are not just acts
of censorship.
These are acts of erasure.
But let me remind you,
Black history is resilient.
the face of oppression.
And let us not forget the
attacks on DEI.
Efforts that aim to provide fair
opportunities for all.
We must defend DI initiatives
because they are about building
a nation that lives up to its
ideals.
Where everyone has a seat at the
table.
And an equal chance to thrive.
settlers, cowboys, buffalo
soldiers and civil rights
pioneers have long shaped this
land.
From the African American
homesteaders of blocked them.
bravely served in the US Army
after the Civil War, played a
vital role in securing the
Southwest.
Blocked to New Mexico was a
beacon of hope in the early 20th
politics, business, and the
arts making significant strides
in shaping the state's identity.
We must uplift these stories,
preserving it, celebrating it
and ensuring the future
generations learn the truth
about those who came before
them.
As we honor black history, let's
to justice.
We celebrate black history when
we support black owned
businesses, artists, and
entrepreneurs.
We celebrate black history when
When we ensure that our children
learn about Harriet Tubman,
Malcolm X, the Joiner Truth, and
the black pioneers here in New
Mexico.
Today we reaffirm our commitment
to the celebration.
We'll hold events, we'll tell
stories and honor our ancestors
and empower our future
generations.
progress.
As we leave here today, let's
carry the torch of black history
forward.
Not just as a moment, but as a
movement.
Because black history is
American history.
And it deserves to be told,
cherished, and celebrated
forever.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Polk.
Senators, we're still in that
order of business announced it's
Peter Worth to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. We'll
stay on announcements and I'd
yield to Senator Jaramillo for
National Laboratory Day, a
certificate that will get read.
Hearing no objection, the reader
will read.
The legislature of the state in
Mexico of fifty-seventh
legislature for session 225, the
New Mexico State Senate does
as national lab Day in the
Senate, whereas Sandia National
Laboratories and Los Alamos
National Laboratory have been
cornerstones of scientific
nation's center of excellence
for military space science,
research and development, and
advanced technology focusing on
United States space missions and
security and developing
technologies that ensure the
safety and reliability of the
United States nuclear deterrent
space forces centers for
Research and Development and
maintains numerous state of the
art research laboratories at
Kirtland Air Force Base and
and companies and performing
multidisciplinary science and
engineering research programs
with significant impact on.
national security and whereas
some of the most pressing issues
facing the world today and
whereas Sania National
Laboratories Los Los Alamos
National Laboratory and the Air
partnerships that drive
innovation and technological
advances in support of state and
local businesses and whereas
Sandia National Laboratories has
employs more than 10,400 people
and whereas Los Alamos National
Laboratory purchases more than
one.
billion dollars annually from
organizations and whereas the
Air Force Research Laboratory
has an overall economic impact
in New Mexico of $675 million
than 200 active duty military
personnel, and whereas the
laboratories prioritize
community engagement and invest
programs donating funds to
community organizations and
supporting STEM education in
schools. Now therefore.
be resolved by the Senate of the
Laboratory by recognizing
February 3rd, 2025, National Lab
Day in the Senate.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
Thank you to our reader, and
I'll yield to Senator Jaramilo.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm a
proud staff operations manager
at Los Alamos National
Laboratory, and my story at the
lab took me there as a high
entered the workforce and you
either provided for the family
or you went out on your own to
learn how to survive on your
own. And so it was a laboratory,
2 mentors, Bill Watt and Joseph
Ortega who told me that
education.
and had a $50 money order
written out to the University of
New Mexico, reluctantly, I
didn't want to go to college,
but they reminded me that
education would be the key to my
is.
the laboratory holds a special
place in my heart, not just as
an economic driver for Northern
New Mexico and fighting daily
for nuclear deterrents and for
you as their senator because
education has been the key to my
success. Joining me today, Mr.
President, are two Los Alamos
National Laboratory scientists,
which I'm excited to present.
2005, his primary experience is
combining statistical models and
large scale simulations to make
predictions and qualify and
d s and nuclear weapons. He
recently served as the group
leader for Lane's statistical
sciences group and as the
machine learning project leader
for Lane's Advancement
This project brings together
over 100 scientists from across
the laboratory to develop AI for
Lane's mission. Also joining us
is Doctor Susanna Wood. Doctor
Doctor Wood has been a member of
the XTD division since 2011 and
a staff science and scientists
since 2019. She has combined to
high.
energy density physics
and stockpile related projects
resulting in 3 large team
distinguished performance awards
and two defense program awards
of excellence. Doctor Wood is
integrator and into blessary
work, Mr. President, if you can
help me welcome these two lan
scientists to the New Mexico
Senate.
We're still in that order of
business announcements
miscellaneous.
Senate majority leader Peter
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So we're gonna go to
Senator Hickey, did you have an
announcement that you would like
to make?
Senator Wirth.
present. Let's go back to
to follow through that I would
be uh uh putting forth a
certificate for the anesthesia,
uh, associates at the University
192,020 and developed a program.
Uh, after a bill authorizing
passed, uh, a couple of years
ago and the program is permanent
and we are now seeing a number
states who are getting their
degree here and then practicing
here, reversing some of the
shortage issues that we have.
honors the fact that the folks
have been working very hard and
that today should be the day
that we have
started, uh, Alia Arie, who's
president of the inaugural
class, and this is the first
class where we brought people in
from out of state. Eileen.
that we are able to keep them to
help us get through surgery, all
the surgeries that we have to
do, uh, in the state is
particularly in Class A
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senator Georgia Flo leader Peter
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go without our business
committee has had under
consideration amended Senate
executive letter number 55 dated
January 16, 2025, in which the
governor makes the following
confirmation expiring December
31st, 2030. Your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this reappointment.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig, chair.
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader will read.
Senate executive letter number
50 dated December 18, 2024,
2025, and expiring January 1st,
2029.
Committee recommends the Senate
confirm this reappointment.
Senate executive letter number
of the state board of finance
for a term conmencing on July
22, 2024, expiring July 21st,
2026.
the governor makes the following
reappointment. Martin Aranao as
a member of New Mexico Finance
Authority for a term commencing
Katie Doig Cha. Senator Dog, Mr.
President, I move adoption of
the committee reports we have a
motion to adopt the committee
reports.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those pone, the eyes have it.
go to that our business
confirmations, and I yield to
Senator Jaramil.
Hearing no objection. We're in
that order of business
confirmation Senator Jaramio.
Munoz.
Senator Munoz, thank you, Mr.
President. I want to introduce
Joe Lujan. You know, we've been
friends for a long time and, and
you learn a lot about people and
Mexico, from leadership New
Mexico as the past chairman to
the Mexico Migos to Mexico's
kids can and, and the list goes
on and on, uh, TBI presidential
leave it in my wallet and leave
a million dollars in there.
I know if I died, I might have
1,999 because he might have
bought himself a cup of coffee
on the way to bring me my
a father unless you father isn't
here anymore to watch your
father stand up and show how
much love and respect they have
Make warms the heart of all New
Mexicans that the father is here
supporting the son with so much
trust in what he wants to do in
the board of finance and so as
we move forward with this and I,
move through that, I asked the
body support Joe Lujan and, and
Mr. Lujan, I appreciate what
your father, uh, good for your
son.
dated October 21st, 21, 2024, I
moved that to who I confirm the
appointment of Joseph Martin
Lujan to the state board of
finance.
already, we'll move into debate.
We're debating the appointment
as a member of the state board
of finance Joseph Martin Luhan
anyone wishing the debate?
The records show that all the
role has been called.
And all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, senators. We
are voting all senators to your
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The appointment of Joseph Martin
Luhan is a member of the state
board of finance for a term.
Thank you, Mr. President. With
the body welcome Joe Lujan as
your new member of the port of
finance.
Aron Szo he presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
member of the New Mexico Finance
Authority. I now yield to
Senator Campos. Thank you,
Senator Campos. Thank you very
reappointment of Martin Abra
Suazo
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
Thank you. Say no objections.
Senator Campos to explain. Thank
small business owner along with
that, the time that he has spent
on many boards and commissions,
it has always been to help the
public good, the common good
here in New Mexico.
the lives of many New Mexicans,
a couple of those things are is
uh serving as chairman of the
New Mexico Land Trust advisory
board along with that as vice
As they moved forward with so
many needs all the way from
housing to health care.
Along with that, in terms of his
background and acumen, if you
will, in the area of finance,
authority and one of the latest
initiatives that he's undertaken
has been how he can continue to
assist and help those people,
the working class individuals
vision to help people at all
levels as he moves forward and
so with that, Mr. President, uh,
we stand for questions and then
of course, uh we'll move forward
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. Thank
you, uh, Senator Campos for
bringing this conferry forward.
I've known this individual for
many, many years, and I don't
Mexico and and all New Mexicans.
I do, uh, chair the oversight
committee for the legislature
for the New Mexico Finance
Authority, so we work closely
with this, this particular
organization, and I will tell
you that, um, in addition to
on things that are popular or
things that are, um, feel good,
takes on really tough issues as
well. So I just want to thank
him for agreeing to do this work
for us, and he's just got my
the Senate, I ask and consent
that the records show that the
role has been called in all
those present voter in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Senators, we are voting
all senators to your seats,
By a vote of 35 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The reappointment of Martin of
Ron Suazo is a member of the New
New Mexico Senate, Senator
Campos, thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, if you would please help
me welcome and congratulate
Martin Swazo on his
reappointment. Thank you.
President, I ask that the
credentials of Kathleen Diane
Keith, be presented to the full
Senate for consideration as a
member of the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
the reappointment of Kathleen
Diane Keith to the New Mexico
Finance Authority There are no
objections. Senator Jarami to
explain. Thank you, Mr.
President, Kathleen Keith is Los
in the small business and
business community. Kathleen has
over 20 years of experience in
public policy, including working
as a legislative director to a
Department. She has experience
managing budgets exceeding $400
million and organizations with
over 100 personnel. She has
worked across the nation as a
body of Santa Fe Community
College, Kathleen holds a
bachelor's degree in journalism
and political science from Texas
Tech University and a master's
Thank you, Senator Demil.
Senators, we're debating the
reappointment of Kathleen Diane
Keith, Senator Trujillo.
very dear friend, uh, Cathy, but
I was actually having breakfast
with her husband at the Lanel
Breakfast for legislators this
morning. She is as has already
been stated, one of the most
See no further debate. Sent her
how to meet a close on the
confirmation. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
I vote of 36 in the affirmative,
0 in the negative. The
reappointment of Kathleena and
Jaramillo. Thank you, Mr.
President. Congratulations to
Cathy Keith, members of the
Senate. If you can please help
me and congratulating Cathy on
her reappointment.
that the credentials of Doctor
Yolanda Jones King King be
presented to the full Senate for
consideration as a member of the
New Mexico Institute of Mining
executive letter message number
55 dated January 16th of 2025, I
moved that the Senate do hereby
confirm the reappointment of
you, Mr. President, members of
the body, this person has an
extremely, um,
Skilled and full resume and I'd
secret clearance and uh some
other clearances because she not
only works uh has worked for
NATO and the defense counsel and
many others, but she works
Board and um has led them to uh
at least examine their mission
and see how they can fully
develop.
the statewide level through
professional jobs and through
all of their education and
schooling and I can only um.
highly commend this candidate.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
stand in strong support of this
nomination, um, Ms. King and I
are both members of the
International Women's Law Forum
Mining Shas such value to that
board of regents. It is a
shining star in our state and
part of that is having such a
strong um and effective board of
Regents, so I'm, I'm very much
in strong.
President, and, uh, thank you,
Senator Stephanics for bringing
this highly, highly, highly,
can't say it enough qualified
individual to this role. I will
tell you that I spent about 10
Yolanda, uh, stepped up every
single time we had any sort of
anything of any kind of whatever
we needed to know more about or
we wanted an opinion on or we
wanted someone who knew what was
really happening on the ground.
in the schools and universities.
that now. So, thank you, uh, Mr.
President, I fully support.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Senator Jaramil, followed by
Senator Block. Thank you, Mr.
President. I rise in full
support of this conferee. Now,
a seat at the table and know
that they are equally qualified
to take on STEM jobs and to help
lead science, technology, and
engineering. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
was a mentor to me, uh,
gentleman named, uh, retired
Major General of Thomas, um,
was, uh, very close to her and
is very close to me.
board to talk about our nuclear
deterrence and to help us also
recapitalize our nuclear
deterrence, which is near and
dear to my heart as a retired
capable commander at Voel Air
Base in the Netherlands with our
NATO allies. This is a woman who
is extremely qualified in a
national treasure located here
our, our number one priority in
the Department of Defense are
nuclear deterrence mission.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Block. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
Ramos.
Mr. President, thank you so much
almost 3 years and I shared the
secret top secret in SCI
clearance with you and I, I
really do appreciate the
projects and the research being
done at New Mexico Tech. It
Further debate.
Senator Stephanics to close on
the confirmation. Thank you, Mr.
President. I ask unanimous
consent that the records show
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand, sit in
sinner Maestas.
and Technology, Border regions
for the term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
31st, 2030 has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate, Senator Saanics.
Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We go to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous. Hearing no
objection, we are in that order
of business announcing
miscellaneous Senator Peter
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President, now being 11:59 a.m.
morning session are present in
this afternoon session. There's
no objection. It is so ordered.
Mr. President, I ask you to ask
consent that the rules be
suspended that the records show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved, subject to
adjourn until 12:01 p.m. The
Senate will come to order.
Mr. President, I ask you to ask
consent that the rules be
suspended to the journal show
all those present in this
morning's session are present in
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. There's no
objection. It is so ordered.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent, we
go on our business introduction
Enacting the special special
education act creating the
Office of Special Education.
Providing powers and duties,
providing for the transfer of
certain federal funding from the
um by removing the office from
the developmental disabilities
council to the public education
department recompiling the
special education IA Act in the
Then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate bill 38.
Senate Bill 243 introduced by
portion of gross receipts tax
revenue to municipalities and
counties distributing a portion
of gross to see tax revenue to
all the cities and counties
fund.
that Senate Bill 243.
Senate Bill 244 introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to crime, creating the crime of
definition of racketeering
Senate Bill 244244 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
schools requiring all charter
schools to be board of boards of
finance separating charter
school audits from those of
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee Senate
Bill 245.
Senate Bill 246 introduced by
Senator Pope.
An act relating to schools.
Limiting liability. Senate Bill
246 246 having been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee, the Senate Judiciary,
An act relating to public
schools requiring the public
education department to publish
the results of the department
approved summative assessments
for science, mathematics, and
publication access, assigning
duties to the public education
department. Senate Bill 247247,
have you been read twice by
Senator Pope.
An act relating to lobbyists,
amending the lobbyist regulation
Act, providing definitions,
Then Senate Judiciary that
Senate Bill 248.
Senate Bill 249 introduced by
Senator Brandt, an act relating
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee.
Thence Senate Finance Committee,
that's Senate Bill 249.
An act relating to federal use
of state resources.
Prohibiting state and local
agencies from expending
obsolete.
Federal reference Senate bill
250 250 having been read twice
by title is order printed and
Senator Sanchez.
An act relating to public
employees, expanding the
definition of peace officers who
could return to work under
Senate bill 251.
Senna bill 252 introduced by
Senator Figueroa and act
relating to telehealth amending
Send a bill, 252 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate bill 252.
possession of a firearm,
providing that a person
convicted of possession of a
firearm or destructive device is
not eligible for earned
meritorious deductions.
The Senate Finance Committee.
That's Senate Bill 253.
Senate Bill 254 introduced by
cybersecurity advisory
Committee, Senate Bill 254254
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Rules Committee.
Creating the crime of
facilitation of the unlawful
sale of a firearm without a
background check.
Providing penalties.
Adding unlawful sale of a
Senate Bill 255 Senate Bill 255
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee.
The Senate Judiciary Committee.
Introduced by senators Thornton
and Paul.
An act related to school safety.
Enacting the school teachers on
site Protection Act.
Adding school employees,
licensed and appointed to carry
a handgun to exceptions to
unlawful carrying of a deadly
weapon on school premises.
that Senate Bill 256.
Senate Bill 257 introduced by
senators Thornton, Boone.
Townsend
Security, providing powers and
duties.
Allowing for the exercise of
eminent domain.
Creating the border Security
Fund.
Making appropriations.
referred to the Senate Rules
Committee.
Thenenate Judiciary Committee.
The Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 257.
courses shall include
comprehensive human sexuality
education, beginning in the
2027, 2028 school year for
middle school and high school
grades.
charter schools to submit an
implementation plan for
comprehensive human sexuality
education.
Requiring the public education
for academic content for
comprehensive human sexuality
education.
Requiring the public education
department to establish a
process to approve school
Senate Bill 258.
Senate Bill 258 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Education Committee.
An act relating to charities,
amending the cha charitable
solicitations Act to strengthen
requirements for professional
fundraisers and third party
solicitors.
Princeton referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee, that's Senate Bill
259.
An act making an appropriation
to the Department of Environment
to assess and clean up abandoned
and conduct cleanup actions.
Senate Bill 260. 260 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Conservation Committee,
Creating the hub and spoke pilot
project as a 5 year pilot
project in the Department of
Health to deliver preventive
healthcare services at public
appropriation. Senate Bill
261261 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, the
Senate Finance Committee that
parks division of the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department, the Department of
Environment and the Department
of Game and Fish for program
coordinators to oversee citizen
maintain web portals and
information.
to to track and evaluate the
citizen science projects Senate
Senate Bill 263 introduced by
Senator Hickey, an act relating
to insurance.
Enacting a new section of the
criteria. Senate Bill 263 263
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee.
Senator Munoz, an act related to
administrative fees, amending
certain game and fish licensing
fees and allowing the state game
commission to increase the fees
Changing the basis of certain
fees collected by the Department
of Environment from a dollar
amount to a reasonable for
neuter program fee.
Repealing certain laws, making
appropriations. Senate Bill
That, Mr. President, Senator
Woods, for what purposes do you
rise, Mr. President, on that
particular bill, it's talking
about uh the livestock, I mean
the uh game and fish commission,
So Mr. President, in hearing the
title read in, I believe that
you are correct, and let's just
pull it back because we may want
it to go to Senate conservation
and instead instead of Senate
version of this piece of it, or,
or you're gonna hear it soon.
It's come in that direction. So
I'm happy to make that change.
So why don't we just pull that
one back and let's get it fixed.
finance implication and a
contribution implication.
Senator Woods, Senator Worth,
Mr. President, I thought it was
just a fee bill. Does it also
have a tax in there?
Uh, we can talk about it. Thank
you. Thank you, senator. So I
just want for clarification. So
Senate Bill 264, we're gonna
pull this back for now, is that
correct? Yeah, just hold it back
and we'll take a quick look at
Senate Bill 265 introduced by
Senator Munoz, an act relating
to motor vehicles.
Increasing the penalty
assessment for certain
misdemeanor violations of the
the Senate Tauss Transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 265.
Senate Bill 266, introduced by
agreements with administrators
for state educational
institutions or community
colleges.
Providing for a review and
approval by the Attorney general
agreements by the state board of
finance to the attorney general.
Creating a civil cause of
action.
Against a Board of Regents or a
community college govern
In the event of a board members
the Senate Education Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Bill 266.
Senate Bill 264 introduced by
Senator Munoz.
based on inflation.
Providing a discount on the fees
for residents who receive
supplemental nutrition
assistance program benefits
increasing fees to the fund.
administrative costs.
Changing the base of a fee
collected by the environmental
Improvement Board to the
administrative costs of the
program.
appropriations enate Bill 26464
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate.
Conservation Committee then
Senate Finance Senate Bill 264.
And Trujillo.
An act relating to housing.
Requiring owners to provide
notice to dwelling unit
applicants of fees related to
Extending the notice period for
rent increases.
Reducing the limit on late fees.
Expanding private remedies.
printed and referred to the
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 267.
Senate Bill 268 introduced by
senators Munoz.
the Board of Regents of the
University of New Mexico and the
Board of Regents of New Mexico
State University to fund
athletics.
Cenel 269 introduced by senators
Lopez.
And Pinto.
An act relating to medical
Providing protections against
adverse employment actions.
Providing requirements for
determining determining
impairment.
I ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Judiciary Committee, Senate Bill
269.
Introduced by Senator Lopez.
Pinto
Sadio Lopez.
And Hickey.
Senate about 2700 been read
twice by title is order.
Princeton referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
the Senate Finance Committee
that sent a bill 270.
And Hickey
An act relating to the
legislature, revising the
membership of the legislative
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 272 introduced by
Senator Bradley.
An act relating to taxation.
Senate Bill 272 272 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business,
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Sure
Thornton
Block
And Pinto
support transitional housing for
veterans and their families.
Senate Bill 273 273 having been
read twice by title is order
Senate Memorial One introduced
by Senator Pinto.
A memorial requesting the crime
victims reparation commission to
convene a statewide gun violence
Senate Memorial One Center
Memorial One, having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee that Senate Memorial
won.
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go without
our business committee reports.
We're in that order of business
committee reports the reader
will read.
referred Senate Bill 13 has had
it under consideration and
reports the same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
the journal reflect that they
were acted on individually no
objection.
The reader will read
Senate Bill 68.
pass as amended and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 82 recommendation do
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee.
do pass and then referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 10.
Has had it under consideration,
Do pass and thence referred to
the judiciary committee.
Senate Bill 19.
pass and then referred to the
rules committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
William P. Soul's chair.
Centers so I move adoption of
It doesn't match the agenda that
I have in front of me for the
education committee. So I was
just wondering maybe I didn't
hear something right, Mr.
was a combination of both the
Friday committee report, uh, at
least as I was tracking the
bills of the ones we did on
Friday and the ones that we did
today, otherwise it sounds like
saying I.
Those apone the community
reports have been adopted and
the record will show that they
were voted upon individually.
The Reader to read.
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chair.
Senator Maestas.
And you see no objection.
Move it option. The reader will
read.
Cen a bill 161 recommendation
that it do pass thence referred
to the finance committee.
Cen a bill 191 recommendation
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those are Poney the eyes have at
the community report have been
adopted and the journal will
announcements and miscellaneous.
no objection. We're in that
order of business announcing
miscellaneous Senator Worth.
Thank you, Mr. President, just
for committee chairs, uh, with
respect to the schedule
jump over to the joint session,
uh, and then return back to the
floor. So now's the time for
committee chairs to make their
announcements and then I do have
a switch on a committee referral
a uh uh Senate Finance Committee
priority bill submission
process.
Um, I've been asked by the
chairman to let you know that
that submission process is on
input the data and just hit
submit. This will allow our
committee and our our staff to
uh prioritize or or start
reviewing the bills that you,
purposes so that we can, uh,
begin to prioritize uh reviewing
those bills as opposed to, uh,
each of you handing to chairman
a little note please hear my
bill. So thank you.
at 9 a.m. tomorrow and we will
go until 11:30 or whenever we
can finish our business, the
ranking member and I have had a
they want to discuss in depth
and which bills they might be a
little more comfortable with, so
we will have.
longer conversations on some of
Everybody practiced that and uh
we are hoping to get through 5
bills tomorrow, but we will get
through whatever we can in room
senate.minority at NM LEGIS.gov
and I just wanted to give you an
update on, on how that's
working. seems to be working
great.
So we had several comments or
From the federal overreach,
particularly our Native American
communities and so we had
several uh positive thank yous
from some pueblos and Pueblo,
uh, tribal councilors.
And
Any abuse to our citizens in New
Mexico.
Especially the Native American,
uh, communities, and I think
that's working great because
Of Native Americans by ice since
we did this, so I think the
whole thing is working, Mr.
President. Thank you.
Thank you Senator, we have
Senator Hickey.
session at 1:45 in room 311.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Hickey. Any further
announcements, Senator? We have
Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President. Sorry,
majority floor leader, I know
321. Uh, we are starting our
bills and we have a lot of
bills, bills, bills, and so
looking forward to that, I'm
gonna try and work in a song
lyric there somewhere, but I
look forward to meeting with the
you, thank you, Mr. President.
The Senate Finance Committee
will be meeting 15 minutes after
the floor session, the chairman
and I have a bill in another
committee, so, uh, we've asked,
uh, Senator, uh, uh, Bobby
Indian cultural and Rural
Affairs Committee will have its
first meeting, organizational
meeting tomorrow at 10 excuse
me, 10:30.
I believe the room is 303 for
Anyone planning on playing in
the game, it hurts a whole lot
less the next day if you played
a couple of times and gotten uh
some exercise before that day.
Thank you, Mr. President. So
did we announce the time start
time of the Senate Judiciary.
Or did I dismiss that?
Mr. Chair,
you members I believe it's
scheduled for 1:30, so it should
start right about that time,
maybe, maybe a little after
that.
It reminds us what room will
that be in?
Thank you, Mr. President that is
room.
Thank you, Mr. President. See no
further announcements, you to
Senator Peter Worth. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President, as I
mentioned, uh, I'd like to ask
unanimous consent that we change
referral was gonna go to Senate
Judiciary because it didn't have
an appropriation. What we've
realized in presenting the three
bills that the 3 bills need to
stay together, and I think it's
gonna be very important.
with Senator Cervantes and
Senator Munoz and Senator
Scherer and I'd ask unanimous
consent that the second referral
to judiciary on Senate Bill 3 be
dropped and replaced with a
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
that is it for today with that
unanimous consent, the Senate
stand in recess until 11:30
