Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Center Gallegos.
Santo Gonzalez
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Nova.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Ramos. Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scott.
Center Cia Lopez.
Senator to share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tobiasson
Senator Wirth. Senator Woods.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you. I'd ask
everyone to please rise.
today by Senator Angel Charlie.
The Pledge of allegiance in
Espanol to be led today by
Senator Ramos and the salute to
the Mexico flag to be led today
by Senator Scott.
deal for a fellow with the last
name of Shannon.
But before I begin, I'd like to
thank you for taking on the
critical responsibility of
representing diverse people in
this great state.
fortunate members of our
community who have both
material.
And spiritual needs.
Now let us pray.
In the name of the Father, the
Son, the Holy Spirit.
In controversy.
May you like the shamrock that
Saint Patrick used to teach
profound truths represent the
diverse voices of our
May your leadership be marked by
unwavering integrity, clear
vision and steadfast dedication
to the common good.
values of our democracy and the
shared hopes of your
constituents.
May the legacy of Saint Patrick,
a leader who transformed
challenges into opportunity.
United States of America
the
God.
Huroidilliar a la bandera de
estados Unidos de America
Yalla Republique indivisible
Everyone can please remain
standing.
I'll you to Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. President. This
morning, Senator Ramos brought
Artist. And so we've asked her
to join us in leading us in the
national anthem as she joins us
on the Senate floor today.
But the
we
Uh
the
to
were
so
swimming.
the
no
that of
like,
still
Oh.
or the
of the
And the
Ladies and gentlemen, Western
New Mexico University
studentiano Huerta.
Once again we'd like to welcome
you to today's session of the
New Mexico Senate and I yelled
to Senate Majority Flo leader
Peter Wartz takes to that first
order business. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Good morning to
for that fantastic way to start
a Monday morning, uh, just
beautiful, so lots of thanks
there and to brother Shannon,
appreciate you.
perspective and we do, uh, make
a real effort here to take your
words and apply them every day,
trying to bridge differences and
understand we're going to be on
So I really appreciate you being
here, uh, this morning. Uh, let
me yield to Senator Padilla
first and then to Senator Woods
in case there's any excusals,
and then I'll let folks know
what we're gonna do. Senator
since she was 14, and she is a
complete rock star. You're gonna
hear more about her later, so I
won't keep going, but she's one
of my, my students that I've
been working with for a long
time. With that, Mr. President,
um, a couple of unanimous.
gallery today, Senator Padilla,
uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senators Pinto and
Cervantes until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call. no
objection. Thank you, Senator
it's, it's good that we have
people come in from our small
towns to bless us during these
times and especially during San
Pack's Day and, and Mr. Chair,
very much, Mr. President, and my
excitement with my green, yeah,
uh, Ye's consent to excuse
Senator Stephanics until she
returned to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call. No
care day at the legislature.
It's also, of course, Saint
Patrick's Day. Uh, we do have 3
confirmations. So once, uh,
members introduce guests, we'll
go.
go ahead and read in those
begin with Senator Padilla.
Uh thank you very much, Mr.
President. It does give me great
pleasure and honor to introduce
some guests that I have here
today, Mr. President. I had an
President, last night. And, uh,
then I had some dinner with them
and I learned so much about all
of them that I said, well, are
you going to be recognized
anywhere in the in the building
and so we decided to have them
come here.
these policy councils when I
served on the Youth Development
Incorporated board for 22 years,
Mr. President. I know Senator
Nava also served on the same
board and she may have something
to say on this one too, but uh
And I really hope I get this
one. I'm just gonna say Justina.
New wise, yes, I hope I got that
close to correct. I apologize.
Shamira.
Shama Shamara Ortega, Jennifer
Garcia, Steven May, Savannah
I'll just say several years and
she leads the largest program at
Youth Development Incorporated,
and she is a true New Mexico
treasure, and can we welcome
Deborah Baca and I'll ask the
body to welcome all of my guests
today.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
I'll yield to Senator Nava if
she'd like to say a couple of
words. She was also a board
member as I was.
Thank you Senator,
thank you, Mr. President. Thank
transformative job, I think at
reaching our communities in need
ensuring that our families have
opportunities and access and
every single one of.
pordiacionescavini
thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you. Thank you
Senator Nava. Senator Padilla,
uh, thank you very much, Mr.
was rehearsing and practicing
and how do we approach
legislators and how do we get
our message across? What a
wonderful thing for you to do
the day before you come into the
building, but I did let them
know, Mr. President, that we
work for you, you don't work for
Sender had a meal.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
School for the Arts. She's
pursuing her passion for theater
and developing her creative
skills beyond her artistic
pursuits, Feliciana maintains a
profound connection to the land
Aseque Association and
contributes to the stewardship
of her family ranch.
Recognizing the power of
creative exploration utilizing
art and technology. She
programs as STEM Smart's lab in
her free time Feliciana enjoys
horseback riding, hiking, and
skiing, and spending time with
her family, Mr. President and
members of the body, if you can
help me welcomeiana to the
Thank you, Mr. President. It's
my honor to introduce a very
special guest of mine. If you
would please welcome Miles
Romero to the chamber. Miles
Mexico teacher of the year.
After school, he tutors
homebound children who have been
expelled for disciplinary
reasons, um, until 7:30 every
day after school.
of Josh's family by joining me
instead as my guest, and so if
you would please help me
honoritor Senator Sanchez's
cousin and a wonderful teacher
here in New Mexico, Miles
Romero.
thank you so much, Mr.
President. I, I'm honored today
to announce our honorary
lieutenant Governor Adrian
Jaramillo from Colbury High
School. He's in 11th grade
hunting and fishing this spring
break to be here with us today,
uh, Mr. President, and he is
accompanied by his grandparents
Dolores.
and Horace had a meal. This is a
Dolores and Horace Harmio.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Any further announcements,
thank you. Happy Monday,
everyone and top of the morning
to everyone.
If I were home, I'd be nursing
trays of corned beef in the oven
floor uh session, I did approach
Senator Wirth, and he came up
with a plan for all of us to
have corned beef and cabbage for
dinner.
So that's pretty cool, but
before I give us too much
proud to show me her Irish flag.
Uh, with a last name like
O'Malley, people assume I have
some Irish blood and that's not
the case. I grew up on Papa's
For, uh, for many years, uh, to
me, Saint Patrick's Day was just
another day for another excuse
for people to drink and of
course have corned beef. It
visit the whiskey makers and the
Blarney Stone and no I did not
kiss it. It's pretty gross. Got
stuck in the parking lot for an
hour because we could not figure
out how to.
ancestors lived surrounded by
gravestones. We had just missed
the O'Malley reunion. Afterwards
we went to a museum that told
the story of the suffering the
a million people leaving their
homeland behind, that's
desperation. I just can't
imagine my family has lived in
and I felt a kinship with them
even though they are not my
people, so to speak.
My people are coming from the
South desperately trying to get
into this country today.
came to America, so our
neighbors to the south. If
anything, Saint Patrick's Day
should be a day to recognize the
plight of so many people in this
President. Happy Saint Patrick's
Day.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Cervantes.
prohibit the consumption of
alcohol, uh, in this building at
various times and uh uh uh
Senator O'Malley in her
presentation made several
references to whiskey and
I've never known anybody who
would do so, um, here on the
floor, interfere with their
work, but, uh, uh, but if we
ever did so, I sure would want
an exception made for Saint
Patrick's Day, and, uh, I want
Patrick's Day is to honor a
former Representative Tommy Foy.
Tommy Foy was a batan death
march survivor. He was a hero in
I don't know how long,
established a tradition on Saint
Patrick's Day, where, uh, the
Speaker of the House will gather
former chairs of the judiciary
mostly because we do it to
really honor Tommy Foy and, and
I'll join, I think former
speakers of the House and former
judiciary.
chairs for a toast in his honor,
his name, his importance in the
tradition he started and, and
many of my colleagues who
continue to maintain that
tradition and Tommy Foy's name
and, uh, Mr. Mr. President,
senators, I want all of you all
Center share
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
So some people think that uh
O'Malley's Irish, but she's not.
Other people think that she's
their share of abuse throughout
time. They were abused by the
Romans. They were abused by the
English. They were abused by the
Americans.
And then they decided to throw a
big party.
Irish on, on this day. And, but
the Irish still have a wee bit
of uh being maligned. So the
I don't think any of us have had
a drink in here.
In the last two hours.
But because we throw a big
cut the fight in Irish. The
fighting Irish is important. And
I want to share with you, there
was uh during the Civil War,
after the Civil War, uh, a
Confederate general named
Longstreet was asked how could
So maybe brawling, OK, we'll do
that one too. Woman corrupting,
you know, this is a very
interesting one, Mr. President,
because there's 5 million Irish
in Ireland.
talked about the Blarney Stone
and how it was kind of nasty and
all of that. And of course, no
Irishman actually lies about
anything. We just have a wee bit
of blarney in us, and that's all
fire and brimstone sermon, and
he goes, anybody that wants to
go to heaven, stand up.
Of course, the whole
congregation stood up.
Then they all sat down. Anybody
wants to go to hell now stand
up.
And he says, no father, not
particularly, but I felt bad for
President. Thank you, Senator.
Any further announcements,
senators?
I'm probably the only person in
here that actually served on the
House Judiciary Committee with
Tommy for it. I remember him
committee. He was kind of
winding down with his state rep,
uh work and uh so he was on the
judiciary Committee when I got
So, 20 years later came over to
the Senate.
Uh, so, come, it's such a
wonderful tradition we do on
Saint Patrick's Day to honor
Patrick's Day from an Irish
Scottish gal.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Happy Saint Patrick's Day.
We have Senator Gonzalez
followed by Senator Cedillo
Lopez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
representative uh Foy, him and
my father served together in the
South Pacific.
And was very interesting because
uh he was a commanding officer
when my father was drafted, uh,
there was 33 men from Taos and
uh during their training.
navy.
And um, so making my story
short, you know, on my father's
side, uh, their ship got hit
a a some uh understanding and
things what we have gone through
in our country.
Is out of the 33 men from Taos
that left that same day, only 3
came back, um, and two others,
you know, he never liked to talk
about it. He was very quiet in
those days, there weren't any of
the programs that we have now to
was mentioned about Tommy Foy,
but, uh, what a gentleman and
what a
Representative that he did, you
know, as far as um serving in
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I had
the great privilege a few years
ago to uh visit Ireland and
Hundreds of years.
And
at the end of the tour, um, I,
you know how you just don't know
what you, what to say. I said
Madam, it is the policies, not
the people that one must resist
and that always stuck with me,
and so there are times I will
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
also stand in
Just really lucky to have had uh
representative Tom Foy in our,
everyone respected um our
representative and you know it
was, it was really neat because
his son Jim was my baseball
coach.
And, uh, when we're practicing
Southwest New Mexico for Grant
County, you know, there's not
enough buildings that we could
probably name under his, his uh
leadership because he really
anyone heard uh about the Bataan
Death March. His, his name was a
first name, um, talked about and
very well respected, so I, I
stand up in, in respect to
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
we are gonna go to the
confirmations, but just before
we do, um, wanna give everyone a
heads up. We are gonna do a
split session today, so we'll,
24, and 25, and I'll reiterate
those, but I just want to give a
heads up upfront about what
we're gonna do, uh, so Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
go down our business committee
report.
committee has been has had it
under consideration. Senate
executive message number 9 dated
March 13, 2025, in which the
governor makes the following
31st, 2026. Your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointments
respectfully submitted Senator.
T Duhig chair.
I had a meal.
that they were acted upon
individually no objection. The
reader will read Senate
executive message number 9 dated
March 13, 2025, in which the
December 31st, 2020.
6. Your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm this
appointment.
Senate executive message number
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring
December 31st, 2026. Your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment,
Those opposed, the eyes have it.
The community report has been
adopted and the journal will
show that they were acted upon
individually.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
credentials of John V. Wertheim
be presented to the full Senate
for consideration as member of
the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regents. I
9 dated March 13, 2025. I move
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of John
V. Wertheim to the Western New
Mexico University Board of
he's an extremely talented
businessman and legal mind.
And he looks forward to
listening to the UNM the uh
Western New Mexico University
community, the faculty, the
uh debate champion, which is
kind of cool. He came home to
University of New Mexico School
of Law, uh, and his intelligence
is only outmatched by his
although he was not an alum, Mr.
President, I think it's
important that some outside eyes
take a look at Western New
Mexico University as it regains
its credibility.
chapter of John Wertheim's
service to our state with that
I'll stand for questions. Thank
you Senator senators, we're
debating the confirmation of
John V. Wertheim as a member of
the Western US University Border
Wetzheim and Bianca, I think
since 1996, was it about it for
a long time and um I have just
watched both of them have
for Western is the view.
that he will take of it. He
supports education, and I think
he is going to be a great
addition to the Regents and I'm
and uh I I stand in strong
support of John Wertheim, you
know, hearing him speak today in
rules really made a lot of sense
about bringing people together
and I'm looking forward to doing
everything we can to make the
Mustang nation even bigger and
keep, keep double interview
moving forward.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
thank John for stepping up and
being willing to serve. I've
known him and known his family
for many, many years. I went to
uh Stanford with his brother,
one of the first people I met
it's exactly what westerns gonna
need. We had.
Senator Neville here, uh, at
some point I've lost all track
of time at this point, but
another great appointment and I
special place. So thank you for
stepping up and good to see
Bianca and see your son again
and uh congrats on this
appointment. Look forward to
voting for you.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Democrats and, uh, I don't know
what happened to us. We've both
gotten a little grayer and a
little less hair, but I still
think of us as young Democrats
and, and the excitement, the
energy that we brought to
lot of discussion, a lot of
concern about what happened at
Western.
And what what the qualifications
of a regent should be and how
regions should be selected and
a college degree at all. I can
see a regent having none of
those things and still being a
very effective region. What,
what I will tell you where I've
seen Regents effective and
is the key to a good region for
me is somebody who immerses
himself in the community who
will be in Silver City, who will
listen to the people in the
community who will reach out and
down there and will attend the,
the university events and go to
the socials.
go to the graduations and do all
those kind of things. It's very
time consuming and I want to
commend you for recognizing that
means going to the Rotary clubs
and everything else and
listening to the people in the
community having access uh to
you and I commend you for giving
that time when I've seen
you Silver City with the
lieutenant governors next to you
is a beautiful, lovely,
wonderful place, and you're
gonna enjoy getting to know it
well, and I hope you will. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you
Senator Cervantes. We have
Mr. President, uh, necessarily
worked on any one piece.
Or anything together directly,
but every time I turn around or
something important that's going
on in New Mexico or nationally
he's done that for many, many
years. He he started when he was
about 5 doing all of this work
and uh so I I don't even know
his age, but I know that every
time that I've interacted with
him, Mr. President, it's always
And I think, you know, John, you
have something very hard to do
now, and I think it's going to
do now, and I think it's gonna
be very important that we have
someone like you to just sort of
calm everything down over there
sit down with us and make this
happen. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Padilla.
Sanders.
Each and every one of them
wherever they are regionally, I,
I don't believe you have to live
in a community to be a regent.
My wife got two masters from
Western. She lived in Gallup.
is how do we fix that ship? How
do we right size it? How do we
make it happen for those kids?
How do we give those kids in
that community, the ability to
college.
You are and this is gonna be to
all the regions so I don't have
to speak once you, you are gonna
have a rough time. The
loyalty when you do pick a new
president, uh, so you get, get
it steered in the right
direction, but, you know,
everybody came into this session
and say, oh, what are you gonna
do with Western? Are we going to
cut them because of what
do. Uh, if we need to add more
money, if we need to help you
fix this situation. I'm here to
help. We're here to support you,
uh, just be prepared for a lot
of hard work and a lot of
way it tracks, um, Western
always came and this is a
situation that started, and he
said, we're always short. Well,
they weren't the ones that were
short because the priorenator
fact and the numbers proved that
out, and that's where the war
started, uh, and what happened.
We made agreements to, to fix,
and Mr. President, I think it's
Aldo Nova school.
wayside and the money was thrown
by the wayside and he thought he
was gonna do what he wanted and,
and wanted some people moved off
committees.
Uh, that's how much power he
what's right for the school and
do what's right for the
committee, and I'll stand with
you and I'll fight them off
among you and, and be along your
side every single way, so I
appreciate what you're doing,
step of the way. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Munoz. We have Senator Campos
next.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, uh, members of the
Senate and of course to the
And it's happened one situation
after another. It's your common
sense. It's your ability to
really help to put the pieces
This is going to go ahead and be
a tough task, but you're the
person for the position.
And again, Mr. President, to all
the members of the Senate, this
you very much, Mr. President.
Senator Compos. We have Senator
Gonzalez followed by Senator
Lanier.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
story with you that I hope that
you can go back and look into
it, for many, many years, the
summer institute to train school
bus drivers was there.
were going to the community for
a 1 week, 2 week training.
And then they did without it and
from all over the state would
meet and work with us. So I hope
that you can look into that but,
you know, it was um program that
uh was very well deserved and
here in our state. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Deni.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
know we're kind of they're not a
I think we have taken our time
and we're placing the right
people in the right spots, and
City, and if you spend as much
time as I got to spend over
there, you know that that
university is the center of that
town and so I, I'm looking
on your plate, and we will
support you. Don't be afraid to
reach out to us and, uh, we'll
do what we can from this
roundhouse. So thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
to the group for Western is
appropriate.
I think, um.
Yeah
Crosses party lines in the are
Regardless of which side of the
fence you're on what happened,
that's history. What is
important is the future of the
university.
I said this morning with tongue
All voted in support of the
former Democratic chair.
And one of those Republicans is
Mr. President, even when Marty
Chavez stood up, we still
supported him, and we do today.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think he'll be a great addition
to the, to the group.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President,
members, and even though the the
uh.
Mr. Wertheim, John V. Wertheim's
is the same age as me, uh, he's
Wertheim got a big wheel job in
DC. John didn't hesitate, so his
wife is a force and he allows
that force to flourish if we
want honesty and integrity at
now move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of John B. Wertheim to the
Western New Mexico University
Board of Regents. I ask
anonymous consent that the
record show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Buy a vote.
34 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative, the appointment to
John V. Wertheim is a member of
the Western UMexico University
Mr. President, members, please,
uh, join me in, in an applause
for our new region at Western
New Mexico University. John B.
Wertheim.
Oh, you'll know Senator Hume.
University Board of Regents. I
know yield to Senator Ramos.
Senator Ramos, Mr. President.
Pursuant to Senate executive
letters message number 9 dated
Mr. President,
I probably stand up to support
Dean Reed. Dean Reed graduated
Mr. Mr. Dean Reed was a student
body president at WNMU in 1981,
1982, and ex-official student
member on the board of Regents.
commencement speaker for WNMU.
Mr. President, he was also
inducted into the Student Hall
of Fame at WNMU in 2023.
Mr. President,
He also, Mr. President,
Was the VP of sales in the
national sales trainer for
respiratory in, in, uh, in
Texas, so Mr. President, I do
support um Mr. Dean Reed fully
debating the confirmation of
Joseph Dean Reed as a member of
the Western New Mexico
University.
Border regions
Senator Brantley,
that hard, and I'll tell you
why. You are well supported by
the legislator. Western is a
beloved, uh, school there in in
Silver City in Grant County. You
Chairwoman Doig for making this
a priority to get you guys
confirmed by the end of this
session, so you can go out and
do the good work of Western.
We're excited. I could not be
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President, as I
stand here as a Mustang again. I
would like to also make sure
and, and thank, uh, Senator
late. I decided we were probably
going to be here late tonight,
so I, I thought I'd come in a
little bit late, and as I'm
walking in, there were two
gentlemen following behind me,
and although we none of us try
So as we walked across the
rotunda, I pointed him to the
right direction. I hope that
they got, they got coffee, um,
there in the cafe, and I told
meet them, and I'm very excited
at the time I did not know that
they were the nominees for
Western, but I'm very excited
that they, that, uh, Senator
Ramos brought them, uh,
everybody there because it is
close to my heart and Senator
Ramos did ask me to mention one
thing.
We have a national championship
So that might be the first line
of uh investigation over there,
so please find that trophy for
us.
Thank you, sir. Welcome. Thank
you, Senator. We have Senator
Block next. Thank you, Mr.
rules with Senator Duhague, and
I want to thank, uh, my good
friend Senator Ramos for
sponsoring, uh, two of the
nominees today.
And when you look at, um,
who loves his university. I
think everyone in his family has
gone there from second cousins
to grandparents to grandkids to
neighbors and all that. I mean,
uh, Mr. Reed and our lieutenant
governor and Senator Lanier and
Senator Ramos, these are, these
are great graduates that are
incredible alumni.
Mr. President, one of the
named Logan White.
Logan White worked for the
Dodgers.
I hate that.
I'm a Red Sox fan.
This is a great man who cares
deeply about Western and Mr.
President.
I think we need to bring
baseball left Western, but we're
gaining even more with these 3
nominees and uh Senator Nouvelle
to bring Western back to
greatness to open it up to
them, quite frankly, but, uh, I
am just so honored to get to
know Mr. Reed and to call him a
friend and Mr. President,
God bless Western New Mexico
University go Mustangs.
Thank you, Cinderblock.
See no further debate, Senator
Ramos to close on the
confirmation, Mr. President, I,
you know, I'm, I was glad to
hear, um, Senator Munoz states
that, uh, DublinU's budget
wasn't guided because last, last
time I seen the budget, there
was nothing there for us and
I moved at the scene. I do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Joseph Dean Reed to the
western New Mexico University
Board of Regents. I asked
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
to do.
We need to excuse some unanimous
Senator Padilla until he returns
to the chamber, except for
purposes of a call. Thank you,
senators, we are voting all
senators to your seats please.
We're voting on the confirmation
confirmation and expiring
December 31st.
2026 has been duly confirmed by
the New Mexico Senate, Senator
Ramos.
Mr. President, thank you very
Thank you very much.
credentials of Kiana, Rachel
Huerta be presented to the full
Senate for consideration as
student member of the Western
New Mexico University Board of
March 13, 2025, I moved that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Kiana Rochelle
Huerta to the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regents, Mr.
around playing in the park with
her siblings. She comes from a
great family and I, I can't, I
can't say enough about this
young lady. Kiana was born and
of Hurley from 2023 to 2025 and
is an active member of the
Silver City Kiwanis Club.
As a leader singer of Simpre
band Kiana Showcases her passion
dedicated uh dedicated herself
to the level 2 nursing student
program. In addition to her
studies, she serves as an ASW
singing and recognize and is
recognized as a to local Tejano
recording artist under Shelly
Lares, LMD Productions. Her
you'll know that she makes a, a
positive impact on everyone she
meets. You can't, you can't.
Look past that big smile and her
You know, again, I've known
Kiana since she was a little
girl. She's always passionate
and everything she does and
I've, I've seen her in action in
the Hurley Town Council is very
of Chiano Rochel Huerta as a
member of the Western New Mexico
border regions, and I'll begin
with Sanammi.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
stand in full support of the
student confer.
as the lieutenant governor of
the state of New Mexico. She got
to work with students from
across New Mexico on legislation
that meant something to
Hispanics in the Southwest, and
ent hu s ia s tic about becoming
a nurse. She's a servitude
leader who will roll up her
sleeves and ensure that she's
getting the job done. What's
nice about her is she's also a
great listener, and that's
something what a student regent
Mexican is very proud of that
Southern New Mexican, and I
can't wait for the great thing
she's gonna do, Kiana, you
always have a senator and friend
in Espanola if you ever need me.
And I look forward to working
by Senator Block.
And Senator Bradley and Senator
Gargos.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, uh,
I too stand in strong support
Her family and her love for the
institution.
She, um,
I think she's gonna do really
good as a board of reaching,
Where she goes from there.
But I have no doubt whatsoever
that we'll uh we'll see her
continue to get back to her
Senator Townsend. We have
Senator Block followed by
Senator Brentley.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
I'm proud to stand in support of
uh Kiana as well, uh, during the
together and the liaison between
the regents and the students,
um, quite frankly, Mr.
President, she's, um, um, more
More citizens.
More people like Kiana,
this would be a much better
world.
And I want to thank her mother
I was talking to your mom, not
you.
OK, and you as well. Thank you
so much, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Block, Senator
Brantley.
leader at a young age. In fact,
she is the youngest serving a
councilwoman in New Mexico. And
so she ran for office her senior
year. She's been active in the
Western, so congratulations. We
look forward to working with
you. You should be very proud of
you, yourself, because we are of
you. So congratulations. Thank
you, Senator Brantley. We have
Senator Gallegos next.
for a long, long time. I met her
for the first time this morning,
but I can already see the value
of her for the regents at
Western, but also for the whole
beautiful or this afternoon when
we started, uh, it was
beautiful. I really appreciate
the, the opportunity of meeting
you in.
is it's been stated being the
mom's proud because just meeting
you today, I'm totally proud of
what you do, what you've done,
and who you will be going on in
the future. I stand full
wasn't aware of uh Miss Huerta
until today and I googled her
and I, I'm so impressed with an
interest in nursing and health
and so valuable, um, to bring to
a board like this. I wasn't
aware that she's the only
female, um, but I've been in
that
situation before and the
important advice I would give is
very young woman, um, and so I
say, you know, from here, um,
and I just wanna say you've done
an excellent job and I'm so
proud of you and I'm definitely
Selena a little bit. So thank
you, thank you, Mr. President.
I'm honored to stand stand in
support of.
this nomination.
Thank you Senator Lopez. Senor
Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
gonna see some phenomenal things
from this New Mexican right
here, and I met her when she was
a part of the program that, uh,
I helped put together and uh
that we do every summer about
government and then they come up
here to Santa Fe and they
organize a government and I will
tell you, Mr. President, you may
or may, this may have already
come up. I don't know, I was out
of the room for an interview,
the program stayed active in New
Mexico and we, we all sort of
got together Senator Jaramillo
has been very helpful with me to
keep that program going. It's
going extremely well.
But I also just, just want to
represents her community
extremely well. She is not shy
about talking about what is,
what's on her mind. You heard
that she's a village
councilwoman and, uh, gosh, can
you imagine? 18 woke up one day
Mr. President, and I see her
eventually sitting in the
governor's office here someday
and I'm, I'll I'll be the first
one to maybe make that
announcement. Thank you, Mr.
President, I fully support.
Thank you Senator Padilla. We
have Senator Nava followed by
tell you, Kiana, as one of the
two youngest members in this
body and this one of the two
youngest women in the body. I
know the importance of
representation. And I know that
President, because as someone
who grew up listening to Selena
and
pretending that I could sing. I
just, uh, looked at your videos
and I would really love to hear
you sing one of those songs here
minds and hearts and thank you
for your commitment to health
care at a time where we need it
so desperately, Mr. President, I
stand in full support and the
Thank you Mr. President, Kiana,
I'm very excited for you. I was
getting to, to know her sitting
back behind Senator Brantley,
and then they whisked you away.
appreciate you, um, being an
advocate for young people to
start getting involved because
all of these laws and things
that we, we take care of up here
of you. I, I thank you for, for
having the willpower and.
The guts to do that. So I
appreciate it and thank you Mr.
President.
Kiana will have the fabulous
Four and I'm really looking
forward to seeing how they work
together and bring Western back
Rachel Huerta to the Western New
Mexico University Board of
Regents. I asked unanimous
consent that the records show
that the role has been called
and that all those present vote
raise your hand.
Keanu Rochelle Huerta as a
student member of the Western
New Mexico University border
regions for term commence upon
confirmation expiring December
welcome Miss Kiana Rochel Huerta
to the border regions for
Western New Mexico University
with Delila Huerta, her mother,
be right.
Be cider. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you you to Senate Majority
Floor Leader Peter Warz to take
us to that next order business,
Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We go out of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous.
254, item 2, Senator Hickey.
Senate Bill 278, item 3 is
Senator Tobiasin, Senate Bill
Bill 443 and then on the House
bills, we'll do item number 23,
uh, House Bill 357, that'll be
Senator Scherer. Uh, item 24,
Hamlin. Uh, so, Mr. President,
with that unanimous consent, we
go to that on our business 3rd
reading of legislation, and I
yield to Senator Padilla for
item number one, Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 254.
records show that all actions
for placing Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 254 on final passage has
our work to build a strong, um,
cybersecurity environment for
the state of New Mexico. That's
what Senate Bill 254 does. It
changes the name of the
cybersecurity office to the.
Office of Cybersecurity to
government, Mr. President, uh,
the overlap issues, um, just to
have created some duplicative
nature with some of the work
done and this actually solves
that, uh, the solution that we
created is that the state chief
Mr. President, because again, it
enhances executive agency
protections, uh, the use of the
state, uh, network will be
further defined, um, the policy
application that is required for
See no debate.
Senator Paita thank you very
much, Mr. President. Again, our
cybersecurity and security of
consent to the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators, we're voting all
senators to your seats please,
Senator Munoz explain my vote,
Senator Padilla
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
think that we have a I
apologize, Senator Munoz to
explain his vote. Thank you, Mr.
President. You know we put money
people that are doing business
with the state to check theirs,
and the other one for all the
state agencies to check their
cybersecurity. Nothing happened
we know we've had a problem at
the office of Superintendent
Insurance. My public school has
had a cybersecurity attack, uh,
so this office had better get
go on to the next item in
today's calendar, that's item
number 2, and I'll ye to Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
taken and that is now subject to
debate, amendment, or
substitution. Thank you. So
that's Senate tax business
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 276.
Senator he could explain.
disease kills 600,000 Americans
a year. It is the most
devastating disease in the
United States far outstripping
all cancers. We spend over $600
to 1700.
sudden deaths from coronary
artery disease, that is heart
attacks that literally killed
the person at the moment, and
Uh, in New Mexico, we spent 23
billion approximately on
healthcare and almost 5 billion
on coronary artery disease. The
a substrate for endocrine and
then it just goes on to be
unfortunately not dormant but
produced by the
the LDL low density lipoprotein
can burrow into the arterial
wall. This is what causes
atherosclerosis and narrowing of
the artery.
done very simply, not by
catheterization, not by nuclear
scans, not by all these things
that cost us so much money, but
The radiology entity maybe 30
$35 to do. Unfortunately, it's a
high-end radiology procedures,
so most health plans charge a
if the cal, so we can detect it.
What happens in the information
is calcium is deposited whenever
there is an information due to
the LDA.
to treat and very cheap to
treat, and that in essence is
the bill, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator. Thank you
Senators we're debating.
Anyone wishing to debate?
Senate bill 276 uh.
has uh
Committee substitute
now pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative, except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands. Senators, we
are voting all senators to your
Senator Brant
Voting now
Sen Lanier voting no.
Senator Brantley voting no.
Senator share.
Voting now
Center block but you know.
Senator Paul voting no.
Senator Thornton voting no.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Centeralgos voting now.
If I vote of 24 in the
affirmative, 15 in the negative.
Senate tax business,
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 278
has duly passed the Senate,
Senator Hickey. Thank you, Mr.
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate bill.
305 once amended on final
passage has been taken at the
and that this is now subject to
OK, Senate Bill 305 committee
substitute wants amended.
Correct?
Oh, Senate Health Public Affairs
Senator Tobiasin see no
objections. Senator Tobiasson
explained the bill.
Mr. President, um, Senate Bill
sleep in state office buildings
with no end in sight. This
situation is untenable.
Our children Protective Service
systems or foster care was
wait, and I'm committed to
finding solutions that can begin
with recruiting and retaining
more quality foster families
statewide.
Nationally, 1 in 3 foster
foundation of fixing our broken
foster system and keeping
already traumatized children
from sleeping in state offices,
and with that I'm proud to
families for our foster care
system in crisis. Thank you
Senator Tobias, and senators,
we're debating Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for.
Centerville 305 as amended.
Center Pinto.
about where in some sense in the
headlines is the aftermath of
COVID.
Where many of our children are
now parent they're they are they
children, at least the last one
parent during the COVID
epidemic.
So as we move forward, I don't
see how, you know, you see much
of these numbers escalating,
and has shortened the life
expectancy for those that have
repeatedly, um,
Been infected.
there was never a study, never a
deep look into um the issues and
yet we put bills forward, so
thank you, senator. Thank you,
Mr. President.
President, with the sponsor of
the bill yield? Senator Tobiasin
Y. Yes, Mr. President.
Center Brent, thank you, uh, Mr.
President, Senator, I appreciate
in their foster care, CYFD than
our state is?
Senator Tobison
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, yes, actually, part of
for one placement or one sibling
group per foster, uh, care
family. Yet here in New Mexico,
um, we have in one instance, I
from 6 different families and
then a 7th that is verbal, so
actually in our state we are in
a crisis and we have to get this
figured out and we are looking
at programs like Utah's to do
Mr. President, Senator, that is
correct. Um, I have been told
that that situation is under
boys, boys have two speeds on or
off, and I certainly cannot
imagine one parent in a very
small home, might I add, um,
really being able to give the
we're putting children in a
situation, quite frankly, where
we've become the traumatizer and
we have to do better for our
children.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, um,
of look at what they're doing.
Will they, will they kind of do
a survey of some other states to
get some ideas is that kind of
what you're seeing for this task
force?
having some demographic uh
similarities to us in, in many
ways. We're looking at that
program because they have
literally never had one child
sleep in an office. So yes, we
sleep in my office, but, um, Mr.
President, Senator, as these
kids are sleeping in, in their,
the offices, um, why aren't
they?
not as familiar with what's
happening in the group homes. I
do believe that we are
challenged, which is what we are
also hoping, um, you know, some
of the recent legislation we've
difficult to place. Um, that's
not an excuse, but, um, the
situation is not fantastic and
One thing that I found out in my
I don't know if they were
complaining or not, but anyway,
they were sent home for
Christmas to spend Christmas
with their own families and our
foster children that were
sleeping in offices were taken
that we need big, bold
innovation and changes in our
foster care system for our
foster care children that are
being just absolutely
traumatized even by the system
with the money that our state
has from oil and gas, might I
add, the billions of dollars
that we have in our budget.
It's hard to find an excuse why
to say how much I appreciate
your passion on this issue as
well as um.
Senator Brantley and Senator
Gallegos that have been working
on this issue for years, you
know, this has been something
Um, no one even wants to be the
director of CYFD because you
just get beat up.
It it is not like the optimal
secretary position in our state.
these kids' needs.
These kids that are in foster
care, either their parents have
been killed in some kind of
tragic accident and there's no
Hell in this lifetime.
And they need people that love
them, that will care for them.
What they don't need is a
department that's going to
making kids sleep on the floor
in your office.
Those kids don't feel very
valued.
And so I really appreciate your
attention to this. I really hope
this task force can come up with
girl, uh, last week, who was 5
years old.
And she'd been in foster care
with the same person, thank
goodness for her.
Since she was born.
This child should have a forever
home already and the older a
child gets, the more difficult
it is to find a forever home.
And so I really hope that we can
get this department right that
don't know how to help and so I
think we can fix this situation
just by letting the people in
our community know.
Really training them.
through.
To actually continue to do
foster care.
And that's one of the things
that foster parents need that
I, I needed to be able to take
my father, who was having some,
some real struggles at the time
to his mother's funeral.
care.
So we've got to make sure
families have the support they
need when they need it. So thank
you very much and I hope these
are all things that this task
much. We'll send her Tobias and
Yi,
please.
Yes, Mr. President, I yelled.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I was reading through you,
fast counting and there's 123456
of these members that will be
appointed by children, youth and
families. Do you have a problem
It's hard for us to help move,
um, an operation of business
along to meet their goals if
they don't have buy-in from
leadership.
their voice as well. It's not to
cut them completely out of the
process. It's to really discover
what do we need to attract and
where we make much movement.
Cinerzel.
Mr. President, thank you very
much for that response. I am
Whenever you're talking about
representing service providers,
can you tell me how that
selection might be made through
CYFD.
And Tobiasson.
And who's uh Miss Beck with
Senator.
I, I gosh, what's the name New
Mexico child first.
OK. Thank you Senator, and
there's been unanimous consent
Centers is that once you get
settled I'll yield back to you.
children, youth and family would
be selecting one person that
Mr. President, um, it's a
there're a service foster care
provider within CYFD, so that is
the number of selections that
CYFD would have. They actually
have 7 selections that they will
be able to
talking about representative
foster families.
My concern there would be, OK,
you're going to pick a foster
family that has nothing but.
Center, Mr. President, I guess
my concern here with me reading
off all these appointments made
by CYFD, there might be some
Thank you, Mr. President. It,
it.
The point is that it is a
diverse group of stakeholders
in the foster care system, so it
would, the intent is that it
would be a diverse group.
And Mr. President, I have to
appreciate the diversity of this
group that is being made up
department is the one young
person that's lived the
experience who has been aged out
of the foster care system. To
Mr. President.
And Senator Tobias and one
member from a rural county.
Foster care.
From all of our rural areas of
the state. How is that selection
gonna be made and how is that
other um members it would be an
application process and I agree
with you that is just as
critical of a voice as um the
member who is aged out of the
foster care system and remember
whoever was chosen from the
applications from the rural
area, um, they would also help
represent all of those.
children from rural areas.
Mr. President, there are
currently 2100 children in our
foster care system.
And Mr. President, that breaks
my heart whenever I hear that
is a personal experience I have
been through trying to help a
grandmother trying to be able to
get her grandchildren.
And
grandchildren.
The grandchildren were moved
from where they were domiciled
at because of drug abuse in the
household.
children. I want to take care of
them. They are my flesh and
blood. They were moved from
house to house to house, they
this person was.
The grandmother does not get to
see them.
Because I do live so far away.
I have reached out to seeYFD.
they have been fighting this
from the very start they wanted
their grandchildren. They did
not want them to go into the
system.
So whenever, please like that
that are suffering from this, it
does my heart, it harms my
heart.
I hurt for the grandparents. I
hurt for these kids. Mr.
President,
that turnover rate is in CYFD.
Thank you centers uh center to
buy.
Mr. President, um, Senator, and,
any town in our state, and this
is exactly why I am a part of
this type of legislation this
session. This is critical, and I
will say that currently it's at
Thank you, Senator Tobias and
Senators there.
Mr. Preston, thank you very
much.
How much have we helped?
Senator Tobison, Mr. President,
it's the money that's the
problem at this point. I think
it's the system that we have in
action here or in inaction and
Mr. President, it hurts my heart
too. I'm a mother.
We have 2100 children.
Who do not have a forever
family.
How are they fully engaging in
society, especially here in New
Mexico and if you also look at
those numbers, those children
President and Mr. President.
What Senator Tobiasson has just
told us here, the amount of
money that we've invested into
that are at stake. It breaks my
heart last year I helped a
gentleman that wanted to take in
2 children from his neighbor
that lived across the street
His license to be a foster
parent had expired 3 months
prior to.
stay where.
Two weeks later they were
separated and at this point they
are still living in separate
foster homes.
That one hurts Mr. Speaker. Mr.
President, I, here goes another
cookie.
Mr. President.
some children that are problem
children.
The instance that took place of
children having to sleep in the
office of CYFD happened in
alleviate that situation because
of the security risk that was at
hand.
Mr. President.
It's time that we as a body said
the change necessary where
families if they are
grandparents or aunts and uncles
that say we will step up, we
Where it might be one of their
siblings might be.
Mr. President.
Many years ago whenever I was
first campaigning, I met one of
pretty nice size house. They
also had another really nice
sized house on their same lot.
Through the course of the years,
And they loved each and every
one of them and every one of
these children love them back.
And to this day.
matter. They had enough love to
go around and enough compassion
to care for these children.
That these children are all now
Just like Senator Tobias Ai to
make a change in a system that
is not working, so thank you for
bringing this bill forward, Mr.
We have the foreign member
that's just arriving.
We're waiting for the Florida
amendment to be prepared. We're
still on the bill and the
toenila Lopez.
We're on the bill senators.
Will the sponsor yield
Yes, Mr. President, I yield.
Um, why is this bill a bill and
realized that.
As a bill, we potentially get
more traction and more immediate
action and in the past, um, some
Mr. President, no, it doesn't.
So when does the task force end,
Mr. President?
complete its work on July 1st of
2026.
Senator July 1st of 2026. OK,
and then I noticed on page 3 it
that, was that a bill that never
passed? That's an unusual
citation, um, because normally
you would cite the law, not the
bill, Mr. President.
Um, Mr. President, so to
clarify, is that a law?
Mr. President, yes, it is a law.
actual provisions of the law,
um, were in, in this, which I
actually do think should be a
memorial, um, because it's got a
very specific beginning and end
suggested that it be a memorial,
um, I thought it would turn into
a memorial, um, because I think,
I think study is always good,
and I particularly like the
amendment that was made in Spach
Mr. President, do you know why
about 20 children or 1% of the
children in, in the system have
been cared for in offices?
Mr. President, the CYFG
statement on this in the FIR
said that um 90% of the
treatment center or treatment
foster care, so the issue, it
seems, Mr. President, continues
to be a level of care of
residential treatment programs
buttress our treatment programs
and I hope it includes, uh,
children, um, and at least that
is definitely the, at least my
expectation and hope, um, and
so.
issues. I support this bill as
opposed, you know, because I
like the idea of, of retaining
and um and recruiting foster
care parents, but what I
understand from the report by
understand and regret that these
children are in offices that
shouldn't be, but in order to
address the problem, we've got
to get the behavioral services
Um
In focus, and I don't know, I
haven't gone to Senate Bill 163
parents and forever homes and we
do know that sometimes children
are taken away and brushed into
forever homes before their
parents, their biological
parents have a chance to get it
From parents who have lost their
kids, um, I think that that
would really, really help
balance this because the rush to
concerns I have about this bill.
I would be much more comfortable
if it was if it was a memorial
because setting it up in statute
is going to have this on the
books for a long time, yet it
diem, um, because memorials with
unless you do junior money or
you have some other support you
with memorials, um, you don't
participating got per diem.
Hotel and memorial. Of course,
that happened before COVID and
they ended up doing the whole
thing on Zoom, but um I, I, I,
Mr. President, am I able to
respond? I didn't hear a
question in that, uh, Senator
Tobiasson, so we'll go to the
amendment. We do have a floor
amendment.
The reader will read
And Branley to move the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
addressed by Senator Azel. She
is correct in identifying the
number of seats on this board
and so to the sponsor, I would
just say that what we're
proposing on here, the first one
Secretary of CYFD and I'll echo
the concerns that were addressed
by Senator Azel. There are
number of appointments on here
by the CYFD secretary, and while
she does not need to have the
from that agency so that they
could provide information and
correctly identify solutions
because as we know, this task
force is not to look within CYFD
what I am, uh, recommending is
the removal of the one at-large
representative on page 3 at the
top of page 3, that would still
leave a CYFD appointment that
young person with lived
experience who has aged out of
it. Another
CYFD secretary appointment is
the juvenile justice one. We of
course have the tribal member
and the final one that she would
be appointing is still the rural
communities. And so I would then
turn to the sponsor for feedback
we're debating Senator number
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment, Senator Bradley to
close. Mr. President. I move
Senate floor amendment number 1
to senate Health and Public
vote. Thank you.
Voting on Senate For Amendment
number one, all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposed name.
and I'll yield to Senator
Thornton.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Will the sponsors yield for a
couple of questions.
that this task force will be
looking at or are there other
models that you can suggest that
they also look at. Mr.
it also says other states. So we
have just highlighted Utah
because they are in within our
region and they are highly
successful, but we will be
looking at other state models.
Mr. President, um, other states
with successful models would be
California, Colorado, Minnesota,
New York, North Carolina, North
I would imagine that there are a
lot of states doing a much
better job at this than we are,
so I'm, I'm glad that we'll be
looking at all of those to, to
affect the change in in our area
32%. Is that something the task
force is also gonna be looking
at?
And to buy some, Mr. President,
Senator, I am aware of that, but
Uh, thank you for that. Um, I
think that was really the, the
two major questions I had. I'm
just trying to get an
understanding of of what this
bill will accomplish and uh I
just wanted to make sure that uh
I, I, I understood that
initially you came in with an
appropriation and my concern
here is this may be another
unfunded mandate, uh, because
we're we're asking this group to
unfunded mandate or house is
going to be handled,
Mr. President.
Senator Thornton, thank you for
that question actually. Um, this
million to recruit, um, train
and support foster care in TFC
providers, so the money is
there, it has been earmarked,
taken, and this is our way of
making sure that we do finally
address the um retention and
this isn't really focused
because there are children in
offices.
I think last time I asked the
cabinet secretary, there were
The point being that we are not
keeping foster care parents for
some of the reasons that Senator
Brandt mentioned earlier, and
Getting, they're not paid
actually, they don't make money
being a foster parent, but those
reimbursement payments they get
every month, that's not their,
continue um to be in a situation
where they're taking in children
and if you look at these other
states, um, they're not putting
6+ children from different
families in one foster.
home.
and our goal would be to at some
point get to where Utah or other
states are where there is one
case or one sibling group, we
heard the touching story from
foster care parents, um, the
training and support and figure
out how do we retain these
wonderful people who are willing
to bring these children into
their homes and give them a
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
well, the sponsor please yield
Yes, Mr. President. Charlie. Uh,
into an actual law, I think has,
um, what doesn't have the same
effect as, as a, as a memorial
task force, and I've served on
smaller, um, was able to build
out parameters and then grow to
um the
number of representation that's
proposed in this bill, um, that
family violence Protection Act
review, which was also a large
and substantial number of
individuals, um, but that was
Without having those operational
supports, um,
Mr. President, I worry about
creating a law to address this
yes, I'll, I'll respond actually
the John Paul Taylor task force,
we spoke about in Senate
Finance. It does set precedents
that um a bill like this could
had a lot of eyes on this, a lot
of support, because we know we
have to do something different,
um, immediately, and the
you, Mr. President. Um, getting
into the bill itself and using
Utah as a as a model, um,
Senator Tobiasson, how many
tribes does Utah have federally
recognized.
Mr. President, could she check
that with her expert?
Here, I've got to bend over
And how many tribes federally
recognized as New Mexico have?
Miss.
Mr. President, we have 23 plus
Uh, Mr. President, studying Utah
for the placement of American
Indian children is not, does not
meet parody, um, for the vast
Mr. President, Senator, um, what
this task force is doing is
looking for solutions. One, we
will be asking the types of
questions that you're asking
right now, um, this bill is not
bringing forward the solution,
relative placements for Native
American children in Utah is far
below average, um, what is, Mr.
President, what is the number of
Mr. President, um, Senator, I
think that that would be a
question for CYFD. That is not
information that I'm privy to at
Mexico on this task force to
help guide and ask very
important questions so that we
can make sure that all children,
including indigenous children in
the state of New Mexico are
question I asked is 85%. Tribes
in New Mexico place our children
at 85% when we have our own
children. And so Mr. President,
Family Protection Act goes
beyond the Indian Child Welfare
Act as the platinum standard for
placing children in foster care
and
And so I ask um the good
Mr. President, Senator, I think
that's a wonderful question. And
again, that's why um we have
someone from the Native American
currently doing that or if they
are. I do not know, and it's
wonderful to hear that in our
native populations in the state
that we have an 85% placement, I
force looking at all challenges,
all possibilities, how do we get
more foster parents recruited
and retained, and honestly my
And I think for all children,
whether they're
Here in Santa Fe, in
Albuquerque, in Las Cruces, or
them grow in their stability and
understanding of who they are in
the world around them, that we
do everything we can. So this
task force has 2 people from the
you, Senator. Um, and, and I
appreciate the addition of the
um second Native American on the
on the task force. Um, the
only naming Utah by name. I fear
for um religious indoctrination
of our children.
um, because of those placements
in Utah. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President, Mr.
President, I just wanted to
briefly touch on the issue of a
memorial versus bringing this as
a bill, um.
want them to do, we should bring
it as a bell, uh, as a temporary
provision like this, so it's not
staying in our statutes forever,
uh, but if there are task
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
just some comments, uh, the, I
may have maybe one question for
the sponsor, um, Mr. President,
colleagues, but um there are
task forces that do get work
done.
And what I've learned over time,
Mr. President, is to have
something even if it's
story short, Mr. President, I,
we have suggested that the
senator consider converting this
into a memorial.
Um, just because we very, very
rarely do, um, task forces and
Memorial 5 Task Force last year
which did a wonderful work and I
think brought many of us
together and it happens to be
one of the um expert witnesses
that's the senator had in our
committee.
debate.
Senator Tobiasson to close on
the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
would like to restate
to um Native American New
Mexicans appointed to this task
force because we understand that
they are different cultures and
those children may have
in ne s o ta New York, North
Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and Virginia, all
with amazing models of success,
and that's why this is such a
diverse task force.
I'll back up what Senator Doig
just said, a memorial is a
suggestion.
A bill
Is a mandate
incarcerated, knowing the
chances of them, not getting a
real education, the chances of
them not being a full balanced
As a body we have to stand
forward and say, OK, it's a
bill, but we do know it has an
end date, so I ask, please don't
get hung up on whether or not
it's a memorial or a bill
with a more immediate solution
for these children.
who need a home. With that said,
Mr. President, I move that
Do now pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present present voted in the
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senor Pinto voting no.
affirmative, 2 in the negative
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 305 as twice amended has
passed the Senate, Senator
Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate,
that record show that all
actions for placing Senate tax
business and transportation
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
I'm very pleased to have been
part of a historic initiative
representatives about trying to
upgrade and change an area of
Albuquerque that has becoming
very problematic, uh, Senate
fairgrounds that area is now the
state epicenter for crime.
Pedestrian fatalities, cartel
activity, human trafficking,
Department released a $500,000
RFP for a master plan.
To develop alternative plans for
the trajectory of this very
challenging part of New Mexico.
Of course, that master plan is
meaningless without a financial
geographic area and keep them in
that area. They've been done at
the
local level around the state,
but never at this level for
governed by a body of elected
officials and one community
member, 75% of the gross
receipts generated within the
The boundaries of the district
could be expanded solely to
include contiguous land acquired
Just want to restate that.
There will be no power to
acquire land by eminent domain.
Ownership of the land will
remain with the state of New
impacted. We have kids stepping
over people pasted out with
fentanyl, alcohol.
With
Department. They are making a
much more concerted effort in
that area.
Um, but if law enforcement solve
it alone, the problem would be
green space filled neighborhood.
That's what my constituents
want. That's what we want. It'll
be transformative. We've had
grocery stores leave the area,
So there are similar that these
types of projects, the
legislature has authorized for
other special districts such as
when UNI did one with their
South campus, which is now
generated much more housing and
commercial development.
So the state fair district would
necessary powers to advance the
community benefits that the
community wants.
The bonding capacity is up to
half a billion dollars will
We utilize tax revenues
generated from the state fair
itself would not be a general
obligation of the state, county
or city.
legislature. Text distributions
could commence, uh, immediately
after if the bill is passed and
signed, but the bill provides
2029. So I put provisions in
here to protect the state.
Similar to the TEDA, any bonds
issues would have a term uh.
know that yet. We have to wait
for the master plan. Um, we have
to look at the options that it
gives us, you know, we used to
So I believe this is historic
legislation. It'll address the
horrific challenge that we have
now in the middle of
level of state government
associated with these
neighborhoods have agreed.
So Mr.
President, I'd say maybe not
Senator Tobiasson followed by
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Padilla. Senator Townsend, and
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Tobiasson, thank you, Mr.
President. Will the sponsor
Rhode Law Firm, if I could have
him join me on the floor. It's
been a unanimous consent request
for an expert witness.
Say no objection if Sergeant Ars
can please escort our expert
witness into the chamber.
Senator Tobiasson, you have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
and the sponsor yielded,
correct? I wanna make sure I'm
And when my boys were very young
on school field trips, I took
them to the state fair a couple
times, and I'm going to admit at
me, if you haven't met any of
them at this point, my boys look
like a linebackers, so, um, I
make sure that I have my own
personal security with me when I
go to that part of town. Um,
I can't imagine living in the
housing areas around the state
fairgrounds.
I've looked at and been made
aware of, even the Tucson that
we're looking at for the
downtown corridor. It's
different.
And right now there isn't a
they're gonna get 2 or 3
responses in the next month or
so, and once those responses are
back, our economists will be
area. Is that what I'm
understanding? Is that correct?
Senator Stewart?
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
One thing that I've heard and,
and I want to hear it here,
because it's going to help me
make up my mind whether I
support this or not.
Berlio County has created what
this space is today. We've
created it by allowing the
activity there, by not holding
speak, or maybe semi cleaning up
that area with low density high
or high density low income
housing, or is it truly and
idea and is, are you committed
A livable neighborhood, green
space, walkable, low income
housing, mixed use housing,
neighborhood pharmacies, um, my
constituents want this to be a
gem in the middle of the city
that they live near, so I have
not heard any plans from anyone
the mayor, the county
commissioners, the state reps,
the city councilors. We're all
pretty united in having the
speed the best we can have in
Senator Bison, Mr. President,
sponsor, that's really good to
hear. I think that the city of
Albuquerque is looking for
Thank you, uh, Mr. President. I
don't need the sponsor to yield.
I just want to first, um, I, I
And uh Towski Valley, while it's
known for their wealth, uh,
excellent place to ski, the
infrastructure had gotten old.
this was done, it's, it was like
night and day, you know, that
place is really, really
developed beautiful.
Uh, it has many accommodations
for more retail.
Employment situation, so I, I
really feel that this would be
the same that would happen, you
they always had that vision,
they had a plan, they just
couldn't afford it, but by going
with this, with the tax
increment really gave him the
President, and I too don't need
the sponsor to yield. I, I live
in this city alongside the
senator, uh, Senator Stewart,
and we're, we're not far from
each other with our districts,
have a 42 and 42,000 and
growing, um, how, uh, um,
dwelling unit house housing
deficit here in.
can you envision, Mr. President,
being in that area of town,
roughly 5 to 8 years after this
project begins. I think it's
happen is is very well spent
from the people of New Mexico. I
also think that uh when I looked
at the legislation in in the
committee that I serve on in
finance, this simply authorizes
getting this done. I don't think
that we jump in to the swimming
pool. I think we're actually
putting maybe at this point we
maybe have our ankles into the
water at this point with this,
but I think it's very, very
smart.
Sinorel, do you wish to debate?
Mr. President, yes, well, the
good senator you'll please.
One of the concerns here, I, I
will date myself, OK, Mr.
President.
The very first rodeo I went to
Evans, and I'm sure a lot of
these millennials that were here
don't even know who Roy Rogers
and Dale Evans is.
Mr.
President
I was also concerned whenever
all this information started
coming out and I can't remember
if it was November or December.
There was plans to move the
state fair. It was going to move
airbase being 11 mile south of
there with Windrock Center as
well as it's been improved and
everything a mile north of
there, there was that hole in
the doughnut, if you want to
call it that, with all this.
about because I know the money
that has been invested into that
casino through the owners.
Own money
And
47
And I have reassurances from the
owner of that particular
So Mr. President.
You know, I don't know yet
because we don't have the master
plans.
Uh, so, um, there are no plans
that I know of to move the
casino there has been some talk
to separate the casino and the
compact, so we probably can't do
anything with that right now,
but it will be part of the
master master plan, uh, to tell
And Mr. President, Senator
Stewart, that's exactly right.
They are tied together if the
race track shuts down that
the GRT and 75% of the gaming
tax.
Will be used as leverage in my
understanding that correctly,
Mr. President, that's correct.
they do move, it will have to be
through the racing commission
that that does take place.
Mr. President, Senator Stewart,
whenever I'm looking here at the
That would like to be included
in part of the state
fairgrounds.
Whatever you want to call this
now, uh, a district. Is that
correct?
Senator Stewart.
um, the state is about to
purchase, um, there's, um,
there's not much there.
itself. So it's land on the
other side of that plus the
contiguous land we have put in
place that the district could uh
is not in color, mine is just on
blue paper and it's black and
gray, but I can't figure it out
because it is down here as uh at
maybe it is, maybe it is. OK,
but anyway, that part of it is
the area that they are looking
to purchase. Is that correct?
Domain in this bill, you have to
actually put it in there to be
able to do that, and this we are
not having that be part of the
state fair district.
And what we were hearing back
whenever this was first brought
up the county was opposed to it,
is that correct?
Uh, Mr. President, they were
them into a tit which didn't
really work because this is
owned by the state, so, uh, they
are now in support of this.
And Mr. President, President
Prote.
at this location.
And Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President, I just don't
have the answer to that. I will
tell you what I've heard other
electeds talk about, especially
comes back with we should move
the state fair. um, there's,
there's
areas being talked about,
Edgewood, Mesa del Sol, South
suggests, um, I, I think that we
have a chance to make a
tremendous state fair. I mean, I
love the state fair. I took my
classroom to it every year for
just really fun for the kids. I
want to still have that around
the central part of the state,
but the master plan may suggest
something different, and we just
don't know that yet.
the state fair. This was an
opportunity for those kids that
do live in the biggest
metropolitan area in our state
This is
the New Mexico State Fair used
to be in the top 10 rodeos.
on in the surrounding areas. I
know that whenever I used to
haul.
All these 4H and FFA kids and
kids that were involved in high
school rodeo and
This is what they looked forward
to. There is a facility there at
the state fair grounds that is
during the state fair. That's
urban areas do get to experience
if the fairground was moved to
any of the other locations you
talked about, that would be an
impossibility.
Why are we, why would we not
want to leave the New Mexico
State Fair at the New Mexico
State Fair District. That's my
question now, Mr. President.
at the options. If you leave the
state fair there, then you don't
have redevelopment of the area,
essentially, um, but I, you
know, I want to keep the state
get the balloon fiesta Park
unless the balloon fiesta is.
Happening, then it's impossible.
Uh, so I just think that we need
that anymore. So this is just as
much to redevelop and make that
state fare better as it is to
develop 236 acres back up in the
problems there on the grounds
themselves because of what.
The city of Albuquerque is now
experiencing with the population
of people that do not have homes
taking all these 4H and FFA kids
up there many years ago, and I
was the one that was in charge.
It was y'all stay together. If
there is a problem, you go to
But the, the grounds itself is
home to the New Mexico State
Fair and I will lobby for the
New Mexico State Fair to stay in
right now during the offseason,
I see lots of, I don't know what
they call those, it's uh.
Mr. President, I'm sorry, I'm
drawing a blank right now what
coming in that are the
undesirables, and that is a
problem there. If there's
improvements on the ground that
will stop this.
the availability of lodging.
For
parents for FFA advisors for 4H
leaders to be able to take these
the, our state fair to be in the
top 10 again, but whenever we
are saying about moving it out
to Edgewood or what the
availability of housing,
area and I don't think y'all
want me to go in the discussion
of this right now because I get
very adamant about it. There is
a way to clean that area up.
mill gets going in a hurry.
Whenever I hear that some of
that land may be used for low
income housing? Well, what have
we just done? We have not fixed
it's talking about, uh, public
school facilities will be
expected there. Can you talk to
me a little bit about that?
And Stewart.
Um,
whatever plan we come up with
has to be approved by us also.
Um, so,
Uh, now I have to try to
remember your question.
was developed by the community.
Uh, the community really does
want to see a, a, a beautiful
good neighbor and what a kid can
do is help areas outside of that
area, um, and that's the purpose
of putting the public schools,
uh, that are around that
helping with the infrastructure
around that area that will also
help the public schools.
Center
Well, Mr. Chairman, like I said,
of New Mexico that receives no
funding from the county or
anybody else because it is
privately owned.
They have been in operation for
Of course, like I said, rumors
get going whenever I was first,
whenever this was first coming
you? We do not have the problems
down there in that area that
Albuquerque has been
experiencing because we do take
care of the problems down there.
Whenever you're talking about
the educational part of it, what
better education is these metro
kids from the metropolitan area
to Indian Village, the Hispano
village, all of these other
places that.
They will learn from Mr.
President, I am very adamant
All the activities that could be
going on in Tingley have
diminished because of the size
of it.
was a big colosseum Tingley is
not the answer right now,
madams. Mister President and
Madam Prote.
problem with lots of senators in
this body saying, why would we
put money forward on this if
that problem is not going to be
well, the sponsor yield for some
questions that I may ask or may
not. Senator Stewart, certainly.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
don't know about the rest of
you, but I mean for years I've,
have the time PBR there. Even Ty
Murray, who was a seven-time
all-around champion cowboy of
the world doesn't have, want to
have a bull riding there. Uh, so
it's time for Tingley to go
away.
This may take a while. This may
take some time. It's going to
develop around it, but you go to
any town, you go to Nashville
and Bridgestone Arena's downtown
and you go right down the street
having this in New Mexico.
Absolutely nothing. Is there
issues where we move the state
fair? Sure, but if I was, uh,
the guy that owned Mesa Del Sol
state fair in Albuquerque. It's
in the vicinity, there's state
land out there, I think at Mesa
Del Sol that's available, but
one of those pueblos that has a
golf course and a hotel right
Until we decide and we get out
of this, I'm gonna call it old
fuddy duddy mode and turn the
page and say that we can have an
But until we decide in New
Mexico and that we want a nice
venue.
For anybody in the state to use,
whether it's a concert venue,
it is that hardly anybody can
use, um, they built one at Rio
Rancho, they hardly use that
because it's too small.
So it's wake up.
flight, uh, and when you do
that, you'll keep New Mexicans
here.
You'll help New Mexicans,
especially our youth. Number one
thing we heard a quality of life
quality of life.
I can go to a concert, I can go
have a nice dinner. I can do
whatever I want, and we're going
to develop that in New Mexico
we can talk about what we don't
want in New Mexico and we can
keep the old grubby burned down
or used up Kingley Colosseum and
or we can have a nice venue
and see you smiling at me, maybe
Elton John, I think you went to
him at Tingley a couple of years
ago.
But what a, what a different
place we'd be if we had nice
things in New Mexico.
Spend the money.
Whether you like this bill or
not, whether you like the tit or
not, if you want to have nice
things in New Mexico, gamble a
little bit, figure out how we're
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
with the, um, Madam Protem yield
Senator Stewart, do you yield.
Happy deal.
questions, um, so we had asked
in finance, um, who would the
reports be going to and I think
I found my own answer and I
There's a trying to find the
part in here.
Yeah, Section 12 on page 20 a
report required by September 1
of each year, the board shall
report to the state board of
records are published.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you Madam Protem and then
business, would those be sold or
would they just be leased.
So, Mr. President, we don't
really know the answer to that,
but it could be either one.
Thank you, um, thank you, Mr.
help fund the master plan.
So Mr. Mr. President, the
legislature would get to see the
Mr. President, Madam Protem,
thank you for that answer. I'm,
I'm learning something new every
day here in the Senate. So I, I
just want to close with the
they had a master plan to build
a bunch of high rise, uh,
buildings to try to provide
housing for uh what was
considered to be low income
individuals in the community.
away parks and they literally,
literally destroyed what they
thought there was a good idea
destroyed the community and it
and, and, and entertainment that
the community and then even
those outside of the community
could come and join. So I stand
I'd like to ask the sponsor to
yield and um just have have a
few questions, um, Senator
Stewart do yes. Senator Pope,
Mr. President, Senator, just
for that question. I'm, I, I'm,
I'm proud of what we've done
already in this bill because uh
uh a very active uh community
creation, open space, and health
services, but if you look then
on 3 and you see public
improvements that just
facilities, parks, recreation
facilities, landscaping,
including earthwork, structure,
plants, trees, public buildings,
public safety facilities and
fire protection and police
community right next to the
state fair is international
district.
23 languages.
Chinese settled, uh after uh
they built the railroads to the
west, um, it's where African
refugees have settled through
the Catholic Church, so it's a
This, um, through multiple
meetings and community
engagement is built into this
plan throughout, but we now have
the International District Group
this until we could have that be
part of this bill and I'm, I'm
proud of that, that it's in
here.
Senator Pope, thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you,
Senator. You know, I go to your
so I know your area well. um,
it's important that that
community input is there. We've
also had the discussion on low
income housing mixed use, um,
and, um, you don't have to yield
But they're not being pushed
out.
And so it's good to hear that
it's gonna be some mixed use
and, and opportunities there and
I know there was some capital
just want to end and say that
this is important and it has to
really be about people. We know
what folks are dealing with.
Whether it be
really about people and I think
we always need to be careful
about what we say about areas of
town or their districts, you
know, terms like zombies and
hell on earth.
and Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, um, I
don't, uh, need the sponsor to
yield.
Um, this area really needs a
this area, uh, redeveloped and,
um,
That's what tax increment
districts were created for is
for redevelopment projects like
site, uh, I'm glad to hear
things like neo traditional
neighborhoods mixed income,
mixed use, those are all very
good things and they provide um.
Simon's strong support, I think
this is very forward thinking,
uh, I was, uh, born in
Albuquerque. I've seen the, uh,
I was 6 years old when I-40 went
up.
down back then it was uh it was
condemnation. The government
would just condemn the houses
and people didn't have any
choice. They just had to leave.
And that was really hard on the
community. Um, this is a diff,
important, so I think it's a
good thing, um, I did want to
address the issue of, you know,
we've, we've gotten away from
the term low income housing and
I'm using more of the term
affordable housing.
are the people who would benefit
from what you call affordable
housing in a, in an area like
this, so I'm in strong support
office. Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Um,
Lane 11, it talks about that
this particular district board
will be able to alter the
boundaries of the district.
And Mr. President, Senator, my
question is um.
Has there been a discussion
about what process will be taken
if the board decides to grow the
boundaries.
we have power to impose taxes
upon property located within the
district boundaries.
So it's a question to ask um.
What's the process that the
especially when we talk about,
uh, levy taxes on any entity
that's brought into the
district, uh, Mr. President, a
Um, I don't think you're looking
at that, but we found what you
referred to and essentially the
being sold to the state as we
speak, um, so that's the
contiguous land, um, you know,
the, the board will have to do
things by.
So, Mr. President, the, the
property tax can only be imposed
district only when we've got
people there, uh, so that,
that's several years down the
it's got that usual uh uh voter
affirm affirmation that we have
to have before we would do that.
So this would, in the beginning
this the revenue would.
total of about 9 million a year
in total and that would be the
income for quite a while until
we started developing it because
looking at the 343.10.
Version that's online, Mr.
President, so I am referring to
Mr. President, but when we put
this legislation in statute, of
course, if it's 10 years down
the road, um, again it's a.
that out and ask a question on
the thought process, um, Mr.
President, and just one more
question. I know there's a metro
redevelopment Act that does
as we have this new road going
through um on bridge.
But uh was there any
consideration, Mr. President,
about um maybe utilizing the
metro, uh, Metropolitan
to look at a lot of things
through through development. I
think we did look at that act,
but this is, this is pretty
unique, what we're trying to do,
state owned land, so it's not
owned by the city, it's not
owned by the county and so it's
difficult to use a metropolitan
Development Act.
Mr. President, thank you. Just a
couple of questions I wanted to
ask. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, do you wish to
debate?
I have a couple of questions, so
will the sponsor Yelp, please.
Happy to yield.
Townsend, Senator Stewart, I'm,
legislation, there seems to have
been.
plan and I'm just trying to
figure out has the plan changed
when I read these early on, I, I
figure out
481 is 482 still an idea or it's
just not time for it yet.
Senator Stewart
clear that um the state fair,
uh, Ted was a better idea, uh,
that came from Berlio County
commissioners who were
482. So I haven't even brought
482 to any committee. So it was
the process we were going
through, but then we, we, uh, we
That is mentioned in the bill,
who exactly?
Any taxing for property would
have to be approved by the
voters, qualified voters. We
have no qualified voters now.
for us starting this process is
the gaming tax and the GRT.
So that's possible that we could
do that as we go, go along, but
Senator Townsend. OK, thank you,
Senator, I think that kind of
clears up 482 and that was what
I want to thank the sponsor of
the bill for getting the
community involved because when
this first started in the rumors
started flying about this, um, I
was hearing from a lot of
believe it's yesterday, um, I
only read it today. I got a
letter from a lot of community
members who had been concerned
and complaining, saying that
they're grateful to the senator
for
the planning process and they
feel that the impetus behind
this bill is to improve the
area, not to freeze them out,
not to gentrify, but to improve
So I walked in later, but, uh,
my question is if the, if the
sponsor will yield. Happy deal,
Mr. President. My question is
the initial board for 6 years is
of the governor, um, then, um,
let's see, where is it on page
9, there's gonna, the board may
hold an election of new
directors by majority vote of
qualified electors in
accordance.
the Local Election Act
and will they be residents of
the area or, or how is this,
because it, it doesn't.
It doesn't specify.
board is for 6 years. I hope in
6 years we've got qualified
electors, but if we don't, the
provision is that they could
continue until we do. So it's
So the qualified voters will be
residents of the district.
Mr. President, that's correct.
OK, well, that, that clarifies
it because I think that that's
who they would be, but if that's
what normally happens in a TI,
then that, that gives me some
great comfort. Um, I think that
this is a really great idea, as
the sponsor has a lot of, uh, a
lot of commitment to, to her
district and I believe that this
is going to be a positive and
net positive for the district,
um.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the senator yield for some
questions. Stewart. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, so I, I really support
reinvesting public funds to
redevelop an area. So,
Obviously the prima facie case
for redevelopment has been made
legislative floor right now.
I've ever voted on a TED, may
even know what a TED is and have
seen different models of TIS.
Well, we saw a tin in Las
Cruces, Mr. President, a year
pay themselves exorbitant
management fees, and these are
taxpayer funds, mind you. Also
with taxing authority. Well,
when it took, thankfully a few
members of the community who
knew enough about a kid to say,
get it to an appropriate place
and then the developers like,
well.
Um, so I, uh, there's an area in
this bill.
Mr. President, colleagues, that
I am concerned about, and I
And that is the possibility that
a development interest could be
on the board. And, uh,
Mr. President, Senator, it's not
I told you in finance,
absolutely not, right? With that
being said, um, Mr. President,
Senator, we have a law called
the governmental Conduct Act and
right now with advisors for this
bill, but also with the
legislative counsel over whether
or not an appointee would
technically be uh subject to the
government.
Governmental Conduct Act,
whether an appointee is actually
It allows a lot of financial
possibilities.
And so based upon what the
senator said, I know that's not
your intent, but the bill
seemingly allows that
possibility.
definition, that person is also
not subject to the governmental
accountability Act, but I
recognize that the point of that
is a really good point. It's to
have a member of the community
as my colleague, predecessor
just uh brought up the bill.
Talks about after the original
board, we could then elect a
whole new board. Now the
original board, Mr. President,
to the local governmental act
and, and, and local election
Act, and I do believe it is
someone who is qualified to
vote, which probably would be
someone registered to vote in
on a board that is actually
making decisions.
To issue bonds, to issue taxes,
to spend money, and decide that
money could be spent to benefit
of address all this, which is
simply be to add andendment
saying that all board members
shall be subject to the
governmental Accountability Act.
And that way, your intent of
really having good government,
interests that are going to be
circling overhead. They already
are because we're talking
hundreds of millions of dollars
that this bill involves bonds,
other financial opportunities,
have strong conflict of interest
in that one amendment would deal
with that.
And, uh, Mr. President, Senator,
I'm just curious as the bill
moves forward? Are you open to
look at it, but our Constitution
required support to be compiled
of elected officials.
So even the second, uh, election
has to be elected officials.
we have one person who's not an
elected official, which is what
we would have now. I want a
community member on there, um,
but I will continue to look at
this issue.
the board may hold an election
of new directors.
New directors of a qualified
electors in accordance with the
local Election Act. It does, it,
I'm just, it's there, it's right
there in black and white. I
would just urge you, Madam
President, uh, to just look at
this and, and ask someone maybe
outside of
do you want to respond to that?
Stewart.
This president trying to listen
to two people at the same time,
you have to continue to read on
says in the absence of an
election, the initial 7 members
shall each serve an additional
turn in the absence of an
election. So what I'm saying is
if that election were to occur,
it's already covered. I've
spoken to different people who
think that it may not be
covered, cause, cause there's a
difference between an appointed
official.
which is what the government,
the worthy government
just saying I, I don't, there's
a lot of interests already
involved in this and, and again,
I think we need a firewall as
legislators. We need a firewall,
Uh, but I, I love the concept. I
wish this one thing we could fix
it today, but in lieu of that, I
think it's just something that
needs to be addressed moving
forward.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Steinborn. We have
Senator Scott next Center Scott.
Of course. Senator Scott, you
have the floor.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator,
My concern here
wrong, but did, did I hear?
That the squalor, the
lawlessness, the drug use that
is.
Senator Scott, I apologize.
Could you restate the question?
I will, Mr. President. Did I
hear accurately?
Be in the squalor, the
lawlessness, the drug use, and
the, and the crime.
And that this legislation, is it
going to be required?
If any expenditures in the area.
to Mr. President, this is one
tool that will help us uh
redevelop that middle spot in
Mr. President, the, the current
financials would not indicate.
That
Uh
The revenue stream will support.
So how will that process work?
initial bonds will be what the
state fair districts uses to
grow and develop and uh after a
number of years if that works,
limit.
In the bill, and it has to be
approved by the voters.
Senator Scott and Mr. President
Mr. President, it's really hard
to say. We don't have any voters
yet. They have nothing to vote
on, uh, we have a number of
years we would have to go before
plus 75% of the current GRT.
That's right now. That GRT is
going to go up as we develop
that area.
impose a bond after 4 years, all
the money reverts the general
fund and we go back to where we
are now.
Uh, being the old fuddy duddies
according to Senator Munoz.
Before we pass this legislation,
some analyses and projections as
to how the finances might work
plan that would support even a
fraction of a $500 million bond.
Could you address those
concerns?
Uh, Mr. President, there's a
um, estimate from, and that's
the best we can do right now.
This is a plan to change that
area, to change what it looks
like, to change what we're doing
there, um, with the community
it's gonna take time.
it be accurate to say though
that any developer contemplating
moving into this area, even with
the legislation in place would
issue.
So, Mr. President, my expert
says that the current cash that
could be paying those bonds is
So, Mr. President and Senator,
the representation is that $9
million a year will cover
principal and interest on a $500
million bond.
documentation and I'm gonna read
from the FIFIR. Unlike a TI,
there's no requirement that the
formation of the district would
owner is uh seems reasonable and
no requirement that the board
must consider citizen input and
I.
Share the concerns of the
Uh, Mr. President, I think I've
already talked about that, that
the board is all elected
officials except for one, even
about that, uh, and I'm sorry, I
know you asked another question,
I forgot it.
Uh, Mr. President, would the
designees of these elected
designee uh is, is mainly for
the governor, you know, she, she
is often not around. She's got
so many other responsibilities,
accountability Act elected
officials or not.
Center and Mr. President and
Senator, uh, with respect to
Uh, Mr. President, uh, uh, you
know, I, I, uh,
I anticipate this board will,
uh.
OK, we'll take that on faith.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator.
Thank you Senator Scott.
Senator.
The center butilla center
Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Hamblin until she
just want to make a few points,
you know, the state fair,
talking about the state fair is
tough, so I can understand kind
of the, the, the apprehension
You know, we, we can't argue
about a master plan that doesn't
exist. We don't know what the
recommendations are going to be.
We don't know what the economic
Albuquerque. What you got to
understand is in the 40s and
50s, the Northeast heights
didn't exist. Albuquerque was
from downtown up up central to
the university, the fair and the
the high crime rates are, and
it's where streets are parallel
and perpendicular to each other
where there's rectangular
development and that was the
development in the in the in the
Albuquerque is without a modern
indoor multi-purpose arena.
Our arena in our great state was
built in 1957.
visit our nephews and nieces and
kids and we're like, oh, now I
know why you moved to this, to
this city, the plan is
reasonable. There's no eminent
domain. There's, there's a
that we're going to become
accustomed to and that we need.
Albuquerque must become a city,
so I echo the sentiments of the
chair of finance, uh, we, we
includes, uh, you know,
revitalization of the Southeast
Heights and hopefully a
recommendation of a brand, brand
new indoor, uh, indoor arena.
Thank you, uh, thank you for
you, Senator May Este see no
further debate.
Senator Stewart to close on the
bill.
Sorry
Um, Mr. President, I just want
so, um, I really appreciate the
comments, even the skeptics and
the naysayers all had great
stories, so I just want to thank
the Senate for that.
in the bill 481 do now pass
unanimous consent of the Senate
to the records show the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators, we are voting all
senators to your seats please.
Sinner Ramos, you know.
Center is voting no.
Center share, you know.
Settle there, well, you know.
It's in our block voting no.
Senator Tobiasson Rodino.
I voted 24 in the affirmative,
15 in the negative. Senate tax
business Transportation
move the state fair.
Butters
It's an exit with nothing to do.
Uh, thanks so much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate. Senate majority floor
leader Peteror to take us to
that next order business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
up and meet. We have moved, uh,
the floor session to 7 tonight,
not 6:30, so the dinner will be
at 6:30. Uh, there will be
traditional corned beef and etc.
starting about 6:15. We'll be on
the floor at 7,
so Mr. President, unanimous
consent we go without our
business messages from the
house. See no objection that
order business messages from the
respectfully submitted Lisa
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
Journal shows the message from
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I am directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
open session and return same
herewith respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen, chief
clerk Jour show the message from
the house has been received.
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
show the message from the house
has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 348 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa and Ortiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk show the message from the
house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
in the journal reflect that the
message from the house has been
received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, Mr. Perez,
unanimous consent. We go without
our business committee reports.
consideration, reports same with
the recommendation that do pass
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and at the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually. no objection.
The reader to read.
House Bill 117 as amended do
pass as amended and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 448 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
Motion to adopt the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those oppose.
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 146 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chair.
Thank you, Mr. President.
That, uh, you know I'mous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports coming out
of Judiciary Committee that we
House Bill 178 as amended do
pass as amended.
House Bill 183 as amended, do
pass House Bill 281 as amended
to pass, respectfully submitted
Joseph Cervantes chair.
I moved the adoption of the
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your education
committee to whom has been
referred? House Bill 195, as
submitted Senator William P.
Soul's chair.
Sinner souls
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read both of the committee
pass, respectfully submitted
Senator William P. Soul's chair.
Senator.
I move adoption of the committee
report. have a motion to adopt
the committee report. All those
in favor signify by saying I.
Those opposed?
referred House Bill 298 has had
it under consideration, reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Senator Katie Doig chair.
been adopted. The reader to
read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred, Senate Bill 495 has
had it under consideration and
report same of the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee pros and wrote on
them with one motion and the
journal reflect they voted upon
individually.
Reader to read.
House Bill 240 to pass.
Move adoption of 2.
3 committee reports. There's a
motion to adopt the committee
reports. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
The Reader to read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 283 has had
it under consideration in
Senator Nicholas A. Paul
co-chairs.
Senator Paul
I can do the first one, Mr.
President, if Senator Paul wants
to do the 2nd 1, Senator,
motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
I suppose they
Yeah, I have it the 24's been
adopted. I'd like to announce
that the members of the body
referred, Senate Bill 75, as
amended has had it under
consideration and reports that
same has been duly enrolled and
engrossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate,
adopt community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
I was oppose the eyes have it,
and I like to announce to the
members that the officers of the
Senate have signed an open
had it under consideration in
parts of the same has been duly
enrolled and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Senator
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those are pros name?
The eyes have it. The community
part has been adopted and I'd
like to announce to the members
that the officers of the Senate
have signed an open session
legislation. He no objection
we're on that order of business
intro of legislation the reader
to read.
Senate Memorial 25 introduced by
Senator Campos, a memorial
in New Mexico to identify issues
in the system and recommend
solutions to those issues.
Senate Memorial 25 Memorial 25
haven't been read twice by title
House Bill 244 introduced by
representatives Little Ree,
Duncan, and Johnson, an act
relating to magistrate court
providing for a minimum age of
Is 348 introduced by
representatives Ortiz and
McQueen, an act relating to
House Bill 348348, having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Conservation
Committee that's House Bill 348.
procurement of architectural and
engineering services and
construction that state agencies
and local public bodies may
enter into and for purchase
Committee, that's House Bill
456.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So as I mentioned,
we've got some committee chairs.
I know it's the media center
Gallegos has an announcement.
Seals, then Sengos and Senator
Charlie.
High quality early childhood
education.
And I'm not speaking about
opinion, but about the research
of Nobel laureate Doctor James
that early, earlier we invest in
children, the greater return,
not just for them.
But for us,
His research finds that high
Higher earnings reduced CYFD
referrals and reduced crime
rates.
That's much better than the
stock market.
most adaptable. Hecklin's
research also shows that
achievement gaps begin long
before kindergarten.
By the time many New Mexican
children enter school,
remediation, special education,
and even criminal justice
system. The cost of inaction is
far greater than the cost of
investment.
and strengthening communities.
This isn't just a social issue,
it's an economic strategy for
long time growth.
So if we care about our future,
quality early childhood
education.
The science is clear and the
returns for New Mexico are
undeniable. Let's invest in New
Mexico's great wealth.
gonna make a difference. We
spend too much time trying to
fix problems that CYFD instead
of trying to prevent the
problems we are creating for our
children. Thank you.
A Senate Republican caucus will
be meeting the room 326
immediately after the floor
session, and it'll probably take
a half hour, and I will let
Senator Jaramilno as soon as
forgot, um, members of the
Senate.
One among us has.
Oh my God. One among us has been
list. It is the rising Star
Award. It is also a competition.
Um, Mr. President and senators,
Like I said, it's a competition,
um, so I'm asking for all of us
to show our support to Senator
Nava and help her rise to that
Emily'slist.org. That's WIN.
Emily'slist.org or you can go to
any of the New Mexico Senate
Democrat social medias, um.
congratulating our senator.
Thank you Senator Charlie.
Sen Munoz
Uh, Mr. President, Senate
Finance will go in, I guess as
soon as the Republicans get out,
maybe 10 minutes afterwards, we
don't know what time that's
gonna be. Uh, we have a few more
committee over the next day or
two and maybe see it on the
Senate floor this week, uh, Cat
Outlay is in drafting. It's a
final proofing, and so it's
coming along, uh, Rios and, uh
tacos, you and Senator Cervantes
are missing tacos from today,
somehow they disappeared. They
were ordered and when they got
in the Senate lounge, they
disappeared, so if anybody finds
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Munoz. Any further
announcements, Senator Senator
Cervantes, then Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, my understanding is
the Republicans are going to
all please be prompt so we can
get back down here and we'll try
and get a lot of work done and
if we don't see it, we'll start
as a subcommittee and let you
catch up when you get there. So
we'll start at 4:30. Thank you,
Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Seeing no further announcements,
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Unanimous consent
The Senate to Santa Risa till 7
