Santa Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Santo Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul to Pope.
Share.
Santochio.
Senator Sos
San Stefanis Santer Steinborn.
Senator Wirth.
of the disciple of the Christ of
Christ here in Santa Fe, New
Mexico. Please remain standing
for the Pledge of Allegiance to
be led today by Senator.
Cio Lopez pledge allegiance in
Spanish to be there today by
for a few moments of your
attention as we gather.
And we remember that our
attention is our greatest gift.
this very moment.
And I invite us all to take a
deep breath.
The presence.
The silence.
We give thanks for this life.
We give thanks for this sacred
earth upon which we stand.
bodies.
May we remember once more today
that to be alive in this time
and this place is a miracle.
As our days unfold today, may we
find space to pause.
to reflect
To pay attention.
To truly listen.
As the 16th century theologian
Martin Luther said, I have so
much to do today.
That I will spend
That our attention is our
greatest gift.
And may we use that gift for the
good of the people we serve.
Be our North Star.
May we breathe.
Slow down.
truly matters.
Sacred spirit, we give you
thanks.
Thank you.
Hooliar a la bandera deltados
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the symbol of
perfect friendship among united
cultures.
You may be seated.
President. Good morning.
Unanimous consent, we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous are in that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous senatoror. Uh,
taking moments to take.
Those deep breaths and realize
kind of how this all fits
together is a really important
thing to do, so that space and
So thank you, uh, I would yield
first to Senator Padilla and
then to Senator.
Gallegos just for excusals, and
then we'll let everyone know
what we're going to do.
and on the in the chamber
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. We
will have a certificate later
for Volcano Vista basketball
team and while we made a very
good effort to get suits and
to the dress code for our
morning visitors only.
See no objection, so.
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to excuse
sign of the finance members, uh,
until they're back in the
chambers, but also center
Thornton until or for the whole
day. Excuse me. Thank you, Mr.
They're still in finance, I
believe.
And then we have Senator
Thornton that'll be gone the
whole day.
Thank you. See, no objections,
so. Thank you, Senatoregos.
Education Day and National Radio
Astronomy Observatory, STEM
Education Day at the
legislature, uh, Senator Pope
has a certificate, uh, today for
coming.
Uh, Doctor Nuzzo will be back in
the Senate lounge from 1 to 4
for Naturopathic treatments, uh,
Thank you Senor, we do have, uh,
other senators who would like to
make announcements or
introductions, and everybody,
uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senator Steinborn and
we're expecting a high of 72
degrees. Um, I'd like to
introduce you to my guest today
and uh Julie and I go way back.
uh, Julie is here representing
college high school in Las
Cruces and then joined the NEA
Las Cruces board of directors.
She became the membership
director, then the president
where she serves today. She is
Beto O'Rourke campaigns, uh, for
Gaby Vasquez campaigns. Several
local school board campaigns.
She is an activist and advocate
and a champion for her students
education and democracy send a
Thank you, Mr. President. Today
is higher education day in the
rotunda in the New Mexico Higher
Education Department welcomes
over 24 New Mexico colleges,
universities and other education
partners. We'll share
information with visitors on
degree and certificate programs,
University's Mariache orguoguoyo
and vallefo Clorico and UNM
Chicano Chicanastarison Aroso in
New Mexico, Mr. President, the
higher education department is
college basic needs project and
a recognition of the 5 theta.
Kappa Community College honor
students there's a number of
successes, Mr. President, when
it comes to tuition-free
college. This past year, more
tuition free college than at any
time in state history, nearly
4000 additional New Mexicans
enrolled this year at one of New
Mexico's public colleges and
scholarship, enrollment has
increased over 7% in the last 3
years. This past academic year
we saw that more than a 10%
increase in the number of
first-time, full-time students
years, raising from the bottom.
For tile nationally to being on
the verge of the first quartile
in fiscal year 24, adult
education had the highest
Thank you, Senator Jarami.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr. President, if you don't
mind, I'll, uh, introduce your
last name, you know, her proud
grandfather, uh, she's actually
19 years old. Uh, she's a
freshman in New Mexico Junior
College, which we will be
graduating in May of 2025.
and having fun with their
friends and last, Mr. President,
she was the president of the
Yunus High School Student
Council and a member of the City
of Eunice Advisory Council.
wants to go to college to be a
nurse, and Mr. President, I'd
like the body to welcome our
honorary lieutenant Governor for
today, Kierra Marie Gallegos.
Mr. President, thank you, uh, I
have some students from New
Mexico Junior College student
government, a couple of their
student government association,
a couple of their, um,
AJ Cordova.
Diane Zapata.
And De Patel.
also have
In the chamber today, the new
president of the New Mexico
Junior College, Miss Cathy
Mitchell stand up.
president of Student Services
and was elevated to the position
of interim president last year.
this uh tremendous group, but
we'd like the body to
acknowledge all.
Senator Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak again. I
did not mean to forget about our
amazing NEA folks from all over
Thank you all for being here.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Haley.
Any further announcements,
senators?
just was informed by Senator
Pope that his uh volcano Vista
High School basketball team is
on the other side, so they're
gonna be here in a little bit
that in as we go, uh, on 3rd
reading we're gonna just start.
with number one and work our way
down and see how we do. So
Senator Woods, Senator Schendo,
Senator Padilla, Senator
consent. We go to that order
business 3rd reading of
legislation, and I yield to
Senator Woods for item number 1
Senate Bill 220 as twice
amended.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I,
I want to yield to senator
Ramos, uh, he needs the
experience, so
He's a great presenter, so I'm
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate Bill 220 on final
almost if you'll explain what
your bill attempts to do.
Mr. President, this bill
introduces new requirements for
transparency and is and risk
management in New Mexico's for
this allows for all actions, um,
to be loaded to the settlement
to be a complete and awarded
before it is reported to the
agreements. It allows citizens
to to monitor how public funds
are used in legal settlements
and it aligns with open
government principles, Mr.
President, I stand for
Well, I was gonna talk the
amendment, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Woods. We do have a a
floor amendment.
amended. Amendments sponsored by
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods to move and
explain the amendment.
220 twice amended.
He no objection if you'll
explain what your amendment
attempts to do, Senator.
page 1, line 2, strike the 2nd
instance of A and insert lieu of
that, and after agency insert
our public schools.
authority. And what, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. President, what
we're trying to do here.
Senator Ramos and I are trying
to show transparency.
Of different lawsuits in our
state. And how the settlements
Budget for expenses, if I don't
know what the expenses are. So
this is just adding the public
schools, the public school
Woods. Senators are debating
Senate floor amendment number
one, and I'll yield to Senator
Ramos if he wants to speak to
the floor, Mr. President, uh,
uh, I think Senator Woods did a
great job.
state entities and uh thank you
very much, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Ramos senators were
debating. Senator Amendment
number one.
Anyone wishing to debate.
amendment yield Senator Woods
yield. Yes,
I will.
Thank you, Mr. President. I see
that this amendment strikes the
the amendment that was made in
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
What so what is the effect of
that?
And actually, Mr. President, it
looks like they put it back in
Any further debate on the
amendment, I was a sweating that
deal, so.
See no further debate on the
The cinnamon amendment number
one to Senate to SB 220, twice
amended.
And I asked for a voice vote.
220 has now been three times
amended. Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and, and with that, I stand for
questions. Thank you, senators.
We're back on the bill. Anyone
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Well, the
Sponsor of the bill yield for a
couple of questions.
Yes, Mr. President. Senator
Scott.
Uh
are gonna be posted regardless
of whether the risk management
division is, has participated in
the settlement. Is that
accurate?
And Senator, is it accurate to
say that
New Mexico self insures for all
And Mr. President and Senator,
can you tell the body
approximately what those
lawsuits are costing annually
for the last few years.
Uh, our outstanding liability is
estimated to be $370 million Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Woods. Senator
Scott, you still have the floor.
Revenue to the state as a
consequence of lawsuits, Mr.
President and Senator, did I
hear that correctly?
I, I keep asking agencies, Mr.
President.
What are we doing wrong?
your problem here, so once I got
into that discussion,
I found out that many of these
suits, the settlements were
but the circumstances of why we
were being sued was never
brought forward. So how can HR
train people if we don't
understand what's going on. So
doing, what we're doing wrong,
and bring that report forward.
Mr. Mr.
Uh, president, uh, the, the
actual settlements.
It is bad, but Mr. President.
government. So this bill,
Brings forward not only the
mounts we're settling on.
Senator Scott, Mr. President and
Senator, just one more question,
is there one agency?
Uh, Mr. President, and again,
this is one reason for the
portal, uh, risk management does
of risk management duties. So,
um, yeah, we've got, we've got
several agencies and that's
another reason I wanted to bring
in the public schools. We've
that, that has a lot of suits
against it. Corrections has a
lot of suits against it. We've
got different agencies, but we
to determine what budget should
happen.
there. So,
Yeah, it's gonna be a very
surprising thing, Mr. President,
when, when all this information
A piece of sorely needed
legislation to shed some light
on these processes. Thank you,
sir.
Senator Woods or Senator Ramos?
Uh, well, I'll, I'll start with
Senator Woods because he's been
talking the most so far, but
we'll get to Senator Ramos if
he, uh, if he needs a little
help.
Senator Woods do yield.
where we attacked on an
amendment and then you're
modifying that sum. But then
there was a Senate Finance
Committee amendment that I'd
like to ask you about in section
3.
Is on page 3. The Senate Finance
Committee added some additional
serious injury or substantial
loss, uh, caused by a state
agency. But then the Senate
Finance Committee put in
language only in matters where
this claim is pending before a
Thank you, Senator Monte Center
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator, for the question.
What happened?
It came out from the General
Services Department of some
outrageous amount of money that
was going to be required to do
that.
And so,
To
To set a limit as to when we put
a team together, not to say
we're not going to investigate
maybe you're talking about, uh,
Senator, uh,
We
We
settle this claim.
Then to, to even think about
fighting it in court.
I think the general public needs
to know when that happens also.
like
That these claims aren't
A violation of law.
But
We should dig into them and make
Mr. President,
Cinder Cervantes and Senator, I
appreciate the explanation, but
again, I'm still trying to
understand first of all, I find
the language to be somewhat
moment, because again, this is
all new material.
And it reads the director shall
appoint again a loss prevention
review team.
When the, when there's an
occurrence of an individual's
wrongful death or serious injury
caused by an agency.
So, um, I, I appreciate that
you, that the director would
appoint a loss review team.
Actions of a state agency, but,
but then only in matters where
the claim is pending before a
court of competent jurisdiction.
I just don't understand why you
incompetent jurisdiction, um,
but, uh, I'm, again, I'm not
clear why the finance committee
thought that we should only have
or assemble a lost prevention
review team.
settlement made in a, an amount
paid.
Wouldn't it still make sense in
that case to have a loss, uh,
prevention review team, take a
look at that instance and, and
prevention review when the claim
is pending as opposed to say
after the claim has been already
resolved.
Well, hopefully, Mr. President.
Because I think we're talking
about
A claim, but we're always
talking about a settlement.
So if we can have a review team.
good idea.
Thank you, Senator Wood. Senator
Cervantes.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I,
I, I agree that, um, it might
make sense to have a review team
in place when the claim is
pending.
where the claim is pending.
Um, and again, I, I, I don't
think that you want to limit
your bill because I support your
bill, I support what you're
trying to accomplish here. I
think it's a good idea,
against Satan. In fact, I, and,
and defended the former
governor, uh, in an employment
action, so I appreciated that
work uh getting started, but
when I became a state senator, I
I'm, I'm still having trouble
understanding why the finance
committee would want to limit
this kind of review only while
the claim is pending. It would
seem that you might want to do a
review before a claims even
as I did. There are cases.
where the state pays far more.
To defend the case, then the
then the case should have been
paid out in the first place.
the taxpayers should be those
large numbers include not just
what is paid out to the person
who is recovering damages, but
also includes the amount that is
lawsuit where, for example, the
jury awarded $4 million against
UNM Hospital.
But because the hospital is
protected by the Tort Claims
worth $4 million but our law
protected the state hospital or
UNM hospital and reduce that
down to $750,000.
Now UNM's attorneys proceeded to
spend the next 3 or 4 years
of Appeals and then to the state
Supreme Court, and that all
those defense costs, so they're
spending far more money on their
lawyers and their defensive cost
$750,000 they in the end they
had to pay anyway, uh, and so
what I'm getting at here is it
just makes sense that that that
review process should be really
undertaken before a lawsuits
former defense lawyer. I, I
liked defending the cases. I
liked, uh, uh, doing the work it
was exciting, interesting work,
and of course, the state's
check.
case than the case is really
worth and and could have been
avoided those defense costs
could have been avoided if they
had investigated the claim
been settled. So I, I, I see
you're nodding your head a whole
bunch with me. I think you and I
are agreeing. I just don't
understand why we would, uh,
include that language from
finance that limits the review
example, you've got a, a Tort
Claims Act when you're, when
you're filing a case against.
the state hospital you gotta
give, you gotta give notice to
the to the state with the tort
yield to Senator Wirth, I think
who has maybe some some input or
a question for either one of us.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. I have
a suggestion. I think we should
trying to do it on the fly. Uh,
so I see Senator Wood shaking
his head to that. That's a yes,
yes.
The rocks are rolling. Yes, sir.
got our guests here from Volcano
Vista High School. Welcome. I
would yield to Senator Pope for
a certificate that's going to be
read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
legislature for session 2025.
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
Whereas the volcano Vista High
School Hawks boys basketball
team is the back to back 3-time
Class A state champion, winning
Three time district champion and
whereas the volcano Vista High
School boys basketball team is
also the back to back 4 time
Albuquerque Public Schools Metro
whereas the volcano Vista High
School boys basketball team
participates in community
service and hawk pride, and
whereas the volcano Vista
And whereas the volcano Vista
High School boys basketball team
plays in honor of Mike Papa
Brown, the Albuquerque Academy,
and New Mexico's sports Hall of
honor of Mike Papa Brown. Now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that February 25, 2025 be
signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Harold J. Pope Jr. Mimi Stewart,
President Pro Tem. Sherry De
Luhan, chief clerk.
a bit. Senator Pope.
Thank you, President, Mr.
President, and um this is a
great honor.
Um
I stand before you today to
discipline, teamwork, and
academic excellent excellence
that will serve them for a
lifetime.
Let's begin with recognizing
their outstanding success in
competition.
Year after year Volcano Vista
inspiration to their school and
to their community.
These championship titles are
not just trophies. They are
symbols of the relentless hard
work.
success.
The teamwork displayed by this
group of athletes is nothing
short of inspiring.
They understand that every pass,
every defensive stop, and every
Beyond their accomplishments on
the court, what makes this team
truly exceptional is their
dedication to academic
excellence, balancing the
demands of a rigorous athletic
schedule with schoolwork is no
Their discipline and academics
reflects the same drive that
makes them champions in sports.
They are setting a standard for
future athletes at Volcano Vista
are not just achievements for
today.
They're stepping stones for
their future.
The lessons learned on this
The work ethic they have
developed here will serve them
in every endeavor they they
choose to pursue.
To the players, coaches,
families who have supported this
Remember that the lessons you
learned here, both on and off
the court.
Will continue to shape your
future in ways you may not be
realizing today, but they will.
Your community is proud of you
and we cannot wait to see what
you all accomplished next.
With that, Mr. President, um,
I'd like to allow anyone in the
chamber to make any comments.
bringing this forward. Shout out
to the Hawks. Is the Hawk around
the, the, the hawk mascot. I
love that guy, uh, but I, uh,
I'm Senator Mazas. I represent
the West side just south of
34 seasons, uh, Coach Brown,
tremendous it's, you know, we
talk about the great teams of
the past, you know, the 71
Albuquerque High team, the this
Hobbs team, whatever, you know,
Clovis with Bubba Jennings.
all the Hawks keep working hard,
uh, you stru struggled through
adversity. You've hung together,
uh, doesn't matter what the
score is with 2 minutes to go,
you guys are in every single
pride to the west side and to
the entire state.
New Mexico. Thanks for making it
up to, uh, Santa Fe. Thank you,
Senator Maestas. Other senators
wishing to speak to this.
Senator Block
But I mean this is a dynasty.
You guys remind me of the Boston
Celtics.
Hopefully that wasn't
controversial.
2024, 2023, 2022.
Now, if that's not like the
Boston Celtics.
I don't know what is, Mr.
President and fellow senators.
Proudly because not everyone,
I'm a former athlete, I think we
have a couple more here. I
think, uh, the majority leader
might have played ball, high
school ball in high school as
you for what you did on the
court.
But I also want to thank you for
what you did in the classroom.
Because I know your coaches.
for all the time because
players, the coaches are there
before you, and they leave after
you.
Your parents are there to
support you 100% of the time
well.
And man, what a, what a network
that volcano High has.
Just amazing.
don't get that dominant, that
type of dominance.
Comes in once.
In in a generation.
Kind of like my New England
Coaches, phenomenal job,
parents, friends, booster club.
Thank you so much for supporting
these young men and um I wish
you the best for another banner.
Thank you, Mr. President, I too
want to stand in support of this
uh certificate and congratulate
you young men and one of the
things I really, well, I'll,
next level, but what I wanna say
to you is the academic work has
um Senator Block said is also
extremely important.
in your life. Strive for more
because you have demonstrated
both physically and
academically, you can do it. So
I really urge you to, to prepare
Senator Pope, if, if I may ask,
and members of the body if I can
uh take a point of personal
privilege and make some comments
unanimous consent.
See, no objection. I, I, I do
want to take a moment to um
by accident. I think that you
have tremendous um leadership,
your coaching that is there and
I have to share a little bit
about their coach, because we
talk about dominance and we talk
about throughout the history of
championships and their coach,
uh, Hanavis's coach Greg Brown,
we actually had a chance to play
together, graduated together in
'91 and the tremendous leader
that he was in.
now is demonstrated in each one
right before going to the
district tournament, going to
state tournament, it's about the
team and the team is what has
got us to this point, but I
think it's a special moment when
we talk about um events that
specifically because Ryan uh
did.
Something with his health, his
teammates that was pretty
amazing just this last December.
Ryan hit 17 three-pointers in
And it's an honor to be able to
see him here with us and I'd
like to recognize his parents
Reese and Victoria, who are also
I also wanna make sure that we
also celebrate such a special
and rare occasions like that. So
congratulations, Ryan. With
that, I believe Senator Block
would like to speak for a second
time, then I'll go back to
I would like to know if any
senators in here would be just
willing to resign for a few days
and have these guys uh
appointed.
Uh, on our behalf against our
basketball game against the
If you can do something for like
24 hours to appoint them to the
Senate.
We'll, we'll see what we can do.
I'll get with our
parliamentarian and see if we
know, I, I represent one of your
rivals, Las Cruces, and a few
years ago when you guys had your
championship game, Senator
Maestas and I were challenging
each other on Twitter and, you
we, but we are really proud of
you and your your legend lives
large. Volcano vista. So and I,
and I echo what my colleague
said, you know, use this moment
President, Senator Steinborn and
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. President. I rise
as someone who is very
uncoordinated and unathletic,
are out on the res. I know who
you are, um, and I don't watch
basketball, so, um, kudos to all
of you. I wish we had your
talent on our basketball team.
on social media and um as much
as we are celebrating your hard
work, your discipline, your
intention, and the love you have
for this game. I also want to
to, to meet all of you today.
Thank you, Mr. President.
See no further comment, Senator
Pope.
to legal age, so I'll, I'll keep
doing a, a great job.
Uh, with that, Mr. President,
I'd like to introduce um our
guests, and if I could have you
all stand up and we'll do a
Kenya Naguano
Hudson Brown
Ryan Gonzalez, Lucas Kern, Eli
Sali, David Lun.
Jay Allen.
Caleb Van Wilt, I'm sorry, Caleb
Vander Wilt.
Shimdi Awana Akwane.
Luis Gonzalez.
Drayden Montgomery.
Viviana Alamos and Gabby
Attenio. If you could all stand
and give it a round of applause
for the Volganno Vista High
School basketball team.
Thank you, Senator Pope. Once
again, congratulations and best
of luck in your upcoming
district and state tournaments.
I'll now yell to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter Wetz to take
us to that next order of
See no objection. We're on that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous, and I'll yield to
Senator Shando.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I asked unanimous consent of the
substitution hearing no
objection, Senator Shindo to
explain the bill yes thank you,
Mr. President. This is a bill
that passed the Senate uh a
couple of years ago, but the
The Senate Bill 13 supports
tribal autonomy in the
development of their own
curriculum assessment tools,
standards and evaluation
Between 1819 and the 1970s, the
United States implemented
policies establishing and
supporting Indian boarding
schools across the nation.
The purpose of Federal Indian
boarding schools was to
culturally assimilate American
boarding schools. Many endure
physical and emotional abuse in
some cases died.
Prior to contact, there were
over 300 languages spoken in the
This is important.
Uh, for us here in New Mexico,
we're lucky that our languages
are still spoken. There's 8
languages that are spoken with
our children, because everybody
else has been telling us how to
educate our children for well
over 100+ years, and this will
be a turning point in this
state, so I appreciate your
support. Thank you. And now I
wonder if the sponsor would
yield.
Uh, yes.
Center center souls. Thank you,
Mr. President. A few years ago,
the LESC was very fortunate to
presentation that this would
allow the public ed department
to enter into compacts with
tribal schools, would it require
them to or what are the criteria
establish an application process
for negotiating uh this compact,
uh, with the tribes.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
whether they are are meeting the
educational requirements of the
students, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. President, uh, Senator,
uh, so, yes.
Thank you, Mr. President.
If uh good senator Shindo would
yield for a question
Mr. President, yes, you have the
floor.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
Didn't say it. Didn't, didn't
say spout it talked, talked a
lot about
About culture.
About
always someone in some group
coming out and saying, you know,
your culture's bad. My culture
is good, uh, the fact is, I'm
But it's dang sure breaking a
trend, and I want to, I want to
Our values to our children if we
don't stick up for our cultures.
So Senator Shindo,
I guess I don't have a question
Me recognize.
There's hope
In our diverse state.
To keep that diversity out
there.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't, um, need the sponsor to
yield. I just really stand in
support of this of this uh
compact approach. One of the
plaintiffs were the Yazis and
the other plaintiffs were the
Martinez's, um.
We know that we're not doing the
best job we can and we haven't
been doing the best job we can
this approach is and and as they
say I said yesterday, if you
keep doing the same thing over
and over again, uh, you
shouldn't be surprised that
things don't change and I think
over education and to develop um
an educational approach that is
going to find these students
where they are and then help
them excel and so I'm very proud
and I hope many of them take
advantage. Thank you, Mr.
President. Lopez.
We do have further debate,
Senator Brant.
tribes to uh be able to educate,
uh, their students in the way
that that they, uh, need to be
educated. I think it helps with
President, I move that Senate
bill 13 do now pass unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the roll has
been called and that all those
If you wish to vote no.
I vote of 30 in the affirmative,
0 on the negative. Senate Bill
13 has passed the Senate,
Senator Shindo.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, members of the body,
President. I ask unanimous
consent to the Senate that the
records show that all actions
for placing Senate Bill 92 on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
his Eel, excuse me, and um I
wanna thank her for joining me
this year. This is a piece.
legislation we passed actually
in 2023. Uh, we want to make
sure that the funding for this
particular purpose moves through
to get those bills paid as as we
need them paid, but essentially,
uh, what we're doing here is,
uh, again, we're establishing
the fund, we're identifying
clearly the funding sources, uh,
the administration of the fund
President. uh, we want to also
ensure that we have compliance
with legal standards, uh,
financial stability and support
for the horse racing industry in
New Mexico, which I know we all
just love very, very much and
that's essentially the
co-sponsor on this bill. We have
been working together on this
to.
sure that our jockeys are
covered through insurance and
that the laws do mirror what
Thank you, centers, Senators,
we're debating Senate Bill 92.
Anyone wishing to debate?
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, um, I had a, a good
was brief with you, but, um, as
you said this was recently
enacted in 2023. I just want to
understand, as I understand it,
what happens is the tracks
actually collect or pay into the
Yes, Mr. President, that is
correct.
And, and I'm, I, I, I'm sure you
can probably wonder. I'm, I'm
trying to analogize how this
works in comparison to other
the, it seems very convoluted to
me that the tracks collect an
amount uh from their owners, I
presume, or from the purses, and
through all of this process of
collecting fees and circulating
around the money through the
various processes. What is the
reason for that?
Thank you, uh, Mr. President.
perfect sense to me, and I, I
guess I would understand that.
And, and that's again, I'm
drawing the analogies to
somewhat like, uh, medical
malpractice, which we've talked
about a lot here too, where the,
themselves. They're, they're
collecting the fee and they're
using the fee and the fee is
being paid to buy their own
insurance. So they're not
relying on the taxpayers to
actually pay for their
insurance. Is that right,
Senator?
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr.
pulled together, the insurance
rates are lower, and then they
can make those distributions
without uh any of the uh
standard insurance related
issues.
Thank you, Senator for the
Senator Cervantes and thank you,
better terms when you're part of
a group or a pool, and that's
frankly what uh hospitals here
in the state of New Mexico do is
they pull themselves, they all
buy common insurance and
policies oftentimes, and they,
dollars into the process from
taxpayers' sums into keeping
those insurance rates
artificially low for those
hospitals, whereas here the
tracks are paying for their own
insurance, uh, using the state
Uh, yes, Mr. President, again,
couldn't have said it better. I
mean, at the end of the day, um,
The uh oversight is by the
commission, uh, not a dime comes
so that we make sure that those
funds get distributed on time
and, and for the purpose that
they were designed for.
And thank you Senator and thank
you Mr. President. Yeah, my, one
of the concerns I've raised with
others, and I have a track in my
of the tracks insurance
purchasing or obligations, but
here there's none of that. And
again, I would contrast this to
medical malpractice where the
state taxpayers actually uh
you. Thank you, Senator
Cervantes. Any further debate,
Senator? no further debate.
Sepa there, were you close?
all agreed in about 30 years,
we're able to get them together
2 years ago. Now we have a very
successful way of managing these
dollars and getting this out the
door. So, uh, with that, Mr.
President, uh, I move that
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands, and
I thank my co-sponsor, Senator
Rizo.
Thank you. All senators to your
seats, please.
If you wish to vote no, please
Senate Bill 92 has passed the
Senate, Senator Padilla, thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Thank you. We're gonna go on to
the next item I believe that's
gonna be item number 4.
That sent a bill 48 is twice
amended and I'll yield to
taken.
And that's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. Thank
you Senator no objection.
When that other business started
reading legislation I Yen
state.
To reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and or mitigate
climate change. The fund is
administered by the Department
So we have communities statewide
that are asking for resources to
invest, adapt, and innovate in
the face of a changing climate.
minerals and natural resources
department has the grid grid
modernization grant fund, 100
million to that.
development block grant, which
we passed a number of years ago,
that's low income housing
efficiency funding that is 20
Uh, the M nerd has the state
supplemental land and water fund
we passed that, I think 2 years
Uh, public school facility
authority would receive 60
million for buying electric
school buses and putting in the
infrastructure that they need.
projects that they have. I
believe that funding was taken
out of the community benefit
fund and is now in work uh the
economic development and
workforce solutions is looking
at firefighter training.
Um, that would be available
through this. Um, we have looked
at what projects are not funded
In local needs.
And Mr. President, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
amended. Amendment sponsored by
Senator Lanier.
Senator Stephenie, if you'll
please move and explain.
To Senate Bill 48 as amended.
It was too, isn't it twice
amended.
gas, if, if we do have a
production decrease or things
go, um, south like kind of
everybody predicts. We want to
And our capital outlay through
districts.
As a role, as a result, it
would, would be
counterproductive to target this
industry while it literally is
paying our bills.
gas industry would drop below
35%.
Thank you, Senator there.
gentleman's trying to do, um, I
considered this an unfriendly
amendment. I don't think it's
necessary and I don't think it
belongs in this bill.
I do, Mr. President, uh, Mr.
President, thank you. Um,
Senator Lanie, would you, um,
yield for a couple of questions,
please, sir. Senator Lanier
Yes, Senator, Mr. President,
yes, senator, it would.
Center towns and you have the
floor.
Mr. President, Senator Lanier.
Process to provide guard rails,
we do it all the time.
Um,
We sometimes in the legislature.
Past things.
we set guide guardrails.
So that we have points.
I, uh, Mr. President, I, I think
this is a legitimate.
Amendment
To a huge bill.
Mr. President.
Thank you, uh, senators, we're
debating Senate floor Amendment
number one.
Any further we do have further
debate on the amendments,
Thank you, Senator and in
committee and in finance
committee, um, the presenter of
the bill said that, that this
bill wouldn't affect oil and gas
at all, isn't that correct?
Sinner.
Mr. President, that would be
correct.
And so Mr. President, Senator,
you're just bringing this to, to
basically make sure, right, that
affected our income that this
would kick in and this would be
off, so.
I, I'm trying to to figure out
why it wasn't a friendly
amendment, but um.
yes, that was the, I, I thought
it would be a friendly.
Amendment. I just wanted to make
sure because we, we can't
predict the future, so I was
really trying hard to find a way
Senator Brandt, thank you, Mr.
President and Senator, Senator,
you used to be a teacher,
weren't you?
Send it in there, Mr. President,
Senator, yes.
Mr. President, Senator, yes, and
that's, that's why this bill
means so much to me.
And, you still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
gas and and uh it it happens to
production happens to drop that
we won't lose the funding, um,
that we count on.
For our children in the state of
New Mexico to get a quality
Will the senator yield?
Sent their deal.
Mr. President, I do.
Mr. President and Senator, uh,
gas activities, Mr. President,
Senator Scott, I do not have
that number right in front of me
right now. I'm sure I can find
the exact number for you, for
you.
actually depending on who you
talk to, somewhere between 48
and 49%.
So
This amendment.
Mr.
in there, Mr. President, Senator
Scott, yes, that is correct, and
the, the benchmark we put there
Mr. President, Senator, thank
you for that answer, but there
would be another way.
For that percentage to drop
Other economic development
efforts being wildly successful.
Is that accurate?
Senator in there.
to be the oil and gas industry
falling off. It could be a
consequence of other efforts
Mr. President, Senator Scott,
yes, that, that is correct, but
in the meantime, we, we, we're
just trying to protect, protect
I believe, according to the FIR
of about $300 million I think it
was represented earlier that the
And Senator.
Is there any concern that with,
with the drop off in in
Mr. President and Senator Scott,
yes, that is my opinion. That
is, that's exactly how I feel
about it.
On Senate floor member number
one.
See and settling near to close
on the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. If we
So with that, I wanna make sure
that we are not killing the
goose.
That lays the golden egg.
Mr. President, I move that
adopted, and I ask unanimous
consent that the record show
that the role has been called
and that all members present
vote in the affirmative except
raise your hand.
Senator Pope voting no, Senator
Stewart.
Well you know
Serena, you know.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator Cervantes Bodino.
Senator Maestas voting no.
Senator Jaramillo voting no.
Senator Gonzalez voting now.
Senator Munoz voting now.
Senator Hamblin voting no.
Center souls voting no.
23 in the negative Senate floor
Amendment number 1 has failed to
pass the Senate. Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
doggone it.
have another floor amendment. We
have Senate floor A #2, the
reader will read.
Senate floor Amendment number 2
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended.
Uh, Mr. President, I move Senate
floor Amendment 2, the Senate
Bill 48 as twice amended for
discussion purposes. Thank you,
Senator Townsend see no
objection.
Amendment
Would protect New Mexico.
Taxpayers
The children in the Mexico,
Our revenues drop below 35% of
the state budget oil and gas
revenues dropped below 35%.
That this amendment would
repeal.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
First, I think that I need to
ask permission for my expert
witnesses, although they are
works from my office. Thank you,
and I don't believe any, uh,
because they are staff is
permission is needed, but I
appreciate you'wnsend, uh,
asked the question Senator
paragraph of the bill, it's
clear that this is appropriately
written the legislature still
would be the appropriation body
so we don't need this amendment.
Center woods
So, uh, um, Mr. President, if
the sponsor of the amendment
would yield Senator Townsend do
you yield
the last one. So one was bad and
this one's not good, so they're
both bad.
Senator Townsend.
The issues of
expanding that will be before
New Mexico should
That we know may suffer and so
we're just trying to provide.
Guardrails for the taxpayers of
New Mexico, so they don't incur
Uh, not many people was in this
legislature the last time oil
broke.
Uh
It would probably have been
hollering at me that they swept
all their
Surpluses.
And do you know how they did
that, Mr. President and Senator?
Senator Townsend
And I remember particularly one
that just caused me great grief,
and that was when we swept.
$40,000 from a small rural
And, and Mr. President,
That's, that's, uh, just, just
so the general body knows what
happened at that point in time.
And so how we swept these funds
was kind of unique way of doing
it.
We just deducted whatever
surplus they had.
Of that equalization formula.
Lapse between a federal fund
coming in and when, you know,
paying someone and then they,
it's, uh, a time period there
way. You just don't pay that.
And uh
It was a unique action that,
that happened.
Uh, uh, you know, how we did
that, how we had the
Revenues fall so dramatically
that we just don't have the
money to pay bills.
So, you know, I'm going to
support your amendment.
or the other, Mr. President. So
that's all I have to say. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Woods. We do
Senator Townsend yield. I yield.
Then there's Scott you. OK.
Mr. President, and
This one actually kicks out when
the revenues.
Dropped below 35%. Is that
correct?
what's those revenues start to
fall, uh, we really don't have
any control over the trajectory
of that fall.
$340 million on these
I, I would.
view them as a non.
Uh
In the event of a revenue drop.
Is that correct?
the impacts of oil and gas
revenues, which
Is the lion in the room and and
we should. But Mr. President,
Senator Scott, we could have.
Issues they could be global
issues. And we've, we've done
that with COVID. We have had
stresses put on our
That we would spend this amount
of money without guard rails and
it's new money, it's new money
I think the body knows that and
we'll all suffer and we'll learn
well if we don't.
Senator Scott.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. President
Might be in jeopardy in the
circumstance where these
paid care reimbursements,
salaries for state employees,
salaries for school teachers.
And, and what this
Proposed amendment does is just
says.
If things go to heck in a
we're trying to do is protect
the taxpayers because, Mr.
President,
Senator Scott.
Absent this.
I.
So,
Mr. President and Senator.
The net effect of this.
would be to start trimming.
Uh, pathway any longer. Is that?
Correct. Senator Townsend.
Save the disruption of our
economy.
Uh, without having to call a
special session, having to get
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Scott, thank you, Mr.
President, uh, senator, you've
answered all my questions. I
Believe I can support this
amendment.
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment, Senator Townsend to
close.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I moved Senate floor amendment 2
those.
By the show of hands.
So senators, we're voting all
raise your hand. We have sinner
souls voting no. So
theaniclorino.
Senator Bergman's voting no.
Senator worth voting now.
Senator Padilla Morino.
Senator Doigg Bodino.
Sent her had a meal, but you
know.
Senator Gonzalez voting no.
Senator Pinto voting no.
And compost for you now.
Center Lopez voting now.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Charlie, you know.
Senate floor amendment number 2
has failed to pass the Senate.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. I wish
Mexico are watching and they
expect us to provide guardrails,
that's what this does. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Senator
Townsend on that, uh, senators,
we do have another amendment.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Senate Bill 48 is twice amended.
Uh, be adopted subject to
debate.
I think you see no objections.
Senator Bran will explain what
your amendment does.
43% of the.
Autommobiles that are sold in
the state of New Mexico or on a
lot, have to be EV.
there for EVs. Well, I'm also
making another assumption and
and you know.
Most, you know, probably at
least 43% of us will be driving
that if we get an electric
vehicle, we drive it up here,
um, we have a place to charge it
and so this makes sure that
there are charging stations put
makes sure that, that those are
paid for by credit card because
we would not be want to be
accused of charging our vehicles
on the taxpayers' dime.
Thank you, Mr. President.
amendment I have has Pat Wood's
name on it.
We fixed the original, Mr.
President.
And send brand, so the, the copy
that we have Senator Stewart, it
has Senator Brand, so it's a
correct copy there.
Senate Bill 48, that's a problem
to begin with. Um, this actually
is a bill that was not passed
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senators were debating Senate
floor Amendment #3.
Any centers wishing to debate on
the amendment.
sponsor of the amendment yield.
Thank you, sir. Yes, I would.
Scott, you have the floor.
Yeah
Mr. President,
Would it not be?
To be appropriately dedicated
toward
EV charging stations so that the
legislators that are, that are
putting these
In our green Renaissance.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator,
that's, that's exactly why I'm
bringing this and uh.
You know, is
heck, I've kind of looked at
them and, you know, I, I wanna
make sure I'm, I'm concerned if
I'm going to drive one from rear
Rancho that I won't have enough
juice to get home, especially
when we we meet up here in the
Santa Fe when it's been -14
degrees. In fact, I had my RV up
here one year, staying in it
during session, it got down to
-14 degrees.
And so if we're going to be
expected.
To, uh, be limited in our
selection of vehicles where 43%
of them are going to be
electric. Some of us are going
to have to buy electric
vehicles.
should say not just here but
across the street at the public
parking ought to have 43% of
those spaces ought to have
electric chargers.
Um, you know, if we're going to
require people to do this, then
The requirements that we've
already put in place.
And this seemed like the
appropriate place to put it.
Thank you, Senator Bran. Senator
Scott.
In the state.
Be electric or plug-in electric
hybrid.
And, and if I'm not mistaken,
Uh, Albuquerque and Rio Rancho.
Coming up to the legislature in
the wintertime, it would be
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Brent.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
getting blamed for that. Um, so
for, for those millions and
millions of people they're
watching online. I want to make
sure they understand that it
wasn't me and you, and it wasn't
the other side of the aisle. It
was a bureaucratic board.
voted 32 to require all the
dealerships in New Mexico that
43% of their inventory and 43%
of their sales be electric
of business. We've got to have a
place to charge them.
Um, in fact, I can't even think
of a place in my community to
charge one of these, um, and,
and, and in fact, uh, maybe my
next amendment on this bill we
will put in that they have to be
done in the public parking as
well because.
If we're going to put this
requirement in place, we need to
make sure that everyone has the
And Senator, in spite of the
fact that this legislature has
not blessed with the rule of
law, the 43% mandate.
Senator Bran, Mr. President,
Senator, yes it is, and in fact
there was a bill this year that
would have done that, um, but
since that bill's been tabled,
we need to take the next steps
And Mr. President, uh,
anecdotally, I have heard.
From several sources that uh
That getting from Albuquerque to
once in Santa Fe, it would, it's
absolutely.
Mandatory.
That a quick charge.
I'll be happy to support it.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Scott. Senators,
we're debating Senate floor
Amendment number 3.
Center block do you wish to
debate?
Senator, you mentioned, you
know, I was in rules.
When my good friend Senator
Woods put this bill forward.
Which I absolutely
Hey
This is only for the legislators
in the garage. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. President, Senator,
that's correct, and I think that
was a mistake. I think we ought
to make sure that we put them in
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President, because I would
say this is quite elitist
leaving out.
Everyone else in the public
except all the
TV watching.
The charging stations shall
require payment by credit card
to pay for the electricity
consumed.
these in, we would want to make
sure we do because, you know,
again, we, we don't want to be
accused of charging our vehicles
on the taxpayers' dime, um, and
I thought, I really thought we
had charging stations here.
In the roundhouse in the in the
basement garage. That's not
true, those things on the wall I
haven't looked at them too
don't think that works for the
regular EVs. I think you'd have
to have a hybrid to use just the
regular 110.
Center Block, thank you, Mr.
President. So Senator, when,
year, uh, when the board met and
decided on that, um.
We've all sent letters in, uh,
there was tons of testimony from
all the dealers about how this
even today, with just keeping 3
to 4% of their inventory, they
can't sell them.
Send your block. Thank you, Mr.
President. uh, Senator Brand,
I'm not sure if you're aware.
On electric vehicles, uh, Mr.
President, Senator Brandt, um,
are you aware of that?
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, I,
I, I wasn't aware that they had
bought, uh, millions of dollars'
across the street if you go over
to the Para Building, uh,
there's a couple of chargers
there, um, and I do believe you
have to pay to charge your
vehicle at those. I'm not sure
because I don't have one, so I
to the charging, the state has
only utilized all their electric
vehicles, less than 1%.
Of the time Senator Brandt, Mr.
this February, right? So we're
looking at 9 months.
Since this has come down in not
one charging station is here in
the state capital. I just want
to make sure I understand that
Building, um, for the public,
but there's just a couple, and I
know there's some public ones
down, uh, at the outlet center
I've seen quite a few of them
down there. I think those are
actually Tesla ones, so if you
have a Tesla, you can charge
up here and I can't certainly
charge it in parking space
number 91.
Um, that's upsetting, uh, Mr.
President, uh, Senator Brandt,
In the building or in well in
the building I guess and um to
make it 43 or 41% whatever that
number is around.
Our, uh, roundhouse, Mr.
when all bills become law, maybe
it's June 1st, I forget, um, but
they'd be available to start
then, um, it's gonna take some
time because of course we have
it's gonna be an expensive
process to do just for us to do
it as government, um, and a lot
of people have the same problem
at home, um, I, I hope that, uh,
probably 80% of the people in
our state don't live in a newer
subdivision that even has the
power to do a charger at home.
To be installed and I can
guarantee you it would be a lot
quicker to install that than
what we're doing here in the
state of New Mexico.
Um
Uh, lastly, Mr. President, uh,
Senator, are the other Tesla or
Oh, I love Tesla, so I'll say
think are Tesla brand, but I
know the ones at the outlets
are, you know, so you could
always stop there and charge up
for half an hour before you come
in. You could sit there and read
bills and get ready for
committees, you know, that's one
rear Rancho besides, you know,
when, when we buy one, we have
one in our home put in and.
Actually love the Tesla as well.
I think they're a great car.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
It's amazing to me how fast
industry is putting these in
across the country and across
New Mexico cause you can go on.
I know Tesla and find out where
you're
over there 30 minutes to sit
there and read, read bills, but
be, be nice to have a little bit
more convenience.
Uh, I appreciate the amendment,
Senator, Mr. President, and I
Uh, which will affect people
that work here year round.
Mr. President, I yield. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Senter
Block Senators, we're still
debating Senate floor amendment
number 3.
But then you can go on to the
website and.
Ask if you are able to make it
Uh, you know, on the Navajo
Nation.
And as we move forward, even
through committee because of.
internet access in the interim
committee meetings is that there
needs to be charging stations
available for our members that
own electric vehicles.
able to charge your vehicle and
you'll probably be stuck, um,
somewhere along the way trying
to recharge. In the city of
Galla.
Not because they weren't in
support of electric vehicles in
that sense, but that they knew
the demographics of my
particular district.
We're not gonna be.
The mode of transportation is
still preferred, um, especially
for some of the activities we
have to do to meet the basic
needs of heating a home.
to be capable of hauling uh 350
gallon tank of water from Gallup
out to someone's home.
And the reason for so much water
is not just for the individuals
And
Even to Hall wood to heat the
home.
Even to just how cold to heat
the home.
That EV vehicle was not capable
Upgraded and that is what I'm
running into with some of the
projects I have in my areas is
the transmission lines are not
my district than I am dealing
with as we move forward. Thank
you, Mr. President, and thank
you, Senator Brown. Thank you,
Senator Pinto.
Appreciate the debate, um, I, I
hope you all will support this
amendment, although I do think
we, we need to come back and and
do an amendment to the
amendment, making sure that we
driving those vehicles that we
had a previous senator who was
driving to committee in
Farmington.
From Albuquerque in his electric
You're not here anymore, but,
you know, that becomes a problem
and I think Senator Pinto is
exactly right, uh, that if we're
gonna expect everyone to have
electric vehicles and when we
and, and I will tell, uh,
Senator Pinto that, you know,
the Ford Lightning.
Uh, can Hall.
Uh, so it's the only pickup I
find a charger every 70 miles,
and hopefully it's not cold
because then it's probably only
gonna be 35 miles, but, uh, with
that said, Mr. President, uh, I
move that Senate floor amendment
Thank you Senators we're voting,
we're voting senators.
We're voting on Senate floor
Amendment #3.
Senator Pope Body Maestas near
Cervantes Borino.
And I figure about voting now.
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator Gonzalez voting no.
So Novarino.
Senator Munoz voting no.
Senator Hamblin voting no.
Senator Stephanic's voting no.
Center, uh, souls voting now.
Seeing there are no further
amendments at this time.
We do have another Florenceent
brand.
Well, look at that. I think it's
mine.
Senator Brand to move and
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr. President. I move
Senate floor amendment number 4
this amendment is is very simple
and very short.
Um, at the very end of the bill.
Uh, right before the section,
uh, 2 that was, was struck.
nuclear energy is the cleanest
form of energy and the least
expensive form of energy that
you can get. There is no other,
can be used, um, part of our
energy in New Mexico comes from
a nuclear power plant in
California and actually if we're
going to put in these data
centers and all the other things
that we have.
they are super clean and so I
just want to make sure that.
This money is available for us
to look at nuclear energy.
Thank you, Senator Brant.
Senators, we're debating Senate
amendment, uh, nuclear energy is
actually one of the most
expensive kinds of energy, uh,
just doesn't fit with the spill.
deal for a question. Senator, do
you,
I'd be glad to yield.
Mr. President, uh, Senator,
what, uh, what would be the
footprint of a nuclear type
plant.
the small nuclear reactors like
they use in France, uh, they
take a, you know, maybe 10% of
the of the footprint that the
old nuclear systems take, they
don't have the, the water
produced is almost nothing once
it's once it's actually put into
place. So, you know, and I've
been on the Energy council for
the last 10 years.
initial investment, uh, that we
can do. It's a and it is as
clean as you can get the, the
French have developed some great
What is the average footprint of
a solar?
A ray or a, a ray or area.
is a ton of space.
Um, so miles and miles by miles
and miles, um, just, just to
produce what we need, um, some
people think it's a beautiful
Um, once those panels go out,
they, they have tons of toxic
waste inside of them.
Centered almost.
And Mr. President, um,
I, I can't tell you that, but
you know, you have one of the
best, cleanest copper mines in
the world in your, in your
district and I'll bet they've
probably shared that with you.
Senator Ramos
electricity, one of the best
electrical conductors we, we
have available to um all of the
different manufacturers out
there when it comes to EVs, when
when we have the strongest
copper rules in the whole
nation, Mr. President, and
uh, we have to uh make sure we
do everything we can since we
way whenever we do decide to
have a nuclear plant in the
state of New Mexico, we could
utilize that clean copper to uh
do the best we can to create the
best plants available. Thank you
Thank you, Mr. President. With
the sponsor care to yield just
for a couple of basic questions.
Senator Bran, do you be glad to
yield.
Senator Brant, uh, Mr.
President, Senator, I, I believe
that France would consider
themselves to be environmentally
friendly and they, they probably
are one of the leads in the
Thank you, Senator Brandt.
Senator Block,
Senator.
Oh
Um, I'm gonna ask you a
question. I know the answer. I'm
curious if you do. What is the
I'm actually don't know that
one. I, I do know that, uh, you
know, they've stopped doing wind
energy in most of Europe because
it was it's not as clean as
um,
You'd be wrong
Uh, it's close, it's 70%.
If that surprises you 70%.
Senator, you, you mentioned a
point regarding
The cost
I want to tell you.
That when you look overall.
Cheaper than coal and gas in all
countries.
It is still cheaper.
In South Korea,
The US
Least greenest and most friendly
environmentally countries.
On the planet.
Besides Iran and maybe Venezuela
and Saudi Arabia and other
Senator Brandt.
That according to the economics
of nuclear power, nuclear is
cheaper than oil and gas.
In all countries minus Japan,
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Brandt, how many nuclear
Uh, power plants are there in
the United States.
Kansas, um.
Uh
But and I know California had
uh.
Palaverde for a while, I think
they're in the process of
I, I'm not really sure how many
are there
well thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, as of April 30th of
just last year, there were 54
plants in the US.
234, they have 4 nuclear power
plants in California.
Uh, Mr. President, and
Are you aware of that, Senator?
Mr. President, I, I knew that we
received some nuclear power as
part of PNM's.
Of nuclear power plants in some
of the bluest states.
Across the nation.
Minnesota
Massachusetts.
Delaware.
Illinois
Washington.
Holy crap, I didn't even know
blue state Senator Brandt, than
there are in red states.
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
this shouldn't be a partisan
issue.
The, the, the where we get our
our energy is, the more economic
development your state will
have.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator. I'm sorry, I missed
one.
Where I grew up, New Hampshire.
melt down everything around it,
including our good friends down
in Boston.
Uh, that hasn't been the been
the case. It's still producing
power for over 40 years, Mr.
President.
Around the country.
Thank you Center Block,
Senator Bran Mr. President, I,
I, I read in an article that
that the company here in
then Google is interested in, in
actually having one built to
supply their energy needs
because these data centers just
take a massive amount of energy,
um, and, but I'm not really sure
what states they were put in. I
Souls and I have talked about
nuclear energy many, many times.
So not a partisan issue. I'm
just concerned if this goes in
this bill,
That's going to make it very
difficult for Senator Soles and
about this on the basketball
court because that's gonna be a
a big conversation during the
game.
But Senator Brant, you are
correct. New Mexico, sir, is not
on the map.
one in Georgia and one either in
North Carolina or South Carolina
on the border there on one of
those.
And Mr. President, uh, Senator
Brant, I don't know if you were
technologies that quite frankly,
Mr. President, Senator Brandt.
We can't handle it on the
electric grid that we currently
have here in New Mexico.
We have
No matter what side of the aisle
you're on, east, west, north,
south, I don't care. There is a
huge power gap in New Mexico,
And thank God.
We have oil and gas.
Thank God for our oil and gas
industry.
there's more debate, but can you
tell me what percentage of
power.
Well, let me ask it this way.
Mr. President, Senator Brand, do
is gonna decrease or our power
needs going to increase.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, you
know, with the direction that
we're looking at.
They take massive amounts of
power, so um.
Mr. Senator, throughout the
nation, a lot of the economic
development is going to take and
need much, much more power than
we have and we're
decommissioning some of our, uh,
power generation or electric
generation right now, we have to
replace that with something.
This bill, the way it's written
that's very concerning to me
because it is the cleanest
source of energy that we have.
This bill will make it where
that it will not be considered
for that.
Thank you Senator Brant, Center
came to this distinguished body.
I was a county commissioner in
Sandoval County.
We had numerous businesses come
in Sandoval County, Mr.
President, Senator.
Because we cut incredible deals
with large corporate
multinational billion
corporations.
Like Facebook.
And the reason why we did that
is because we at the county, Mr.
President, Senator Brand.
We were getting roughly only
$5000 but Facebook came in.
And they worked with the power
company here.
Mr. President
And we voted
Down in my colleague's area,
some of my colleagues in
Valencia County.
And do you know the sweet deal
they got, Mr. President, Senator
To run their data center.
I don't know if you knew that
Senator Brandt.
But that kind of has been a craw
on my backside.
New Mexicans, you are not
special.
You don't get the discount with
this renewable energy deal.
You don't get it.
You're not one of the elites.
So we're gonna fund on your
back.
And your taxpayer dollar
subsidies.
This green energy deal.
New Mexicans to lower their
prices because they've been lied
to.
But this body previously in a in
a bill we'll talk about when we
debate the uh current bill SB
It was one of the worst
amendments I've seen on the
floor, Mr. President.
It was that bad.
It was embarrassingly bad. It
was elitist.
I can't support that. That was a
bad amendment, which is why I'm
the only Republican to support
all the Democrats over here on
that bill. Thank you to my
Democrat friends.
Having nuclear in our lexicon
and in our industry and in our
state. Thank you.
Thank you, Center Block. We are
yelled for a question or two.
Yes, Mr. President.
Senator without nuclear being
included in this.
Senator Brent.
Uh, Mr. President, um, Senator,
um, well, that's one of the
issues that we have with a lot
of the new, the renewable
portfolio is that it's not
gonna go down or uh sometimes
the wind stops blowing. Just ask
Germany, um, you know, and so,
uh.
Right now, the, the quickest one
um, and so you know that's,
that's one that's important to
stay in the portfolio.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, I think that's um
reactors, the average size of
those is about 920 megawatts,
and they take up only a
footprint of about 35 acres.
If you turn that around and say,
920 megawatts.
That is
Just over 9000, almost 14 square
Environmentally friendly to look
at dispatchable power to
Uh, be able to do all those
things that we want to do. We
have to look at what's available
Um, dispatchable power in New
Mexico is certainly a combined
cycle natural gas, uh,
Not include nuclear. We're
missing the boat. Not all of us.
are as fortunate as my friend,
know that that's true. But, um,
I would, I would say, Mr.
President, that
We have to be legitimate when
we're trying to provide.
Is in everyone's best interests,
whether it's
In New Mexico or anywhere else,
not a, not a civilization has
ever flourished without cheap
support it. I, and I will gladly
support your
Amendment. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. We do have further
debate. We're on Senate floor
amendment number 4. Senator
Scott.
Mr. President, there was a term
used back here during this last
debate between Senator Brent
Townsend.
Uh, that I am not familiar with,
Thank you, Senator Brent.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, um,
I believe, and if I get this
wrong, Senator Townsend just
left who would be my expert
witness on this, but I believe
energy is not available.
Thank you, Senator Branton.
Senator Scott.
Mr. President, would
Wind generators and solar
Mr. President, uh, Senator, um.
I mean, partly with battery
backup, but, but not completely
because, uh, we, we don't know,
keep talking about them, uh, but
batteries I think are still ways
off when it comes to actually.
Being reliable, uh, enough for
us to think of them as
Senator
Mr. President, I apologize.
Mr. President,
and natural gas fired.
And nuclear plants.
The do in fact provide
dispatchable power.
a quite long period of time. Do
you know?
How long that is.
Center Brent Senator,
coal would be immediately
available on location in the, in
the event of uh snowstorm or or
operate independently generating
power before it would need to be
replenished.
President, Senator, I believe
it's around 6 months.
And the same question, Mr.
President, for nuclear power.
make sure that they have at
least that 6 month supply.
Senator Scott.
Mr. President, it's been, I
think, represented that there's
some
These AI facilities and data
center facilities.
Uh, have you heard numbers
anything similar to that?
excited more about the quantum,
uh, that Senator Perdil and I
have been working on, um,
That, uh, we're one of the only
two states that actually have
the ability to do that right
Would it be accurate to say
though that all of these
facilities, including the
quantum facilities that you just
mentioned.
24/7 365 in just about any
weather condition including
The dark of night.
those weird things where the,
you know, the Facebook plant so
they wanted to run the whole
thing off of solar, but they
really can't because, uh, again
at night there's not any solar
their, uh, uh, the servers cool
and the whole thing would melt
down and so there.
There's, there's requirements
for utilities that they have to
that's one thing they all have
in common is they run very hot
and they have to have a cooling
system that keeps them very
cold, um, and so you have to
keep that electricity going or,
would it be fair to say that all
of this economic activity will
bypass the state.
And go to someplace else with
are have to have that available
power, um, one of my concerns
with this whole idea behind this
bill, um, it's just one of the
reasons I'm bringing this
and they'll keep those
facilities up and they'll turn.
off our houses at night if they
need to, to make sure that those
data centers stay running
because that's the only way
they're gonna come into our
Sounds like
This, uh
This amendment is just what the
doctor ordered.
I appreciate your answering my
See no debate on the amendment,
Senator Brand to close.
Thank you, Mr. President, you
know, long.
Gone are the days of Chernobyl
Our own lab Los Alamos National
Labs that has been working with
the French government and other
governments around the world to
create and
that we have to worry about
storing the waste at Whip.
That's the problem we have from
before.
It's time for, for us as New
By putting in that nuclear power
can't be used.
We keep ourselves where we will
And that's why I asked for.
Your vote and I move that Senate
floor amendment number 4 for
Senate Amendment number 4 if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Coos voting now.
Senator Pope.
Senator do here you know.
Senator Charlie voting now.
Senator Figueroa, Senator Hickey
voting no.
Senator Padilla Borino.
Senator Stephanic worth voting
now.
Senator Trujillo vorio.
By a vote
Bible, the 15th affirmative, 22
in the negative. Senate floor
amendment number 4.
Padilla.
Uh, Mr. President, unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
Maestas until he returned to the
chamber. He no objection.
So.
Senate floor Amendment number 5
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended. Amendment sponsored by
Senator Pat Woods.
Senator Woods to move and
explain the amendment.
To Senate Bill 48 twice amended,
see no objection. Senator was to
move and explain the memory.
Go ahead and explain the
amendment.
believe in electric vehicle, we
believe that we're killing the
climate, we believe, we believe,
we believe, we believe so much.
All of the environment.
Department to also drive the
electric vehicles.
I mean, who else should we
require to do this kind of
Senators, we're debating Senate
floor Amendment number 5,
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
we've had this self-serving
amendment. Then we had the
amendment that tried to undo the
having fun, Senator, but this is
very unfriendly.
Senators, we're debating Senate
floor amendment number 5.
And senators wishing to debate
on the amendment.
Um
With the gentlemen, please
yield.
Yes, I will, Mr. President.
Goes around the legislature.
Because if you remember, uh,
last.
About a year ago, I believe it
mandated.
Um
Tried to enforce and mandate
electric vehicles. It was a bill
that said that all new
Mr. President, and then, uh,
this legislature acting
responsibly said, no, that's not
a good idea. We shouldn't do
that.
What we, what we, uh,
In New Mexico is um
For some reason, one of our
department secretaries decided
Under regulation, um, um,
license department, construction
industries division. They go out
and mandate.
These electric vehicles.
That's really unfortunate
because that's costing every new
homeowner.
I, I think at the time the FIR
building a public utility
building for the public.
Their cost of doing that.
increased $282,000.
For charging stations on that
parking lot. Mr.
political will around the
legislature in order to get, uh,
a political initiative in place.
That, uh, we are now requiring
you to do something through
regulation.
That, uh
You don't want to do on your
own.
and it is an unfunded mandate
that this body allowed to occur.
We've, we've known about it.
We've turned her back. We've let
it happen.
fingerprints aren't on it.
Mr. President, Senator Wood, I
think, um,
Although you characterized your
amendment as being a little fun.
new building in their community,
they spend a quarter of a
million dollars. I don't think
they think it's fun. I think
they think it's real because
that's their money that's being
spent, Mr. President.
Force our will on people.
It's, it's very true.
Mr. President
Senator Townsend
Mr. President, Senator Woods.
line, and I look forward to it.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Woods, Senator
Townsend. Senators, we're
debating Senate floor Amendment
number 5 Center block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
Senator Woods, I'm, I'm.
Help me out here a little bit,
will you on this thing?
Are you, let me ask you this,
forced to buy a car, whether
they should be forced to put
certain.
Um
things in their home that the
government says is is uh
Thank you, Senator Block.
Senator Woods.
You know, the first thing I
think of when you started that
question, Senator Block, Mr.
President, Senator Block. The
We got, uh, telling everybody
it's gonna kill them.
And yet we don't balance.
Who taxed the hell out of them,
but we don't ban them.
the kind of car they're gonna
drive. This, this mandates to
government.
To the state of New Mexico that
you will drive electric cars.
We gonna kill the planet if we
don't go to all electric
transportation. This is just a
slow move to that by mandating
one agency.
It shows the hickpocrisy.
That goes on.
When we talk about
Electric
Transportation.
But we're willing to force upon
government or to private
business.
Mandates
That the, when the demand is not
President.
So what this is.
Yeah, it's a ha ha, Mister Bri
because
But yet 43% of the new cars
coming in this next year into
the state of New Mexico.
When it leaves comes off the the
construction line when it is
built.
That dealer has to, to buy that
car.
So now, maybe it's not Sahaha,
Mr. President.
Maybe it's not Zahaha.
Just to mandate a state
government do the same damn
thing.
So, Mr. President, I'm getting
way off preaching to you. I
apologize.
But you see where I'm coming
from, Mr. President.
tell you, I absolutely think
this is one of the dumbest
amendments I've seen in a long
time since Senator Brant's 15
minutes ago.
have an electric vehicle that
she's driven around in?
In center block, Center woods.
Um, Mr. President,
I hate to admit this to you.
believe there's a Senator Woods,
it is a SUV, um, that
She has, is that correct that
she's driven around in, Senator?
thing.
Mr. President, Senator Woods, I
agree completely.
Now listen
While I am a limited government
Which by the way, if I can put
another plug in for my electric
vehicle, I just bought Tesla.
I'm very happy with that, like
Since you wanna
Mandate this.
Well, that's funny you should
ask.
But for
2 pickups.
They wanted a
I'm not, I, I could be wrong
about that. I saw that in the
budget somewhere, but so I just
Count on my memory, Mr.
President. Hopefully, I'm right.
refresh you here a little bit.
They can reach upwards of
$100,000 for
Uh, an electric, uh, vehicle
truck.
About a $100,000 if you would
The Tesla Cybertruck, which is
an amazing vehicle, starts
around 82,000.
Um, you know, now that we're
President and Senator, can you
tell me what the average
household income is in New
Mexico?
Thank you Senator Block. Senator
Woods.
Uh, Mr. President, 52,000.
more than 52,000.
So what you're doing, Senator
Woods, which I despise.
To make them use
Electric vehicles first of all,
I don't know how the hell you
would even
Enforce that or know what
they're driving.
That's one issue I have.
I'm not sure what legal course
that you could have for a
contractor to force a contractor
to, to buy a
An electric vehicle, Mr.
President, uh, or senator, um.
While you do not like do as I
say, not as I do. Are you not
doing the same thing by
mandating these fine people, Mr.
Woods I never thought of it that
way.
I think I'll just withdraw this
amendment, Mr. President, I
would really appreciate that,
Senator Woods. Thank you.
Thank you. The amendment has
been withdrawn.
We do have another floor
amendment, reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 6
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended.
Uh, Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment number 62 Senate
Bill 48 is twice amended for
consideration.
Hearing no objections. Senator
provisions.
Of Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended with the exception of.
The electric
yield to the sponsor of the
bill, Senator Stewart. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unlike the
other amendments, this would
See no debate on the amendment.
Senator Scott
To close on the amendment.
Uh, Mr. President, I now move
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and the
records show that the role has
been called.
And all those present voted in
the affirmative.
Thank you all senators to your
seats please. We are voting on
the amendment.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Steiner Morino, Senator
Sewell's voting no.
Center Shindoin Trujillo, you
know.
Senator Hamblin voting no.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Senator Pope voting now.
Senator Figueroa voting no.
Senator Charlie, but you know.
Senator Hickey voting Senator
Campos.
ly disappointed, but I now have
another moment that you have
questions on. Uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Scott.
Senate floor amendment number 7
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended amendments sponsored by
To Senate Bill 48.
As amended.
Amendment, the amendment is the
After the word fuel.
Insert a comma.
And the following verbiage
again this is a definition
renewable energy resource this
is taken from our rural electric
co op Act, we don't want to
Um,
thank you, Mr. President. I'm
surprised to hear that the
Newsom Amendment is unwelcome in
New Mexico.
I thought that
The wind doesn't blow, sun
doesn't shine, their power turns
off and they have blackouts and
brownouts. And so, magically,
The Newsom amendment said
Really, honestly stunned.
That we don't want to follow
California. First time in 20
years that we haven't taken
California's lead.
We'll see. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Senators, we're debating
Senate floor amendment number 7.
Senator Townsend, I believe,
where you want to debate.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President
Senator B block.
I've heard
Um, the sponsor of the bill
referred to say that this is
not.
proven erroneous, Mr. President,
Senator Block.
Today
We have an opportunity across
New Mexico for a new technology,
Mr. President, Senator Townsend,
am I aware that industry will
pass over New Mexico and not
come here and not employ our
people.
Mr. President, Senator Block,
yes, that is correct. Are you
aware of that?
Mr. President, Senator, I am
fully aware of that, which is
I, I, there's nothing that
solves the problems of New
Mexico. I don't care whether
you're talking about education
or your, I don't care what
you're talking about, when we
start providing
Good, long term.
It's disingenuous of us to stand
up here and say that New
Mexicans don't deserve.
Continuous affordable power.
the most expensive backups that
we have available.
Mr. President, Senator Block.
This is, you know, this, this
The waiting list.
For power in many areas is.
24 months.
industry.
Without a dispatchable power, we
are going to miss opportunities
for our constituents to have
jobs.
people should do, is they're
going to build generation
downstream of the meter between,
and they're going to generate
their own power, and then we're
not gonna have any oversight.
We have to create a power supply
that is dispatchable. It's
affordable, and it is always
available.
And Mr. President, Senator
with your amendment, still a
horrible bill, bad for New
Mexico, bad for industry, bad
for jobs. It's bad for all of
that.
But Mr. President,
not even gonna follow
California. California came to
their senses, Mr. President.
Senator Block, they decided
their constituents had to have
job someplace else and we'll
stay here where it's going to be
dark and cold. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Block. Senator Towns and
Senators, we're still
debatingating Senate floor
Amendment number 7.
Senator Scott
Mr. President and
Senator, I would like
To go over some of the economics
of including
presume that New Mexico.
is currently floating on an
ocean.
Of undeveloped natural gas.
Do you, did you realize that?
And I will say, Senator Scott,
one of the reasons I put this
amendment forward.
is because the sponsor of SB 48
talked about a previous
amendment. I think it was.
And we have a ton.
Of natural gas.
We have, we are.
bursting at the seams with gas.
question, listen, I did a little
research and I wanted to see
what our good friends in
California were doing.
The uh Uber conservative
So I'm taking Mr. President.
And Senator Scott, because I
don't want to believe all the
people from Southeast New Mexico
he has come around to say
natural gas is zero carbon,
which was one of the bills that
we had here.
With cheap natural gas.
This is working with the other
side of the aisle because I have
also supported the other side of
And Senator Woods, do as I say,
not as I do amendment.
This is reaching across the
aisle.
Taking the model of California.
true, and I happen to agree with
this zero carbon, natural gas.
In relation to Senator
Townsend's comments about our
future energy needs.
amendment. This amendment is a
friendly amendment. It's zero
carbon. It's a New Mexico
amendment because it's going to
create jobs for New Mexico. So
Senator Scott, I hope that
And I think what else I was
trying to get to there was that
as we consume natural gas to
generate this low carbon
Mr. President, Senator Scott, I
am well aware of that, which is
why I made the amendment having
natural gas, what we're saying
heat our house.
With electric or gas and gas
provides electricity. We know
that as well. So this is a
summer.
And to keep New Mexicans
employed to, Mr. President and
Senator Scott, and I don't know
if you're aware, Senator Scott,
Out and not accepting this in
this bill is going to cost jobs.
It's going to cost jobs. This is
not a ha ha amendment.
Whether it's solar
Windmills, natural gas, oil.
Mr. President, one of the things
I didn't put in here was
lithium rich areas of our state.
Mr. President,
I'll accept the EV mandate. I
don't like it.
I hate it. I think it's really
stupid.
mining across the world because
we don't do it in the United
States anymore.
The previous Interior Secretary
damn near banned mining in the
United States. We're getting all
To send lithium here.
So we can have our EV cars and
our green energy and feel really
good about ourselves. This is
not a joke anymore.
But somebody's going to say,
Ear wax produces too much CO2.
That's climate change.
Instead, we're contributing to
the exploitation.
Of child and slave labor in
Africa.
Child and slave labor in Tibet.
Thank you, Senator Scott, you
still have the floor.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
if you would care to hear these.
Describing natural gas is an
unacceptable fuel. And keep in
mind,
That all of this every cubic
To what would fill state
coffers. So,
It takes about 12.7 MCF to
generate a
a relatively small, perhaps
small medium sized power plant,
Mr. Perez, I apologize.
We would fill the state coffers.
With a 500 megawatt power plant.
That doesn't
Sound like all that much until
to be needed going forward.
Mr. President and Senator.
This is a homegrown resource.
streams.
To the state coffers.
With every cubic foot that is
produced.
And utilized here.
And it will promote.
forward. I would be pleased to
support the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Any further debate on the
Mr. President, I move that
Senate bill.
48 Amendment 7 do now pass.
And they ask unanimous consent
of hands. Thank you, Mr.
President, for your time.
So that was not the appropriate
script.
So you're moving Senate floor
amendment number 7 to Senate
Bill 48 is twice amended if you
Amendment number 72 Senate Bill
48.
Senator Veal just repeat the Mr.
President.
pass.
Twice
Hold on.
So.
I move that Senate floor,
Amendment number 72 Senate Bill
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you for the
assistance. Thank you. Senators,
we're voting on Senate floor
amendment number.
If you wish to vote no, please
Senator Firo of voting now.
Center Cervantes center senator
Senator Harail voting no.
Senator do hit voting out worth
voting no.
Senator Bergmann's voting no,
you know.
Senator Munoz Rodino?
Mr. President, I am going to try
to make it through the rest of
my day. Thank you, Senator
Block. Thank you, Mr. President.
You have another floor
amendment, I believe we did not
I'll yield to
Senate, I'll, I'll keep this
brief. I'm standing in support.
I don't need the sponsor to, to
yield. I just would like to make
some comments.
One of the things about this,
help increase visitation to the
La Cueva Trail, uh, from
Dripping Springs Visitor Center
in the Oregon Mountains Desert
Peaks National Monument, which
is one of the most popular areas
every single person does.
It will pave close to 3/4 of a
mile and include pullouts for
wildlife and scenery viewing,
and this is a joint project that
states and I stand in strong
support of this bill. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you Senator
Hamblin. Senator Ceno Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President.
massive plume of toxic smoke
into our skies.
Families across Albuquerque and
Burnleyo County were told to
stay inside, close their
windows, and limit outdoor
activity because there was
simply too dangerous to breathe.
These are not isolated
incidents. They're a wake up
call. Our communities are
increasingly vulnerable to
environmental disasters and
money in the long run on health
care costs, lost work days and
emergency response to
environmental disasters.
We must take action to protect
public health and ensure that
help my district. CNM is in my
district and their main campus
is an important institution with
more than 20,000 students.
They're a leader in
sustainability using high
an electrical vehicle
certificate to their automotive
program.
This community benefit fund
would provide funding for
projects like this so that we're
not reliant on the federal
just state that there is a need
to correct the record on a lot
of a lot of the issues that were
stated with regard to some of
these amendments, but thank you,
Mr. President, and I'm, I'm so
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the, uh, sponsor yield for a
couple of questions. Stewart D.
Sure.
lines 21 and 22.
Specifically, the significant
change language that's there.
constitutes significant change
in climate. I'm not really sure
and and don't have an answer to
that.
Senator Stewart, Mr. President,
I guess let me try and clarify
that a little bit.
If we're, if we're trying to
determine whether this bill is
gonna be effective or not, what
Uh, Mr. President, if you look
on page 4D um this talks about
the project that receives
funding from the community
appropriate interim legislative
committee that probably will be
the LFC. This is funding from
communities all over the state
with progress or if appropriate.
evaluated, uh, using the
metrics, LFC is very good at
these kinds of evaluations and
uh most of the funding in here,
about half the funding in here
is over a two-year period.
final follow up question, um,
Climate change isn't just
limited to New Mexico. There's
outside factors that influence
Well, Mr. President, they
probably will affect it, you
know, climate doesn't look at
state boundaries, so we're,
we'll be affected by other
questions. I I guess in closing,
I, you know, if, if there's
outside factors they can affect
what we're trying to do here in
the state and we're not exactly
questions and that uh that I
can't support at the end of the
day, Mr. President, thank you,
thank you, sponsor for, for
answering a few of my questions.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator Paul.
See no further debate.
The funding will provide locally
driven projects that improve
I believe we cannot afford to
wait until the next wildfire,
flood or water crisis before
taking action.
And certainly people all over
An unawarded projects from local
and state governments, nonprofit
organization, energy companies,
private companies, educational
institutions, tribal
technician apprenticeship
program for displaced workers in
San Juan County.
The National Oceanic and
In climate-related disasters. I
don't believe this counts the
12,000 people that were
displaced in the California
fires recently.
The community benefit fund,
will be able to have
more resilient.
In the face of extreme weather.
So other projects, there's
workforce housing in Red River.
Miguel County that serves an
emergency hub for local
families.
We're investing in the places we
call home.
Places like Mora.
fighting chance at a cleaner,
safer, and more prosperous
future.
It's a bit dismaying to think
that people don't want to fund.
Our communities.
It's just embarrassing to me
that so many would say no to
deliver a funds to our
communities.
Mr. President.
that roll has been called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, Senators,
we're voting all senators to
your seats, please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Sander Bergmans.
Center Boone votes no. Senator
Brandt, Senator Brandt votes no.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley votes no.
Senator Camposs. Santo
Cervantes.
Center votes no.
Figueroa.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Hamlins votes yes.
Sent her
Senator Lopez isos votes yes.
Senator Nova.
Center Paul votes no.
Pinto. Yes. Pope votes yes.
Senator Scott votes no.
Sania Lopez. Yes. Center Cia
Stephonics.
Sandra Stefani's votes, yes,
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinburn votes yes,
center Stewart.
Sandra Stewart boats, yes.
Uh, Senator Nava, to explain her
vote and just our senators to
know informational purposes, um,
we each have 3 minutes to
explain your vote.
So sooner Nova.
Thank you Mr. President. uh, Mr.
Housing and Urban Development. I
worked alongside many folks
working on climate resilience,
um, sustainable housing systems
and this piece of legislation
cost of living, this is a
preliminary state uh step in
ensuring that we address the
needs of our communities. Thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator Nova. Senator
Scott to explain his vote. You
have 3 minutes, Senator.
pointed
Toward altering the course of
climate change are not
0.000001 °C.
Mr. President,
I submit that a more appropriate
course of action.
is to give our
To whatever climate change is
coming.
As a more appropriate
expenditure of these precious
this bill, in my opinion, is not
good for New Mexico. It hurts my
constituents.
This bill is a direct attack.
What it does, it, it prevents
our ability to react to it.
Mr. President, this bill is not
a good bill in my opinion for
Senator Munoz to explain his
vote.
Thank you, Mr. President. You
know, this bill actually helped
oil and gas. It allowed them to
energize the natural gas sector,
uh, down there with natural gas.
aisle to get power. They're
currently running on generators
and microgridding power plants
all over, running them with air
actuators, and this would
actually allow them to
beneficial to my community. It's
beneficial across the state, and
but we have to clarify, oh, this
is just hurtful, this industry,
this is just hurtful. No, this
is rapidly going to increase
your power generation in
electrical grid instead of a gas
operator. So, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Munoz.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter wants to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
Hearing no objection, so ordered
Senate majority floor leader.
Peterworth, I, I believe we're
going back to item number one on
today's calendar, is that
Senate Bill 220. It's twice
amended. That's the last bill
we'll do today on 3rd reading.
OK, thank you, Senator Weertha.
Senator Woods, if you'll put
that once again on final
passage.
twice amended on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Hearing no objection.
Center Woodsville explained the
bill.
division. Risk management
division has voluntarily posted
most settlement information on
the sunshine Portal since August
do not opt to use RMD legal
representation can and have been
able to avoid a posting those
amounts in terms of their
settlement and essentially,
from Senator Cervantes and uh I
would like to yield to him to
explain the amendment, Mr.
Chair, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Woods. We do have a
Amendments sponsored by Senator
Cervantes.
Senator Cervantes to move and
explain the amendment.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, at this time I
move Senate floor amendment
through Senate Judiciary and
then after Senate Judiciary went
over to Senate Finance at Senate
Finance, a couple of amendments
were accepted by the committee
there and effectively the
the public at large when these
settlements are involving
lawsuits and state agencies, uh,
what the two Senate floor
amendments do.
is to limit the circumstances
involving $250,000 or more to,
uh, $1 million meaning that any
settlements below a million
dollars would not be disclosed
or transparent as the sponsor
support his efforts and striking
the two Senate Finance Committee
amendments would enhance greater
transparency.
Thank you Senator Cervantes as
the bill sponsors, Senator
Woods.
President.
Thank you, Senator Woods. Any
further debate on the amendment,
Senator Munoz on the amendment.
Senator Jarameo, if you can
please step to the side, Senator
it'll add more clarity, it'll
add more clarity for the trial
lawyers to see where they win
and where they lose, and to
bring more cases on against the
state. We're currently on track
real cost to the agency. We'll
see what happens, but if you
read the bill from page 3 on,
it, it clearly states who shall
work and who shall do what and
how they shall reveal and the
number of people who review
amendment #2 to Senate Bill 220
as amended twice and I just
asked for a voice vote, Mr.
President, on, uh, that
amendment. Senators, there's
been a request for a voice vote
floor amendment has been adopted
to Senate Bill 220 is now 3
times amended.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. We
are back on the bill, senators.
Anyone wishing to debate.
On the bill
I move the Senate bill 220 twice
amended.
Do now pass.
And the, and as for unanimous
Excuse me, I'll send her to your
seats.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 36 in the affirm is
0 on the negative Senate Bill
220 is twice amended.
Has passed the Senate.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President, I
want to thank Senator Ramos for
helping me on this bill, Senator
Savanna, and Senator Dohe, thank
you very much for the chamber to
President, to uh to get this
bill going and hopefully it
carries on and goes all the way
through. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Are you also to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter Wurtz, take
reader will read.
Mr. President, I am directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 12 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted,
has passed House Bill 214 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen, chief
clerk message the journal will
show the message from the house
has been received. President.
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
received.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Wars to take us to next
order business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go to
Business committee reports no
Bill 468 has had it
consideration, reports same with
the recommendation that it do
not pass, but that Senate Indian
rule and Cultural Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
I asked unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually no
objection.
The reader will read.
adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposed? The eyes have it,
the report has been adopted and
referred Senate Bill 471 has had
it under consideration, reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Elizabeth Liz
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
Hearing no objection, the reader
will read.
Senate Memorial 2 as amended,
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
Senate Joint Memorial One, do
pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Elizabeth Litefani's chair.
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
the community report has been
adopted and the journal will
show that they were acted upon
individually.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee to whom has been
Respectfully submitted, Senator
George Munoz, chair.
San Munoz. Thank you, Mr.
President. I asked me consent to
the Senate, the reader be
allowed to read all the
Senate Bill 142 do pass as
amended.
Senate Bill 1043 as amended do
pass as amended.
So as we're gonna do that again
we have a motion to adopt the
committee reports. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Those oppose.
Mr. President, your judiciary
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 119 has had
it under consideration, reports
same recommendation.
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we act on
them with one motion, but the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
There are no objections, the
Senate Bill 417 do pass,
respectfully submitted Joseph
it. The report has been adopted
and the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Wartz to take us to that
You no objection we're on that
order of business introduction
legislation, the reader will
read.
Senate Memorial 18 introduced by
requests for funding for a
master plan to modernize the
Senate Education Committee,
Senate Memorial 18.
House Bill 214 introduced by
representatives Gallegos, Ananu,
Silva, and Shosansky.
Health to promulgate rules to
establish a voluntary
credentialing process to allow
doulas to enroll as Medicaid
providers appointing a doula
credentialing advisory council
regarding services provided by
credentialed doulas requiring
annual reporting.
Creating the Dula fund.
Requiring hospitals and
freestanding birth centers to
House bill
214 having been read twice by
title is.
Refer to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, House Bill 214.
An act relating to behavioral
health enacting the firefighter
emergency service provider peer
Support Act, allowing state,
local, and regional public fire
provision of peer sports
services. House Bill 74.
Mm
House Bill 74 having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
How appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
bills 2 and 3.
expenditures by state agencies
required by law. House
appropriations of Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bills 2 and 3.
the Senate Finance Committee.
That's house appropriation
committee substitute.
For health bills 2 and 3.
business announcements and
miscellaneous objection. We're
in that business announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
that is it for today. Uh,
tomorrow we're gonna do
plenty of notice. I know there's
quite a few amendments on Senate
Bill 21, uh, so we'll do some
3rd reading in the morning and
then go up to.
and then come back at 6:30 for
President, I just want to let
the Senate know that the
title of what Senate Bill 148
is?
Uh, send Bill 148 is an
anti-hazing bill, uh, it is very
also talked to the judiciary
chair where it was headed. We
will try and hear it quickly in
education but recommend that we
have a an education referral on
judiciary and then finance. This
would have it going to
education, judiciary and
finance.
Senators, there's been unanimous
consent request to
meets tomorrow morning at 8:30.
Uh, we've got a number of bills
and we do have a hard stop at 11
for the floor session.
Thank you.
Any further announcements,
senators?
filled out, uh, I know that
Senator, so people know in the
chamber, Senator, nobody's the,
the vacant seat that center
representative E Conn lost.
think anybody else shares that
district, so we're trying to get
that done in, in the houses.
assign someone to help us do
that. So get your capital and
Senate Finance will not go in,
uh, today at all. We're gonna go
House Bill 2. We still got a big
hole in education, about 120,
140 million, uh, we still got
issues with road money that got
we're gonna go through House
Bill 2 and really start this
weekend, uh, diving into
specials and supplementals and,
and Rios, there was 320 million
in
through that stuff, so as we get
these bills out of Senate
Finance, it's gonna get slower
and slower for us. Thank you,
Mr. President. Senator Munoz. We
do have further announcements
sooner Cedillo Lopez.
chair of finance yield Mr.
President, yes.
Senator, I just want to confirm
what you said was $100,000 per
project, so two senators can put
trick, uh, overfunding and then
re-offing the next year. Uh, no,
it's $100,000 per member to
track the projects. We're
pushing on the limit of like
The Senator Charlie and I just
went through that she completely
funded one. I completely
funded the other, or maybe it
was Senator Shindo so that those
projects are completely funded,
Senio Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. I appreciate the
clarification. Thank you,
senators we are on that.
Announcements miscellaneous that
order business and I'll yield to
Senator Hamblin.
meeting at 4 o'clock in room
321. We have an ambitious
agenda. We have had a couple
bills rolled to, uh, Thursday,
but in the meantime, we have got
work to get done. So Senate Tax
Senator Worth, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent,
the Senate stand in recess until
