uh, from the body thank you Mr.
President. Unan consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor and
in the Senate gallery today.
There no objection.
Cameras are allowed both in the
gallery and the Senate floors.
Thank you, Senator Mr.
Thank you Mr. President, and
again it is my honor to welcome
NDI to this floor. Um, this is
their 31st year of teaching
They deliver over 200 classes
per week and over 200,000 hours
of instruction across all of
their programs they.
Through NDI's New Mexico's youth
development works they prepare a
young person to meet the
challenges of adolescence and
adulthood and to achieve their
and supporters in the gallery
and the NDI New Mexico super
wonderful advanced team SWAT.
Thank you for being here today.
attention today and at NDI New
Mexico we believe that it takes
energy and effort to do
something with excellence NDI
New Mexico is a unique blend of
audience members will hear the
messages of work hard, do your
best.
never give up and be healthy.
We believe that in engaged youth
that is healthy in body, mind
partnership for prioritizing
youth, their education, their
wellness, and their well-being.
uh, we hope to see you at an NDI
that you will help us reach uh
some of the 100 schools that we
have on our wait list. At the
end of every NDI class we say
thank you and goodbye. It looks
like this.
Thank you to our NDI dancers,
and I'd like to wear an
announcement Silas. I like to
yie to Senator Steinborg to say
hand in the back, such a
passionate coordinator, NDI, we
had the opportunity, uh, through
some junior funds to get NDI to
come to Southern New Mexico,
their self-esteem and, um, put a
smile on their face and get some
exercise. It's incredible, and I
know that they would
to come to all parts of Donana
County, and I say this for the
them in your school, and it
really is amazing, um, amazing
results for the kids, so good
work to them and to the senator
for bringing him and Cynthia,
thank you so much. Thank you,
is also my honor today to
introduce our honorary
lieutenant governor. We have
Diego Adams Ruiz up in the front
advanced yellow belt in Kenpoe
martial arts, so watch out
everyone. He enjoys making
tortillas and pump.
bread with his grandparents, and
would also like to earn a black
belt belt in Kenpo and he would
like to bring joy to the world.
Please help me in welcoming our
honorary lieutenant governor for
the day.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo. We
have Senator Worth. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. That is a
good way to start off an
afternoon in the Senate. Thank
you to NDI and Senator Trujillo
I'm happy to sponsor them. It's
also outdoor recreation day at
the Capitol. Uh, a reminder
composite photographs are being
taken today in the Senate lounge
and tomorrow morning.
of recognition, uh, Senator Paul
is going to have for Big
Brothers and Big Sisters, and
I'll yield to him at the right
time for that. Uh, we've got a
number of guests who'll
introduce those first before the
by invitation, uh, this
afternoon, the Museum of New
Mexico Foundation and Museum of
International Folk Art are
having a legislative reception
and exhibit in the governor's
gallery from 3.
reminder again for new members
and really anyone who wants to
attend, uh, legislative Finance
Committee is holding a workshop
tomorrow in room 307 from 7 a.m.
encourage the new members to
attend and anyone else who would
like to learn more about higher
education. With that, I yield to
other members to introduce
guests and once we're done with
guests, we'll yield back to
every single day, all of us just
on our feet, high knees, Senator
Sher over there already taking
charge. He's gonna be the
choreographer. But thank you,
Mr. President.
I do have some very special
the central New Mexico, northern
New Mexico area, uh, they do
provide gender affirming care,
which is a pocket of, of health
care that is so vitally needed
in our communities. Anybody can
executive suite, uh, primarily,
um, I do have Monica Maestas.
She was about 18 years of
experience in this area, uh,
with health care. She's an
executive in their, in their
more people in this building
than any one of us because she
and her family have been very
active in northern New Mexico
and New Mexico for a very long
time, so I'll ask Monica to
stand. I also want to introduce
right now, but he's built a very
successful organizations
throughout his career, and he is
building a very phenomenal team
within Southwest Care Center
there. I do want to also
introduce Doctor Michael Adams.
to expand here in New Mexico,
Mr. President, and I think we're
gonna hear wonderful things from
Southwest Care Center, so that's
the my colleagues to please
welcome my guests this morning.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senate body. I'd like to
introduce my guests today. This
is somebody that I've known for
a very long time. You can go
ahead and stand. Her name is Liz
Vega and she is the event
manager for Visit Las Cruces and
imagine those of us in the South
get a little jelly when we get
to see all these amazing
balloons up in the air and we
don't get to experience them
down in Las Cruces. So now
thanks to Visit Las Cruces.
up in April, April 26th to be
exact, called Mira Las Cruces,
and it showcases the cultural
outdoor rec cuisine and music
elements that are so much that a
and listening to some of our
local musicians play, um,
because that's what Mira Las
Cruces is all about. So if you
will send it anybody and and Mr.
President
I was looking for my partner in
crime over there, Senator Munoz,
but it looks like he decided to
wander away. Oh, there he is, he
just wandered down to the front.
that pays most of the bills in
the state of New Mexico.
And I would like to start with
uh Betty Young from Tierra in
incantata.
down the street, but most of the
clothes that we wear are also
synthetic and therefore not only
do they keep our house warm and
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
Munoz, thank you, Mr. President.
I think they forgot Senator
Sheer's hair products are also
petroleum-based.
It's allowed us to put $10
billion in early childhood fund.
It's allowed us to create funds,
uh, all over the state and it's
allowed us to, as a state to
another resource and, and, you
know, as oil and gas, always,
uh, is a great conversation in
the legislature. I mean they
reduced methane emissions, maybe
that trajectory. I mean, they
need electrification in the
South to get off that. There's a
lot of resources we need to help
them.
in order to change that path.
But without oil and gas.
all over the state. Our
executive office building, the
new office building that the
exec's gonna get. Those are all
STBs that were funded through
oil and gas, and so, you know,
it's, it's great to work with
and, and we're gonna participate
as we move forward. So I
appreciate you guys. I
appreciate what you guys do for
every person.
in the state, teacher raises,
you can go, we can go through
the list, but, but we're all in
welcome the folks to pay our
bills.
senators, we have Senator
Brandt.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
got it.
A text message this morning from
And it is at the uh Santa Fe
Jewish Center.
And, uh, lunch is served from
11:30 to 2:30.
It's great food, um, and you
know, most lobbyists don't know
about it yet, or anyone else. So
if you want to get away
somewhere for lunch and not have
anyone track you down, that's a
place to go. Thank you, Mr.
out on your desk today is
information and uh a few little
goodies from Bwell, New Mexico.
Be well, New Mexico is the
for those of us who are older
and not quite ready for, uh,
Medicare.
But uh don't have an employer,
uh, it is still really a great
substantially in the beginning,
there were only 300 to 40,000
participating, but, uh, we are
now seeing those numbers go up
they have some gifts for you,
but what's most important is
they have the gift of affordable
insurance for individuals in
announcements, senators? Senator
Pinto, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
President. And you'll notice on
your desk our book.
Our yearly book or session book
our oldest educational
institutions.
For my particular constituents
and also there are some students
people and some of you probably
already have been visited by our
very beautiful students and
future leaders to advocate for
some funding, so I appreciate
them coming out to really learn
Many senators wishing to make an
announcement.
See and I to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. At
this point, I would yield to
unanimous consent that the
reader be allowed to read the
certificate for national
mentoring Month and Big Brothers
Big Sisters of New Mexico, no
objection. The reader will read.
2025. The New Mexico State
Senate does hereby extend its
recognition and acknowledgement
too. National mentoring Month
and Big Brothers, Big Sisters of
whereas the mission of
Big Brothers, Big Sisters of New
Mexico is to create and support
one on one mentoring
relationships that ignite the
the critical needs of youth,
including fostering a sense of
belonging, encouraging and
supporting education, providing
physical and mental health
literacy, cultivating healthy
leadership skills, and whereas
the mentoring programs provided
by Big Brothers Big Sisters of
New Mexico aim to ensure that
all youth realize their full
Significant societal benefits,
including a 3 to 1 return for
every $1 invested, reduction of
enroll in post-secondary
education and assume leadership
roles and less likely to engage
in delinquency or substance
abuse, and whereas 1 in 3 young
resources to support mentoring
programs for youth and whereas
national mentoring Month serves
as an opportunity to celebrate,
elevate, and encourage mentoring
Mexico that January.
2025 be recognized as national
mentoring Month in New Mexico
service in New Mexico signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Mimi Stewart, President Pro 10,
Senator Nicholas A. Paul, Sherry
De Luhan, chief clerk.
Thank you, Senator. He no
objection. I'm not sure if
there's any other senators who
would like to speak on the
certificate to Big Brothers Big
Sisters and then we have Senator
Ramos followed by Senator
County and, uh, believe it or
not, but, uh, lieutenant
Governor and I were both big
brothers at the same time. Um,
my, my little brother Luke Perez
is a tremendous kid that turned
Big Sisters. Thank you.
very much, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Ramos. Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President, I just
about 5 minutes in Las Cruces
until I was just too damn busy.
And, um, but again, you know, we
have so many kids living in kind
of quiet desperation who are
A respite, a little bit of
different perspective in life,
maybe even opportunity, uh, to
see some things that they
wouldn't otherwise see. And, uh,
give him a little love. So it's
have this experience for as long
as you like or don't like. The
other thing I want to say is I
know that Big Brothers Big
Sisters is seeking more funding
around the state, so.
who's sitting by me who I've
known forever in Las Cruces and
counselor piano up there and,
and uh her colleague, so anyway,
thank you again, Mr. President,
colleagues, and thank you big
Thank you, Mr. President. I've
got several, uh, guests here
today that, uh, deserve a lot of
recognition for what they do for
has served in one capacity or
another with the Big Brothers
Big Sisters organization for 28+
years, uh, roles to include
nationwide.
as other additional roles within
Big Brothers and Big Sisters
locally, she's been selected as
Woman of the Year, CEO of the
year, American graduate
One CEO of the year. I think
none of those come without a lot
of hard work and dedication and
passion for the organization
that she serves, um, along with
sitting alongside me here on the
floor, we have Roseanne Vasquez,
who is a regional director and
before I move on to just give a
little background on the big
because I think it's, uh, what
you guys have done and continue
to do, uh, speaks to your
leadership roles that each of
you hold.
As for Big Brothers Big Sisters
and over 3000 youth throughout
our state.
They are the lead mentoring
organization with over 100 years
We're part of a community of
caring in New Mexico and are
grateful for the work of so many
to ensure that every child who
needs a mentor has one and Big
Brothers, Big Sisters invites
had the opportunity to be a big,
a big brother, uh, number of
years ago, but it was something
that I'll never forget and not
just the ability to.
here now, there's folks in this
room that I consider mentors. I
have mentors in my business and
it's something that I think the
Big Brothers Big Sisters program
helps to teach these young kids
here in New Mexico and uh
continue to do great things. We
appreciate it and I just asked
the uh members of the body to
join me and uh uh giving him a
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Paul.
I yield now to Senate Majority
Mr. President, your rules
committee, to whom has been
referred? Senate Bill 85 has had
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Senator do, Mr. President, move
adoption of the committee
report. Senators there's been a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
Rules Committee, to whom has
been referred Senate Bill 5.
Du pass as amended.
And thence referred to the
Mr. President, Senator Sheriff,
for what point do you like a
debatable motion. Just want to
make that clear. Yeah.
So, Mr. President, there were
certainly uh yesterday some,
as a body get to dig into things
and really try to understand the
bills. It's just easier in the,
in the committee because you get
to ask the expert witnesses and
so forth, then trying to do it
down here on the floor.
bill, ask all the questions that
need to be asked before
anything, uh, comes down here,
uh, to either go to another
committee or come to the floor.
speaking more to each other now
and I want to thank Senator
Wirth and all of the chairs as
well as our ranking members for
trying to work this through so
that we don't have
but I do want to make sure that,
that we're all working together
and that we acknowledge that
it's the committees where we
really get to dig down and ask
the experts the questions
saying I.
Those opposed.
Yeah, I have at the port has
been adopted.
Senate Majority floor leader
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate bill 36, introduced by
by state agency employees
providing exceptions, amending
the motor vehicle code
prescribing penalties. Senate
Senate Bill 100 introduced by
Senator Tobiasson.
An act relating to that
Senate Bill 100.
Having been read twice by title
as order printed and referred to
the Senate Conservation
Committee then.
what purpose do you rise? A
unanimous consent. We go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous, and I yield to
senators share no objection.
We're in that order of business
announcing miscellaneous Senate
Bill 100 center share thank you
moving moment for all of us, and
we have continued that tradition
up to today.
And so Mr. President, I want to
congratulate Senator Tobiasson
celebration.
Of the 100th bill, and she is
now in charge of said
celebration.
somebody will come out there and
help her, uh, figure this out
and uh then we'll we'll all come
to her celebration, but the
celebration is largely for the
celebrate with that. So thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you, any senators wishing
to speak on Senate Bill 100
where an announcement is
miscellaneous Senator Woods, did
you have your hand on the
microphone?
Center woods
honor that you have achieved
today, uh, we appreciate the
things to come out of you. I,
I've told you this morning that
I expect great things out of you
going to that and it's uh dance
your life away kind of.
a deal. So, uh, we, we expect,
uh, uh, a band or two to show up
process and progress report once
in a while, so that's a little
of the stuff that's expected out
of you, and I'm sure that we
will coach you along as you need
Well, thank you, I think this
sounds like Mr. President, I, I
apologize. Thank you, Mr.
President. This sounds like, um,
more than just a little bit of a
set up, um, I love the number
party, it means that um my
colleagues are willing to dance,
um, because that will be part of
it and we already have.
the head choreographer and
applause for our Senate Bill 100
sponsor.
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate bill.
161.
Introduced by senators
checks of Department of Military
Affairs employ employment or
volunteer applicants or
employees who have
that are open to minors,
providing the process for state
and national criminal background
checks, restricting the use of
criminal background check
having been read twice my title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 161.
Committee and act relating to
the severance tax permanent
fund, changing the amount of the
fund to be invested in New
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 162 Senate Bill 163
introduced by Senator Schendo,
federally recognized Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos to
where tribal regalia at
graduation ceremonies or public
school events. Senate Bill 163.
or.
Committee.
Then Senate Education Committee,
that's Senate Bill 163.
wireless consumer advanced
infrastructure Investment Act to
include political subdivisions
and state agencies and the
definition of authority
to the Senate tax.
Business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate bill 164.
allow certified lifeguards to
return to work under certain
conditions. Senate Bill 16565
haven't been read twice by title
Senate bill 166, introduced by
Senator Maestas and act relating
to commitment procedures,
providing a definition for harm
Treatment Act, Senate Bill 166
66 haven't been read twice by
title is order printed.
And referred to the Senate
Judiciary Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee that sent a
childhood funding, transferring
the balance of early childhood
education and care fund to the
early childhood Trust Fund
prenatal programs and services
providing an effective date
contingent on approval of a
constitutional amendment.
Creating the early childhood
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 167.
Senate bill 168 introduced by
of the MMSA 1978. Senate Bill
168.
Center 1668 having been read
twice by title is order printed.
Senate bill 169 introduced by
Senator.
But dear Senator Brandt's
strategic economic development
site readiness Act, making an
appropriation, Senate Bill 16969
been read twice by title is
order printed.
this.
Senate Bill 170.
Introduced by Senator Padilla,
Representative Dixon, and
permitted uses for money in the
public project revolving fund
revising economic development
rates for gas and electric
utilities, providing for
business transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee and Senate Bill 170.
Senate Bill 171, introduced by
section of the NMSA 1978. Senate
Bill 171171 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate bill 172 introduced by
Senator Trujillo, Senator Nava.
Representative.
Johnson
healthcare workforce by enacting
the immigrants Healthcare
Workforce Development Act,
providing for an immigrant
healthcare professional
acceleration program providing
Healthcare Workforce Development
Fund, creating immigrant
healthcare workforce advisory.
group amending definitions in
the medical Practice Act, making
Committee then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 172.
Senate Bill 173 introduced by
telecommunications, as police
members under the public
employees Retirement Act,
providing for elections
pertaining to the adoption of
Senate Bill 173 having been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
173.
districts, providing that the
boards of regional spaceport
districts employed the state
investment council or state
treasurer to invest funds and a
local government investment
Prince and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee, then
Senate Education Committee, that
Senate bill 174.
loan fund, allowing the early
childhood education and care
department and the New Mexico
Finance Authority to contract
Senate Bill 175 15 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
Transportation Committee the
Senate Finance Committee Senate
His order printed and referred
to the Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 174.
And act relating to medical
malpractice requiring payments
from the patient's compensation
fund to be made as expenses are
attorney fees and malpractice
claims, creating the patient
safety improvement fund, making
an appropriation. Senate bill.
Senate bill, 177, introduced by
Senator Seddio Lopez, an act
for U visa certification,
providing for procedures for U
visa certification requests,
approvals, denials, and appeals,
fact and conclusions of law to
grant relief in accordance with
the U visa certification Act,
Senate Bill 177.
Senate bill 178 introduced by
Senator Pope, and at relating to
water amending and enacting
sections of the produced Water
produced water off the oil field
for research purposes only.
Imposing a 50 cents produced
water fee on barrels of produced
the produced water fee into the
plugging and remediating
abandoned wells fund, making an
appropriation. Senate Bill 178.
Senate bill, 179 introduced by
Senator Trujillo.
An act relating to the rental
purchase Agreement Act,
online. Senate Bill 179 179
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee, then
relating to self-service
storage, providing that the
limit for the maximum value of
stored personal property allowed
days of continuous default,
the imposition of late fees for
rental payments in default,
providing for an alternative
Seabel
180 haven't been read twice by
title is ordered Prince and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
Senator Stefaniks.
And act relating to economic
development, amending the local
economic Development Act to
Public Affairs Committee, then
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 181.
23 of Article 20 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
create the early childhood trust
expenses. Senate Joint
Resolution 6 Resolution 6,
having been read twice by title
is order print and referred to
the.
Senate Rules Committee, then
that next order business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go on our
business committee reports.
He no objection in that order
business committee reports the
reader will read.
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass.
Amended as follows. Number one,
on page 16 between lines 8.
Stefanik's chair.
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report.
Senators, we have a motion to
Peter Wars take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President, uh,
unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous. There are no
objection. We're in that order
business.
Now Smithcellaneous Senator
And just for committee chairs
we'll be in at 11 o'clock
tomorrow and just as a road map,
floor at 11 o'clock and I would
yield to chairs to announce
their committees.
Thank you Senator Senator Souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senator Brandtley, Senator
Shindo, Steinborn, and Padilla
tomorrow morning that we're
hoping to get through. Also, I'd
like the senators, please mark
K-12 and higher ed will be
having sort of a social meet and
greet with legislators, um, as
well as we will have the
executive director from the
Education commission of the
Presidentenator Hamblin,
followed by Senator Doig,
followed by Senator Hickey.
Senator Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President. Your tax business.
Transportation Committee will be
today we have the Secretary of
Taxation and Revenue Stephanie
Chardon-Clark speaking to us. We
will do our organizational
meeting first and then we will
finish it off with tax 101 from
to be exact, 140s like 142.
Got you.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Hamblin. Senator, thank
you, Mr. President. Your rules
business investment Corporation
and, uh, Senator Stewart will be
there for the confirmation to
the PRC. So we will see folks
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee, uh, will be meeting
tomorrow. I'm glad to announce
behavioral Health Trust Fund,
uh, the public health and safety
initiatives and behavioral
health reform and investment Act
will be heard tomorrow.
Thank you Senator Hickey. Any
further announcements, senators?
See no further announcements,
Senator Ward, uh, we do have
another announcement, Senator
Shindo.
See none, Senator Worth to take
us that next order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
that's it for today. I would
yield to Senator Senator Munoz,
amorandum of office management
and budget, and each agency is
responsible for conducting your
reviewing federal financial
assistance programs.
just so we know that and it's
effective 5 p.m. today, uh,
everything is due back by
February 10th, and it impacts
all activities and obligations
Little hum around and so it's a
pause until the 10th to get all
the reports in, so that's,
that's important as we move
forward that it's not just an
action executive order to stop
everything, so.
Mr. President, with that
unanimous consent to Senate
stand in recess until 11 o'clock
tomorrow morning. Hearing no
objection, the Senate to send a
