Uh, item number 10, uh, House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 as amended,
of legislation, and I yield to
Senator Cervantes for item
number 10, House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 as amended.
Seeing uh no objection, we are
Out of prison.
consent of the Senate. The
records show that all action is
a for placing Senator Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
today on an effort that came
through the house, um, and, uh,
had some input and work from us
here in this chamber as well too
this bill attempts to address a
bit about the numerous.
Pathways, procedures and
remedies that are put into the
law by this bill with regard to
competency and the options that
revolving door with regard to uh
crimes and determinations of
individuals who are not
competent to stand trial or can
be restored to competency.
In addition to the competency
conversion device that's what
sometimes commonly referred to
as a glock switch, uh, this
would create a new crime for uh
possession of a Glock switch,
uh, apart from the, uh,
auto auto taken, fraudulent
taking.
And kind of increase the
penalties for those and also the
circumstances under which those
various different crimes under
The bill also includes a new
penalty for the threat of
shooting where the threat of a
shooting draws a law enforcement
trying to address that in our
relationships with our
neighboring countries because of
the of the crisis this drug
presents to us this this bill
would create a a.
the issue of, of chemical
testing for alcohol, but now
what is existing law we're all
familiar with breath testing for
alcohol. This bill expands the
that would allow us to capture
things like marijuana in blood
or any other illegal drugs that
are being screened for and so
those are the 5 criminal
components apart from
number of alternatives the
individual is evaluated for
whether they're dangerous or not
there's one pathway for
individuals who may be deemed
dangerous.
the levels up based on whether
the individual is deemed to be
dangerous and also whether the
crime is either misdemeanor
crime or a felony crime and
and restore an individual to
competency so the crime can be
addressed and ultimately the
goal here is to try and assure
that individuals have the
treatment or care they need to
team behind me and so we'll
answer any questions and debate.
Thank you.
Thank you. We do have a floor
amendment, uh, the reader to
A single objection to search of
arms can uh escort the expert
onto the floor. Madam President,
we're gonna, I'm gonna have 4
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
to House Judiciary Committee
Uh, thank you, um, Madam
President, I now move that
Senate floor amendment number
one the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8, be adopted by the
chamber.
device again, as I said in
common parlance, it's what we're
we're calling a glock switch,
although that's probably too
limiting. These devices can
modify a Glock, which is a
common handgun, to function as
House, had some incongruity
really or, or at least.
the opportunity for betterment
between the two definitions of
what is an automatic weapon and
what is a semi-automatic weapon
quickly and so the goal of this
bill is simply to change the
language between the two
definitions so that they, they
correlate uh in those two
We had a little bit of this
discussion yesterday, but some
of us that are, uh, are gun
owners and have been for our
lifetime, uh, would probably
recognize that the existing
language that says to shoot more
uh uh uh the weapon that would
shoot more than one shot and
talks about it firing more than
one cartridge or shell. It's a
little bit, I think, more
technically accurate to define
the
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
with the sponsor yield?
Yes
He'll yield if he'll call me
Madam President, thank you,
Madam President.
um, yeah, I, I, I appreciate not
using shoot and shot and, um,
that's, yeah, I, I think
elementary school kids could
have probably come up with a
little bit better uh than that,
by a single function of the
trigger.
What is meant by manual
reloading?
I, I think your question goes a
little bit beyond the amendment,
not that I don't welcome the
question, uh, and I think we'll
probably get to that perhaps
when we look at the the overall
context, but the amendment in
front of us does not really
Believe it or not, I think it
comes out of federal language,
uh, so this is a good
opportunity for me to recognize
the fact that Washington DC and
Congress doesn't always do such
we could do a better job than
Congress on this uh definition,
and it's an important question
because part of our discussion
and debate yesterday, or at
least some observation relates
to the issue of uh.
automatic weapon or not, but to
your question is, you know,
without, with I think your
question was, um, with regard to
the definition of
Uh, let's see, it's the separate
assault weapon legislation
because I'm advised by uh some
of my my uh knowledgeable, uh,
gun owners including one on the
committee that there are devices
shells by really even uh maybe
even alternating your fingers on
a trigger, uh, again devices I'm
not familiar with Senator, but
I, I don't know how to answer
your question better than that
um, but, uh, yes, I, I do think
that your amendment makes this
sound better. Um, it doesn't
surprise me that that's in.
federal law because the people
Thank you, Senator Brand. I
there further debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none, Senator Cervantes
to close on amendment number
one.
All right, we're on.
Senate floor amendment number
one to House Judiciary Committee
Back on the debated the bill?
Do we have any debate on the
bill? Can we go home? Senator
Brown.
Senator, so if we could go back
to that definition.
Um, my concern, uh, again, I
think we need to have an
understanding of what does that
Senator, the, the reason that
they, um, issue of shooting more
than one shot with a man you
reloading you'll, you'll find
this interesting really comes
out of the concept of a double
barrel shotgun.
uh, that type of a weapon, a
double barrel shotgun.
So Madam President, Senator, um,
I don't know if you've ever had
a double barrel shotgun, but
they actually have two triggers,
one for each barrel.
Madam President, I'm looking at
your colleague over there,
Senator Woods, he's, he's
shaking his head so one that
does. I don't know whether he's
disagreeing with you or you
disagreeing with me, but, but
maybe I'll go buy one.
Oh, that might be illegal now
Senator Woods may have one I
don't know.
I'll, I'll take one. Senator
I will yield, madam, Senator
Brandt,
you have the floor.
Thank you. Senator Woods, do you
have a double barrel shotgun
with a single trigger?
you shoot one shot, the recall
triggers the other chamber to uh
for the other barrel. So I don't
know how that pertains to this.
Particular
Deal, but anyway, that's the way
it works.
But you still have to pull the
trigger twice, so mainly this is
saying that um.
On a single
Trigger pull.
firing more than one round.
OK, I, I appreciate that. I, I
think that's fine. Thank you.
Uh, Madam President, Senator,
on, on the, uh, the, the issues
of competency, what have we done
Senate Bill 12, and 3, I voted
for 2 out of 3 of those, so
that's pretty good, um.
You know, 66%, I probably pass
almost anything in, in, in
education nowadays, but um.
them in prison. Madam President,
said, well, one thing we, we
really don't put him in prison.
Now that's really one of the
issues and that's probably the
right thing that we're not
constitutional limitations, um,
and so.
what this bill does is this
bill, uh, one thing it does is
it assures that any cases where
competencies raised that there
bill puts into uh place
deadlines for competency
hearings. It requires a
competency determination by a
certain professionals. It
requires that the district court
the evaluators is to consider
and the court is then to act
upon those reports with then
again number of alternatives
depending on whether the charge
and the competency evaluation
requires something more than all
of.
that so all of this does so I
think to summarize it, it gives
uh a number of lanes of travel
if you will, based on a kind of
perhaps increasing the level of
um resources that are devoted to
trying to restore the person to
competency all the all the way
to an order of referral to a
facility like Las Vegas or to a
and be reevaluated for whether
there's a chance that person can
be restored to competency and
and then assist with their
defense.
Um, Madam President and Senator,
that works?
That's right, Senator, yes.
OK thank you Mr. President and
Senator. So I think one of the
concerns we've been trying to
deal with is a is a lot of times
and, and what I've been told and
Are we doing anything in this
bill to help with that to make
sure that if people need help
we're getting them that help
commit one that they might be
locked up for a long time.
Uh, before the answer, I'll
remind you both go through the
chair.
Senator Cervantes, what about
me? Are you sure I can do that?
I think I'm not sure.
Uh,
Madam President, Senator, your
question is, yeah, uh, the
other words, uh, where there's
an opportunity for outpatient
treatment or other
community-based, uh, resources
that we are not resort ourselves
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
and, and Senator, I appreciate
that answer you know overall I
like the direction we're going
with this bill.
But you know what, at least
we're going the right direction.
To address some of the crime
issues we have, so I will
support it because I think we're
going in the right direction. I
in, uh, that we can continue to
work on and and try to get
ourselves, you know, at least
let's, let's try to at least get
to 5 or 6 this session, uh, so
that we can really try to see
Uh, we have Senate floor #2, the
reader shall read. Reader.
Reader.
twice amended. Amendment
sponsored by Senator Craig W.
Brandt.
Senator Brandt to move and then
explain the amendment.
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 be adopted subject to
debate.
Thank you so much and if you
will not explain the amendment.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
before and past, uh, this, uh,
exact bill, but they didn't ever
get to it in the house and, uh,
I know, you know, sometimes we
run out of time and and
sometimes we just don't like
of swatting, uh, this changes
the, uh.
Title
Puts in the the swatting title,
uh, and then goes into section
17, which adds a new section,
quickly what swatting is, uh,
and it has become a bigger and
bigger problem in the United
States as well as in our own
state to where um I won't use
uh, at such and such address. I
just heard gunshots. Something's
going on. We need the police.
The police respond usually bring
a SWAT team out, that is why
arms in this country and they
shoot the police.
Or they get shot by the police.
I, I actually sometimes refer to
have had this happen to them
multiple times, so we're trying
to get ahead of this. We've
passed this exact language.
We've, we've all I think all but
one of us.
in our state and around the
country.
A debate on the amendment first
to the sponsor senator
Cervantes. Thank you, Madam
President, Madam President, um,
of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, I have every
assurance it would pass the, the
bill that we heard, we, I think
we heard it in our very first
meeting, Senator, because you
had been working on this so long
I think we scheduled you for
had been your bill then or if it
comes back before us as your
bill now, it's gonna pass, but
I'm gonna urge members to not
begin to try and expand beyond
this bill with additional and
Other debate on the amendment.
Senator Woods,
Thank you, Madam President.
to you about a scenario that
happened to me when I was back
in the days when I was working
in construction. I was up in, up
And what happened was someone
called in a bomb threat.
And naturally they blow the
whistle and told us to evacuate.
So 1500 men went home.
About 2 days later, was back on
the job again, the same thing
happened.
The 3rd time it happened, they
finally caught the guy.
the sponsor?
Would that be included?
Something like that be included
in this amendment.
Senator Brant
been a felony for I don't know
how long, um, so if you call in
a bomb threat anywhere if
someone called in a bomb threat
here and it wasn't actually a
um, I think it's been in law
since I was a knee high to a
grasshopper
So that one's been in law. This
is really dealing with calling
in a false threat, uh, calling
In danger and and that's what we
we're trying to deal with here.
It's it's been happening a lot,
um, you know, and, uh, we're
just trying to.
know if they would charge you
with that.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you
I know that uh we've talked
about not trying to to do things
here on the floor, but Madam
President, we've heard about
this a long time.
It's not that complicated, you
know, it defines what swatting
is.
And uh then you move on, so I
don't see a reason.
At all.
safety, well, to us as well as
to the police officers and
everybody else. So from that
perspective,
I, I don't understand the.
I understand the caucus
position, but
I think that we're missing
missing something important here
today that's easily fixed. Thank
The sponsor of the amendment
yield
to yield Madam President, I do
yield. He yields.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
any one of us.
That if a person were to swap my
home, and I live in a rural
area.
And several people in the middle
of the night.
were to show up
defend my wife.
And my family
And my concern is that if
someone wanted to.
deterrent to someone who would
be considering doing something
like that.
And so I respectfully ask the
committee to consider this, I
respectfully asked.
This floor
Thank you. Any other debate on
the amendment.
Seeing nonin ran to close on the
amendment.
Thank you Madam President, and,
Um, but now the position is that
we don't want to. I'm guessing
it's because it's from this
side, um, maybe not, and I
actually really appreciate the
sponsor, you know, saying that
if this was the bill that was
You know, we still got a 30
days, you know, I'm not gonna
give up. I don't quit. I'm no
quitter.
Right? So I'm gonna keep
working. I'm gonna keep bringing
The problem is I've never heard
that from the chair of House
Judiciary and so you know we
have an opportunity here to get
All the process, this is, this
is part of the process. It's in
our rules. You guys know I know
the rules.
And you know I follow them.
As a body
With the same authority and the
sub, I mean, but you don't do
that with a House bill because
then it's got to go all the way
through the process, as you
know, Madam President.
Anyway
No one on that side of the aisle
has come to me and said, oh, I
think that swatting bills a
horrible idea.
Most people said I think it's a
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 be
adopted.
substitute for House Bill 8 is
twice amended to your seats if
you wish to vote no, please
raise your hands.
Senator Campos voting no,
Senator Pope.
Voting no Senator Figueroa.
Voting no.
Senator Cia Lopez.
Voting no Senator Pinto voting
no. Senator Gonzalez.
Voting no.
Senator Jaramio.
Voting no senator worth voting
no. Senator Munoz voting no,
Senator Sindo.
souls voting no, Senator
Stephanic voting no. Senator
Padilla.
Voting no Senator Stewart.
By a vote of 16 in the
President, and I, I will release
the floor, but it's good to see
you in 13 years that absolutely
nothing has changed.
We are back on debate of the
bill.
in courts and corrections in
intercession, um, and a couple
of drafts uh dealing with this
were just really poorly written,
with individuals, um, so I, I, I
think all of.
this is, is great. Um, I only
had a question that I think.
Yes.
heels. Thank you, Madam
President. So on page 7.
Of the bill
Um
This is how I'm understanding
it. They're not competent, but
then the court is making a
second they've already
determined this person's not
competent. Is this person
reasonable doubt that the
defendant presents a serious
threat of and then this as I
understand the bill this is
expanded and expanded list of
through this list and can um
Madam President, I would be
interested in like what, what's
What, what kind of, and, and I
guess I think about it because I
think about the attempt crimes,
you know, attempts to commit
great bodily harm, attempt,
that you're referring to on page
7 is actually kind of begins at
the bottom of page 6 for
following along. This is, this
is, uh, largely rewritten,
although there's some existing
language.
because it puts us under a
number of different alternative
pathways, if you will, and so
this is the requirement at a
competency hearing once
competency's been raised and
The question before the court is
whether there's clear and
convincing evidence that the
defendant presents a serious
threat. That's the dangerousness
determination. So Senator, you
back to 1979 where the court
said that that would be the
standard. In other words, we're
talking about um making a a
determination that deprives a
person potentially of their
liberty interest and the.
standard of proof and then the
bill enumerates a number of uh
charge or threats I guess I
shouldn't say charge but threats
of various crimes that the court
go through each of those or
whether that's necessary to
answer your question.
Uh, Madam President, it is just,
so I understand that, and this
is the most serious path that
the individual could go go down
a heightened standard, I think
that's very important, um, but
I'm just wondering like how, I
mean, I'm just trying to
imagine.
If somebody
I, I just hope it wasn't because
somebody was screaming in the
streets.
Reminder to go with the Madam
Chair, thank you, thank you for
the reminder.
Madam President, Senator
the Supreme Court has said it's
clear and convincing evidence,
so it's a heightened standard,
of course, and then the issue in
the language that you're looking
at is whether the defendant
presents a threat of these
enumerated crimes and they're,
abuse, uh, sexual.
exploitation, aggravated arson,
and, and others.
Um,
thank you, Madam President. I
guess the question I'm, I'm
Is not going to be considered a
serious threat of committing
murder and so that's what I'm,
uh, manager, I want some
assurance that um even though
the screaming in the in the
Because to me, when you're
prosecuting somebody for
something they haven't committed
it it should be a high standard
of proof.
And I want to explore what this
Um, Madam President, uh, well,
Senator, you're fortunate to be
married to a district court
judge and so your husband would
be the among the type of people
that would make an assessment as
into consideration and we
entrust some of those uh
judgment, uh, decisions to our
courts and and again your
husband being a good example of
a person who would make that
decision, I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam President. I, I
guess maybe I'm even trying to
make some legislative history
here that um.
District attorney should be
appreciate the bill. I
appreciate all of the work that
went into it and um I'm very
proud that I hope this afternoon
we'll be able to uh to pass this
and then move on to additional
Senate floor Amendment number 3
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 as
Senate floor Amendment 3 for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 is
twice amended, be adopted
subject to to debate.
So I think this is actually #2.
I stand corrected, I guess we've
changed our policies so things
do change, Senator Bran. Senator
Duhi to explain the amendment.
I made a change to a portion of
the bill that talks about when
folks are picked up.
Um, to go to uh the behavioral
Uh
competency context, I changed
that to 7 days in Senate
Judiciary, uh, because of
BHI today saying, we just can't
do 7 days. It is, it is setting
us up to fail for failure. So
what this amendment would do
Um, Madam President, this is a
constructive, uh, amendment and
I would urge members to support
it.
Other debate on the amendment.
Of Senator Cervantes, do you
yields. Thank you, Madam
President. So it was like 10
minutes ago.
That we couldn't amend the bill.
I think we treat every moment
that comes forward as an
amendment which can debate all
the amendments.
Senators
the discussion that the bill
should not be amended. In fact,
from the very beginning with I
think unanimous approval of
everyone here in the chamber. We
amended this bill to eliminate
that I had on an earlier
amendment was not to add
additional new crimes because
that's a considerable expansion.
So let me.
be clear what we're doing here.
this is something new. And the
court may order that the person
be picked up, if you will, uh,
transported by the Department of
Health to a facility and the
existing language in the bill
In committee, Senator Deick
thought, I think rightfully so,
30 days is too long a period
between a court ordering an
individual to be transported and
the transportation actually
having an individual transported
for um to a facility for
competency for competency
treatment subsequent to the
judiciary Committee, Senator Doo
amendment here is simply taking
it from the House bill which was
30 days.
Senate Judiciary taking that to
7 days that proposed amendment
here is simply taking that to 15
days. We're trying to find the
Sir Cher. So, thank you, uh,
Madam President, so there's,
there's two things here that I,
I need to clarify one.
Uh
Senator, yes.
So.
On here I'm not seeing that
amendment being then struck.
All right, uh, Madam President,
I see that I didn't see the
amendment here, so that's what
was my, my confusion. So, OK, so
we struck the 7.
1415 in the Senate, it doesn't
matter much, does it?
Um, so, Madam President.
better.
Um, but so I do think this is an
improvement on the bill.
I'm not objecting to the uh
would, I would argue that if, if
the.
If Senator Brandt's amendment
was a good amendment, which we
seem to think it was.
good amendments. I'm going to
support this amendment.
Just the rationale of why we
would accept.
One side of the aisle's
amendment and not the other side
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
and, and.
I, I think we know exactly why
mine wasn't accepted and why
this one will be, um, I don't.
Sponsor of the amendment Madam
President, I apologize.
Senator Doig, do you, Madam
President.
to 15 days, um, this person, the
way I'm reading the bill has
been deemed by the court to be
Uh, that they need to be.
That they're incompetent.
They can't participate in their
own defense. I think that's one
of the reasons I'm again, I'm
not a lawyer, but I think I've
been here long enough that I
could probably pass the bar, um,
Madam President, Senator, why
would we
First of all,
It sounds like what we're doing
is in the original bill is
letting them go for 30 days with
without any treatment when
they're incompetent to stand
trial.
Senator, Madam President, so
they're not on the streets
during this time. They're,
they're probably sitting in
Health.
feels that they, the 7 Days
doesn't work is because that
transport has to be done in
conjunction with law
enforcement, um.
Exclusive control over and so
they felt that they needed this
extra time in order to make sure
that they'd be able to
coordinate everyone who needs to
Amendment then because I, I
think it's absolutely
ridiculous.
That we're having to wait 7 days
for someone who's been deemed
Before they're gonna even get
started on the treatment that
they need.
I, I think this is, this is a
horrible amendment and it
doesn't.
It doesn't serve humanity or the
the sponsor of the amendment
yield for a question, do you
yields.
Thank you, Madam President, um,
Senator, uh, when Senator Bre
in jail is every person who a a
judge finds incompetent.
They are all of them.
Are all of them, um,
Yeah.
They're too, Madam President,
uh, my understanding is, is all
of these people are in custody.
They, they are in custody
from 8 years as a county
commissioner dealing with the
detention center our detention
centers, madam, uh, President
and Senator, quite frankly have
turned into mental health
Um, where, where do they go
exactly in the facility? Do you
know?
Senator Duhe
I'll say, I, I don't know that.
deemed are dangerous, would be
held in custody during this
time, not necessarily at
everyone, but under this
proposal, only those who are are
dangerous are, are set to be to
Individuals that go in front of
a judge that are declared
incompetent are all 100% either
going to a correctional facility
Thank you, Madam President. So
let's talk about this for a
minute. So here we have a judge.
Um, well, let me ask you this,
Madam Chair, the judge makes
that decision.
Thank you Madam President. So
Senator, what you're telling me
is a judge will make that
determination.
Who he has no history of no
knowledge of.
With no
Behavioral care provider.
Helping him or her make that
decides to release.
A criminal.
That criminal may commit a
violent crime that was not
the premise is incorrect, uh,
while the judge makes the
ultimate decision, they do so
with the assistance of of
opinions from the mental health
evaluator, they get extensive
before, but I appreciate you
clarifying that. So again, I'll
ask the question.
Is it possible that a mental
health provider behavioral
health provider.
on the street, where is that
person who is deemed
incompetent.
May be dangerous to other
people.
There's all sorts of things that
could hypothetically happen.
Center block. Thank you, Madam
President, which is exactly why.
We want to reduce the risk and
need. I supported SB 12 and 3.
Which is, which is a huge
paradigm shift for the state of
New Mexico and how we treat
mental health and substance
abuse.
Every person through the court
system who is deemed
incompetent.
May be a danger to society
Examples in jails.
Around the state
That didn't get the treatment,
by the way, that he or she
needed.
That was a danger to himself.
Or other prisoners, inmates.
law, defendants who are not
competent and are not dangerous
are released and their cases are
dismissed, so this bill provides
pathways to restoration
programming in those cases, or
real treatment.
Ciner block, still on the
amendment.
I would disagree because my
experience.
of Counties.
What we have seen, Madam
President, too many times is
this increases the risk of
safety to the individual who's
deemed incompetent.
That have to deal with this
issue.
I would also argue, Madam
President, Senator Duha that
Senator Dock, are you still on
the amendment center block cause
this is straying far away. You,
you'll get a chance to debate
the bill.
that the county jails have the
capability based on contractors
that are in those jails to do
the transportation immediately
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
because you're increasing risk
to the person because when you
talk, when you have a person
who's incompetent, Madam
President, and you put that
Madam President, to make that
person wait for treatment.
I will vehemently opposed this
For our people. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator. Other debate
on the amendment.
Uh sing non sin or do hi to
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 is twice amended, uh,
being now adopted and ask for a
voice vote.
Super House Bill 8 to your seats
if.
And share you're interrupting
me.
Because we've not made the right
those voting in the negative.
Oh
You forgot by a show of hands.
So at your seat, if you wish to
vote no, please raise your
hands.
Senator Gallegos.
But no, Senator Sanchez.
Vote no, Senator Woods.
Volks know Senator Paul, folks
know, Senator Thornton votes no,
Senator Tobiasson.
Volks, no.
Senator Scott.
I filled up 27 in the
affirmative, 14 in the negative.
President, Madam President, I,
there's a lot of good stuff in
this package, um.
But I do want to talk about
about one part.
That that I think is
with um with enhancements for
fentanyl trafficking. I think
the
The intent behind that?
Is, is to stop fentanyl deaths.
That said, the approach that is
being taken.
would create an enhancement, uh,
if someone was found with, with
100 pills.
For a heavy duty fentanyl user,
that might be 2 or 3 days.
Worth of their supply. It is not
necessarily trafficking, uh,
concerns that with the way that
that this currently is is
drafted that folks who
Who are users will be caught up
in
known for a long time now, just
does not work and Madam
President, in 2022, Colorado
passed a law that was, that was
way more stringent than what
to 16 years.
In prison from 4 to 16 years.
And so they, they were clearly
taking a really hardcore, even
more hardcore than we're doing
here approach.
Is to stop fentanyl deaths.
I don't know that these
approaches.
are necessarily going to.
intent at all. Um, I, I'm not
gonna offer any amendments, um,
but I just wanted to
To say that for the body. Thank
you, Madam President.
Senate floor Amendment number 4
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 as 3
times amended amendment
sponsored by Senator Brantley.
Yes, Madam President, I'm a
little confused. You referred
earlier to maybe a change in the
rules of procedure, and I caught
that quickly, but I didn't
understand it and I'm not aware
of that. My understanding here
in the past was always that we
to amendment numbers regardless
of whether the amendment passes
or fails and I see you're
nodding your head and the clerk
nodding your head and, and I
just wanna make sure that's,
that is something new.
the way that we're, we're moving
to. Thank you, Madam President.
that was a mistake I made
earlier. I tried to say it's not
3, it's number 2, but, uh, so
now we're, we're just numbering
them sequentially and.
whatever, so.
All right, Senator Brantley to
move the amendment first.
Thank you, Madam President.
Uh, Senator Brantley to explain
the amendment.
Madam President, and listening
to debate the um esteemed
chairman of Senate Judiciary
clarification of definitions,
that is what this does. This
makes some changes to the
delinquency Act. It is a very
it was not as wide reaching,
specifically this amendment and
it happens only on pages 4 and 5
are where the substance changes
definition of delinquent act to
include lowering the age
requirements for serious
youthful offender from 15 to 14
years of age.
It expands the definition of
Voluntary manslaughter.
Robbery while armed with a
deadly weapon.
And shooting from or at a motor
vehicle.
involuntary manslaughter and
failing to stop a vehicle when
involved in an accident that
results in death.
It also removes the age
requirement that classified 114
That is beyond just first-degree
murder, and I will yield to the
chairman.
And those who have further
clarifications.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Senator Cervantes.
is a partisan issue. I'm really
hoping that in the final vote of
this we're not gonna see
partisan votes, um, and, and
the, the notion that this
amendment would be rejected by
does deserve.
a judiciary Committee hearing,
and I'll give the sponsor a good
example where maybe she'll see
this if you look at the language
that the the amendment would
you'll see the definition of a
youthful offender would be
changed by this amendment.
And striking the language at the
time of the offense and so the,
that's, that's important
Describes how we determine the
age for purposes of enforcement
of these laws by the time of the
offense when the offense is
full committee hearing and a
full debate and discussion
because whether I agree or
disagree that we should be
lowering the age to 14 from 15,
and that may be something that
you could persuade me on,
the offense, you're proposing to
take that out, and that's gonna
lead to some ambiguities or some
uncertainties in the application
of the law by your amendment. I,
I don't think that's your
intention at all, but that's
presented with a.
amendments that really deserve
that time and attention. It's
not a matter of whether it's a
new bill, it's not a matter of
whether it's Republican or
Democrat. It really does the
Senator Townsend
Thank you.
Madam President,
With the sponsor of the
amendment yield.
Senator Brantly, the intent, I
believe, of your piece of
legislation is to protect the
public, is that correct?
Madam President, Senator, it is
the highest rates of juvenile
crime, um, and, and Senator, I,
I think you would agree, is our
concern is legislators, and I
know the concern of many New
Mexicans is that if we're
years because we'll be having,
we're up against a budget
session next if this is our last
opportunity to get some
meaningful changes in here that
will address specifically the
specifically gone into the, the
reforms that they'd like to see
addressing youthful offenders
that, that this is the time to
act.
For lands on the governor's
Senator, you and I both
represent.
Border areas who have
Be
devastated by fentanyl, is that
crisis, specifically, I have the
US-Mexico border, yes.
Go ahead, Senator Townsend.
have have lived in a time.
Um, where crime is just rampant,
but it's not only
The border areas.
Right here in Santa Fe.
It is common knowledge.
morning, and most of the police
officers.
That I have talked to personally
say.
Drugs and in particular.
Fentanyl is the issue.
This issue of crime.
And safety of our communities.
I think it's worth staying
And we missed that opportunity.
If we miss this opportunity,
Madam President, I think the
people of New Mexico.
That's not right, uh, Madam
President and Senator, that's
why I will stand and support
your bill because it protects
the Mexicans and that's why we
got sent up here to do.
Yeah, thank you, Madam
President.
Well, the, uh,
Senator yield for just a couple
of questions.
Madam President, I do. She
Is this adding some offenses
that would not be considered in
the original pieces of the
original piece of legislation.
And Madam President and Senator,
could you, uh,
Elaborate just a little bit on
what we're adding with this
amendment?
It expands the definition to
include 2nd degree murderers.
Voluntary manslaughters.
Robbery that happens with a
deadly weapon.
And Madam President and senator
on page 7, failing to stop a
vehicle when the vehicle is
involved in an accident that
results in injury or death.
Just to, just to closing
comment, these look like
Pretty serious infractions to
me.
answers.
Thank you, Senator. Other debate
on the amendment.
Senor Cervantes.
Madam President, with the
sponsor of the amendment Yale
a moment ago asking you and
talking about the scourge of
fentanyl.
In our state and the
implications of that drug and
what it does to us that was
saying, is your amendment in any
youthful offender and the
delinquent act, although
fentanyl is certainly addressed
within the greater package,
maybe not to the limit we like.
This specific amendment just
share with uh Senator Townsend,
uh, with regard to fentanyl, but
I'm on, on the amendment itself,
am I correct that the, the
amendment has really nothing to
the scope of of offenses and
lowering the age.
And Madam President, Senator,
also again a concern I share
with the good Senator Townsend
and break-ins and our vehicles
amendment would have nothing to
do with breaking and entering
of, uh, homes or apartments or
vehicles this amendment has
nothing to do with that.
Madam President, this amendment
address, uh, toughening some
fentanyl, uh, policies.
And thank you Madam President.
Senator, again, I appreciate the
answers again we're, we're the
matter before us is this
particular amendment and I'm
that defines the age when we're
looking at the age of the charge
of an individual based on the
time of the offense, and that's
the determinant factor in that
by your amendment, you would be
so if you remember was adopted,
we would be striking language in
our existing law that is clear
the age of the offender is
determined at the time of the
offense and, and you're not
replacing that language with
Madam President, that's, that's
correct, and we can pull this
amendment back if you'd like to
make an amendment that
specifically still expands the
definition of these juvenile
forward a crime package that
completely ignores that perhaps
the greatest, the number one
express priorities by our
district attorneys and by our
law.
child murderers accountable. Uh,
I will work with the chairman if
he'd like to correct the
amendment to include into the
original bill.
And I, uh, Madam President, I
appreciate that willingness and
committee process so should the
age be reduced from 15 to 14,
well, we should probably have a
hearing on that. We should
probably hear from some
authorities about the data that
shows what crimes are committed
amendment willingness to have us
try and fix the amendment now,
but the better way to do that is
in the judiciary committee
process and I'll just tell the
sponsor the amendment of this,
juvenile offenders, um, and I
believe this legislation or
something to this effect has
been introduced in the house.
Um, it is not yet passed.
the house and if it does, I have
confidence we'll see it in the
close on the amendment.
Thank you Madam President, I
appreciate the words of the
chairman, because that's why
we're here today, is in an
attempt to include
chairman to his, his offer to
hear this bell, because I agree
completely.
This bill needs to be heard
before the Senate Judiciary
Committee. We stand here with 30
I would move
That
Senate floor amendment number 4
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 as
affirmative, except for those
voting by the negative in a show
of hands.
Uh, senators, we are voting on
Senate floor Amendment number 4
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute to House Bill 8.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Senator Maestas voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Voting no, Senator Figueroa
voting no, Senator Nava voting
no, Senator Charlie.
voting no. Senator Doig voting
no, Senator Munoz voting no.
Senator Stephanics voting no,
Senator Souls voting no. Senator
Lopez voting no. Senator Shindo.
Voting no.
affirmative, 25 in the negative.
Senate floor amendment number 4
to House Bill committee sub
has failed to pass the Senate.
mark that this and other
important legislation will still
be considered for consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you. We're back on debate
of the bill.
I'll wait till it's passed out.
Looks like it's almost there.
The reader to read.
Tobiasson.
Senator Tobison to move the
floor amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I move
Senate floor amendment number 5
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This
floor amendment mirrors the
language in Senate Bill 32
introduced by Senator Antonio
Debate on the amendment, we will
first go to the sponsor, Senator
Cervantes, Madam President, I
urge members not to accept the
amendment and I'd like to
make a a crime of unlawful
possession of a stolen firearm,
but it would make each firearm
possessor transported in
violation a separate offense.
judiciary we've debated and
considered whether that is an
appropriate standard. Again, you
can understand that somebody's
got a a a a bag full of 456
With that issue still I think
before us in the judiciary
Committee again I appreciate the
sponsor of the amendment and
recognizing that it's an
initiative of uh Senator Maestas
um, and so certainly would
disabuse anybody that this is
somehow a partisan exercise when
it comes to addressing crime.
The debate on the amendment.
Madam President.
If someone stole 6 guns.
Would that not be 6 crimes?
subsection C of section 17 there
it reads each each firearm
possessed or transported in
violation shall constitute a
separate offense, so, uh, an
individual breaks into your
that's one crime, but the way
this is written, that's 3
crimes, and that's the reason of
this initiative and this bill is
written has not yet met approval
Because I don't leave him.
Laying around.
But
The whole point of this is to
strengthen the crime package.
To a point where they don't want
to do it anymore or they're next
one down the line doesn't want
to do it anymore and so I think
in this case, uh, if 3 guns were
stolen, potentially that's 3
guns that are then sold or given
to somebody that shouldn't have
a gun because they're probably
already a criminal.
sure.
That they
were punished for stealing 3
guns.
Madam President and Senator, uh.
which is you, you, it's a policy
decision. It's a, it's a matter
of judgment. If an individual
breaks into your car and you
tell me you don't have 3
weapons, but that wouldn't be, I
think unheard of, so somebody
breaks into a vehicle and and
stopped and arrested with those
3 firearms is that 3 crimes
they're charged with and your,
your question, I think related
to the sale of those firearms
many crimes uh the scenario I've
given you is and that that's why
this amendment has not been
favorably considered yet by the
judiciary Committee.
time in the press and in this
room.
I
Gun crime.
And how we have to take
Gun crime is separate than
stealing $3.
And that's why I think this this
particular amendment makes
sense.
Although I understand his
argument.
all of the push, all of the
Hyperbole about guns.
Why would we go soft on guns
right here?
Thank you, Madam President.
just wanted to point out for the
body in our criminal statutes
already NMSA 30-16-11 subsection
It is already a crime and a 4th
degree felony to, to have a
stolen gun.
Thank you. Further debate on the
amendment.
Senator Scott
Yes, Madam President,
Madam President and Senator.
If this person
One crime?
Two crimes or 3 crimes. Well,
So, Madam President and Senator,
Given that the possession of
those 3 firearms would
constitute 3 crimes.
Then the possession of one
firearm from one break-in.
Madam President, um, Senator
weren't expecting their firearms
to be stolen from them. Yes,
sir.
Madam President and Senator,
It does seem logical that the
the possession of one because at
that point, we don't know where
they came from.
Madam President, um, Senator
Scott, I absolutely agree with
Madam President, Senator, I
think we've made the point that
if we are truly
Wanting
Consequences to fit the
Madam President, and thank you,
Senator, for your answers.
Thank you. Further debate on the
amendment.
Senor Cervantes.
I thank you, Madam President,
Madam President, with the
A firearm that is possessed,
let's say it's a single firearm,
uh, the crime here being in
possessed or transporting a
for a 4th degree felony?
at least 18 months if unless one
of my colleagues on the floor
has
A really quick answer for that.
And Madam President, I know
for a 4-3 felony would be 18
months. So, so under our
existing law, if this amendment
was not adopted.
If I possess a stolen firearm
Senator Tobiasson.
And thank you, Madam President.
I don't need Senator Ma to heal.
I'll give you the answer. I'll
help you. I don't mean to quiz
you too much. The, if you're, if
under our existing law, the
$2500. I, I would be possessing
a firearm and subject to a 3rd
degree felony, but under your
amendment, um, I would be
result in a lesser penalty for
receiving a stolen firearm if
it's worth more than $2500. So
you're actually you're
Amendment is actually reducing
the potential penalties for
inaccurate because my
understanding of the legal
process is that the um attorney
bringing forward the charges has
a choice of how to bring forward
those charges and what they are.
felony for that, let me just use
that scenario again. You've got
a single firearm worth more than
$2500 right now, that crime
would be a 3rd degree felony if
reads that that would be a
4th-degree felony. So under the
scenario I've given you, uh,
your bill would create a
conflict in the laws that would
3rd degree felony, so I know
again that's not your intention,
but the practical effect of your
amendment, if it was adopted
would be the lessen the penalty
for possession of a stolen
firearm potentially in some, in
some instances.
believe that this gives the
prosecutor more choices and in
the case of a potential 4th
degree, he could char, he or she
could charge in a potential 3rd
if there is a specific statute
on a firearms receiving a stolen
possession of a stolen firearm.
Your bill would be the more
specific statute than the more
general statute for receiving
penalty, a 4th degree felony,
then existing law, which would
be a 3rd degree felony.
And a more harsh sentence and
penalty. So the end result of
your amendment would be on, on
an individual who steals a
Is there other debate on the
amendment?
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam President, with
Page 32, uh, line.
11 through.
12, I guess it is.
Um, there's language in your
Constitutes a separate offense.
And I understand it's a 3rd
degree felony.
Senator Tobiasson's amendment
has a 4th degree felony.
offenses.
Was, um, you could not support,
but your own bill does that. So
I'm trying to understand what
the difference is.
And Madam President, Senator,
exactly your concern, and we
struck that language, so you're,
you're right to hold me
consistent, but we're being
consistent and we took care of
How you just
house judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 as 3
And now be adopted and I asked
for.
Oh, in all those present voted
in the affirmative except those
for hospital aid is cemented.
If you want to vote no, please
raise your hand and let me tell
you the reason I say this so
no. Senator Pope votes no.
Senator Campos votes no, Senator
Figueroa.
Senator Charlie folks know
Senator Pinto votes no, Senator
Gonzalez votes no.
Shindo.
folks know, Senator Lopez votes
no.
And souls, folks know, Senator
votes no senator Stephanics
folks know.
Sir Padilla folks no
sinnersteinborn votes no.
failed to pass the Senate.
Senator Tobias, and you still
have the floor.
Why thank you Madam President,
and um thank you for the
that excites me anyway, whatever
the record was, I thank you all
for your support.
Good job.
Further debate on the bill.
Senate floor Amendment number 6
to House Judiciary Committee
Senator Paul to move the
amendment?
Thank you, Madam President. I
move the Senate floor amendment
Madam President, this amendment,
uh.
succinctly stated is, uh, adding
in a new section on page 40
this bill, and those are the
factors to be considered when
determining pretrial release and
for the sake of the the body
you'll keep it brief, but those
factors are the nature and
nature or seriousness of the
danger to any person or the
community that would be posed,
um, uh, by the defendant's
release.
Any facts tending to indicate
the defendant.
All right, debate on the
amendment. First we'll go to the
sponsor Senator Cervantes, Madam
welcome to the Judiciary
Committee. We've enjoyed having
you and, uh, it's a good
opportunity for you to do a
little bit more of the same work
here on the floor. Your
amendment, um, has some new
Madam President, uh, Mr. Chair,
that is correct.
And Senator, uh, your proposed
amendment, Section 18B would be
right?
Madam President, Mr. Chair, that
is correct as well.
And sir, wouldn't you agree that
we don't really need to pass a
law to tell a court to consider
statute to tell the court to
consider the evidence.
Madam President, Mr. Chair.
My understanding is that
currently the courts are not
in as an amendment.
Well, and, and Madam President,
Senator, I, I would disabuse you
of that notion that the courts.
insulting to the courts to
consider they wouldn't consider
the evidence, but let me, let me
stay on with your amendment.
You're, your amendment.
a good senator is that the court
expect a court when deciding
whether to release somebody to
consider the nature and the
circumstance of the offense and
deciding whether to release or
not release somebody and do we
to anyone of marginal
intelligence.
Madam President, Mr. Chair, um,
I think the intent here is just
to make it a requirement rather
a requirement. And um, Madam
President and Senator, I, I
appreciate that and at the same
time I also urge us to sometimes
apply some common sense up here
