confirmations, uh, and then the
go to that our business
committee reports no objection.
We are in that order of business
committee reports.
The reader to read.
Sorry
2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Cali Danielle Keel, as a member
of the Mexico Military Institute
Board of Regents for a term
Senator had a meal, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
letter number 55 dated January
16, 2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Thomas Emmett Jennings as a
member of the Mexico Military
Institute Board of Regents for a
Katie Doig chair. Senator, Mr.
President, I move the adoption
of the committee reports there's
a motion.
that the committee reports, all
those in favor signify by saying
I.
See no further committee reports
I yield to Senate Majority of
law leader Peter Worz to take us
to that next order business.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go to our
business confirmations and I
yield to Senator Jaramillo. He
full Senate for consideration as
New Mexico military institute
Board of Regents. I now yield to
Senator Eel.
Senator.
January 16th, 20025. I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Thomas and Emmett
Mr. President and members of the
body.
Tom Jennings.
Roswell his entire life. He is
the father of 3 children. He's a
very lucky man.
He, uh, held on, I've got to
turn over here just one second.
I got my papers messed up.
He is here today with his
beautiful wife Lorena Segovia.
He attended school at the
University of Texas.
He also attended Creighton
Roswell, 1968.
Tom Jennings has been the mayor
of Rosville. He is mayor of, uh,
president of the council there,
also a member of the New Mexico
Landmen's Association, but do
keep in mind that the television
show is not necessarily based on
his actions, OK?
community of Roswell. He has
been on the chair of the board
of the Sertoma Club. He's been
first vice president, 2nd vice
Roswell JCs and he has been
chair of the Eastern New Mexico
State Fair parade, which is the
oldest state fair in the state
of New Mexico.
Mr. President and members.
Tom Jennings was also
instrumental in getting Ros will
recognize as the UFO capital of
Has more people in it per day
than any other museum in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you for that.
So everybody does have to visit
in July. He is also working.
They have moved from Reno to
Roswell in their first event is
going to be this September.
Other organizations that he's a
member of is the archdiocese of
Southeastern New Mexico. He was
a founding member in 1998 and he
was chairman and board on the
board of directors from 98 to
2015.
a founding member in 1994. He is
a member of the board of
directors from 94 to 98. He also
has been a member of the Roswell
Community Improvement
association.
He has received numerous awards
for the Roswell Convention of
Visitors Bureau, the tourism
leadership award.
from the Toposa Developmental
Services.
Mr. President, and I could go on
about all he's accomplished here
in Rossville and Mr. President,
I am asking for the approval for
the uh nomination of Mr.
Jennings to be on the board of
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
it is my honor to stand here in
support of, uh, of Tom Jennings.
Tom, you could not have a person
who is more about their
To everything connected to his
community, you couldn't have
done more jobs in this community
serving his community than Tom
Jennings has done, but he and I
have so much in common. He is an
NMMI grad.
Which we also share in common.
He is a big brother in Big
Brother's Big Sisters, so I
just.
I was just like a day deal and I
left my wallet at home and I
looked down and I'm almost out
of gas. I'm like, oh man, what
do I do? And I was like, I'm
gonna call Tom because he was
the only one I knew and I was
very compelling reason. But
anyway, Tom, congratulations on
the appointment and I'm really
proud to support you and thanks
for all you do for your stay, uh
actually have serious concerns
about Tom Jennings. Uh, I have
it from a very reliable source
that while at New Mexico
Military Institute, he allowed
another cadet.
To take his punishment.
and forth at the time with the
rifle. I don't think they do
that anymore.
And he allowed another cadet to
take his punishment and that
just, you know, in a school
where you're not allowed to lie.
Tim certainly needs to be
punished. So fine.
Thank you, thank you, Senator
Cher.
Any further debate? See no
role has been called and that
all those president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Thank you, senators we are
voting all senators to your
seats.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
The appointment of Thomas Emmett
Jennings as a member of the New
Mexican Military Institute
Border Regs for a term
commencing upon confirmation
expiring December 31st.
body, let's congratulate new
regent Tom Jennings to the board
of the New Mexico Military
Institute.
credentials of Callie Kill be
presented to the full Senate for
consideration as New Mexico
military institute Board of
Regents. I now yield to Senator
Tobiasson. Senator Tobiasin.
January 16, 2025, I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Kaylee Keel to
the New Mexico Military
Institute Board of Regents.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. President.
The New Mexico Military
Institute has been a cornerstone
of leadership, education, and
service in New Mexico for over
excelled in military business
and public service. It's
rigorous academic and leadership
programs instill discipline,
integrity, and a strong work
students from across the nation
and fostering a legacy of
excellence and benefits in New
Mexico and beyond.
with a distinguished career as a
senior military officer and
legal expert. She has expertise
in government acquisition
contract, fiscal law and served
Nuclear Weapons Center
headquartered in Kirkland Air
Force Base where she manages a
team of acquisition attorneys
and legal professionals. She's
also a brigadier general in the
Mr. President, I'm ready to
yield to anyone who has come.
Thank you, Senator Tobias, and
we do have debate on the
appointments.
Center Block.
type of great American.
That we have
And I'd like to say, Mr.
President, it's nice as a
retired Lieutenant colonel being
able to speak to a general
about the general.
Is she started as an E1
airman basic and was an honor
graduate, which is number one of
her commission all the way up to
a one star brigadier general
serving this great state of the
New Mexico Air National Guard.
nuclear deterrence mission,
which I am very familiar with as
a retired nuclear officer for
over 20 years in the Air Force
as a missileer and working with
better than this general. Thank
you, Mr. President, and I salute
you.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
I vote of 39th affirmative 0 in
the negative, the appointment of
Kelly Danielle Hill as a member
of the New Mexico Military
Institute Border regions for a
term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
me with a warm welcome to
Brigadier General Kelly Keel to
the Board of Regents for an
Emmy.
Be awards to take us to that
next order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, so that's it for
confirmations. Uh, unanimously
legislation. Again, we'll do
items 1 through 3 in that order.
Uh, item one will be myself,
Senator Scherer, and Senator
Stewart. Item 2, Senate Bill 1
Third reading of legislation.
Senators we are on that order
business start reading the
legislation.
And I yield to Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
it's now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution.
Hearing no objection,
Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to have some
expert witnesses on the floor.
technical expertise, but yes,
I'm happy, uh, Adrian Avila from
the Senate Finance Committee
will be on my side, and Senator
Sherry, you want to make a
unanimous consent on your side?
unanimous consent to allow Eric
Senator to explain Senate Bill
3. thank you, Mr. President. So
Senate Bill 3 is the first bill
that's part of a package of
we've called this the guardrails
and accountability bill. The
reason it's being heard first is
because we realized in the
journey of this bill, that it's
critical to the whole package
comments in Senate Finance on
the substitute from NAMI, New
Mexico that I think really hit
home for me. Basically, they
said this bill will provide
changing. So this is the guard
rails and
Accountability bill and then
you're gonna hear a bill that
creates a trust fund and a bill
that has an appropriation, uh,
behavioral health system,
basically being dismantled.
Uh, these are the incredibly
important services, uh, that
need to get their life back on
track and we've had a lot of
discussion about issues in New
Mexico, uh, certainly focused on
public safety, and I think
health. We need to have places
for folks to get treatment. So
Senate bill 3 provides the
seen very often, which is a
unique collaboration by the
three branches of government.
Uh, the Senate Judiciary who
deals with these issues on a day
state. Uh, it's a logical
extension of the work they are
doing to set up assisted
outpatient treatment courts and
behavioral health, uh, and, and
something did pass that is
absolutely critical and has laid
the, the road map for this bill
you're hearing today, and that
was the $3 million appropriation
to the judiciary.
new assisted outpatient
treatment court. It's a process
that has the court working with
local government and working
with providers, uh, and they
going through that process that
really showed me, and I think
showed many of us that this,
that this unique role with the
court playing a role in setting
Department of Health, uh, and,
and the, the state for kind of
working to pull this all
together. So, Mr. President, I
think, you know, we don't get
many bills down here that have
the potential to make
share, uh, one of the
co-sponsors and then to Senator
Stewart. Thank you, Senators.
We're debating Senate floor
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 3 with the emergency clause
in a UL to center share.
By establishing some regional
planning.
The regional planning is
important and I'm gonna go back
to that in a minute.
while we don't yet have a goal
that says we're going to reduce
it by X because that'll happen
in each.
Each region, I do want to give
you an overview of how this
thing uh is gonna work.
Right now, most of, uh, not
most, a lot of what we uh run
into is people show up in the
court system.
And the court system's not
to that. And so as we build all
of this together.
The regional
Uh, uh, the regions.
in Union County and so forth.
And so what this allows each
region to do is say this is what
our issues are.
Uh, the regional plans will be
reviewed and approved by a
behavioral health executive
committee of 7.
real decisions can be made on in
real time. Secretary of uh of
the health care authority, the
director of the behavioral
health Services Division.
The medical assistant director,
administrative officer of the
courts, and so somebody's gonna
say why? why AOC in here and
what we've done here with.
Collaboration with the courts
We are going to have a review
process as the, uh,
Is the body that the the
appropriations body.
Every region
So we get a chance to look at
it, question it.
And decide if there's something
else that needs to happen.
But the AOC is really the chair
says, de silo.
Because what we've had for about
a decade now.
Yeah.
If you look at our numbers,
things are getting worse and so
what this does is it builds this
framework.
Framework that that has lots of
This framework to define what
needs to be done.
And keep us on track so that
unlike what we're doing now,
As a rudderless ship.
ship. It doesn't yet fix all of
the problems. It gives us the
framework to fix the problems,
which we have never had before.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
I'm so proud of what we've
worked on over the last few
suffering and economic costs
resulting from an inadequate
level of effective diagnosis and
treatment of mental illness in
our state. Uh, we've known as
this.
By June 1 of 2025, the
Healthcare Authority in
consultation with these other
healthcare authority will
confirm that regional plans meet
that behavioral health
standards.
Each year, starting on June 30th
A government entity from each
region designated by the
committee that senator sharer
talked about the behavioral
health executive Committee with
give public feedback. So we're
going to have an evaluation as
we go that comes back to us, the
health care authority is charged
So our, our LFC last year, uh,
did a report on our state's
behavioral health needs.
overarcher overarching
difference than we've done ever.
Um
The, uh, the interagency effort
will include a standardized
enabling state and local
entities to provide adequate uh
care. So this is a huge change
for the way we've done things in
saw such positive uh success out
of what we passed in the special
session with the pilot in the
north. Um, everyone worked
I think we all stand for
questions.
Thank you. We are debating
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3.
With the emergency clause and we
have Senator Block followed by
Senator Munoz Center Block.
I'm hoping Senator Wirth, uh,
will yield to a couple of
questions on the bill.
You know, Mr. President, one of
the main reasons that we're here
today is to fix a problem.
I'm a proud Republican and
conservative, Mr. President, but
I'm a New Mexican first.
And we should all call out bad
policy.
No matter if it's our own party
In 2013.
The previous administration
decimated.
Dismantled our state's
behavioral health.
System.
we are facing here in New Mexico
to 2013.
We must make a huge investment
and provide the people who are
As a person who has grown up in
a drug infested house.
As a person who, like many of us
have seen people need treatment.
These people on the street,
we'll help get their lives back
on track.
So today we're here to do what's
right.
And to fix a problem.
And then here in the Senate
between Republicans and
Democrats.
You know, there was a famous
coach in 1980 in the US Olympic
hockey team.
As a saved Christian that God
put us here to fix this issue
for New Mexico.
Let us do our duty.
A conservative like Jay Block in
a left, left winger like Senator
Antoinette Sadil Lopez, working
And Senator Scher and Senator
Wirth got tired of us.
And said, you two go fix it.
We've never worked together
before, but it was enjoyable,
Mr. President and fellow
We're not working together.
And talking to my fellow senator
with a beautiful heart, Senator
Antoinettesvilla Lopez. We made
most certainly.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Wirth, Senator Stewart
was talking about this pilot
program that we have with this,
and I believe it is.
We want to make sure we're not
just throwing money at this. We
want to make sure we're making
an impact and getting in the
taxpayers are getting their
dollars worth so we know that
this new program as Senator
Stewart mentioned, just kicked
off the first week of the
session, so it literally is
brand new. The 6 months were
question that the metrics piece
of this legislation we're
looking at is critical, and so
that's there. I do think it's
important, Mr. President.
center block to also say and
for the assisted outpatient
treatment program. And so the
pilot here in the first is not
the first program. There's
actually thanks to her
leadership down in Donana
you the specific within the
courts what those specific
metrics are of those of those
programs.
Senator Block, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, thank you,
And I would also ask you um,
Senator, if you look at Section
C, I want to make sure I
understand this correctly, uh,
Section 2, letter C.
the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center.
Do you read that as a learning
opportunity for students at UNM
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
Senator Wirth on a few pages or
a few lines down in Section E.
are, please.
Senator Worth, so Mr. President,
Senator Block, can you just
direct us to the right page.
We're not seeing that in the
Generally recognized standards
for behavioral health means
standards of care and clinical
practice established by
evidence-based sources. Mr.
President, this is the
Expert assistant here is telling
me it's now section F. Oh, I'm
sorry. Yes, Section F. Thank
you, uh, senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator Wirth, uh, these
regional reports.
are not going to be standardized
bill. Each district has unique
issues, they've got unique
stakeholders and their reports
are going to be different for
sure, and their needs are going
to be different.
Center block.
A lot of discussion was talked
about in the committee regarding
putting this additional burden
on the administrative of the uh
administrative office of the
courts.
Do we have an idea of what type
of uh additional, um,
Billets or manpower might be
needed.
And Mr. President, that those
res are in Senate Bill 2 that
we're going to hear in just a
bit, and there's also some
contract money to do that. I, I
might just say this is a good
to have the AOC do all of the
initial upfront work, but there
was an amendment done to add a
behavioral health executive
committee that Senator Scherer
mentioned, and I think there was
appreci
Health, uh, the director of, of
the medical assistance division
of the Healthcare Authority and
other experts that are involved
in that. And so I think that was
something that
up and those and those they're
up and running. I think their
role is gonna really amp back.
Thank you. Thank you Mr.
President. And lastly, if we
Mr. President, it's on page 8,
section G, line 9.
Um
Thank you Mr. President.
and Senator, these reports talk
about the status of
implementation of each regional
plan and sequential intercept
mapping, which is very
important.
Available data on performance
requests made by a legislative
committee, the administrative
Office of the courts, or an
executive agency.
And a list of qualified and
certified behavioral health
providers in each region that
Lastly, uh, uh, Senator Wirth, I
think that these regions should
be adding.
A recommendation for each region
they're all different. Would
you, would you agree, uh, with
that, and would that be if I,
uh, propose an amendment, would
that be agreeable to you to have
And our branch to be able to
really follow and track what's
happening. And so I think having
recommendations from the
regions, things that issues
they're dealing with things
Center Block thank you Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator. I
think we can work that language
here uh during the debate, uh,
quickly to, to get that, uh, in
worded in the bill.
And I wanna just get your, um,
interpretation, uh, Senator
Wirth.
let me just quote you this.
Because this is important.
Uh, under the sequential
intercept resource mapping.
There's a
treatment.
I read that line to say, this is
not about somebody who has been
arrested, but this is a way to
that how you read that, sir?
So, Mr. President, center block,
I actually think it's both.
I think we certainly want to
keep folks out of the criminal
justice system, but I think
system instead of just
dismissals and one of the real
drivers to that criminal
competency discussion is Justice
Brianna Zamora, who testified
Supreme Court, just seeing the
same people over and over being
coming in and being dismissed,
not getting into the treatment
that they need. So I would just
say absolutely, we want to keep
If they're not dangerous, rather
than dismissal, get them into
some treatment so that they can
begin to get out of the cycle of
addiction and whatever brought
them there.
together and bringing both sides
across the aisle together, uh,
for this bill, but I especially
want to thank, uh, Senator
Antoinette Cedilla Lopez, who,
um, put a lot of work into this
So, uh, with that, Mr.
President, I yield.
Thank you Center Block. We have
Senator Munoz followed by
Senator Padilla, then Senator
Hickey.
Anyone else?
behavioral health, but today I
heard from someone from the
health Sciences Center at UNM.
And it really brought it home.
He said, you're doing everything
Increase efficiency and
sustainability and to reduce
disparities are the four key
things that this bill does that
Using models such as the call
them the Sims, but the
sequential intercept model is to
reduce the justice system
on mental health.
But in the last 4 months, I've
learned quite a bit.
But when you have someone in
that position.
Who tells you
He wasn't in his position
before.
Uh, and he wasn't consulted. And
so when we developed this in the
where we're headed.
But at the end of the day today.
When you have someone that
The way you have the agencies,
the way you have the commission
set up, the way you have
everything set up in this bill
is done right.
$2.4 billion on behavioral
health in the last 3 years.
We're on target to spend 3.4
billion.
our districts, in our areas,
walking down the street, driving
down the road. We haven't seen
that change in New Mexico.
But this will change.
this is because like Senator
Sheer mentioned a little while
ago, the good senator from.
Aztec and Farmington.
That it's different in every
way it's modeled for one broad
spectrum across the state and
you take this modeling or you
leave it.
It doesn't work that way.
phone or their phone was busy,
there was no mental health for
the rest of the week. It doesn't
work that way.
It has to function, it has to
function correctly.
I think
provider networks that serve the
entire community, the behavioral
health framework, Sims model
will improve the overall system
of care.
Uh yes, Mr. President Mr.
President, can you ask your
expert witness. How much state
money we put in to behavioral
of of our own budget about $250
million that is then matched by
the feds which gets us to that
$1.1 billion that you talked
about.
So a 3 to 1 match roughly, is
People are gonna be critical of
us and say, oh, you're just
gonna spend this money and it's
never gonna work, but my
conversation this morning proved
Mr. President, it's been a long
time since we've changed
behavioral health. I agree with
the good senator from Rio Rancho
or Albuquerque and it was
destroyed.
With us sending our staff to, to
the Miami model to the Houston
blend model to, to educating
ourselves.
On long days and, and lots of
have Senator Padilla followed by
Senator Hickey, then Senator
Scott.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, uh, Mr. President. um, I
do rise in support of the
legislation and I do want to
as you know, uh, have a focus of
some kind, and I think that
you're seeing the work that
happened to this legislation
along the way, which is a
terrific thing. um, we heard
bipartisan, we heard this, you
was a glaring.
sort of hole in the legislation
that we were very concerned
about and I want to thank the
sponsors for being open to what
we were suggesting, which was a
gonna make sure the trains are
running on time and the projects
are getting done and that action
items are being listed in a
centralized location and if
there's slippage on the project,
who's gonna be responsible for
that and so, uh, this executive.
Scherer, uh, Mr. President, was,
uh, there's not gonna be any of
this horsing around in the back
of the airplane where we send
designees and this and that
cabinet secretaries, directors
of this and that, that are
meetings and this and that.
are in the room helping craft
and design and make the
decisions so that that was one
of the big things that that we
asked for and that was was put,
so we want to thank him for
while ago and some of the, the
testimony and some of the, the
stuff we heard, well, you need
somebody that's keeping
everybody together and and uh
documenting an action plan with
standard management, um, project
very slowly a piece of
legislation that's going to come
together to meet those metrics
that we heard from Senator Block
and others because we also
brought those up too in in the
uh in the finance committee.
again and so I think that you.
We're seeing a very thoughtful
bipartisan piece of legislation
here that ties all of these very
the executive committee and I
hope it makes the body feel more
comfortable that this large
dollar figure and this large
undertaking that we're doing
here is actually gonna be um
achieved that by putting this
executive uh committee together,
and I want to thank the sponsors
for being open to it and
allowing it in the legislation.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Padilla. We have Senator
One of the main reasons that I
left medicine and the
administration of it was to do
something about mental health
and behavioral health and as you
almost everyone in here is not
immune from having an addicted
individual in their nuclear
family. Rare is the family that
doesn't have this and it cuts
across all spectrums.
Experienced 4 years of just
looking at behavioral health and
watching the circles and the
money spent out and nothing
happening.
And um
governor we spoke about
administration that didn't do
any good to behavioral health,
but it really hasn't done
anything. We were stuck.
Just plain stuck.
credit to Adrian, who I think
has a, a good business mind and
we just talked about project
management and so forth and
being able to put the pieces
together.
um, there are states who have
actually pulled this together
and done a good job. And the key
to their success.
Is the regional approach.
isn't quite a two gray Hills
rug, but the weaving that comes
together in this between the
departments, the, uh, the AOC,
project management, which is, I
mean,
Basically, there's no successful
business today who does anything
without project management and
watching all this come together.
sobriety, doing well, but they
were in programs, sober housing
and so forth, and they were kind
of regionally based. They built
connection.
together and the what other
states who are successful are,
are essentially do, we're doing
what they're doing. They are
project management and
accountability is built into
this, and as we get a little
more sophisticated, the numbers
we'll be able to see the
bill will be able to work with
the comorbidities of mental
health and addiction health,
which in addiction, there's a
70% correlation with the metal.
Situation
experience, um, both as a
business person and as a family
member. This is amazing, and I
am so pleased for New Mexico,
and I think this is one of the
Thank you. We have, uh, Senator
Scott, followed by Senator Ceil
Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
would, uh, Senator Wirth yield
for a question,
Uh, several representations that
our behavioral health system
sort of went downhill in 2013.
Uh,
this spiral.
And Sinner Scott Cinworth. Uh,
thank you, Mister President, so
I was here and the mantra of the
recollection.
Uh, who came in and we're here
for a period of time and
basically when they came in, the
whole infrastructure that was in
contracts that were then sent
out of state, uh, to this
Arizona group. Eventually, the
Arizona group.
Kind of fell apart.
And all that infrastructure that
So, Mr. President and Senator,
would it be safe to say,
That there was no responsibility
A shouldering responsibility for
successful outcomes.
So Mr. President, I do think
that's a fair thing to state and
working and the system wasn't
kind of a regional focus like
we're proposing here. So again,
the overlay just did not have
that type of.
that didn't have those things in
place, got shifted around. I
think that's what really created
the crisis that was referenced.
Yeah, Mr. President and Senator,
I remain concerned.
Ultimate responsibility for
outcomes. Uh, if I may, could I
start at the regional level and
at the top of that chart that's
responsible for the successful
outcome of everything that's
going on in that region.
page 8, I think Senator Block
went through this. The key thing
is the written reports, uh, that
are made back by each regional
entity to us, and we've got a
Senator Scott.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
This behavioral health executive
committee that's envisioned.
representatives from HCA has
representatives from the
legislature has representatives
from the executive branch.
And
I see the possibility.
of government for the failure of
this program.
If in fact it is not achieving
my mind should have some place
where the buck stops. Can you
describe if that is in place in
this legislation.
Senator Wirth.
agencies.
That are where the buck stops.
We're creating a situation with
this bill where there's
basically one. So again, that's
here and say that even with all
the good words that we've heard
about it, that we've heard
today, but I think we've come up
with something that's a very
good bill, and there's gonna be
Make sure that this is working.
And that there is cause we
control the purse strings,
which, and again, the reporting
comes back to us and we need to
stay on top of that. I
completely agree with you on
Does this program envision it's,
it has not been the public
policy.
Of this state.
To hold people with behavioral
consequence of the efforts in
this legislation.
So, Mr. President, I don't think
that is in this legislation.
What we're gonna see in a
parallel.
That will, in fact, go through
those situations where someone
can be held.
The Constitution.
criminals got a similar type
threshold, but you're going to
see some new avenues to get
folks where they need to go and
in some cases where they need to
go is either a civil commitment
needs to be held. Uh, so I think
we'll see this kind of in
parallel but in this specific
bill, I think Senator Block kind
of touched on this. I mean, it's
not just to get those who are in
you are in the system though.
Let's create a diversion that
gets that person to the help
versus
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
OK, I guarantee this is the last
one.
There would be
I think core functions.
system.
Either to the point of
rehabilitation or
In extreme cases, incarceration.
Uh, individual circumstances in
each region, but the cores
should be in common is that in
the vision.
So Mr. President, on page 10,
section 5, these are the
behavioral health uh service
that roadmap, we can't figure
out if that train is still on
the tracks and when it's off the
tracks, we got to figure out,
OK, how do we get it back on?
And so I think your point is, is
so they're, they're doing what
they need to do, they're
following their flow chart, kind
of where are they going? We want
to just see what direction
they're going to make sure
they're not gonna head in a
direction, you know,
your answers. Thank you,
President. With that, I yield.
Thank you, Senator Scott. We do
have further debate. We have
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't know. I guess he's not
him very much that we may, we
had a very similar concern, and
that was.
At least for me, I won't speak
for him, but we both raised the
concern about AOC in the first
for the courts, but my worry was
that they would focus on only
justice involved individuals and
this money this and and I also
want to commend the brilliance
that the program has to cover
beyond justice involved
individuals we talked about
perhaps veterans who we didn't
want to ever get justice
involved with the justice system
and um and there was a line
that's no longer there anymore.
That they would focus on keeping
people out of jail and as one of
I do believe that the amendment
that was proposed by, by, uh, I
guess you could say jointly, but
Senator Block led in proposing
one of the amendments and then I
mean, I led the amendment on on
have our political differences,
but at the core we care about
the best interests of all New
Mexicans and so we came together
with that. I also want to
individual we have it with the
committee and I'd like that the
committee is now
Um, includes the secretary of,
of health, the healthcare
designated by the director of
the administrative
administrative office of the
courts, but also we have a
provision on page 5 that if
of the plan and that is really
important to ensure that nobody
is left out.
And I, I am very proud of this
bill. I think it is just an
ranging from severe mental
health issues to really severe,
um, alcohol misuse we have drug
uh, the development of the plan
and especially the funding of
the plan that will provide for
secure funding in the years to
come is going to move the needle
and take us into an era where,
um, we will have the needs of
our citizens met and fewer
people.
will be in the prisons uh with
behavioral health issues. One of
shouldn't be that way. So with
that, uh, I stand in strong
support of the bill. I don't ask
the sponsors to yield because
I'm very grateful that at every
issues and um care very much
about it and it's, it's very
clear that the Senate stands as
one in support of increasing the
baby.
services for the benefit of all
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
Watching my feed coming in, we
must have a million people
watching us today. There's a lot
I do yield and I also I'm happy
to share Senator Sheer if he
needs to yield as well, but
happy to.
Maki center wherein Townsend.
Is it
Would it be uh correct for
people.
To understand that these.
Those regions is I think what
you're asking, uh, and I'll just
take you through.
Through the bill because the,
it's true, the AOC, uh, and this
are presented, and that's gonna
be the formative stage, and I
think the courts will play
probably their biggest role in
this whole thing, just getting
judicial district, but there's
some flexibility.
as well. And again, we have
tribal communities and different
things and I think getting those
regional groups right is gonna
have heard from, uh, people
across New Mexico is.
Trying to make it, I mean, we
happened and I would tell you
that Senator Munoz's comments
were very compelling, at least
from my perspective because it
seemed to come with a third
I, I wanna make sure that
Senator Sheer's district is much
different in stresses then.
Um
Different and when those
processes are bid to provide.
That it will be a unique and
different.
Uh
Do, do, or should we just
Do we leave it alone and let
them bring it back. I'm just, I
mean, there's been a lot of
concern that district, that each
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So I think that
is the beauty of this approach.
It's what we have not done up
until this point. You are
districts will come in and then
basically, it'll be up.
You know, to them to come
forward with an outline of a
The problem we have now is that
we've got 7 different entities
and no regions. The region is
the boundary of the state and
your district is very different
than my district, and I just
say that we're not potentially
going to have to shape a few
things as it goes and as we
learn to live with this because
it's a new approach.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
questions.
Mr. President, certainly, but
the pilot program happened here
in Santa Fe.
Yes, so, so, Mr. President, I
think the, the questions are
probably more directed, uh, to,
to Senator Wirth because the,
the actual pilot program that I
believe he's mentioning.
district uh involves 3 different
counties, uh, that certainly
are very different.
Santa Fe, Los Alamos, and Rio
Riva.
Judges here in the first
judicial district worked with
our local governments and each
of these three counties and with
the providers to come up with an
and providers that are specific
to these three regions, and I do
think it's interesting that, you
know, there's different needs in
Santa Fe and Rio Reba and Los
Alamo.
correct that what we're going to
do is then replicate a process
that we have successfully, uh,
debuted in Santa Fe and, and
are some pilot criminal
competency programs. There's the
AOT that's down in Las Cruces
that Senator Pain was
instrumental in putting in place
Being willing to step up, and we
asked them to step up in the, in
the AOT law.
But that, I think, kind of gave.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
that is exactly what I had been.
Hoping that we were doing, uh,
Mr. President, is that
Process that we have proven
that, uh.
Mental health
Uh, experts could look at and
say this track record is good
to
Um, Senator Munnos was, um,
Involved in completely aware of
that program.
Munoz.
If you would please, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Mr. President. I was
listening, but repeat that
question for you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend, if
you can repeat the question,
please.
the processes outlined in the,
in the proposal. My question to
you is, was he equally informed
of what had occurred in Santa Fe
didn't, we didn't consult him on
that modeling, but he had
testified in committee, not
testified, but stood up and
supported the bill, and that's
the, the UNM health sciences
That he thought this was the
best model with the 4 points in
place that were to improve
access to health care.
And I said, well then, we think
we have it right, he says, if I
were going to design one today,
you, this is what I would have
designed.
Senator Townsend.
Lanaire followed by Senator
Charlie, then Senator Thornton,
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Um, if you look behind me, you
I have spent the last 5 years in
San Juan County, really working
hard on, um, mental health, the
behavior, all of these things
and it's um
Mental health.
was injected into my life.
And
I want to make sure that we get
wanna uh thank you personally
for all of the work that you
did.
Uh
Whip, uh, Senator Padilla, uh,
thank you for listening to me
and and putting up with me. I
really do.
classroom that said, if you
always do what you've always
done, you will always get what
you've always got.
And I'd kind of forgot about
that, and this week I was
And so it, it made me reflect.
And so I do stand in support of
this bill today.
Because we are.
coach to go in without the
perfect game plan.
And
I, I do think this is going to
be a solid plan. Do I think we
are going to have to make
changes to it. I, I'm sure we
We can work together and we can
debate and we can come out of
there as home.
And so
That's, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
stand in strong support of this
legislation. What is most
powerful about this legislation
is that it underscores a
community organizing tenant that
To our behavioral health crisis
exists throughout our New Mexico
communities themselves. This
The best legislation this body
can pass on behalf of New
Mexicans has to center people
most impacted by the decisions
and with particular attention to
place regions. I am hopeful that
we are doing something deeply
right by the people we serve.
rates, post traumatic stress
disorder and addiction are
everyday issues that native
people face.
legislation, I can go home and
look my people in the eyes and
tell them that resources are
coming.
And Mr. President, not just
Thank you Mr. President.
Um, I really applaud the
The work of the sponsors uh with
the the level that the bill has
received at this point.
accountability, and also local
resources available to support
the people who need it.
Um
If the sponsor will yield for a
question.
Senator Thorn.
The question I have, Mr.
President, is, is can this
framework that we've developed
and I again applaud the
framework and I support the
Centworth. So Mr. President, um,
all three bills really tie
And then Senate Bill 1 is a
continuation of what we've been
doing in this body since Senator
Smith really created the early
childhood education Trust Fund.
behavioral health, and I think
it's those two streams working
together that provide the
resources that are needed to
make this work, and there's
going to be additional resources
in an amazing place in.
New Mexico and that we do get $3
for every $1 we put in. So to
the extent we can leverage these
in recurring money. And so I do
think they all work uh together
and that those res resources are
needed for this bill.
Senator Thorton, thank you, Mr.
behavioral health regions are we
gonna have? I, I think, I think,
uh, Senator Townsend and you
mentioned there that there would
be one for every judicial
is to be determined by the
behavioral health executive
committee.
But
I think the starting point is
the judicial districts and
districts aren't working really
well. There's very low
population in some of the
counties. And so I think there's
flexibility there, uh, but that
will be determined by, uh, the
new behavior health executive
great. My only concern is, is I
know this has been prototyped,
but I'd like to see statewide
activity prototype as well and I
think my biggest concern is, you
know, we go down this path,
I, I'm asking whether or not the
sponsors would be willing to
support maybe a lesser amount
going in.
For like the 3 year period
review and then decide we want
to put in the billion dollars
work with our respective
districts to make this happen.
And I just want to emphasize the
reason it worked in Las Cruces
when Senator Pain passed the AOT
to get there and make it happen.
I think and we'll talk about the
specifics.
of the next two bills, the, the
one time money literally is
infrastructure money and it's,
dollar request. It's only
creating the entity of the trust
fund. That money is gonna come
as part of the budget process
and so you're not gonna have to
make a decision today to say,
I think the key thing is trying
to have a steady recurring
revenue stream, and there's a
way to do that. We did it with
the land of enchantment Fund
that Senator Novelle and I did
together. We actually created a
that in the next bill when it
gets there.
Thank you, Senator Thor and you
still have the floor. Thank you,
Mr. Mr. President, thank you,
Senator.
That's all. Thank you.
on the Mr. President. I, I do
stand here in strong support of
this bill, um.
Behavioral health knows no party
You know, I myself and my
immediate family have uh had a
family member that was addicted
and this is really, um,
To help her, um, at the time,
and
She ended up spending 4.5 years
in prison over addiction.
help her as we and my family
knew she needed help.
Um, thank God that, uh, she's
doing very well now, but if, uh.
uh, both, both sides for working
so hard to bring something to
the floor and hopefully this is
the uh good big step in the
President.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senators, uh, we are debating
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate bill today
with the emergency clause for a
Thank you Mr. President. um, I
just want to make sure that we
flush out, uh, some of the
Policy on this in regards
some of these districts are not
gonna have some of the services
that others may have of my
district, the 13th judicial or
yours, the 1st.
that service to another
district, is that correct, sir?
So Mr. Mr. President, Senator
Block, you are correct. The er,
there has to be some
times when you've got a 501c3,
or you've got a provider who's
in a different.
District and it's gonna have to
have some overlap to make that
work because again, you're
love is economic development.
Um, do you see how this ties
into economic development.
spent, uh, in this state on
behavioral health, there is no
question.
Uh, that there is.
An impact when those dollars
again, to build this up is gonna
require rebuilding that
infrastructure and then making
sure that, that those that those
folks are there and that working
for the providers that can make
They were talking about some of
the guard rails in relation to
the flexibility.
Of this bill and.
I, I would, I would argue, uh,
27 if I remember correctly. It's
gonna take about a year or two
for us to really get a solid
baseline.
Uh, looking at the different
trends in these reports that's
uh, looking at various different
funding, uh, at the different
districts if they're not
performing or we are, uh, not
really solving this problem, but
it's getting worse.
different priorities and when
one of those priorities is not
working, there's nothing
prevents that district from
shifting and for us with the
oversight into one of the ones
that's not working, then making
sure that that money is able to
get to a place that to one of
the priorities that is.
Thank you sir thank you Mr.
President. uh, one of the things
I think is important when we
Uh, Senator Wortz, how does this
bill or, or maybe um Adrian
might be able to tell us, but
when it comes to training for
from SB 1 or 2.
Senator. So Mr. President, the
One of the things that I
committed to the Chief Justice,
agreeing to do something that's
above and beyond their normal
duty, and I think you heard
about 6 FTEs. I think we're
gonna see that uh in the bills
that are coming up, but
Both the courts and then also I
think one of the things that
excites me in this Bill is on
page 9, there's a whole higher
education pipeline because we've
got to build up the behavioral
The specific resources to be
able to allow the courts.
To do the job we're asking them
to do.
and public health was other
states.
Um,
in crafting this legislation for
you and Senator Sheer.
models did we look at to provide
and to develop these guard
rails.
Uh, the big 3, Mr. President,
uh, Arizona, Texas, and Florida,
the whole Miami model, uh,
something that Mr. Avila
actually traveled and saw and.
you happen to know, um, let's
take a look at the Miami-Dade
model for a minute because I
think that was a model, uh,
law or something isolated in
Miami-Dade that, um,
That's very similar to what
we're using.
is telling me that in Miami, it
was literally one judge in one
district who I think like
Justice Zamora was tired of just
seeing the same.
I think we're seeing the, the
fruit of that now happening in
other states and it's kind of
where we are here.
And block
Thank you, uh, senator. Thank
in New Mexico. I'm curious if,
uh, his, uh his staffer Adrian
might have some data related to
where they are, where they start
So Mr. President, um,
piece, the similar kind of build
it up from the ground and, and I
think there's some parallels to
You know, the different types of
communities that exist in
Arizona that we have here as
well.
like to ask Senator Wirth since
he's been spearheading this uh
bill.
Um, I know you said it wasn't a
perfect bill. Where do you see
This is about as good as we
could do as we sit here today,
uh.
My point in saying,
incumbent to us to watch it, to
shape it and figure out if
there's additional tweaks that
we need to make. And I just,
again, again, having
Having seen lots of legislation
standing here today, I would
suggest that we need to do my
point though was anytime you
take on something this big.
Necessarily, we need to stay on
top of it and be willing to come
agree about the flexibility of
Senate Bill 3. And since we're,
uh, in session on a 60 day right
now and then is a 30 day next
Readjusting the policy and the
funding of various uh
Programs and Senate Bill 3.
This April. So I just think this
is gonna be something that the
legislative Finance Committee.
Uh, certainly is part of the
oversight and also the Health
and Human Services Committee
we'll we'll be back here for 30
days and we could fix it there.
The big, the big time frame in
here is really 2027. So that's a
couple of years, uh, but I think
Like I said, it's not just
that's on us here at the state
level and then I really think
what's gonna be interesting is
for all of us at our local
level.
districts.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President. Uh, in, in that
regard, when we're getting the
of the legislative.
The executive in the judicial in
regards to really taking a look
at the data coming back and if
three branches of government do
the collaboration once we're
getting the data back.
Uh, how does this process, uh,
work?
So Mr. President, on
The reporting is in section 4.
Uh, page 8.
every by and by every June 30th
thereafter, the behavioral
Health executive Committee shall
designate a governmental entity
within each behavior health
region to provide a written
report to the legislature and
That we need to add. I'm not
quite sure why it's so
complicated to get that 6th item
down here. It's interesting.
We're early in the session, uh,
Thank you Senator we're cinder
block. Thank you, Mr. President.
uh, thank you, uh, Senator Wirth
for indulging my questions here
and I, my amendment apparently
um, can you tell me about the
collaboration that the counties
had in the judicial districts,
obviously, uh, in crafting this
bill, and I assume those
So, Mr. President, uh, we work
directly and I'll just speak for
myself with uh the director of
oversees the AOC so we didn't go
down to each district.
Level and speak to every single
judge, uh, about how it's gonna
work in there.
Thank you, Senator War. Thank
you, uh, Mr. President. um, Mr.
President, we're having some
delays with legislative council
recommendations piece in the
report and, um,
Mr. President and Senator Wirth,
I would ask Senator Wirth if you
would be uh amenable to.
changes from the house. Thank
you, Senator Block, Senator,
Senator, Senator, Senator, uh,
Mr. President and Senator Block.
My sense is that there may be
we can go get that amendment put
on over on the other side. I
don't see any problem with that,
uh, again, because I do think
there will potentially be
additional tweaks, and I know in
want to get the amendment right,
uh, for sure, and again, it's a,
it's a friendly amendment, so
don't have a problem.
Doing it that way, if that's how
you'd like to proceed.
questions on this bill.
And I would like to, uh, Mr.
President, I'm sure Senator
Wirth would like me as well to
yield the floor. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, members for the
debate. Thank you for all the
work on this.
You know, Senator Tobiasson said
something interesting in the
Senate Finance Committee that
working to address something we
see every day in each of our
communities. This is one piece
of that.
Uh, I am encouraged and I really
think that this behavioral
health and substance misuse
needs throughout our states.
And Mr. President, I would yield
to Senator Scherer for final
comments, and then he's gonna
ask for the vote.
to care by expanding the
services, uh, at key points,
reducing unnecessary criminal
justice involvement for
individuals.
here. Right now we have siloed
systems and that was brought up
here, uh, people are in these
little silos. This will bring
them together so it's one move.
Uh, it certainly increases
uh, that, uh, uh, Senator
Charlie talked about. I think
that's the key here. So we've
got the smallest, uh, the
government that's closest to
everything that's doing what
with the emergency clause do now
pass and ask for a roll call
vote. Senators, we are voting
all senators to your seats.
We're voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Bergman's. Yes, Senator
Berman's votes yes. Senator
Block.
Center Brandt votes yes. Oh pass
center branches.
Santa Brantley, Senator
Brandtley votes yes. Center
compost.
Sentra Du Hick votes yes. Center
is L.
Center his votes no. Center
Figueroa figure over votes yes.
In Gallegos.
Center Hickey votes Centamiomi
votes yes. Senator Lanier.
Center Lanier votes yes, Senator
Lopez.
Sinnos votes yes. Senator Novava
votes yes Centro'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes yes.
Yes. Senator Pope votes yes, San
Ramos.
Into Ramos votes yes.in Sanchez.
Yes. Senator Sanchez votes, yes,
share votes yes, incendo.
Centerendo votes yes, center
souls souls votes yes. Senator
Stephonics.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Thornton votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Tobiasson
votes yes enter Townsend.
Center Townsend both no center
Trujillo.
Brown. Yes Center Brand boats,
yes.
Santa Pinto.
Center Pinto votes yes.
Of 37 in the affirmative
affirmative 5 in the negative
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3 has
passed the Senate with an
him.
Uh, thank you, ladies and
gentlemen of the Senate.
Thank you. We're gonna go on to
the next item on the calendar,
that's item number 2. That's
gonna be Senate Bill 1.
As amended
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill 1
as amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
To the legislative Health and
Human Services in committee.
Senator Munoz, I and Adrian
And after I give you a few uh
pieces of information. I will
turn it over to uh senator, uh,
Pat Woods for further comment.
creation of a behavioral health
trust fund. Hopefully it would
be a billion dollars, but we
don't know that represents a
forward thinking approach to
addressing the state's growing
sustainable financial foundation
for essential behavioral health
service for years to come.
This fund will cover a broad
spectrum of needs for mental
This holistic approach ensures
that individuals facing
behavioral health challenges
will have access to a full range
of services designed to improve
This will amplify the state's
investment, allowing it to tap
into additional resources and
support a large number of
This trust fund will help cover
the costs associated with
ensuring compliance this
proactive financial planning.
instrumental in the
implementation of regional
behavioral health plans across
the state.
By focusing on regional needs,
the state can tailor programs to
signals a commitment to treating
behavioral health as a priority
issue that deserves long term
sustained investment by the
state.
from investment of the fund is
credited to the fund.
The state Investment council
will follow prudent investment
rules for this fund.
Quarterly and annual reporting
would occur July 2026 equal to
5% of the average year-end
market values of the trust.
And in this trust fund once
again members.
Necessary infrastructure
technology and workforce
supports matching funds for
federal, local, and private
money and grants related to
behavioral health services and
It required reversions of
unexpended funds at the end of
the fiscal year, and I would
turn to my one of my uh
co-sponsors, Senator Pat Woods,
on final passage and then we'll
go to Senator Woods.
Uh, Mr. President, I did put it
on final passage, but I'll do it
again.
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. Thank you, thank
you, Senator Stephanics. Uh, we
are still on Senate Bill 1 as
amended on yelled to Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President.
a B.
all
We don't figure we can fund this
all in one year. It's going to
take more than one year to get
this total fund together.
savings. It's going to also be
used as a reserve.
For 2 years.
In case the legislature falls
Major part of funding for the
Senate Bill 2 and 3, but the
main reason that I think this is
a good idea, Mr. President.
And you may not, uh, remember,
sir, it's been so long ago.
But uh actually voted against
the first bill.
But we've got the house that
might have some additions to it.
And it might make it so much
better.
When it goes through there.
want to pile up a billion
dollars somewhere.
We have real issues with
Behavior health in our state.
To get to where we need to be.
In this situation.
But the first thing we need to
do is put some money together so
that we can accomplish it.
But it's done much like we did
the early childhood trust fund.
In the higher education Trust
Fund.
Senator Stefanik, sir, I'm ready
to take questions, Mr.
President. Thank you,
Senatoranics and Senator Woods.
We are debating Senate Bill 1 as
amended.
Sending my assist you wish your
Mr. President, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, uh, Senator Stefanis. I may
not have a question, but just in
case.
Um, I just wanna share some,
the bulk of my career trying to
get money out of trust accounts
so it's very difficult for me to
put more money in.
And I'll, I'll, and, and for the
following reasons.
endeavor, Mr. President, uh,
Senator Stefaniks, thank you,
Senator Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President and
Senator, since I don't sit on
I will yield and to that
question, Senator, I, I, uh,
We have
We, we've experienced a growth
in revenues.
So we have available funds.
That can be put into this, this
year.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator my still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Woods. So I, um, so
let's to make the math easy,
utilize 5% off the top for
government services and of
course the way the math works
is, you know, you hope the fun
grows by 7%, you figure.
that's the beauty of these
concepts that that it is a uh it
is a uh consistent, uh, and
reliable income stream that's
part of state government.
Just like the question of should
early childhood development be
part of state government and I
better than folks can do
individually build a road, build
a prison, uh, uh, build a police
force, build a behavioral health
system.
Uh, based like we do, you know,
95% of state government and
let's do the math, Mr.
President. We put a billion
dollars and with all due
respect, the finance chair,
In the mattress.
Let's take a billion dollars
that we could spend on this or
spend on that or spend on
another.
it to the SIC, the State
Investment council, and they
wisely invest it and 5% of a
billion dollars is $50 million
and I'm not opposed, Mr.
we're gonna spend it.
But we're making that commitment
in increments of $50 million so
we've spent that billion
dollars, um, and, and, and our
budget, Mr. President, uh, to do
let's just make the math easy is
$10 billion a little bit above,
after 20 years after 20 years of
growing our economy, working
hard, educating young people
having free college education.
We should take this billion
dollars and not put it in a
mattress, Mr. President, but we
should spend it to build a
future, spend it to build an
behavioral health services and
so in conclusion I look at the
FIR, Mr. Mr. President, members
about the administrative
implications of the FIR.
management in 2019 December of
2019, state government had.
Approximately $27 billion in
assets under management $27
we have over $58 billion.
In the mattress.
That we're committed.
To never spending
ourselves, have confidence in
young people have confidence in
our ability to build an economy
that then builds a tax base that
then funds future government
It's called Taxes.
Sorry, Mr. President, didn't
And it's not a percentage it's a
it's a, it's a dollar and cent
amount.
So it doesn't even keep up with
inflation we, we have the exact
vehicles and more electrical
vehicles so that depletes our
ability to to to collect fuel
tax. We have not renegotiated
with our business partners, uh,
And so we haven't made any
adjustments to our tax code
given given uh modern realities,
uh, and, and we need to, we need
the banks crashed in October of
'08.
And we had to come back in the
summer of '09 and cut existing
budgets in the middle of a
the oil prices crashed and we
had to come back in the middle
of a fiscal year and slice
budgets close to 4 to 6%. We, we
were here when that happened and
Our state government is not.
In that situation anymore and if
we're wise it will never be in
That we, that we just simply
fold behavioral health into our
uh general fund account and make
it part of state government, uh,
put money on a mattress that
were never ever ever gonna
spend. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator. Senators, we
are still debating Senate Bill 1
as amended.
Senator Munoz.
Senator my yield. Yes, yes, Mr.
President, I would like his
address to see go check his
matress.
Mr. President, Senator, do you
Senator Mr. President, Senator
Munoz, it's working incredibly
well as long as we consider it
liquid cash and not consider
how much when you do the math.
At 5% average.
Mr. President, uh, Senator Munoz
approximately 600.
That's at 5%. Now, when we do
the Medicaid Behavioral Health
Trust. I'm uh Senator Sheer a
question a while ago when his
expert witness said, we get a 3
2200 million.
Plus the 50 Mr. President, yes.
Maybe that's in the mattress.
Medicaid, we're gonna spend $1.1
billion on behavioral health
this year, and that some of
that's a Medicaid match. And if
you take the 3 to 1 match and
stream that would compound like
with early childhood stream, we
could get
$5 billion and maybe start a new
revenue stream.
in Medicaid and now we're really
talking about changing the game
with new money and putting money
in trust funds that compound and
build and lighten the load for
everything else, but you know
when we have a Republican
president, usually oil gasses
stay low or level. We won't see
spiking like we said with the
for our future, we're planning
for what's gonna happen in, in
our budgets. And so as we look
at creating these funds and
putting money there.
We know that this fund is going
around 35%. Um, we could raise
that by another 10%, 45% parking
that in reserve so if something
does happen in the economy.
happen next.
Uh, they're talking Medicaid,
they're talking cutting grants
or talking about cutting other
programs. So we have to be as
See this coming to fruition in
20 years from now, and my kids
or grandkids maybe.
beneficiary of them. I hope they
don't need it, but they may be.
Uh, that they'll know it's there
We're building a future in the
budget because we have changed
our budgeting system in the last
2 years where we're almost gonna
be able to get the same amount
we're putting in a fund, we're
investing it. The first year we
did that, it spun off $25
million.
And so now we're sending New
Mexico up.
But when the good senators
talking about 0809, we cut a
billion dollars out of the
budget then. I don't know what
percentage of the budget was
then, but I think it was about 4
I want to see New Mexico have a
solid base, solid foundation,
and a solid future. Thank you,
Mr. President.
Thank you Senator Munoz. We're
debating Senate Bill 1 is
amended. I yield to Senator B
Stefaniks, um, both who I, I
deeply respect, um, one question
in here because I've signed on
to the bill, but I see, you
know, um,
Either one, if either one of the
Members, Mr. President, uh, with
the following skill sets of
5 social community service
coordinators one financial
Before we set this aside, or is
there a time limit where we can
kind of delay if we have a hard
time finding this, these uh
thank you, Senator. I'm gonna
start with the answer and then,
uh, Senator Munoz will probably,
uh, finish with the budget, but
their department to come forward
to make this successful.
In committee, and I believe it
was the uh health and public
affairs Committee that you sit
these services and we said 50%
or more of our entire state have
mental health issues PTSD,
behavioral health issues,
access and services, and they
are well aware that we need more
behavioral health internally in
their department for the the
positions they need, I would
turn to Senator Munoz and the
The health care authority is
just going to sign off because
they're the ones that are going
to receive the 50 million in the
future, and then they're going
to take that 50 million and then
they're going to match it with
general fund that may continue
in the future, it may not. We
may be able to figure out
another way. But ACA is the one
that receives the money from SIC
when there's an annual, um,
other costs or behavioral health
as this moves along. So that's
the function of where it's gonna
work.
Thank you Senator Muno. Cinder
block still on the floor. Thank
you, Mr. President. uh, if
Senator Munoz would yield for a
there's anyone in this body. I
trust more with finances than
you, sir, and I just want to ask
you in your experience, uh,
doing some of these previous
bills where we're setting money
of these downturns you mentioned
2008, 2009, and, um,
potentially.
during the, during the last 4
years during the pandemic, have
you seen Senator Munoz, uh, that
Mr. President, Senator, we've
seen downturns in the market,
but not the way that we set up
these trust funds. These are
really new. I mean, the early
childhood trust fund is only 5
years old.
that way. If you really get into
pension funds and, and, and
learn how pension funds and
compounding interest is in the
five-year rolling average of
interest in the cost, you know,
To that level and are coming
back and, and that's the prudent
investment that we have to watch
when we invest in these firm in
these funds and, and how SIC
invests in them.
can assume there are guardrails
on how we manage this money to
make sure that we're not going
to be losing or if we can maybe,
uh, other, other mechanisms in
discussion today in rules.
With some retirement gaps of
going below the reserves, I
think from 2034 to 2040.
that under the SIC and the
Prudent Investment Act, they're
allowed to invest in certain
sectors in the market. Now, they
can be real reactive to the
market because they may have
parked that money for a term
see a big giant downturn, we may
not even see that coming, and we
may get hit, we may not. We may,
in a five-year rolling average,
that thing may just.
might come right back up. And,
Thank you Senator Mundo uh
Munoz, and thank you, Mr.
President, I yield. Thank you.
We do have further debate,
Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. President and um
and thank you, um, to the
sponsors of this legislation.
I, I'm really excited about the
comprehensive solutions that
talking about, the next bill is
like how do we fund it this
coming year, um.
Here in New Mexico, not only do
limited resources that they
have.
We've seen other dedicated funds
grow. We've already heard about
the early childhood and care
consequential to our long term
mental health care in New Mexico
and this will help us to deal
with the many of the pressing
issues while setting ourselves
grandkids, and for my great
grandkids. These long term
investments will continue to
help New Mexico achieve better s
This fund will establish through
Senate Bill 1 will be
instrumental in ensuring the
successful implementation of
regional behavioral health plans
1 that will create this
behavioral health trust fund.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Trujillo see no
further debate, Senator
for our future. We have many,
many, many people in our state
who could benefit from services
who could benefit from
infrastructure who could benefit
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the records show
the role has been called.
And all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you all
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator Boone voting no.
Senator voting no.
Hispanics. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. President, members of the
Senate. Thank you. We're gonna
go on to the next uh bill on
calendar item number 3 Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
President, I ask unanimous
senator of the Senate that the
records showed the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 2.
Uh, I thank you, Mr. President,
as you've heard, uh, these 3
bills, Senate bills, 12, and 3
are all companion bills.
Senate 3, as you've heard, it
payment to the state's
behavioral health investment to
build up.
And build out our decimated
behavioral health system in this
state.
So this is an appropriation that
various uh agencies that will be
uh recipients of these uh funds.
And so, uh,
I
I don't know if I should go
it, and if you have any
questions, I will yield.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Senators Rita Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 2 with the emergency
clause.
Anyone wishing to debate?
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2
with the emergency clause, uh,
do now pass. I do not pass and I
we are voting all senators to
your seats if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand. We send
her Bran Bodino.
Senator Scott voting no.
Senator Thornton voting no.
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 4 in the negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2
with the emergency clause has
President. Thank you, members of
the body. Senators, we are going
to have a yield to Senate
Majority Leader Peter Wars to
take us to that next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
of business messages from the
governor. The reader will read.
February 14, 2025, Senate
executive message number 3, the
Honorable Mimi Stewart,
Mexico Constitution. I hereby
submit to the Senate Rules
Committee the following
nominations for appointment
Marisol Elizabeth Olivas for
appointment as the student
Dean Johnston for appointment as
the student member of the New
Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology border regions for a
term commencing upon
message from the governor has
been received.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter what's next, uh next order
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, unanimous consent we
go without our business
committee reports.
referred to Senate Bill 247 has
had it under consideration,
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the health and
public affairs Committee
of the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion the
journal reflect they were
elected upon individually.
will read
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those oppose, the eyes have it,
the report has been adopted and
the journal will reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read
pass and then referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Uh
we vote on them with one motion
and that the journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually hearing no
objection, the reader will read.
Senate Memorial 2 do pass as
Katie Doig chair
adoption of the committee
reports we have a motion we'll
adopt the committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those of Hone, the eyes have it.
referred Senate Bill 82 has had
it under consideration, reports
same with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator George Munoz,
Those pone, the ayes have it.
The community report has been
adopted.
The Reader to read.
Mr. President, your conservation
committee, to whom has been
submitted, Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stefani's chair. Stephanics.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
Senate Bill 156 do pass and
thence referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senate Bill 188 do pass and
Senate Bill 210 do pass as
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee reports,
there's a motion to adopt the
community report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
That was a pose name. The eyes
have it. The community report
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 128 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee.
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually no objection, the
reader will read.
the finance committee.
Senate Bill 152 do pass and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee.
bill tax, business, and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 175
do pass and thence refer to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 265 do pass and that
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 265 reports same
Reports same without
recommendation.
And thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Carrie
Hamblin, chair. Senator Hamblin,
been adopted and the journal
will reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Wartz to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go without
Senate Bill 384 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez.
An act making an an
appropriation to plan, develop
and create a Rio Hondo watershed
Bill 384.
Senate Bill 385 introduced by
Senator Campos, an act relating
to the attorney general revising
the method for setting rates for
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee Senate Bill 385.
Zen bill 386 introduced by
to include chiropractic
physicians within the definition
of licensed healthcare
Senate Bill 387 introduced by
Senator Figueroa, an act
relating to public schools,
changing the community school
framework renaming the community
referred to the Senate Education
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee Senate Bill 387.
Senate Bill 3088 introduced by
Senator Wirth.
corporations and foreign and
in-state business corporations
and the filing of unincorporated
associations and clubs when
articles or filings list the
or in state.
Corporation or unincorporated
association or club.
Making it a misdemeanor to file
such invalid articles of
prescribing penalties.
Amending sections of chapter 53
NMSA 1978.
Senate Bill 388.
Senate Bill 389 introduced by
Senator Hickey.
An act relating to health care
oversight extending the delay
389 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 389.
health care providers to be
reimbursed for all necessary
services that they provide.
Senate Bill 390,390 haven't been
read twice by title is order
senators Scott Townsend,
Gallegos and Spence.
An act relating to the
environment.
Amending civil penalties for
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 391.
Senate Bill 392 introduced by
Senator
Enacting a new section of the
hospital funding Act.
Requiring a county hospital or
contracting hospital to provide
circumstances. Senate Bill 392
392 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, then
senators Paul and Campos and
representative Vincent.
An act relating to taxation,
providing a temporary gaming tax
declaring an emergency. Senate
Bill 393 393 having been read
twice by title is ordered Prince
and referred to the Senate tax,
Business, Transportation
an appropriation to the Board of
Regents of the University of New
Mexico for the site preparation
construction equipping,
furnishing and landscaping of an
Education Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee Senate Bill
394.
Senate Bill 395 introduced by
senators Lopez.
Sen about 395 395 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 395.
And Pope
An act relating to public
schools, amending sections of
the Hispanic Education Act to
Requiring the statewide Hispanic
education status report to
include initiatives to increase
school attendance and report on
Senate about 396 36 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Indian rule and Cultural
Affairs Committee, then Senate
An act relating to public
benefits enacting the New Mexico
Next Generation Act, creating
the next generation trust fund
and providing for investment of
that fund by the state
Providing the benefits shall not
be guaranteed and that a
property interest shall not be
created by the New Mexico next
Generation Act exempting from
making appropriations. Senate
Bill 397 397 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
Boone
Lanier
Gallegos and others, and act
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business and Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance,
Senate Bill 398.
Creating the local government
board of support reimbursement
fund requiring the Department of
Finance Administration to
administer the fund.
Providing for the reimbursement
Sent a bill 399 having been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, the
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 399.
are victims of domestic violence
or sexual assault to be released
without penalty from rental
agreements.
Providing that other parties to
the rental agreement may be
released from financial
liable to an owner regardless.
Of whether the person was a
party to the rental agreement.
Making, conforming amendments.
Senate Bill 400.
Senate Bill 401.
Introduced by
Senator Padilla represented
Tarana.
severance tax bonds for
education technology
infrastructure.
Amending the broadband access
and expansion Act.
Adding definitions.
broadband deployment and
connectivity program and
statewide education network to
the Office of Broadband Access
and expansion.
Senate Finance, Senate Bill 401.
Senate Bill 4002.
Introduced by senators.
Ramos
member who entered a uniformed
service of the United States for
any amount of time to purchase
service credit subject to
certain conditions. Senate Bill
Senate Bill 403 introduced by
senators Ramos and Townsend.
An act relating to insurance.
Amending the New Mexico
Insurance code to define and
Committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 403.
Senate Bill 404 introduced by
Senator Stewart. An act relating
repealing section 24-14-18 NMSA
1978 being Laws 1977, chapter
206.
Sent a bill 404 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 404.
Senate Bill 405.
the Criminal Justice Policy
Collaborative Task Force,
providing for the committee's
membership and duties, making an
appropriation.
Senate Bill 406 introduced by
senators Lopez and Cedillo
Lopez.
An act relating to child
welfare.
Senate Bill 406406 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 406.
Enacting the wrongful conviction
compensation and Services Act.
Providing for damages and other
relief for a wrongfully
convicted person.
Senate Bill 407.
Senate Bill 407 having been read
twice by title is order prints
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
Senate Bill 408 introduced by
senators Gallegos, Campos, and
Gonzalez.
An act relating to procurement.
enter into and for the purchase
orders under the contracts.
Senate Bill 40808 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Bill 409 introduced by
Senator Sanchez, an act relating
to public affairs.
Establishing the 2nd Monday in
February as a public holiday
Senate Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Rules Committee. Senate Bill
409.
Senate Bill 410 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
go to health and judiciary. OK,
thank you for that, Senator
By golly, you were right, and it
read twice by title is order
Prince and referred.
Senate Bill 411, introduced by
Senator Brandt.
An act relating to higher
education.
recipients and the higher
education department, providing
for release from contract or
recoupment, creating a fund.
Prescribing a penalty.
Making an appropriation.
Senate Memorial 7 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo.
A memorial declaring February
Senate Memorial 7 Memorial 7
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed his order not
printed, not referred to
committee to be placed on the
president's table, Senate
Pinto Cedillo Lopez, and Pope.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend Article Article 4, Section
even numbered years and
providing for consideration of
veto overrides for bills of a
regular, a special, or an
extraordinary session
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate Rules
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Joint
resolution 12.
President. First up, I, I do
have a unanimous consent request
with respect to Senate Bill 386.
Uh, this is a bill that updates
protocols used with youth
As to see that bill, so
unanimous consent to change the
second referral from Senate
Health Public Affairs to Senate
Judiciary. I did check with the
sponsor and the different chairs
So. Senator. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So that is it for
today. Uh, we are not coming in
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Education will be meeting at
8:30 on Monday morning, uh, your
blue sheet says 9 o'clock. It
will be at 8:00, 8:30, I'm
rolled over with uh two Monos
bills will be then about 9:30 or
so and then we'll continue on
from there, uh, but it is at
8:30, not as listed on the paper
at 9.
Senators, uh, Cervantes, Mr.
President, we did publish an
agenda for Senate Judiciary to
be meeting this evening.
Uh, um, and I just want to
disabuse the body of the notion
we're not going to meet tonight.
And, and I think it's
particularly important to note
that my colleagues who are new
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee over here are really
kind of twisting my arms telling
tonight. So we're just not gonna
do it. I know those of you that
are disappointed that would love
to spend the evening with us and
you know, Mr. President, just
one last note on Valentine's
Day, I'm looking at my house old
politician, and he made sure
that on Valentine's night, he
had his beautiful wife Carmen
sitting there with him, um, and
Then he would run about 30 bills
in about an hour because nobody
short matter of time. He was a
brilliant politician and we
missed him a great deal, but,
uh, we're not gonna do that
tonight in the Senate Judiciary,
Mr. President. So watch the
agenda for tonight roll over
until Monday and you all have a
Uh, thank you, Mr. President for
recognizing that. Actually, that
was yesterday, and, uh, Jennifer
is not fond of the fact that she
thinks I planned our wedding
night on the day before
Valentine's and so yes it was
our anniversary's Valentine's
and thank you, Mr. President,
for recognizing the same
anniversary, Senator.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senate Finance will meet Monday
And they're in charge of the
numbers.
Well, not the office numbers.
The budget numbers but not the
office numbers.
we'll meet Monday at 8:30 and
3:21. Thank you, Senator any
further announcements, senators?
See no I you to Senator Peter
Worth to take us to that last
make this place run, and I'm
gonna go down the list.
Legislative council service, the
legislative Finance Committee,
uh, the LESC Legislative
Education Study Committee, uh,
room, E&E IT journal maintenance
payroll, proofreaders, our
sergeant at arms, including
floor, committee, and hall
attendance, all of our committee
analysts, our secretaries, our
analysts and communication
staff, legislative assistance,
bill room staff, state police,
print shop staff, and today a
special thank you to Adrian
to everyone that makes this
place go. Thank you.
And with that, Mr. President,
