Hi.
Saint Boone.
Santa Charlie.
Senator Dohe.
Santa Isel.
Santa Figueroa.
Senator Harmiel. Senator Lanier.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Maestas.
Santa Minos.
Senator Nova.
Santa Pinto.
Santa Ramos.
Santa Sanchez.
Senator Scott,
Senator Stephanics. Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Townsend.
For the invocation to be led
today by apostle.
Manilarizaba transformation
Ministries International from
Albuquerque.
We'd ask that you remain
Boone.
floor. I first want to take this
opportunity to be able to honor
you and your family.
I want to honor you because I
know there's been a great
honoring.
Because of the sacrifice of your
time.
So I want to pray for you and
family's time, Father God, for
them to legislate on behalf of
their constituents in their
district and for this great
state of New Mexico.
I pray, Father God, peace in
Father God, as we honor all the
senators here on the floor. We
give you praise in Jesus' name.
Amen.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico, the Z symbol of
perfect friendship among united
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
It's good to be back on the same
day since we were here on this
want to thank, um, Postle Ladi
Zavo for the invocation this
morning. Uh, we talk a lot about
the sacrifice on families and
just for you to lead with that
is appreciated. This is a big
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
let me yield to Senator Padilla
and then to Senator Woods and
then I'll kind of give a little
run of show. Thank you, Senator
Padilla. Uh, good morning, Mr.
President. Uh, unanimous consent
to allow cameras on the Senate
Unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Charlie until she
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
See no objections, so ordered,
Senator Padilla.
Chance of a call. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So today is Rio
dinner, 6 o'clock in the Senate
lounge. Uh, thanks to Marla
Schultz and her team, fellow
lobbyists, we appreciate, uh,
Padilla, uh, Sarah Munoz and
Senator Sheer, I think all have
guests ideal to them to
introduce their guests. Thank
you, Senator Worth. So I'll
begin with senators, uh, centers
geographically located in the
very heart of New Mexico and is
my home and home to diverse
traditional community, including
many unique and historic
was established in Riorriba
County in 1598 near the
confluence.
of what would become known as
the real chama and the Rio
Grande Rivers inspiring a
innovation in is home to a se
Hermanos Penitentes praying in
our morada, Guadalupana
community land grants, deer
rostrum right next to you, Mr.
President. And I'd like her to
stand. Her name is Mabel
Yulavari.
Mabel and her late husband Henry
Yavaie are from Tierra Maria.
honored for the life she has
given to Henry's, a one of a
kind store that survived for 53
years in Tierra Amaria in 1972,
Henry sold snowmobiles and
miscellaneous hardware and
goods, Henry's would eventually
evolve into a true value
hardware store and then hometown
general and liquor store.
Whether you needed concrete.
President. Henry's customers are
considered family. Henry never
met a stranger, and Mabel always
saved the day.
Mascanada, the real success is
of Henry's gracias Mabel, you
truly are an embodiment of
Northern New Mexico. Muchisimas
gracias for showing us what it
testament to your faith, family,
friendship, and dedication to
hard work. Truly, you're a
symbol of what it means to be a
Nuvoericana and I'm beyond
And we're not done yet, Mr.
President. We've got a packed
house of people from Ririba
County. I would like those who
County Assessor, Sarah Archuleta
Riariba County clerk. Joshua
Martinez, Riariba County
treasurer Moises Morales, Ria
chief Enrico Trujillo, Deputy
fire chief Zachariah Enriquez,
the Chamita Volunteer Fire
Department and their trusty dog
Sparky, and then those students
who joined me from Alcalde to
the 3 pre-players of the
championship, which is Lucas
Casados, Anthony Padilla, Aiden
Romero.
Elias Tapia, coached by Juan
Padilla for his 3rd
Casados, Vice President Sophia
Hi, secretary of the line
Carajal, uh, treasurer Mr.
Rascon and a couple of others,
Elias Tapia, Piper Romero,
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo. We
And our deputy county manager
Linda Padilla.
Thank you, sir Jame Senor
Gonzalez.
part of Via Reba, very proud and
you're very special and as he
was mentioned by Senator
Jaramillo, the beautiful things
that happened there.
Uh, part of the area that I
area and you see our, our very
special walking, uh, Lorraine
Montoya, uh, she's one of my
constituents, you know, so, um,
thank you for being here.
Thank you Mister President.
Thank you, Senator uh Gonzalez.
Senator Ramos.
Mr. President, thank you so
not, uh, he, he's, he's too
modest and whatever say that he
was one heck of a pitcher. He
was part of the 1985 Kobri
and his brother pitched the next
game.
And you'd see his father
cheering up a storm up up in the
up in the bleachers where I was
90 mile an hour fastballs. They
had some great junk and they
used to sit everybody down. I
believe you be Portales in the
state championship, wasn't that
guy just admiring their fastball
and I just had to mention that.
So, thank you very much for
being here. Thank you for all
your faith in God and I know
you're praying for us every day
student uh studying economics
and philosophy at UNM and she
wants to become an attorney. So
I want, I told her I'd come
around and, and uh introduce her
Thank you Senator Ramos. Center
souls.
in the chamber and with the laws
that we pass, but this May 7th
through the 8th, the Hunt
Institute is holding a
by the Hunts.
Institute. If you're interested
in knowing and understanding
about education, there's going
to be sessions on pre-K, K-12
Um, I'm one of the hosts, uh,
Leo Armijo, Senator Armijo,
Senator Pope are the hosts on
the Senate side, on the House
side, Representative Brian Baca
and Joe Garrett are the hosts
They do great, great nonpartisan
bicameral work in education,
it's well worth going, please,
please mark your calendars and
register for the Hunt Institute.
me, uh, Senator Armijo, Senator
Pope can give you some more
information, but hope to see
lots and lots of you there.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senor Padilla.
say on this fifty-ninth day of
the session, how thankful we are
to you, Lieutenant Governor, uh,
for hosting this very successful
program for New Mexico children,
Mr. President, you've done a
to your right.
there and I got to meet him and
talk to him for a little bit
there. Uh, you're even importing
them from other states now, Mr.
President. That's what's so
exciting about this program that
Beach, California. He is a 4th
grader. He enjoys participating
in many sports, and I'm gonna
have to read all of these, Mr.
Perez. He's an athlete like you,
Mr. President. Uh, basketball,
flag football, soccer, park
is, uh, a member of the Temple
Bay Yam religious School. He
also has something in common
with me, you know, maybe not on
the soccer field, but, uh, Lego
building. I do enjoy building
things out of Legos. I have a
Did everybody hear that? His
goals are to be famous, Mr.
President, which I love because
that's gonna lead to so many
other things and a successful
Lego designer. He's just a good
challenge to pick a state out of
all the 50 states that they
wanted to visit and learn more
about and to write about and
when he returns home, he's going
to write a report all about New
Mexico for his classmates and.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Any further announces we do have
Senator Gallegos and Senator
Lani Center Gallegos.
Henry's NTA, uh, I've been there
before, uh, when, when I was a
kid, we did some pushing cattle
up to the east of TA, a
beautiful area, uh, but I just
Sir Gonzalez also, the only
thing that kept me from being
part of Rio Reba was a barbed
wire on our fence, but it is one
Unique heritage that's in that
area. I don't know that I've
ever met Mabel, but, uh, I love
the store and I love the, the
area and the people. I just want
morning. I sound a little
stuffy, so be patient with me. I
just wanted to recognize my um
legislative assistantin Ye, uh,
he is on the ice right now and
he is skating, so he's not in
the, in the chamber so that I
can recognize him, but I did
want to just, uh, congratulate
him.
Shepherdson.
With their help, Kintron is now
able to follow his dreams of
figure skating and continuing
his excellence on the ice.
Thank you, Senatori. Senator
Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
Jimenez family in Lovington, a
relatively new business, opened
the storefront in 2022, and they
Any further announcements,
Senator Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Perez. Just for information of
the body, uh 23 hours and 49
See no further announcements.
Senator Worth, you have quite
the line.
Uh,
do is the messages, there's a
message from the governor. We're
gonna do the committee reports,
then we're going to go to
concurrence, uh, but this
Woods, uh, 22 House Bill 244,
Senator Thornton.
Uh, 23 House Bill 6, Senator
26 House Bill 41, Senator
Steinborn.
Uh, House Bill 56 number 27 will
be Senator Bergman's.
Uh, House Bill 78, number 28
so be prepared, we'll just work
our way down the list. Um, Mr.
President, unanimous consent, we
go to that order of business
messages from the governor.
Thank you. See no objection. We
Senate executive message number
13. The Honorable Mimi Stewart,
President pro tempore, and
members of the New Mexico State
Senate President pro tempore
and Senate Bill 417 enacted by
the fifty-seventh legislature
first session 2025.
Respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham, Governor.
There are no objection. We're in
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. President, your rules
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 17 as
amended has added under
the committee report. Senators,
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
I
Those pose, the ayes have it.
The community port has been
amended has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chair Senator
Cervantes, thank you, Mr.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131
has had it under consideration,
reports some of the
recommendation that it do pass.
please. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I those
opposed, the ayes have it, the
community port has been adopted.
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Senator
Kerry Hamblin, Senator Heather
Bergman's senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs.
The eyes have it. The committee
report has been adopted. I'd
like to announce to the members
of the body.
That this officers of the Senate
have signed an open session
Senate bill 72.
duly enrolled and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted, Senator
Carrie Hamblin. Senator Heather
Bergmans, Senator Nicholas A.
it the.
Commit report has been adopted
and I wanna announce to the
members of the body that the
judiciary committee committee to
has been referred Senate Bill
Committee, to whom has been
referred? Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 219 as amended has had it
under consideration reports that
Heather Bergmans, Senator
Nicholas A. Paul, co-chairs
Senator Hamblin.
I moved the adoption of the
committee reports a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 219 as amended.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred to Senate Bill 252 as
Carrie Hamblin. Senator Heather
Bergman's Senator Nicholas A.
Paul, co-chairs Senator Hamblin.
I move the adoption of the
committee report to adopt the
judiciary committee to whom has
been referred, Senate Bill 252
as amended has under
consideration and reports that
same has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory to signing by
had it under consideration and
reports the same has been duly
enrolled and engrossed
preparatoryly signing by the
officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Senator
Carrie Hamblin, Senator Heather
favor signify by saying aye.
That's much better.
All those opposing me?
No.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Wars take us to the next
order of business, unanimous
consent. We go back to that
owner business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Hear no objection. We're in that
just go through them. Uh, number
7 on the pink sheets will be
Senator Nava, Senate Education
substitute for Senate Bill 480
is amended, uh, concurrent
Senator Steinborn, uh, the tax
business sub for Senate Bill 353
as amended. So Mr. President,
unanimous consent, we go to that
order of business concurrence,
Mr. President, I move that
Senate concur with House
amendments, Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 480 as amended.
Thank you, Sennava if you please
information upon request and it
is a friendly amendment and I
urge the body to vote in favor.
Thank you. Any discussion,
senators on the amendment?
See no discussion.
Mr. President, I move that
Senate bill Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 480 as amended. I do now
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those oppose.
The eyes have it. The Senate has
concurred with the Senate
Education Committee substitute
Senator Worth, I yield next to
Senator Brantly, uh, concurrence
calendar number 8, Senate Bill
11 is 3 times amended.
Senator Brantley, thank you, Mr.
President. I move the Senate
concur with House amendments to
integrity of the bill. There was
a drafting error in House
Judiciary that had to be
corrected on the uh house floor,
a language inition that allowed
learning. It is a friendly
amendment, and I urge the body
to vote in favor. Thank you,
Senators any discussion on
House Amendments to this bill.
See no discussion. Senator
amendments and for the Senate to
concur, all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Oppose
the eyes have it. The Senate has
concurred with the House
amendments to Senate Bill 11 is
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I.
I moved it to the Senate concur.
With the House amendments to
Senate tax, Business
amendment in, in two places in
the bill that just changed the
technical term of service, a
public service points, public
safety point, which is kind of
technical term in the dispatch
See no discussion Senator
Steinborn, thank you, Mr.
President. I move that the
Senate, um, concur and I call
in favor signify by saying I.
Those oppose the eyes have it.
The Senate has concurred to the
House amendments.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
Mr. President, unanimous
centers out.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that all action for placing
can explain the bill.
Mr. President, House Bill 206 is
the annual water project fund
project authorization bill.
Mr. President, contained in this
bill.
Is the list of 84 projects whose
application request total
Senators, we're debating. House
Bill 206. It does have an
emergency clause. Anyone wishing
to debate see no debate.
Sinners out of clothes.
do now pass.
And I ask, I'm sorry, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Sanchez, I see you.
clause.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator. We're
gonna go on to the next item,
actions taking for placing house
Bill 240.
On final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate,
state revolving fund loan Act to
bring the state Act up to
Date with the federal.
State safe drinking Water Act. I
revolving loan fund is federally
funded by US EPA and jointly
administered by New Mexico
Finance Authority and the
Environmental department.
systems, to finance and repair
and replacement of drinking
water infrastructure as
prioritized by the Environmental
department. The proposed
revision to the state Act will
Primarily the revisions to the
state Act provide for addition
to loans, the EMF.
New Mexico Finance Authority
Made pursuant of the act. Mr.
President, stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senators, we're debating House
Bill 240.
Do now pass and ask me sent of
the Senate that the record
showed that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative, except
those voting in a negative by a
I'll send it to your seats
please.
By a vote of 36 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
House Bill 240.
Excuse me.
By a vote.
on the calendar that's gonna be
item number 22, Hospital 244,
and I'll yield to Senator
Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I ask you now, don't consider
substitution.
Thank you, Senator Thorne.
Senator Thorn, if you can please
explain the bill Center Block,
if I can please have you just
step to the side.
Thank, thank you, Mr. President.
Judges Association and basically
it's promoting more of an
experienced professional and
efficient magistrate judge, uh,
it does not impact any uh any
House Bill 244. Anyone wishing
to debate?
See no debate. Senator Thor on
your clothes on the bill.
Mr. President, I move that House
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, Senator
Thorne. Senators, to your seats
please.
To your seats
If you wish to vote no.
Thank you, Mr. President. It's
my first bill on the floor, so
congratulations, Senator Thorn.
We're gonna go on to the next
item on the calendar that's
gonna be item number 23 House
Bill 6.
Senator Stewart.
It's now subject to debate
amendment, or substitution.
See, no objections. Senator
Stewart to explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
wage Act to promote good
economic and fiscal policy, uh,
IRBs are the most widely used
and powerful economic
development incentive available
developers use IRBs to support
relocation or expansion. They're
powerful inducements that
provide companies that receive
millions of foregone tax
revenue, but the expense is
justified by the jobs.
be recipients create.
So House Bill 6.
Rather than the minimum wage,
which is what they have now, uh,
in fact, many minimum wage
workers in New Mexico earn so
workers and Mr. President, I
have asked unanimous consent to
have an expert witness, Kelly
O'Donnell, an economists on the
floor.
Yeah
Mr. President, Is time for a
question.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senator Scott
Mr. President, Senator, what is
the
primary objective.
Issued.
Senator Stewart, so Mr.
President, IRBs used widely
economic development incentives
Because right now, they don't
have to use the prevailing wage,
uh, it's all, it's often minimum
wage that these workers get.
set by the workforce solutions
department, um, it's set every
January 1st every year, uh, this
bill would.
living wage, better health care
benefits, uh, better able to
take care of families.
Senator Scott,
projects are paid at minimum
wage is a bit of a
misrepresentation.
And I will give you an example
in our community from several
years ago.
Eunice community, all of the
folks developing this project
very highly skilled.
I don't think there was even one
is a bit of a false choice. Uh,
Mr. President,
And Senator, could you
March.
Uh, Mr. President.
it will be significant for the
workers.
Senator Scott.
Mr. President and Senator, that
again is a bit of a
On these projects are about 50%
of the total.
Labor is about another 50% of
reviewed on prevailing wage is
that the prevailing wage
provisions increase the labor
costs on these projects by about
did you follow that logic, Mr.
President and Senator. Thank
you, Senator Scott. Senator
Stewart, Mr. President, it
certainly did. My economists say
Thank you, Senator Stewart,
Senator Scott.
So, uh, Mr. President and
Senator, that 15%, let's, I
But, uh, Mr. President and
Senator, these would not be.
These would not be projects
Mr. President, they are being
treated as public service
project for the IRB issue for
And the whole another discussion
revolves around New Mexico gross
receipts tax policy, and the,
just last, just yesterday, Mr.
President, we
I believe, uh,
Uh, authorized.
Some $50 million.
outfit wanting to build some
transmission lines here in the
state, but the only reason why
these are necessary. The only
reason why we need them.
It is because of our
Let's go back to the fact that
these projects are not state.
Projects they are private sector
Senator Stewart
Uh, Mr. President, if you could
repeat the question.
Sitter Scott
Uh, benefiting.
From these IRBs, to what purpose
would that be to create jobs?
Senator Stewart.
treated like state projects uh
through the mechanism of the
IRB, uh, if they accept the
IRBs, uh, they have a tax
dollars and our cities and
counties are losing tax revenue.
Uh, we do that because we want
to promote job growth, economic
have a better paid worker,
you'll have a better product if
you have a worker with health
benefits, who can take time off
when they're sick. You'll have a
better project when you can
retain.
So your example earlier, Senator
Scott, was great. You had a
project they paid well it wasn't
minimum wage. That's what we're
looking for all the projects,
and Senator, this would impose
prevailing wage which now is
only effective for state
they're trying for an industrial
revenue bond where they don't
have to pay taxes for 30 years.
It's those projects that are
trying to get an industrial
prevailing wage mandate apply.
To only the construction phase
of the project, I believe
there's some 300 employees in
And there is no, uh, uh, would
there be a mandate to pay them
prevailing wage, and when would
you know that the prevailing
Mr. President, the project is
defined through the IRB. It's
the construction project. When
that project is done, the
That the
process of issuing the
industrial revenue bond to save
money on taxes would be
substantially offset.
these projects not to even
occur, would you not agree?
Stewart, uh, Mr. President, no,
I don't agree.
When you have good paying jobs
for workers, uh, projects go
they're paying minimum wage. The
state has to pick it up through
SNAP benefits, Medicaid, and
other issues, so prevailing wage
offer the prevailing wage, I
think is good economic policy.
It's also good social policy. It
food, etc. all their household
expenses through a prevailing
wage.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senator Scott.
Mr. President, Senator, once
again, you are representing a
construction workers are very
highly skilled folks that make
far above prevailing wage or far
So what we do here, Mr.
President and Senator is just
bump whatever wage they're
getting by about 15%.
The state prevailing wage.
Mandates into the private
sector.
We just can't.
Something on the order of a
billion dollars.
Of state projects.
Waiting on
Uh capital
Now 15% bump in the cost of the
project doesn't sound like much.
But on a billion dollars of
projects,
That's $150 million that if the
Mr. Mr. President and Senator,
uh, I appreciate your answers.
But this is bad public policy
See no further debate. I'm
sorry, cinder block.
Thank you, Mr. President, with
the, uh, sponsor yield, please.
want to make sure that
We're on the same page.
This is what it says and I'd
like you to ask her just answer
if it's accurate.
of construction, increasing
costs for the overall
development, therefore reducing
the value of IRBs as an
incentive.
Higher costs, Mr. President,
Senator may discourage
So, Mr. President, these FIRs
always give both sides of the
picture. There's just as much of
an emphasis on this being a good
project, uh.
It's labor cost is 23% of an
overall project on average.
So, if, if Senator Scott is
correct, all these projects are
already getting high wages.
their workers a little bit more,
so yeah, the costs will go up
some, uh, their tax abatement is
for 30 years we've paid out
this bill does.
Thank you, Senator Stewart
Center Block. Thank you, Mr.
President. So, uh, Senator, if,
let's just say they go up 25,
Who pays for those higher costs,
those, uh, IRBs.
Stewart
So Mr. President.
People who pay for the cost for
project gets that abatement, so
we're already paying for these
IRP projects through uh the lack
very successful and very useful.
Uh, I'm glad to hear from
Senator Scott that all these
jobs are high paying, so if
they're all high paying, let's
put in prevailing wage to catch
up on those jobs that are not
once again here in this state,
start picking and choosing who's
going to get the higher wages.
Econo economic development
experts, Mr. President, across
throughout the state, Mr.
President, that are sounding the
alarm once again because
government is sticking their
nose into business that they
don't know what the heck they're
Against our neighbors.
When recruiting investment and
resulting in fewer projects,
fewer jobs and lost economic
studies
That you can easily Google or,
are saying as well, this
increases the cost to the
taxpayers. Here it is again, Mr.
President.
taxpayers.
To fund these projects.
We had this argument before
earlier in this session.
Will impact negatively, the
private sector.
Construction project.
We know that everybody knows
that.
But not the state of New Mexico.
money up.
And are hiring the people.
To be more competitive and cost
effective for the taxpayers of
yeah, yes, sir, Mr. President,
why do we think we know better
than the experts who are doing
this day to day for a living and
keeping costs down.
Senator Stewart, I will yield,
of all, all these projects get
30 years of no taxation shall we
stop having the government
interfere with that.
You know, the IRBs are a good
uh cadre of workers to choose
from when they're offering
prevailing wage.
Center block, thank you, Mr.
President. Well, let's talk
workers at prevailing wage or
the other workers not as good
workers? Do they not have the
same quality as these workers?
Is that what you, that's, can
you just verify that's what you
apprenticeship programs, you're
one of the best.
You know, IBEW their
apprenticeship programs are
phenomenal.
And they're training high school
project. They have health
benefits. They're part of a, a
group of people that want to do
the work, so, you know.
Center Block, well Mr.
President, uh, thank you.
Listen, once again, this shows
the state of New Mexico has no
understanding on how the private
not taking care of their
workers.
It's, it's, it's ridiculous.
That's a false premise because
the private industry which I'm
in and many on my side of the
would ask when these projects
are done, Mr. President, they
have to go through permitting
process. I would ask the
senator, do you have any data at
all in regards to the work
Have a better quality when it
comes to the permitting process
and the inspection process,
please let me know. I'd love to
see that right now. Thank you,
Senator Block. Senator Stewart,
Mr. President, there's a
Way more expensive for the
taxpayer.
I can send you those studies
I've just quoted some of them.
We've operated Intel in Rio
Rancho.
For many, many years on IRBs.
Not using prevailing wage.
Mr. President, the senator
doesn't know what the wages were
there. They could have been
hired than prevailing wage.
We used the private sector, the
competitive basis to build a
quality world-class facility
that is doing incredible things
here in Rio Rancho is the
largest manufacturer.
this, uh, Mr. President, when
we're uh doing, going through
the permitting process and the
approval for the inspection,
does the local government, the
municipalities or the county of
the state, do they ask if
Mr. President, I, I do. It's no.
We don't care.
We don't care as long as we're
meeting the requirements of the
local county and state
Have basically we're hands off
industry in the construction
process for the most part,
especially on prevailing wage
and you know what's happening in
Rio Rancho, Mr. President.
It's the fastest growing city.
That's because it's a
pro-business climate. This is an
anti-business.
Bill
That once again ties the hands
That's why we're losing to our
neighbors.
So Mr. President, um, I
appreciate, and I do, I know the
what we see in California in the
fast food industry of making
that $20 an hour. What's
happened? They've lost jobs.
We've seen it everywhere.
This is like my senator over
here said this is bad public
policy.
But I know the senator deeply
cares about New Mexicans. That's
not the argument here. It's the
argument about the policy.
And how government touches
private industry.
And this is not
What government should be doing.
Thank you, Mr. President, I
yield. Thank you, Senator Block.
We have Senator O'Malley
to, to yield. I just wanted to
say a few words about this, uh,
having experience on the
commission and the county. I
mean, the city of Albuquerque
in, in, uh.
want predictability because they
have to comply with zoning,
building codes. They just want
to know the rules. They want the
rules to be clear. And IRBs are
a negotiation.
that's a decision, apologies
decision, that in exchange for
taxes in exchange for a public
subsidy.
These are the rules.
because of the rules. That's
their decision. They don't have
to apply for IRBs.
For
If it's cheaper for them to
operate without a public
you're saying, look, I'd like to
be able to, to, to, to uh have
taxes abated in exchange for
what? And this is what we say.
These are the rules.
Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley. We
have Senator Galgos followed by
Senator.
Townsend, Senator Geos.
Thank you, Mr. President, with
you're doing. I understand, you
know, what you want to do with
the IRBs, but as a contractor, I
want to explain to you how that
works for us. So, uh, currently,
we, we consider him, and he's a
good operator, um,
I take that back, our wages went
up. Uh, he's now currently
job now would be $24 an hour,
but as we trade into a state job
that same operator.
goes up.
1951 for the same exact job.
Mr. President and Senator, and,
problems because now I need to
make sure that that employee
isn't just sitting around not
doing anything.
We have to manage that person
Senator, and it's uh we have
iron workers that do the rebar
on the construction jobs for
cement.
They make 2896 on a construction
1951, Mr. President, Senator,
and those jobs
Have to be monitored because it
doesn't take a whole lot, Mr.
manage our employees just
because they like more money.
For the same amount of work. I
just wanted to clarify, Mr.
do. But during the construction
project, a lot of that isn't
retained as on the job
employees, that's just during
that we, we did, we do work at
Ureco, but we don't stay there
at your ankle. They come back,
we put them on a different job
and we put them back out to
work, but Mr. President,
you know, Mr. President,
Senator, is that an incentive
for them to build in our state.
Thank you, Senator Galgo.
Senator Stewart.
Well, Mr. President, it seems
purpose is to incentivize
businesses to build here.
Senator Gregos, well, Mr.
President, Senator, then I would
say that we keep this as an
For a state job.
As it would for a private job
and I'll yield. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Cayos.
Senator Townsend.
Just thinking through this as I
was reading it and listening to
the debate and
And
I think we
One that I would say is that
you've made the statement.
And I, I think I agree with you
that.
People with higher
family, and that's, that's
where, where you're coming from,
is that correct, Mr. President,
Senator?
Um, Mr. President, yes.
Well, Mr.
will.
On companies whatever are coming
to New Mexico.
Is, is that what we do? When I
look up there on the rostrum
Is this lady standing to my
left.
That works for us day in and day
I mean, we're telling other
people they got to do it. Do we
do it, madam, uh, Mr. President,
um,
Senator?
Mr. President, the prevailing
finally redone our pay structure
here with legislative staff, uh,
we've put in provisions for them
to work for us longer, uh, so
the
consumers, taxpayers aren't
paying this.
the companies are. And in
exchange for 30 years of no
of those are prevailing wage.
The local projects, the city,
they pay prevailing wage, local
projects, city projects, so this
Senator O'Malley.
it's a negotiation process and
if they don't want to pay it,
they don't have to do their
project.
Mr. President and Senator.
we pay them prevailing wage?
Senator Stewart.
Mr. President, yes.
Senator Townsend.
that we are imposing on a
contractor coming into New
Mexico and working.
I, I don't believe that for a
minute. I look at those pay
talked to our LA's, I talked to
these people that work for us.
We don't pay prevailing wage.
We just don't do it, so I think,
The best there is and, and I
would agree wholeheartedly we
ought to pay them prevailing
wage. We ought to make sure that
the state does exactly what
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, UNA consent to excuse
Senator Figueroa until she
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
Thank you, Senator Padilla see
no further debate, Senator
Any public works that we do in
the state.
We pay prevailing wage that's in
big economic development in Rio
Rancho all paid by prevailing
wage. Prevailing wage is only
for construction workers. I'm
that we want to happen around
this state with IRBs also pay
the prevailing wage.
Mr. President, I move that House
Thank you all senators to your
seats, please. We are voting.
I'll send it to your seats.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senator Townsend, let you know.
Senator Scott you know.
Inner woods, but you know.
And a share voting no.
Senator Thornton voting no.
Center Block voting no.
Thank you. I have 23 in the
affirmative.
15, the negative House Bill 6
has duly passed the Senate.
Senator Stewart, thank you so
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate.
we're just waiting for an
amendment on item 24. So what
I'd like to do is just jump over
that for the minute and go to
Senator Block next, uh, and then
House Bill 402 substitute.
See no objection we are in that
other business 3rd reading
legislation center block.
Thank you Mr. President. I'd
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh, I
asked unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that all action for placing
House Bill 402 on final passage
substitute on final passage has
been taken. That's not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution no objection.
Center back to explain the bill.
dentists and dental hygienists
into their payment system within
30 days of receiving a complete
credentialing application.
If additional review is needed
investigation.
If they fail to meet those
deadlines, they must still
reimburse providers for covered
services right now, Mr.
reimbursement in 2023, this
legislature passed SB 232
establishing the same
credentialing timeline for other
healthcare providers, so this
matches it up.
providers. The bill also
streamlines the process, ensures
fairness and prevents providers
from being caught and
unnecessary bureaucratic, uh,
identify who your expert witness
is.
Well, Mr. President, I had to
scrape the bottom of the barrel
for this one, but um, I asked
that Representative Josh
Hernandez, uh, be my expert
here, Representative.
With that, Mr. President, I
stand for questions. Thank you.
Senators were debating.
House government elections and
in affairs Committee substitute
I move that house government
elections, Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for a House
bill 402 do now pass and ask
Show of hands. Thank you,
Senator. I tried. Thank you,
Senator.
Senators we're voting all
senators to your seats.
House Bill 402 has duly passed
the Senate center block.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, uh, to the Senate
body very much. Appreciate it.
Thank you. We're gonna go on to
item number 26 on today's
All right, Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate, the record show that all
action for placing House Bill 41
colleagues. This is uh just
transfers money so that we can
fund our public pro project, uh,
projects that stand for
questions.
Thank you, senators, we're
debating House Bill 41.
House Bill 41 to now pass
unanimous consent of the Senate
Record show. Roll has been
called and all those present
voting in the affirmative,
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you all senators to your
seats once again.
But I voted 30 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative.
House Bill 41 has passed the
Senate.
We're going to item number 27,
This is Aurora.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that house.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
See, no objection, Senator
Bergman, you please explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President.
40% of New Mexico's counties are
considered maternal health
deserts since 2015 birth centers
have been licensed and
reimbursed by Medicaid, and they
play an important role in
healthcare authority adopt rules
to ensure Medicaid facility fee
payments made to birth centers
for non-complicated births and
newborns are comparable to those
those facility fee payments made
Senators were debating hospitals
56 is amended. Anyone wish any
debate?
See no debate.
Senator Berg wants to close.
Thank you, Mr. President.
hands.
Thank you, Senators. We're
voting. House Bill 56 as amended
if you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senators.
Senator Townsend, I, I
apologize.
This is the point of personal
privilege. I thought it was
Senator, Senator Bergman for
anyone that missed it, this is
my daughter Aurora.
Welcome, Aurora, Senator
Townsend.
All right, senators, we're gonna
go on to the next item that's
gonna be item number 28.
And I'll yield to Senator
Stephenix. Thank you, Mr.
for House Bill 78 on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objection. Senator Stephanic
qualified look likes. These are
clinics and all of our
communities they're in 32 of our
33 counties there are 200 sites
allows low cost drugs. The the
federally qualified health
centers serves.
Decade, Medicare, private
under $30,000 a year and uh Mr.
President, I could stand for
questions or comments. Thank you
Senatorpanic senators we're
debating how judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
the senator yield for several
questions,
Mr.
President, I do yield. Senator
Scott, Mr. President, Senator,
could you describe for the body
enrolled in the 340B program to
purchase drugs at very
significant discounts. Is that
correct?
Mr. President, Senator Scott,
340B pharmacy program and so
while some individuals who are
patients at the lower end of the
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
let's, let's go all the way
through the chain of custody
here if we could.
Appropriately.
Uprighted to accept these 340B
since 1992 and again uh the
federally qualified health
centers would have to contract
with pharmacies to specifically
Approved clinical facilities now
have a significantly discounted
drug in their inventory which is
then can be sold.
but it is not sold to the
federally qualified health
centers which we refer to as
FQHCs for all of their patients.
That some of these federally
qualified facilities.
That are qualified to receive
that would not necessarily be
low income. Is there an auditing
process that, that can go
through this chain of custody to
Mr. President, thank you,
Senator Scott, for that
question. Uh, the FQHCs are in
annually recertified by the
Health Resources Services
The, uh, they are audited and
it's very transparent, so there
is a state audit every year.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
Uh
I think I might, I only have 2
pages.
Of 23179 3.1.
Yes, and is it line 10?
to submit any claims
utilization.
As I mentioned, Mr. President,
center status and it's under the
Health Resources Services
Administration at the federal
level.
Well, I, I, I'm wondering about
that. Why that prohibition, if
there is complete transparency
if somebody is certified to
receive or to purchase the 340B
pharmaceuticals then they have
part of that.
And Mr. President and Senator, I
think the concern is that these
drugs are going out.
drugs. Is that, is that
potential there?
Mr. President, Senator, thank
you for that question. You know
our federally qualified health
centers have to adhere to very
and while they have an
extremely, I'm gonna say for
lack of a better word, skinny,
uh, overhead, uh, they don't
have a lot of profit coming in
rooms. They're staying out of
our hospitals, so it is in their
best interests if they want to
The need for paragraph.
3 on line 20 of that bill. Uh,
process would not be fully
transparent. Thank you again.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
See no further debate. Oh, we do
have further debate, Senator,
uh, Block.
Before I, I, I asked the
question, Mr. President, there
should be an amendment there.
Senator Soonics to introduce
your expert witness. Thank you,
Mr. President, members of the
Senate, Yvette Ammerman is the
executive director of the New
in for her, please up Senator
Stepanics, we have to go to the
body first, Sergeant Arms, we
have to go to the body first.
There's many unanimous consent
requests to allow our expert
witness into the chamber.
introduced or would you like to
go straight to the moment?
Uh, Mr. President, I'd like to
go straight to the amendment,
please is a floor amendment the
reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
Center block to move the
amendment,
Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment number 1 to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
one of the issues that I had in
committee with, with the bill
and uh I want to appreciate the
sponsor for bringing the bill
forward is related to
transparency.
manufacturers, Mr. President,
can request claims data,
information, which this bill
prohibits. This allows them to
verify that they are
saying that FQHCs can have drug
discounts contract as well with
uh retail pharmacies to dispense
those.
has problematic oversight and
accountability.
Even though those FQHCs have
rigorous reporting.
The oversight of the 340B
program is separate and not
amendment also provides
oversight and accountability.
This amendment ensures the
intent of the program is
maintained. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Senators,
h und re d s of pharmacies all
over the state that contract
with federally qualified health
centers and we would hate to run
some of our community pharmacies
We do have debate on the
amendment, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
This amendment would seem to
overcome the objections that I
Supply chain to know for sure.
That the 340B drugs were going
That discount program being
abused.
Mr. President, uh, absolutely,
because, uh, Senator, when we
were in the committee together,
discount prices, for instance,
right here in Santa Fe, uh, a
woman named, uh, Miss King was
getting treated for cancer.
And the price that should have
been sold to her that that
So this amendment is to protect
those vulnerable New Mexicans
that can get screwed over, uh,
by this, by this program unless
Uh, that sounds extreme. Why was
the charge so much higher than
the 340B drug price. Was it
because she had commercial
insurance.
An abuse of the program and
contrary to the objectives, is
that correct?
absolutely this would close that
loophole.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator, I
I think transparency, follow the
money.
Uh, these disclosures or the
request for information from
manufacturers to who are trying
to determine whether their drugs
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Senator
Scott.
See no further debate on the
amendment, Senator Lo to close
on the amendment.
very much appreciate that. This,
this amendment.
Ops up the, the data, uh, so the
manufacturers can actually see,
uh, the prices here and where,
Mexican would want so they know
they're not gonna be getting
screwed over in their insurance
costs for drugs that should be
coming at extremely discounted
prices, so with that, uh, Mr.
number one to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee.
Substitute for house bill 78,
Amendment number 1, adoption if
you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Center Nova voting no.
Senator Cervantes, what do you
know?
Senator Pope.
Well you know.
Center Maestas.
Voting no
Sinner Dio Lopez Borino.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Trujillo voting no.
Senatorpanics voting no.
Senator Lopez, but you know.
Senator Doig voting no.
And send her had a meal voting
no.
By a vote of 18 in the
affirmative, 21 in the negative.
Senate format #1 has failed to
be adopted. Center Block.
for this one, you got to hit the
target, uh, right on target to
win, so I appreciate the debate
and uh appreciate uh my
senators, uh, the Senate body.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78 amendment sponsored by
Senator Maestas.
Send a message to move the
amendment.
They said my assassin no
objection if you'll explain what
your amendment attempts to do.
Uh thank you, Mr. President. I
Services unless required by
federal law, it's my
understanding that that the
federal courts and Congress are
in in flux. What this amendment
would do is merely uh bump out
Senators were debating Senate I
remember #2, and I yield to the
sponsor Senator Stephanics. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President, uh,
Senator Maestas and I did speak
about this. This is friendly.
Thank you, senators, we're
Thank you, Mr. President. I
thank the sponsor for
leadership, uh, I now move that
Senate floor Amendment #2.
I now move Senate floor
A voice vote. Thank you,
senators there's uh you know
there's a consent request.
There's a request to adopt
Senate floor #2.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
with the sponsor yield,
please
Mr. President, I do yield.
Um, Senator, Mr. President,
Audits, uh, they provide the
oversight, is that correct or is
it another agency?
The, um, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
scale and then it's there uh
parent organization that comes
in and does the audits once a
year, but Mr. President, it also
program rules so if there is a
backup for any private entity
who believes the program is
being misused.
drug manufacturer. Why, why
would they want to deny that?
that according to my expert it's
discretionary.
Thank you, Mr. President.
But that
Uh
it's denied by the HRSA, uh,
that's one of the reasons why.
Uh, I, I have a hard time with
this bill. In fact,
uh the New Mexico covered
entities about 18 times and out
of those 18 audits, Mr.
President, Senator, there was
340B category, uh, that was
purchased, which is exactly why.
We need the transparency in the
accountability in this. So can
no FQHCs that um had that
problem and if anything they
were looking for more paperwork,
but not one FQHC was found to be
category, uh, do you know what
happened there?
Mr. President, according to my
expert, it was not within the
FQHC system.
Why would a manufacturer ask.
For claims data,
And why do you think it would be
important to them when providing
the 340B pricing to a covered
Uh, Mr. President, yes, ma'am.
Let me ask it this way, without
having that window into the
claims level data, how does a
Mr. President, uh, Senator, my
expert is telling me that that
is outside the scope of this
bill.
bill specifically prohibits, Mr.
President, Senator, a
manufactured from receiving that
claims, uh, date which would
give them cause to pursue an
If you are being treated, that
the
Drug price that you get.
times higher than what it should
cost you?
Mr. President, Senator, 90% of
the people in this program
people on Medicaid, people on
Medicare, and the sliding scale
fees for the low income if you
have private insurance or you
Medicaid, I mean, who knows what
type of fraud is going on that.
I mean, that's been well
documented, um, for decades, but
when you look at what happened
have cost her $2500. We could
have prevented that with my
amendment by allowing the
manufacturer to do that audit
and to get the claims data. Um,
Uh thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, uh, would you yield for
just one more question.
Mr. President, Senator, I do
yield.
In paragraphs 12 and 3 will not
become effective until January
1, 2026.
Between now and then,
We will have some inquiries made
that might shed some light on
See no further debate Senator
Stephanics to close on the bill.
Mr. President, I move that House
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you all senators to
your seats, please. We're
voting.
Senator Ramos voting no.
Senator Boone
Voting now.
Sitting near voting no.
Senator Tobiasson, but you know.
Senator Woods, voting now.
Senator Scott, but you know.
President, members of the
Senate, thank you very much.
Thank you. We have the sponsor
back in the in the building on
the item that we skipped over a
little while ago we're gonna go
back to item number 24.
And that'll be Senator Munoz.
of here in about 24 hours, less
than 24 hours, 23 hours, 22
hours.
I'm happy senator.
It's good. You have, you're
gonna have to race me down the
substitute for heist agriculture
sekis and water resources
committee substitute for House
Bill 137 as twice amended on
final passage is now subject to
debate amendment and
governor's office. Senator, can
you identify your extra witness?
I didn't quite hear that. Um
unanimous consent to allow my
expert witnesses on the, on the
floor, Rebecca Baroos from the
governor's office, policy
Thank you, Mr. President. The
strategic water supply in New
Mexico has been worked on for
over a couple of years, a couple
of years ago, we put $5 million
into the Environment department
today, so I, the most important
thing is you can do is create a
future for children.
And, and this will do that with
water. Uh, what brackish water
is, we drill down into the
public consumption, industrial
consumption, uh,
Or any other consumption that we
may need.
Uh, what this bill does, it
allows the strategic water
supply program to uh.
reduce the states.
Need a reliance on freshwater
resources, creating the
strategic water supply program
funding and providing
If we give you an idea, they did
this in in El Paso almost 60
some years ago, the US senator,
I forget her name, did this in
El Paso,
uh.
military base and and she
created something that was
great, a great future for El
Paso.
By the turn of a dial, you can
turn up 10 million gallons of
figuring out what's in that
water supply, uh, and how we
handle that.
Uh, Mr. President, the Gallup
pipeline costs $3 billion in
Mr. President, if we would put
one of these wells, uh, in
McKinley County in San Juan
County. We reliance on river
get water, water lines are going
out to the reservation, uh, so
they are going out there in big
quantities, six-foot pipes, uh,
we could in New Mexico's
and across the US with that, Mr.
President, we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator when you.
Senators were debating, are you
to Senator Hamblin.
And it was Senator Hamblin or
Senator Trujillo Senator Til.
will yield. Thank you, Mr.
President. So, um, senator, I, I
just wanna kind of point out
some things that we discussed in
with also treating produced
water, is that correct?
Mr. President, Senator, yes.
Thank you Mr. President and
thank you, senator and um what
this definition for produced
water stayed because if you look
at the definition for brackish
water, the last uh few words
correct.
Thank you. And then um my
concern about this bill and, and
I very much support us, um,
um, can you explain to me, uh,
right now the, the bill has in
there the ability to give grants
to other public, uh, entities,
local jurisdictions, counties.
Well, Mr. President, I, I'll
give you an example of, if
Gallup was awarded one of these
contracts as a public utility
and, and got a grant to do drill
to drill the well. Somebody has
to build the facility. Somebody
has to maintain and manage that
facility. It's gonna take a lot
of technical expertise, those
filters, uh, are
chlorinated, add chlorine uh
and.
Colgate back in and, and so you
have, this is a different
procurement process. So as we
learn this, we're gonna have to
brackish water does. And so it's
a combination of a partnership
between if it's a public body.
Uh, and a contractor or
you, Senator, and so is there a
possibility that we would
contract with a private entity
to potentially build uh
filtration system.
determination, and it could be
different in every area. It is
different in every area. I may
have high salts, you may have
high minerals, uh, there may be
other things that do that, but
it makes the project more
to people, how we use it for
consumption, um, and.
New Mexico gets better.
Thank you Mr. President, and,
brackish water, what would they
then do with the water?
Um, Mr. President, in, in a
public source in uh, in Gallup,
you know, it's, it's, it's
surcharge on that, uh, is, is
high. So if it was a public
body,
Uh, they, they'd, uh, sell that
to their customers as a public
body and may use Gallup because
concrete plant is a good example
of drilling the brackish water
and not using well water.
Uh, they could do whatever they
want with it. Uh, they could
bring it up, treat it to the
the water at, at a certain rate
just like they sell produced
water in the, in the oil fields.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator, that's kind of where my
using state money to potentially
uh build a fil filtration system
and then that system would turn
around and sell that water to a
local business, they could sell
clause, and when I look at the
anti-donation clause, I noticed,
um, you know, it says that um
the anti-donation clause
corporation with certain
exceptions, and those exceptions
include.
indigent and sick persons, which
this doesn't qualify for that.
that are living here in New
Mexico again it doesn't apply to
that and then we kind of get
into the, the last few, and it
exceptions that for us to give a
private entity, uh, money, uh,
falls into either uh expanding
understand that this isn't
primarily for residential
services that really what we're
looking at is it could be used
for residential services, but
really the idea behind.
residential services and the
brackish water after it's been
cleaned, um, would most likely
go to a business you mentioned
the cement company, um, I've,
And so, so I don't see that it
fits into there, which then
takes us to the economic
development function and the
anti-donation clause does have
business to help build economic
development, uh, to help enhance
cultural um cultural facilities
and so I, I actually, um, Mr.
We do have a floor. Do we have
another floor, man? We do have a
floor amendment, the reader to
read.
Senate floor Amendment number 1
for House Bill 137 as twice
amended amendments sponsored by
Senator Trujillo.
Senatorillo to move the
amendment.
Um, Mr. President, I move that
Senate floor amendment number
one.
To house energy environment and
natural resources Committee
Thank you, Senator. Senator, if
you'll explain what your
amendment does.
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
the title, allowing the use of
the fund because we're creating
a fund with this, allowing the
use of the fund for relevant
statewide economic development
Department of Environment and
the offices of the state
engineer we're just calling it
an agency.
and that will include both of
those.
And then uh we strike all of the
the state and a public and a a
private entity to help their
business grow. Um, we don't need
the procurement code or any law
entities. So we've, it strikes
all of the contract language and
then it, um, also incorporates
in the the house floor
development finance Act and
local economic development Act.
Projects provided that the
projects are approved by the
Swed for projects that are
approved by either the state or
the local, we want to make sure
that the environment department,
because they are the experts in
that, Mr. President, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator Sanders.
We're debating Senate floor
amendment number one.
Uh, you know, to the sponsors,
clawback provisions.EA was set
up by, I think I was part of
that. I think 89 years ago as
strategically economic
development. We're talking about
provisions, and it also has
contract.
So if we remove the contracting
provision, then Lita's clawback
provisions will work and when
you're drilling wells, uh,
form, uh, they could, they could
hit a dry hole and have to drill
another one that it could
happen, uh, but they usually
know where the water is. They'll
dri drill deep enough. But Lita
move forward, uh, and if the
project fails, uh, on a water
project uh and Leda does the
contracting. There's a clawback
this provision of the leader
would not work. Oh.
sure we want all eyes on every
project that we can handle, uh,
and especially with water, but
Lita is not uh uh uh.
Uh, NED, the quality, uh, what
the well is, the state engineer
because we're not taking public
water rights away. Uh, these are
Thank you Senator Munoz. We do
have debate on the amendments we
have Senator Hick.
Thank you, Mr. President. I rise
in support of this amendment,
man by taking out the contracts
from this amendment, uh, I think
that is absolutely essential and
Mr. President, I'm, I'm going to
give a quick little lesson on
Consideration means that each
party is exchanging something of
value to their detriment. So Mr.
President, if I sell you my car,
there were these contracts would
have zero consideration, because
the private company who would
get our public money.
So there is no consideration
from them back to the state.
These would be invalid contracts
as this is set up.
And Frank and Mr. President, I
This would provide for a
clawbacks, for a clawback for a
public benefit.
We as a state, when we are
The I in this case, a vague
concept of what we would get in
return if we are not getting
that.
If there's not more fresh water
being produced, uh.
uh, fraud, abuse and waste in,
in government spending and
rules, Mr. President.
And not adopting this amendment.
would be
private company, you don't have
to give anything in return. And
even if you don't do what we,
what we thought you were going
to do with it. We can, we can't
that that Lita is appropriate
here, uh, because for those.
those private companies who are
going to be getting, uh, public
be part of, of the process in
this bill. So Mr. President, I
urge the body to vote for this
amendment, uh, and not pass
unconstitutional laws. Thank
Thank you, Mr. President.
I think we have to remember that
the water in the state of New
for beneficial use and what's
interesting to me is I, I had
the opportunity, Mr. President,
of traveling to Israel in a
Hispanic to a Hispanic leaders,
constitution and the way they
treat water at first look.
a lot like ours. The water
belongs to the people for
beneficial use.
time, first in right in Israel
they have priorities and with
regard to water for, um, for
farming, that is the highest
They, they subsidize the the
little um tubes for watering.
It's just an incredible,
incredible system. Then second
to that is water for household
use.
And industry is accept to pay
it's supposed to pay its own way
with regard to water.
And by doing that, Israel has
food, um, they have turned a, a,
a place like ours.
Um, you know, a desert like
ours, they've made that desert
bloom.
say that in the context of
higher or approach to strategic
water feels wrong to me or the
strategic uh plan, it looks like
The cattle growers.
Or are we going to prioritize
this water for some kind of
economic development use.
Third industrial use, and it
seems to me like we have it
backwards, but the reason I'm
going to support this amendment
New Mexico a way for nothing.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Celia Lopez.
yield.
Senator Munhoz,
please
Mr. President, yes. er Munoz,
uh, how much money are we
talking about now that's in the
budget?
For this, um, Mr. President,
Senator, there's currently about
40 million in the, in the budget
sponsor to yield further, but I
think, uh, it's an opportunity
to recognize that this strategic
water concept, I believe we
first saw last session for the
first time. 3 sessions in a row,
for a strategic water, uh, and
we needed to have that.
And of course, I realize it's
changed some that included
produced water at the time, but
we've gone from, uh, uh, needing
this session maybe at 7870 $80
million and now it's $40 million
and
You know, colleagues, if, if
we're running a business like
this and I went to my banker and
said, you know, I need $500
my banker would laugh me out of
the room, right? Uh, this is not
strategic and it's not a plan,
uh, when, when we're throwing
million to maybe 140 million to
70 million, and now we're at 40
million.
Now, to the, to the issue of the
amendment, which is really
you. And I see the floor
amendment sponsor kind of, uh,
nodding her head affirmatively
and shuck shucking her shoulders
because I think she knows where
I'm going with this earlier in
the session we've talked several
times. This, this money would go
to perhaps lead to projects.
not. Let's not be naive.
Uh, and let's not be fanciful. A
lot of the money we put into LEA
goes into people's pockets, uh,
and I gave some examples of that
went.
And we think, well, there's
clawbacks, but I don't know that
we really ever pursue clawbacks.
If we have, uh, I, I've never
heard of it. I don't know about
And maybe take care of some
offices and some other expenses
and go to some conferences and
do some good things without
leading money, but in the end,
if the project doesn't
materialize, and I'd be happy to
give you all, uh, many examples
LEDA is somehow different than
an an a donation clause issue,
again, I think is spurious,
which is that that money
oftentimes can go into any
dubious as well too, because
when I asked in committee,
Give me some examples of where
this money now at 40 million.
Give me some examples of the
projects that are in the budget
in the plan.
Uh, my guess is that right now
there aren't any specified
projects that we're going to use
this money for because we
thought we needed half a billion
and then now we're down several
steps to to 40 million. So
gonna come to the people that I
represent, there's no assurance
that the leader of money is
going to be spread around the
state geographically fairly, but
the same is true really with
strategic water.
Reserve projects as well too.
engineer. We're going to trust
the Environment Department.
We're gonna trust economic
development because they're all,
somebody's gonna get the 40
million bucks, regardless of
what we do with this amendment,
asking for anyone really to, to
give me any answers to these
questions. I think we're going
to do a lot of this on blind
faith. We're gonna put $40
million in somebody's pocket and
hope for the best. Thank you,
a sponsor of the amendment yield
you yield yield.
Mr. President and Senator, this
Mr. President, no senator, it
doesn't. It still gives the
left pretty wide open that they
could give it public to public
grants, we don't, we don't have
to have a law in order to do
the Gallup City, um, so that
they can do some exploration and
they'll use that grant money to
hire an engineer. I don't know
all of the specifics of how you
ends, you know, the drilling
ends up with nothing.
They're still getting a service,
they bargain for a service, um,
they thought that there was
water down there and if they
exploration or even the
development and building of a
facility to treat the brackish
water so that the public entity
then can then sell the brackish
priorities are is already been
said, but this doesn't take that
away at all. What it does is it
puts some guard rails on money
businesses so that we're using
less of our.
fresh water. The concept is
perfect. I love the concept of
it. I just think it's important
so no, it doesn't take away the
opportunity for us to do that
kind of uh research and
development and and and building
out and cleaning it just makes
and I'm not quite sure who to
address, which of the sponsors
to address this question too,
but
The, I mean, the, the technology
And, and how do you handle the
waste stream that is a
consequence of
Of the desalination.
So
intended.
To
Uh, provide
applications of existing
technology or or would we be
overcome these technical and
economic hurdles.
Senator Scott, who would you
like to yield to as a senator,
Senator Munoz, please. Senator
operating, look at Israel. uh
Almogordo got 10, about 10 $10
million in 2017. I'm sorry, she
moved the paper on me $9 to $10
either to an
agricultural product use and
some of it's gonna be evaporated
and used for a mineral use and,
and then disposed of, uh, in El
because each one is different
and they reinject that back into
another field. And so the
byproduct is is either sold, uh,
it's a, it's evaporated in, in.
Mr. President and Senator,
these, this $40 million would be
primarily earmarked for
Her applications
to take.
correct. I mean, uh.
About 6 to 8 months ago, the
governor's office in Rebecca
came to me and said, we're
looking for a test well to test
their filtration system on that
water works in Gallup, we don't
have a brackish well, but we
have a well with high mineral
artesian whale, so it
automatically once they punched
the, the water layer, it
automatically flows up, but the
mineral content was so high, so
they could clean that artesian
well.
And say, OK, we can desell that
artesian well.
Uh, and not have to drill a
brackish well because artesian
flows, there's places in New
Mexico we have a lot of water,
artesian water flows
it for sale project, but this is
a proven system.
It's proven in Saudi Arabia.
It's proven in Israel, it's
proven in El Paso, uh, it's
proven in Elmar Gordo.
day, and so they're they're
proven systems, uh, it's just
how do we want to handle uh what
the amendment how do we want to
handle how we do this. If you
look towards the bill on page 3.
to have a benefit to the
community is that drinking
water, is that economic
development, but the community
benefit plan is required in the
bill, so.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Senator Scott.
well that you're referencing are
presently unknown would there be
a fairly significant risk that
this project will not be
It is that.
A reasonable question, Senator
Munoz, Mr. President, Senator,
LEDA is designed for a clawback
quality, uh, Lita is designed
for jobs, uh, and, and so it's a
completely different system with
Lita. Water's completely
different than, than anything
clean those minerals out and see
what the quality of the water is
at the other end, uh, but
Lita's.
Lita, when we did Lita, I can't
think it was Representative
Larry Yaga and I that did lead.
The glove plant in Gallup, which
they gave 4.5 million to uh went
broke.
Now the county has to do the
clawback provisions because they
years. And so now the counties
that had the money held for the
project, sends the money back to
the state. So that's where the
clawback provision at leader is.
If you do this with water, it,
project is and how you wanna
handle that, but my vision of
this and uh Senator Brigman's
daughter Aurora vision is this,
is to turn on her tap and have
water.
be tapping those river wells,
the the wells close to the
river, they're drawing the well,
the water out of the rivers,
we'll be drawing deep brackish
water and that reduces our
reliance on river water and
groundwater.
Senator Scott
Fundamentally different
objectives between the strategic
water reserve and lead it, that
is, late is about jobs.
The strategic water reserve is
the, uh, economic opportunity of
producing this water anywhere
close to what people will be
willing to pay for it.
More economical for the folks
that eventually will rely on
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and, and senators, um.
I, I rise against this
amendment. I think that this
It, it's really gonna depend on
how the contract's done and the
bill says that you have to meet,
you know, all the state.
Requirements.
So, if you're contracting with a
we actually saw a lot of the
same things when we were there
as far as when it goes to the
desalinization, and they're very
good at it. They do it all the
time it's, it's they went from
And
They're extra water, imagine
extra water in New Mexico. The
extra water they're using to
refill the Sea of Galilee.
I don't think there's been any
decisions made. It's one of the
reasons we need to do this as to
whether or not that water is
going to become people's
drinking water.
well.
There's no problem using it for
drinking water and for tap
water. Not any problem at all,
as long as they get all the
minerals out.
There are companies.
company in Albuquerque that does
this, and there's a company in
Texas that does this, and
they'll all come in and say,
hey, we're willing to help you.
Contract with you. Now, the one
in Israel that I've talked to
and that we've had conversations
with that's more than glad to
advise us.
On some of this stuff they said
look when we come into a
million. I have no idea, by the
way, how much it costs.
But if it costs $100 million and
the state puts 20 million in and
We can do those as long as the
state owns a portion of the
asset that they're doing without
violating the anti-donation
clause.
So I'm, I, I'm not sure where
that's a fee for service. That's
just like we do with everything
else that we do.
It's not against the anti-nation
clause to do fee for service,
water is, all the water, not
just brackets, not just fresh,
but every everything.
It's, it's gonna take a long
time. We could, we could put a
100 million in there today. It's
But within the next.
You know, hopefully 30 or 40
years.
We will have identified within
10 years we should have
identified where every
I'm gonna tell you, with the way
that we are running out of
water, we don't have 10 years to
wait. We know sites now that we
30-year project that's not
running.
Now there's a test one there, so
there's 2 of them in in the
Almogordo area, there's a test
But the one that Allan Maordo
has invested all this money in.
The one thing they failed to do
is secure a water source.
And that's why it hasn't been
why.
Leda doesn't know how to do
that.
It's not there, it's not their
thing.
company.
Thank you Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Brandt. We do
have a debate for a second time.
Senator Duig on the amendment.
body heard a suggestion that
that someone can get LiDA funds
and, and just not and and just
take them and go and, and, and
So, all I'm reading here from
the uh from 2.94.1.8, the
administrative rule on LIDA all
LIDA investments are funded on a
project participation agreement.
So, uh, I think to the extent
that there is a suggestion that
these funds would be no better
protected by LIDA.
than as they are now. I don't
pub where the state pays, gives
the private entity so much money
and then owns 20% of what
they've built with it and they
own the other 80%. Here, the
state would not own anything.
money. On the private company
would own the water that they
are producing with that. The
state would get zero
consideration. This is not a fee
for service
you for thank you see no further
debate on the amendment, Senator
Tillo to close on the amendment.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you, body
for this lively discussion. I
need this language in the
statute to give them that
authority to procure for
services that the state needs.
So
As long as the, the procurement
If the state doesn't get
something in return, then
they're not going to be able to
procure and the only way to do
that is through a program that
doesn't violate the
their business and then in turn
sell their product, um, truly in
my mind is in fact, and what I'm
trying to do with this amendment
indicates that they can do that,
just trying to find a mechanism
whereby we can help businesses
to help the state of New Mexico.
And with that, Mr. President, I
and water resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 137 as
amended.
Be now adopted and I ask for a
On the amendment, please raise
your hand.
I should put, if you wish to
vote yes, please raise your
hand.
Senator Stephanic voting no.
Senator Havia Bono.
San Minos voting no. I'm sorry,
Senator Worth voting no.
Senator Hickey, you know.
And compost voting no.
Senator Figueroa, Morino.
know.
Senator Thornton voting no.
Senator Paul voting no.
Senator Brantley voting no.
Senor Sanchez voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator.
you know.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Center block.
Voting no.
By a vote of 9 in the
affirmative, 32 in the negative
Senate floor. Amendment number 1
has failed to pass the Senate.
Senator Hill.
Thank you Mr. President thank
We'll have Senator Thornton,
followed by Senator Pope on the
bill, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. President. I.
I listened to this debate and
I'm actually intrigued by it. I
you, just a quick question.
Does this bill include
developing a, a master plan to
transport water across.
The state of New Mexico.
the, the idea and there is no
plan to transport, so let me
just stop there.
Thank you for that, and I, I
think I knew the answer before I
asked it. And that, that's,
that's probably the biggest
various spots.
We can go through the technology
which is fairly well established
now and actually build a
desalination plant.
New Mexico and move it from the
site. It is developed.
To the sites where it's gonna be
used, whether that be a farm, a
municipality.
Or wherever
include how we're going to
transport that water from where
it's developed to where it's
going to be used.
I support the activity. I
support this effort, but I'm
this $40 million be used by the
state engineer to put together a
master plan that says, here are
the key sites we want to develop
initially.
Here's the water that we were
Would you not agree with that,
Mr. President, Senator, uh, so
that what you're talking about
be complimentary to what we're
7.5 to, to map all the aquifers
in New Mexico, so that's gonna
get done whether brackish water,
uh, what level the waters at
when they map that water, we'll
know where the water exists. So
engineer will now look at that
where those waters are and tell
you if you can have a well or
where the best places for
brackish water. So it's kind of
hand in hand, uh, we're having a
university do it, not the state
engineer, uh, because the
together. Nobody wants to drill
a dry well. I don't know if
you've ever drilled one. I
drilled the dry well for water
one time, and then went $7000
down the hole.
And then we had to move over and
plan that will help every city
and county in New Mexico and
that will put the more tools in
the toolbox as we develop this
water field.
I thank you for that. And, and
that's really all I'm suggesting
And that is has actually has to
be part of the economic uh
concern and situation when we
actually start developing water
Senator Charlie, Senator
Steinborn, and Senator
Stephanics, Senator Pope, thank
you, Mr. President, with the
sponsor Please Yield Mr.
President, Senator, yes, I will.
The clean up of this water and
the standards, could you tell
me, making sure we're, you know,
we're moving any type of
par, or do we need to do other
things to ensure that these are
removed from the brackish water.
Um, Mr. President, under the New
Mexico Environment Department
drinking water they'll
water is produced by brackish
water treatments required are
required to meet EPA standards.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you know, there's some of this
stuff is hazardous materials,
um, are the regulations in place
to put them in sights to where
they need to be and that's we
um, is it gonna be disposed of
properly.
Um, Mr. President, Senator,
those, those, those hazardous
waste regulations all apply.
They're already in place, uh,
for when the waste comes out.
this money is going, some of it
is going to be a
characterization and and mapping
and understanding where some of
these bracky aquifers are, um,
the characterization and
understanding where these
brackish aquifers are before we
commit to establishing a.
many hazardous materials to make
sure that this is the type of
water that we should be using.
Could you talk a little bit
about how this bill ensures that
as they look in in wells, the
well and rear Rancho, they, they
know what the middle concentrate
is now that they drilled it and
and what's coming up and so
they'll be able to determine is
who doesn't have that high a
level of quality. So those are
all those rules will be done,
uh, they'll be done hand in hand
with the mapping, uh.
I'm looking at maps all across
New Mexico and the brackish
New Mexico from Clovis down to,
to maybe gel, but there's basins
everywhere, a lot of basins
around Mesa Valley up and down
the Rio Grande Hornado, um, but
Um, is that actually one of the
proposed sites right now or is
that just an option?
Mr. President, uh, that's an
option, but there is a brackish
well there that's drilled and
that has been testing, uh.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator, and that's also
wanna make sure that we're
properly removing the salts in
the waste, uh, Mr. President and
Senator, next question, next set
of questions, um, wanna talk
sometimes maybe you could use
elevation and gravity to help
um.
Use this brackish water and
pushing it through the membrane
Powering these desalination
plants and you know, is there
any thought about any type of
renewable energy.
Mr. President, Senator in
section on page 5 of the bill,
gas emissions so where there's
availability for clean energy,
whether it's solar, wind, uh,
they'll use those, um, and when
there's not, then they'll use
other, other sources.
Uh, we're gonna be giving these
grants in some cases it seems
like this could be to the public
sector, but it might be to a
private entity to start these
Who ends up owning or having the
rights to this water after it's
cleaned up.
Um, how is this process gonna
work?
state of New Mexico, who is
giving the greatest benefit? Is
it the people that I, I'll just
use Gallup again because we're
gonna pipe water from farmington
to Gallup. Is that the greatest
there's no, it's all gonna be,
uh, uh, application process,
whoever has the best
application, whoever has the
best community benefit, whoever
has the lowest greenhouse
for computing benefit, but you
do hit wells where they're,
they're high in saline or high
in salt, uh, we all have call
again at some of our houses.
There's nobody picked in in the
water quality control will be
determined by the state engineer
and the environment department.
So Mr. President, Senator, um,
If they end up using the water
rights and going into a brackish
well and.
Cleaning this water up and it's
there, is there anything to stop
anyone from just cleaning up
drill the well, and they'd have
to get a permits once the water
quality is known what they're
going to do with it, uh, and so
they'd still be under the, the
regulations and the permitting,
Del Sol. They could speculate
that the solar plants can need 4
million gallons of water a day,
uh, to do solar panels, uh, and
they could speculate that
they're going to sell them to
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you Senator. And so this
goes kind of to my last
question. Have we looked at.
how when we clean up this
this question all day because
I've had this laid out in front
of me, so in Elmo Gordo, when
they did theirs, uh, for a 5
million gallons a day desal
million and it cost $4000.04
dollars per 1000 gallons. So if
you can divide $1000 into $4. I
plant, so 4 $4 per 1000 gallons
in a desal plant is is cheaper
than what we
Have in front of our desk right
now in the bottle.
not that expensive, but I'm
wondering, is this being paid in
subsidies or in other areas to
actually get the water this
clean. And so the cost might be
there but.
brackish water, that cost can
decrease or increase. So, um,
are there other costs that we
have to worry about with these
plants?
Mr. President, Senator, uh,
repeat that question. I'm trying
I'm wondering, is there any
other cost that is outside what
the ratepayer is paying.
Per subsidy or what was invested
in the desalination plant on the
it comes up, it's costing you,
uh, roughly $4 per 1000 gallons,
but there's a cost that they'll
add, you know, the operator, the
cost of the filters, the cost of
may be costs with pumping, uh,
you got to pump some of that
uphill to storage tank and put
it in a storage tank and then
it'll gravity flow after that,
but there, there will be
additional costs, uh, I don't
about that. Almo Gordo is
operational, um, but the one I
mentioned is in Santa Teresa.
At $4 per 1000 gallons.
Thank you, Mr. President and
it again. Have we looked at the
impact geologically to tapping
into these wells. You just want
to make sure we're not causing
Mr. President, before any,
there's going to be drilled, the
state engineer is gonna look at
that process and make sure that
we don't cause a sinkhole, we
don't cause a cavern. We're not
be very cautious and do that
because we don't need an
economic disaster like the
Carlsbad sinkhole that we, we
had when they mined out the sal
covered and then had to spend
hundreds of millions of dollars.
to fix the interchange in Carl's
they've been doing desalination,
uh, for decades, but in a lot of
cases it's been from the ocean
water and I just think sometimes
this is a little different what
we're doing here. I just worry
been a sacrificial zone for
nuclear, uranium, and other
things. And I just want to
ensure that with what
we're doing that whatever we
clean up that it's really safe.
characterizing the water before
we move forward, so I still have
concerns on this bill. Once
again, I think we're gonna go in
this direction, um, and it's
O'Malley, I yield to Senator
Gargos. Senator Gegos.
Mr. President, can I get
unanimous consent to take our
jackets off. Senators there's
many unanimous consent requests,
seeing no objection.
to, um, Senator Munoz and I may
have a question for him right
now just have a, a statement. I
think it's gonna be very
important that the public own
uh, it has a board, um, uh, uh,
board of directors of of the
different.
Um, of the commission and, and
the, and the council.
utility. I think if you um if
you even indicate if, if,
depending on what town you are,
I guess, that you're going to
enter into a public-private
partnership, and there's going
And uh with the senator please
yield Senator Dominos.
Mr. President, yes, I will.
Thank you. uh, it's my
understanding, Senator, that
the public.
Um, Mr. President, so that'll be
the application process. I mean,
if the city applies, then they
would get it. If a private
company applies, then they would
probably bring it right to the
forefront if it's, it's for the
benefit of the of the public and
the private citizen, uh, rather
than commercialized.
uh in a situation like that, I
mean, uh, that's, uh, for the
public. This is a big issue.
It's one of the number one
issues, and, uh, if there's any
Anyway, I, I was hoping that the
uh senator that the answer would
be yes, that there would be
assurances in that in that
regard. That's all I have. Thank
Mr. President, yes, I do.
Um, thank you, Mr. President and
Senator. I understand that sites
have not been identified um for
private entities, and so those
those requests were sent out and
how it be handled.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. I wasn't aware of
the IPA requests last year, um.
conversations about this and
developing such an enormous
project have already been had,
um.
There was uh an RFI request for
information last year by the New
Mexico
Environment department, uh, on
the, on the water on the
strategic water supply. It was a
got it. And to go to the other
question, it, it depends who
develops the brackish water.
Um
In your area of Laguna, if the
that water, um, and whether they
put it in the pipes for people's
consumption, uh, whether they
put it in the lake for aquifers.
Uh, they would determine, uh,
Um, Mr. President, a private
company, uh, like I've said a
couple times, you know, if
they're developing water and
there's a classification of
Use that for their concrete
plant. You could use it for a
solar plant. Um, I, I hate to
say that data centers now
because data centers are now
currently in, in Valencia County
and Los Lunas that use almost 10
million gallons a day of
freshwater and well water to to
cool their stuff. But I think
Thank you, Senator, and if the
award goes to a private company
and they own the water, what is
the benefit to the citizens of
New Mexico.
Mr. President and Senators, the
us, uh, they're going to
commercialize that any way they
want to see fit. Currently right
now, Clovis is operated by a
private company, the city of
Clovis, uh, has a private
come in and say, uh, there's a
field here we're gonna add
brackish into this and they
could sell that the same way
they're selling it to the city
of Clovis. They would own the
water, they would sell it to
you, Senator. Have we identified
a site for um the constituent
waste.
Mr. President and Senator, it
over to a byproduct it's using
for, used for agriculture, they
really didn't want to tell us
what the byproduct was in that
well. And the other waste will
be determined by regulation and
rule what it contains and where
desalination plant they also,
uh, inject it back into the
land. um, Mr. President,
Senator, how long can our New
Mexico aquifers sustain us
President.
Mr. President, it depends on the
aquifer that you're drilling
into, uh, but the way they look
like,
hundreds of inland desalation
plants across the US today NMSU
conservatively estimates the
Santa Teresa, the one in the
Massa Basin, to have 65 million
And
He would draw approximately
2,280,000 acre feet over a 50
year period, and that's roughly.
region.
Mr. President and Senator, thank
you for that, um.
The truth is we're
Building the plane while flying
it here at at least that's what
we're proposing to do because
standalone effort and then move
forward with development and
investment.
Um, Mr. President, Senator, the
research is being done.
We know that we can clean the
whether you pull it from the
ocean, whether you pull it from
the ground, uh, whether you pull
it from, uh, a fresh water
source we know that we can clean
that water to a level.
Teresa.
We know it works in Almogordo.
And so we know the testing has
been done, but it's now it's
time to develop these all across
tested. It is a reliable source
for um the countries that have
made those investments in it,
but I'm talking about the bill
specifically. We're putting
millions of dollars, um, for
Mexico Strategic Water supply
feasibility study developed by
NMED and Eastern Research Group.
In 2024 states main finding of
water supply. Mr. President and
Senator, we do not have all of
the information to move forward,
um, I absolutely support this
wrap my head around why we are
not just investing in research
right now. Um, the countries
that we were mentioned earlier,
million, um, for desalination.
They're set, we have limited
water here, and I would feel so
of um water complete the mapping
before we invest millions into
this project. Um, Mr. President,
Charlie. Senator Steinborn.
Center Block
Thank you, Mr. President. Would,
um,
private public partnership, uh,
well, first of all, Rio Rancho.
Is, uh, I should say Sandoval
County, Mr. President, we have,
uh, 2 wells out there.
had her in my office. That is
one of the priorities, uh, that
she has had, and I'm very
familiar with the, uh, New
Mexico Tech, uh, level of effort
Mr. President, Senator, I, I
don't do PPPs because uh I, I, I
federal contracting, uh, I build
for myself, um, but I don't do a
lot of public private
partnerships. I don't think I've
done one, not one.
Mr. President, I'm sorry,
whether it's uh in your, in
Gallup or McKinley County or
around the state.
Mr. President, there's, there's
PPE scattered throughout and
depends how we use them. Lita as
a PPE really. It's a
thousands in LIDA now that, that
show that and show the
wherewithal of a public-private
partnership. Each one is a
little different in how we do
this, uh, but in order to get
of water, how much water exists.
We need to know that and, and
that's all public-private
partnerships working together.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, so, uh, would you
Mr. President, in this incident
with brackish water, I agree
100%. There's no other way for
them to do this, but other than
the state step in and private
contractors developing and build
public well it helps government
use to attract private
investment to achieve.
Those public and private goals,
uh, senator, to develop a, an
those blocks off. Would, would
you agree with that or am I off?
Mr. President, Senator, no, I,
I'd agree with that.
Mr. President, Senator, let's
Mr. President, are you, um,
Is your expert there saying that
we would look at mapping and
mapped, uh, throughout the
state. I'll hold it up for you,
but you look at the purple and
the green and the turquoise
dots. That's the brackish water
that's already been mapped. You
might need your binoculars, uh,
middle Rio Grande from the
Colorado border to the Texas
border along the Rio Grande is
the greatest mapping of of
brackish water if you want to
lump it all together. So where
the population base is in New
tank, a holding pond up above
and they use that water. But if
Something happened a couple of
years ago, I believe in Santa
Fe, the brackish the, the, the
lake was running dry and they
Uh, that now flows water into
that, so they have water,
sustainable water. When you look
across the board and if you
build a, put a brackish wall in
They're well system and their
treatment system is not working
if a bracket system was built in
place there, uh, and I'm looking
across the board, it looks like
there is some, yeah, the Las
it's just so beneficial across
the board when we think about it
for drinking water use,
commercialization is gonna
happen. Now people are gonna
come where there's water rich.
Arizona was developed because of
In that, in that aquifer, in
that river of water.
Water develops life.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Rural areas would
would revitalize some of our
it'd be too costly for the
rancher to, to use a diesel, uh,
to, to irrigate or to to do
that, but on the community side,
I agree at 250% for economic
a river walk that the game and
fish stocks fishing.
Because they have plenty of
water, but in Gallup, we don't
have that option, but wouldn't I
love to have a fishing pond in
in Gallup, New Mexico like Grant
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, but
the desalinization plants would
Significantly impact
agriculture, uh, would it not?
Rio Grande Conservancy.
Uh, if you quit poking so many
straws in the ground and drawing
that river water out and the
river water have to backfill
those wells in that aquifer, uh,
No snow like this year, no snow
in the mountains, uh, no runoff
and being able to irrigate so
that would alleviate a lot of
the pressure off agriculture.
Mr. President, Senator, yes.
And Mr. President, uh,
desalination plants around the
world in different climates and
you know, different.
Types of um.
Uh, you're gonna find different,
different things, uh, you're
gonna have some different
challenges when you're doing
desalination operations, um, I
to our, uh, operations that we
had for the base and obviously
for sustainment for uh the life
support uh operations of the
base population.
And uh
because it's the first of its
kind.
Uh, do you know where the first
US city to deliver clean water
using efficient and
environmentally responsive,
New Mexico.
There's a company there called
the new Company. I believe
they're out of South Africa.
Uh, KNEW.
the infrastructure issues that
they've had with water where
they couldn't take showers for a
couple days and had issues, uh,
with drinking water.
This company has been around the
how we do pull water out of the
ground in our aquifers.
And that is something that I
would, um, maybe your expert
there could take a note and talk
to the state engineer on.
Mr. President and Senator,
it's also possible when you're
going into these, um,
Brackish aquifers that you would
that's another benefit for a
public-private partnership is
some of those minerals that can
be pulled out of the ground when
they're extracting the brackish
Is that, uh, is that also
another benefit for uh expanding
our tax base and expanding our
job base, um, Mr. President,
Senator, yes, that would be El
Paso currently does that.
I, I think now is the exact
right time to.
Approve this bill because we
have a state engineer.
Who's a water expert and just uh
this capability.
Um
If we don't do this, Mr.
President and Senator.
I see it each and every day
where, you know, my kids want to
run off to Arizona.
Where water has developed an
entire state.
Whether you want to go to Lake
we're losing our population.
That's the number one thing
we're losing.
The other thing is, if we don't
have water.
We don't have anything.
You can have a desert, you can
those aquifers and water wells
across the Rio Grande from
From, uh, Santa Fe from Pagosa
to, to El Paso. All that is
It'll dry up with the
population. It'll dry up because
there's no water.
replenished.
Infiltration and runoff.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
lastly,
I think, uh, Senator.
I think it would benefit the
rural areas in our tribal
partners more than it would my
own community of Rio Rancho in
the northwest side of
Mr. President, I'm sorry, I
couldn't hear that $3 billion
pipeline.
For river water.
Out of the San Juan, uh.
We could have built in for less
than half a billion dollars and
fill those pipelines without
relying on river water.
completed, uh, they live in
wrong rural areas where wells
are expensive to drill and they
can't do that, but we can pipe
the water, we can desell it, we
can desell it in Las Cruces, I
mean, Las Vegas.
When we know we have the
resource there and we know we
have the technology to develop
it. There's no reason to let
people wait and go into water
McKinley County.
Oh, Mr. President, that, that
job, uh, I think that pipeline,
they started digging, uh, at the
San Juan lateral up by Nappy,
so it's been 20 years of just
laying empty pipe.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator for this bill. I
completely support it. This is a
bill that will transform New
Mexicans here in the state, it
will provide jobs. This is a
safe and mature technology. This
is something that we should all
Mr. President, yes.
Senator,
thank you, Mr. President. So Mr.
President, I was, I was very
confused sitting here on this
brackish and produced water was
a really bad idea and a very
dangerous thing to do.
And so I googled to see if I was
remembering that correctly, and
there's an article here.
link to that, that committee
meeting and so I was just
watching it here with the closed
captioning and, and that is
exactly what was said then. So
my question for the sponsor is
not have done it to now.
now when.
When the same person is
sponsoring.
that effort.
Allowed them to make it a
commodity. This doesn't do that.
This allows us to develop
brackish water, uh allows to
produce in the fields, uh, and,
study and so with brackish
water, I've always supported
brackish water, uh, but when
they had the other bill with
produced water and they were
going to sell it and clean it up
and I, I didn't support that at
all.
That's all, Mr. President.
You know, for the 5th largest
state.
With dozens of aquifers.
We're seeing we can study some
areas where we can develop other
President, with that, I asked
M's consent of the Senate.
Uh, I, wait, I move that.
House energy and environment and
natural resources Committee
substitute for house agriculture
and all those president voted in
the affirmative, except those
voting negative by show of
hands.
Thank you senators we are voting
all senators to your seats.
Senator Trujillo voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senator O'Malley voting no.
Senator Pinto.
I, I got the title. It's a very
long one, Mr. President. Uh,
house, energy and environment
and Natural Resources Committee
substitute for house
I, I got something to write on
these boards, that's the hardest
one I've seen, uh, this year. So
thank you, Mr. President,
members of the body. Thank you,
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous we go that
substitute for House Bill 149,
that'll be Senator Scherer. So
unanimous consent we go out of
business 3rd reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
Sher for item 29. House
Judiciary.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The record show that all actions
for placing house judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 is twice amended on
final passage has been taken and
has to do with supported
decision making, and that's
where individuals with some kind
of disability make it, they,
they're continuing to make
choices in their life, but we've
themselves, but with support,
and that's what this bill does,
man. Thank you Senator.
We do have a floor amendment.
Before I go to the store I'll
yield to center Padilla. Thank
you, Mr. President. You consent
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 149 as twice
amended. Amendment sponsored by
Senators share.
Mr. President, uh, this, uh,
amendments looks pretty thick,
but what it really does is it,
uh, deals with the harm to self
or harm to other situation that
close, uh, we do have debate on
the amendment centerator Celia
Lopez.
Um, Mr. President, will the
sponsor yield?
before, um, or that we've seen
this before. Hasn't this bill
been rejected?
Center share.
Um, Mr. President.
It has not. It, uh, there.
Voted down in a committee being
voted down?
Literature.
Mr. President, we have bills in
committees right here right now.
There's not been voted down.
the amendment, which is um what
is the bill? I guess it's SB
166.
Mr. President, uh, what was the
vote on the bill?
Mr. President, my understanding
is this has been voted down in
committee twice.
Um
I really think it's such a bad
But I do not like this. This is,
this just does not seem right
and straightforward and
transparent. There was a
hearing, there was public
right before it would go to the
governor just.
is wrong and I, um,
I object to that.
I don't need the sponsor of the
amendment to yield.
Um, I too am a co-sponsor of
House Bill 149.
But I stand in opposition to
into this particular, uh, bill
that we are debating right now.
Is is changing some definitions.
doing if we are to um
Adopt this, it is actually
expanding.
And I call it overreaching.
Mr. President, I also believe
that with the changes of the
definitions here also will have
an effect on persons with
And as Senator Sah Lopez did
mention, uh, the bill that's.
In the amendment has been
rejected a couple of times, I
believe already.
reasons, but that's where I'll
stand at this point, Mr.
President. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. We do
have further debate on the
amendment, Senator Pinto,
followed by Senator Charlie and
Senator Do here.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President and Senator Sheer,
could you describe to me exactly
Who were trying to um
some people. There's a, a, a
significant group of people.
That
They may be doing petty
misdemeanor kind of crimes and
things like that, but, but there
they have PTSD or other things.
And what this is designed to do
is help.
That group of people.
So how do we, how do we.
What is this that group we're
trying to help.
Mr. President, anybody that
needs help.
Definitions in here, can you
describe to me exactly where in
this this uh amendment is
We can start with.
Client. Client means a patient
who is requesting or receiving
disabilities facility for the
purpose of receiving such
services.
That's who we're trying to help.
Mr. President and Senator.
services or the the requested
the services, so what is this
amendment who are we?
Who else is uh entailed in this,
Mr. President and Senator.
It is someone requesting, but
you know we've got people all
over the place.
That, um
We can say, hey, please come
along here, but, you know, the
other day I was walking, uh, I
walked to church every morning,
well, not this week, but uh.
Uh, he stood in front of me. I
crossed the street, he crossed
the street.
I walked in the middle of the
street, he stepped out in the
middle of the street.
That's the guy we want to help.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
or Madam President and senator.
To have access to those
sidewalks, um, but I, I wasn't
there.
bill was OK and got where and
then we have um how many pages
this is.
That's where I'm trying to find
out where in the bill are we
Mr. President, Madam President,
God, do I owe you a cookie now?
No, Madam President.
admit I was not paying attention
just then, so, uh, whatever was
said will need to be repeated.
you'll repeat your question.
So, um,
Who what is going on because I
know you were involved in in
making this happen and uh as a
side note, Mr. uh, Madam
rejected on this side of the
world. Anyway, if you can help
us out there, Senator, I'd
appreciate it.
So, Madam President, so yes, I
think a little, a little history
on how this developed might be
original language in that bill,
I was very, very uncomfortable
with it. I thought it was way
too broad. I thought it was
going to sweep people up
talked to the folks at, um,
Disability Rights New Mexico.
And I asked them if they thought
it was OK, and they were happy
with it. Uh, and then I went and
talked to the governor's lawyer
fact, I, I personally thought it
was, was a real improvement. Uh,
it was not only an improvement,
I think, on the language that
was initially, uh, being
suggested, but I think it's also
to the house came to the floor
here and we passed it
unanimously here.
Um
I think
I think so.
think there should be a very
high standard.
To civilly commit someone, which
is really what this language is
getting at when we're talking
about harm to self and others,
very high standard.
Um, it shouldn't be with no,
with, with, with all due
respect, it shouldn't be because
we see them on the sidewalk and
us if we see them in public or
or disturb us in some way. It
should be if we should only go
to that extreme length of taking
someone's liberty when doing so.
other people need to be
protected because because of a
risk in the very near future
very substantial risk in the
very near future. Uh, it has to
People who are in some sort of
crisis. It's kind of, it makes
me think, Madam President, of
the um the the updates to the
Earth Po law that we, we didn't
hear the other night when
step in and say, we're gonna
help you get through this crisis
and get resolved in a safe way.
Um
That is what this language is
um people struggling with
substance abuse off our uh away
so that we don't have to see
them or deal with them.
Um, it is to make sure that if
someone else. There's a
mechanism, mechanism for the
state to step in and, and try to
prevent a tragedy.
So share.
Thank you, OK. Next on for the
soin Pinto, you still have the
floor? OK center Pinto.
So Madam President and Senator.
I heard the word if.
Can you
too.
If and then those people.
Madam President, Senator.
Madam President, I'd like to
yield to my attorney.
those people, I am talking
about, uh, my own family
members, uh, people I know and
love, um, this is us, not them,
That person actually has
inflicted serious bodily harm on
someone or has tried to, has
attempted to inflict serious
bodily harm on someone.
year from now when this person
gets off their meds, they're
going to be a danger again. That
would not meet.
This standard.
Um, if a year ago, they did
or 6 months, uh, if it's not the
recent past, when they did, when
they actually did inflict
serious bodily harm or or tried
to, that would not meet this,
To, to care to get medical care
if you need it to, um, to get
shelter or or protect yourself,
and it would have to be more
serious physical or medical
debilitation in the near future,
if you don't get treatment. So
again, all of this, it's really
important, the time frames
around this stuff is really
important. We need to be talking
have to be real serious risks,
not just we think.
We think you might do something,
uh, you're not living the way we
think you should live. That is
there is a present serious risk
of things like death and
debilitation.
That this would that this would
kick in under this language.
Serra Pinto.
You might do something.
I just said that now.
Then we say something now.
Will Senator Doig yield to this
question?
OK, we're just gonna do sin or
do against Senor Pinto. OK,
so looking at harm to others,
they have to have actually
already inflicted serious bodily
harm or already tried to inflict
serious bodily harm.
for now, uh, so we we specify,
it has to be the recent past and
the near future. Now, the
language that was originally in
could be going back 6 months, a
year, 5 years, depending on what
you think is relevant and it
also the original language did
not have that in the near
future.
Language in there. So it could
the recent past or near future,
and, and those, those terms
aren't defined. It would be as
we, we know them.
They, it's using the the
language as, as we know it if in
reasonably something that could
was the recent past or or in the
near future, um, but I, I think
I, I share, Madam President, I
that
Safely preserves people's civil
rights and liberties while also
making sure we can, we can take
amendment.
Senator Duhe, Madam President,
it doesn't say think anywhere in
here. I'm, I'm using that word
right here on the, on the floor
something is not at all a
standard under this language.
You have something, it has to be
real.
Center Pinto, so Madam President
and Senator Doig, that, that's
the bill or in this amendment,
uh.
Of that actual body of of this
process.
existing statutes around, around
civil commitment that this would
apply to.
Senor Pinto
So Madam President and um
senator.
statute?
Sarah Duhe.
So Madam President, no, so no,
we don't define recent. We don't
define near for the near future.
of art. We usually don't define
it, and I, I think I understand
what, what the good senator is
getting at, which is what what
does recent mean? What does near
future mean if if we're not
call about whether something is
actually recent, is actually
near, near future, um, but if we
we we can't define everything we
the, the concern. It was the
exact same concern that I had
about the use of relevant past.
To me, that was an undefined
term that was far too broad, and
senator, um, there was also
mention of attempts.
And who decides on these
attempts and the severity of it.
The judge who is just
Um, their counselor, I, I'm not
sure, um, Madam President,
Senator.
So you do it. So madam, Madam
judges. They're these like
mental health judges who
specifically hear these cases,
um, and this is all they hear.
ones making those calls. I, I
assume it would have to meet
some legal standard to qualify
as an attempt, just as if
someone was going to be charged
with an
attempted crime. It would have
to meet that that standard.
harm to others means that within
the recent recent past.
Left up to interpretation by the
judge.
Or has acted in such a way as to
create a substantial risk of
serious bodily harm to another.
this, um, Madam President and
Senator.
Senator Duhe
So, Madam President, I'm, I'm
thinking back to
uh, had dementia.
And was uh, was, was thought
everyone walking past her house
was trying to kill her. And so
someone had asked, you know,
did, did anyone actually get
harmed with a firearm, um, was
that she had
She had struck someone with her
had taken affirmative actions to
try to to harm people because
she thought that they were
trying to harm her. I mean, I
think she thought she that she
was acting in self defense
there.
Because
A similar situation where
I think, I think.
My understanding was in that
situation, she actually had
that had happened in the recent
past, uh, not if it happened
months ago, but in the recent
past, that that would be
inflicting serious bodily harm
on someone, uh,
that this has happened once.
It's that there has to be a
finding that it will continue to
happen if, if the person doesn't
get the help they need.
Sara Pinto
listening has been in a fight,
and at that point, I don't know
it's not very recent.
Or
And that's where I find some of
this a little bit um.
Because
Who are we still going back to
who are we trying to to bring
But yet we are going to decide
this with these words on this
paper, but yet we know that
those people
And are we truly evaluating
that?
We have a, sounds like we're and
we're in this amendment is to
expand it.
it more, you know, not just
include, you know, a couple of
people or the person on the
sidewalk, but we're gonna take
everybody that's maybe talking
to that person.
Their parents is falling into
that category.
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
how are we making sure that
we're not just gonna
Because
It, it seems like we're going to
have a situation where maybe
almost half of our bodies should
be in, in the, um,
Senator Pinto. So you clarify
even more, um, how we're making
sure we're not including, um,
just anybody on appearance and
For this App appearance hasn't
would have, is not a factor
that's looked at whatsoever
under this, um, and again it's
not just if.
and, and that caused real harm
that may and make, and it is
more likely than not that those
real things are going to happen
again and cause that serious
because I think it, it has to be
based on, on real history, real
present circumstances that don't
include things like what you,
of those things, just because
you had, just because of those,
none of those.
Would, would qualify under this
language. That's what I was
really afraid of with the other
language was that that could
I, I, so that's what I was
trying to remove from the
language with this language.
Senor Pinto.
So Madam Chair and
Senator.
Do they have 100% access?
In which they could address some
of these issues early on before
they actually
Madam President, I think that's
what we've spent a lot of time
this session trying to create.
here this session, um, and I
really hope that we're going to
come back next year and see, see
some really significant, um,
improvements in the availability
But
Since these crisis points are
happening now. We need to have
an ability to get help to people
who need it.
Center Pinto
Speaking to us kind of
supporting it and guiding us,
um, but it's
In a way,
hearsay saying, well,
in the field that actually is
dealing with this particular
issue.
Um
Be then in the sense of the
people with developmental
But we're actually going to take
someone's freedom.
So Mr. President and senator,
um.
Senator Pinto, were you, who
were you yielding to? I
apologize, Senator Doha.
Senator here.
I, I can't support this, um,
amendment or I think even the
bill. um, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Senator Pinto. We still are on
well, the sponsor of the
original bill.
Yield, Senator Maestas.
my president,
yes.
Senator Charlie.
Charlie, this bill, meaning the
original bill, Senate Bill 166
passed this, uh, body 39 to 0 on
March 12th.
Senator Charlie
and.
Human Services Committee, uh, it
wasn't a full committee, um.
I thought the conversation went
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator, um.
What were the reasons that the
committee gave?
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
they somehow equated it to
criminal law.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I
President, Senator, does the
original sponsor representative
of Beta know about this
amendment?
Sinner share.
Um, Mr. President, I
for her on her bill. Um, does
representative of beta consider
this amendment friendly?
Senator Sher.
that site.
Sent her charting.
Mr. President and Senator Sher,
can save us the uh.
To her bill that she trusted us
with on the Senate side, um.
Mr.
President Senator, why did you
adding a bill.
That the other chamber.
took under due consideration.
Mr. President.
I believe this is part of the
greater package of how do we
help.
Wirth and I, uh, and othersgos
Woods.
Um, worked on behavioral health
package, a big comprehensive
package.
And charting.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. Still not quite
um, by the committee and then it
came up again as Senate Bill 510
but I also believe that a bill
should pass.
On its merits.
We passed it. We sent over a
It was killed 2 times over in
the house, Mr. President and
Just like now.
There's a misunderstanding.
People got off topic.
What I'm trying to do here is
make sure that the narrative is
more in line with what we're
doing.
And that is helping.
Not rounding them up.
designed to help people that are
in crisis. They're current
crisis is harm to themselves or
harm to others.
And right now,
It clearly need some love.
How do we provide that?
How do we help them?
And
About rounding up people.
This has never been about that.
Senate Bill 166 was not that.
You can arrest him, take him to
judge. They're going to be
released and now they're still
in crisis.
There's still
Right where they were.
can do what needs to be done to
get him out of that crisis.
And then set them on a path.
That's what this is, this, this
spill is about that.
And I voted for this on this
floor.
But when it left this chamber.
And was failed to move through
the due process.
You know, and then we wonder why
our bills aren't getting
scheduled on the house side.
I'd like to believe.
I've been told by colleagues.
Who I very much respect.
Here in the Senate that
A breath of fresh air.
It makes me wonder if that means
that the good old ways
It makes me wonder if this is
how.
I have to operate.
To get my legislation through.
Trusted
By our communities.
By our constituents.
To do right by them.
spoke about.
And Mr. President,
I'm asking this body.
Thank you, Mr. President. We do
have further debate on the
amendment, Senator Maestas on
the amendment.
Uh thank you, Mr. President. uh,
no need to yield just some quick
policy was passed by this
chamber 390.
And going into the house, even
though the the ACLU doesn't
support it because it's a big
Then the bill we passed out of
here at 390. Uh, last night
there was uh another vote that
was uh 3 dissenting votes. This
policy is too important. We have
this language we had a good
hearing in the house, uh, but
they, they, it got sideways
because I was making kind of
different points, um, and I.
This provision is too important.
This policy is too important.
This statute has not been
amended since 1977. This is
clear and precise and leaves and
It's just, it's, it's, it's
whatever the judge.
Decides on that day it leaves
too much to interpretation. This
is tighter. This is more
protective. This is just better
thresholds are still the same.
We're not changing any rules of
the game. We're just, uh,
updating this, uh, definition
based on great conversations,
leadership for uh for wanting to
get this through. This is a key,
key component to the whole
thrust of the Senate behavioral
health uh project 1, Cen Bill 2,
Debate on the amendment, just a
reminder, senators that I know
there's been reference to votes
in the house and this reminder
general practice here in the
Senate, uh, we ensure that we
have the debate, but we don't
I'm just 100% in with
Senator Meister over.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Cervantes.
is an awesome bill. It supported
decision making that truly when
we get on the bill, um, really
helps and works with.
A certain population.
A Senate bill that had been
discussed, and I know I was
corrected by Senator Cervantes
that the bill passed. I may not
have been in the chambers when
you all passed it or if it did,
I was brain dead.
you, Mr. President, two separate
issues. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
We have, we're still on the
amendment, Senator Pope on the
amendment.
amendment.
And I yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President and
Senator, so just trying to
understand this amendment.
You know, we've done a lot of
Mr. President,
We're trying to find ways to
help people that need help.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator. I'm just
really
Troubled how this is occurring.
This is an amendment, but we're
essentially putting in a whole
prior bill, but we passed it as
a separate standalone policy.
I, I'm just concerned of how
this being this is being done.
So
I proposed an amendment that
said
Let's add Senate Bill 279 to the
airport.
Would you be supportive of that?
By some people that have some
leadership positions.
This isn't unusual.
But what we're doing right now.
Is absolutely appropriate.
Mr. President, I know that
there's
The
then, uh, now we've got what 16
or 17 new members in here and so
what we're doing now is not
backroom deal.
in a bill, um, and an amendment
that, that we think will help
it.
Uh, either in our chamber or the
others or help it with the
governor or help it with
You can, you can debate it
object. That's, that's perfectly
within our rights to do that.
And, and Mr. President, Senator
Charlie actually made a good
point there. We actually work
And
In this particular case, I think
it's important.
That we, as the legislature,
President, is somewhere out
there in the ether, somebody's
saying we're locking up people.
And what this amendment does is
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator and, you know, this is
my 2nd term. I'm still
Learning, but I think the
difference here is.
Not where
The other side stalled it or
stopped it.
And now we're injecting it.
In the house bill
I don't think that's the way
that we should be doing
business.
And I agree.
It is about debate, and that's
what we're doing now. That's
And that's what this is.
At the same time.
I want to agree with my
colleague and what she was
And so
I asked the chamber to reject
this amendment.
And let's pass House Bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pope. Seeing no
further debate on the amendment,
Senator shared to close on the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, uh.
Uh
I come back to the idea that we
have
New Mexicans.
What we don't have is a way to
help them.
And I think that that's, that's
the issue here.
Means incarceration. They can't
get that out of their head.
And Mr. President, the
In the past, there used to be a
lot more, in fact,
bipartisanship.
But in this particular case, Mr.
President.
I believe that we work together
Mr. President, I work with the
governor.
And I would like to point out
that I had at least 2 Democrat
attorneys. Help me on this
particular bill.
represent your district.
Your district hired you.
And that's why you should vote.
But your district also hired
you.
substitute for House Bill 149 as
twice a minute and ask that the
record reflect that the role has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
the amendment please raise your
hand. There's been a request for
a roll call.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
Centeralvosent Figueroa.
center Figueroa votes yes
Centallecos.
Sanos, yeah, entra Gonzalez.
Senator Harmielenharmi votes yes
center line. Yes.
Central Linier votes, yes,
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez votes no. Senator
Padilla.
Centropaia votes yes Santa Paul
Center Paul votes yesenator
Pinto.
Center Pento votes no center
Centra Scott votes, yes, Center
Cia Lopez.
Yes, explained my vote.
Center Dia Lopez votes yes in to
Center souls votes no. Sanator
Stephanics.
Stefanis vote no. Sandra
Steinborn.
Sandra Steinburn boats no Sandra
Stewart.
Sandra Stewart votes, yes, San
Santo Trujillo osinor
votesen Woods.
Senate Flo member number one has
been added to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 is twice amended.
Center Cia Lopez to explain her
vote. You have 3 minutes,
And I also supports the the
decision making part, this is so
this was actually a very hard
vote for me because I support
sponsor of the original bill,
and I just really don't like
making the sausage, and I know
we make sausage here this way,
uh, but I voted for it.
And transparent about how we
make this sausage. Thank you,
Mr. President.
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
how we do things that the bill
gets hijacked from the sponsor
who wasn't consulted about a
major change or addition to the
bill and when we've already got
tensions between the two
chamber.
honorably. Thank you.
Thank you, Center souls, Center
share.
Um, Mr. President, is there any
further debate on the bill
Thank you.
I'm ready to beat the bill if
there. Thank you, Senator.
We're, we're done. We already
took the, took the vote,
senator.
the bill.
Thank you, mister, Mr. Presley.
Oh, you better consent to excuse
As for unanimous consent to
choose them from the chamber
until they returned, except in
the case of a call.
See, no objection, Senator
this bill along with the chair.
Uh, I do practice in the area of
the estate planning and do quite
a bit of elder law and there
The big concern that I initially
had is that this somehow would
be seen as replacing a health
care and durable power of
attorney that has potentially
morning to educate myself about
supported decision making and
came to the conclusion that this
really is a good thing and an
alternative to guardianship and
then worked with the courts,
This is a new option to avoid
guardianships which are
incredibly uh invasive. You
know, it works and it's for
really will emphasize that and
the Supreme Court in the rule is
in in the bill is going to
promulgate a form, uh, which is
super
this will become a, a very
valuable tool along with powers
of attorney and also a last will
and testament. So again, I, I, I
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, um, supported
decision making, of course, is,
is recognized um by many
This is a very effective model
that will.
Um, help for self-determination
of persons with disabilities and
this is a process that will
truly help, um, not just my son
but many others in the community
who don't need, who just need
some guidance as I call it
simple guidance even if it's for
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders,
otherwise known as wings, um,
and, uh, we had an opportunity
to be educated and work on the
particular model that's in front
Seeing no further debate.
We do have further debate,
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President.
And I don't need the sponsor to
out there and do.
I hope there is not any
unintended consequences.
Because going out there and
here.
Because
It got too much in some people's
districts.
Although we tried to address it.
something.
So I applaud that you finally
see them, you finally see our
they're in my way. They're in my
way on the sidewalk, they're in
my way on the road. I don't like
the way I'm, I'm in walking in
fear.
So we're gonna do something now.
I expect the population to rise
a little more.
Because of our recent um.
I, I'd like to like just keep
talking and talking until we're.
Till tomorrow.
supported it.
I hope that's the case, and then
when we get out there.
That, um
I don't get any
Because we saw them and that's
why I wanted to really have a
definition of who are we really
trying, but
But we're gonna have somebody
else help them.
I don't know if these facilities
actually exist in some of my, I,
I can't recall something
Remember, we did some other
legislation to tackle this and
in my eyes we were just
displacing them.
Moving them from one place to
jurisdiction and it's been said
they're down riding the train,
putting their tent somewhere
else where they can't be reached
because and then they come into
town, do what they need or um.
It, it won't be the uh.
It won't be help for them.
It'll be yes, kind of doing
something that is um
probably pretty terrible.
With the strip searches and all
of that and if we don't have
these facilities and there's no
oversight, I, I don't recall an
oversight bill either.
Trying to make sure what we're
about standards and uh meeting
that.
Are we going to make sure
they're actually cared for or
we're gonna get this out there's
a chain link fences they're
on other things, but if you're
gonna do this to someone who's
not really have the capacity. I
hope it is a nice place for
them.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. This
is this.
Supported decision making is an
important step. It helps people
that can make decisions, just
decisions with some help and so
with that, Mr. President, I move
the House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 149 is
now 3 times amended, do now pass
and ask unanimous consent of the
seats.
We're voting on the bill if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Center Pinto
I vote of 37 in the affirmative,
1 in the negative. House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 149 is three
times amended.
from the house. There are no
objections. We are on that order
of business. Message from the
house.
The reader will read.
Senate Bill 88 as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
the House and request the
concurrence of the Senate to the
has passed Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33
with the emergency clause and
return same herewith
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended by the
Senate. Senate Bill 155, as
amended by the Senate.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in and gross copies of
Senate Bill 72, Senate Bill 100.
Senate Judiciary Committee
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the house in
open session and returned same
herewith respectfully submitted.
Lisa Ortiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk show the message from the
house has been received.
As amended by the Senate and
returns same herewith
respectfully submitted Lisa A
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk
show the message from the house
has been received.
the Senate. Senate tax business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
with the emergency clause as
amended by the Senate.
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
Journal will show the message
from the house has been
received. I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the House has
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in and gross copies of
Senate Bill 280, Senate Joint
Memorial One, as amended, Senate
And it'll show the mess in the
house has been received, Mr.
President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 302,
Senate Bill 303, as amended by
Senate Bill 16, as amended by
the Senate and returned same
herewith respectfully submitted
this Martiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk Jour will show the message
from the house has been
received.
respectfully submitted, Lisa
Martis McCutcheon, chief clerk
Journal show the message from
the house has been received.
President. I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Finance
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
Mr. President, unanimous consent
we go that our business messages
from the governor. There no
objection. We're on that order
of business. Messages from the
governor, the reader will read.
president pro tempore and
members of the Mexico State
Senate President pro temporary
steward and members of the
Senate pursuant to my authority
session 2025 while SB 82 seeks
to open the proverbial door for
school facilities.
The improvements statewide our
approach to capital funding for
lunch in cafeterias without
functional kitchens. These
realities are all too common to
students and families across the
state. However, it seems the
body that governs school
facility improvements does not
reports a balance of more than
$1 billion. Our children deserve
better. I urge you to come back
next year with a proposal that
assures that New Mexico students
received.
The Honorable Senate executive
message number 15.
The Honorable Mimi Stewart,
president pro tempore and
fifty-seventh legislature first
session 2025. Respectfully
yours, Michelle Lujan Grisham,
Governor. show that the message
from the from the governor has
been received.
I'm, I'm Mr. President, I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the House has failed to
pass Senate Bill 112 as amended
by the House and returned same
Uh, Mr. President, unanimous
extent we go that our business
committee reports.
See no objection. We're on that
order business committee
reports.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
respectfully submitted Senator
Cary Hamblin, Senator Heather
Bergman's, Senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs.
Senator Paul.
Those opposed name, the eyes
have it the community report has
been adopted. I'd like to
announce to the members.
As the Senate that the officers
of the Senate have signed an
open session Senate Bill 8 as
amended.
consideration, reports the same
has been duly enrolled and
engrossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted. Senator
Cary Hamblin, Senator Heather
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposing?
Yeah, I have at the community
port has been adopted. I'd like
to announce to the members of
the body that the officers of
the Senate have signed an open
referred Senate Bill 280 has had
it under consideration and
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in and gross
preparatory signing by the
office of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those supposed name? Yeah I have
it the community port's been
adopted. I'd like to announce to
the members that the officers of
One as amended, has had it under
consideration reports that the
same has been duly enrolled and
engrossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Senator
adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
the community report has been
grows enrolled in ros
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate.
Reader to treat.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
respectfully submitted. Senator
Carrie Hamblin, Senator Heather
Bergmans, Senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs.
Center Paul.
Thank you, Mr. President. Move
adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
Joint Memorial too.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
Uh, Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We know that our
recess, uh, the Chinese dinner
has been moved from 6 to 6:30,
uh, and then we'll come back on
the floor at 7. I do want to let
after we've had our Chinese
food, right about 7 o'clock, so
that's something to look forward
to, uh, I believe I've yielded
to Senator Gallegos first, who
has an announcement and other
meeting in room 326 immediately
after the floor session.
Thank you, Senatoregos. Thank
you, Mr. President.
Senator Bergman, thank you, Mr.
President. Your tax business and
Thank you, Mr. President. Just
wanted to remind people again,
check your legislative email for
the invitation about the Hunt
Institute, uh, retreat for the
paid for, including travel by
the Hunt Institute. You will
learn lots about cutting edge
education in the country and the
things we're doing well in New
Mexico and places we have lots
more.
I think that's a fair bet, Mr.
President. How's your daughter
doing in the game today?
Thank you, Senator. They won
their first game, so thank you
for asking. It's good that they
played in Farmington. Who did
town. Senator Sheriff, they lost
once.
If, if they lose again, then
Senator Sheer's gonna owe you a
box of creamsicles.
I, I'll take that. I don't think
he's in here, but I'll take
5:30. So, uh, the Republican
caucus, uh, we'll probably go in
like 20 minutes after Republican
caucus, um, Mr. President, could
you do me one favor though?
gets his fortune cookie. That,
that's the last time he got one,
he says, help me, I'm being held
hostage in a cookie factory, and
he didn't go help him.
I, I will do that, Senator,
kind of leave that open. I'll
wait to see, we'll, we'll call
it for 30 minutes after the
Republican caucus and uh subject
to call the chair, we'll make an
announcement and let you know,
Thank you, Mr. President,
members, so the locals have not
won a tournament game in 12
years and they have not advanced
is here in Santa Fe, but it'll
be in the lounge. The game will
be in the lounge starting at
5:25. And they're going to the
Sweet 16.
6 ft, seat 16. Thank you,
Senator Maestas. Senator Gon
cheerleading.
And also in my district, Questa
girls in their division took
first place.
announce that the core cheer won
the 3 state chaired this year,
so please give me, give them a
round of applause.
Thank you.
doing that more often, so thank
you for that announcement. Do we
know who won the 58 year contest
yet.
Senator Jarame, I think we need
a refund on the flowers you sent
uh, unanimous consent to the
Senate stand in recess until 7
o'clock this evening. no
objection to the Senate to send
a recess.
