Senator Figueroa.
Santer egos.
Senator Maestes.
Senator Nova.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Scott.
Saidia Lopez.
Here.
Senator Shando.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Thornton.
Senator Tobias.
Townsend.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President.
Thank you, I ask that everyone
please rise.
For the invitation to be led
to be led today by Senator Leo
Jaramiel and a salute to New
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator Scott.
Bodyguard, we, we pause.
Got us lead us direct us in the
work that we do and
And, uh
Lord, I just ask for your
continual blessing over this
for your wisdom and your
strength.
To be in each one of us as we
make these decisions and, uh, go
with his father.
Of the United States of America.
una nacion jodios invisible
New Mexico Senate, and IL to
Senate Majority authority there
Peter wants to take us to that
first order of business. Uh,
good afternoon, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to go without
our business announcements and
very much appreciated. It is
time to take that pause cause
you're right, we've got some big
decisions and you know, when you
sit and kind of step back from
Cameras and
Any excusals.
Sen, uh, good morning, Mr.
President. Thank you. Unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
Senate floor and in the Senate
Duig until they return to the
chamber and uh just a friendly
reminder to the clerk that
Senator Gonzalez is excused
until he returns to the chamber
as well.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator Worth.
Senator Woods, Senator Brandt.
Sen Lanier
And Senor Sanches until they
return to the Senate chamber.
Thank you, Mr. President. No
about Monday, we will have box
lunches Monday, uh, the
Questaconomic Funds Board and
Chevron Mining, uh, Senator
Gallegos, I think, is hosting
those on Monday and we
So those are the two
announcements that I have, I
would yield to any
other members if there are
announcements and then I'll let
folks know what we're gonna do.
announcement. Seeing no
announcement, Senator Peter
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So the plan is to do
items 1 through 6, in that
order. So item one is Senator
353, uh, item 3, I am doing
Senate Bill 81, I think Senator
Ramos is also a co-sponsor on
that, uh, and
And then item 4, Senator Nava
and Trujillo, Senate Bill 480
additional.
Uh, yes, let me yield to the.
Whip for announcement.
Senate Majority whip Michael
Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President, and I do ask the body
valuable healthcare service in
all of our communities, Mr.
President, and they are the
certified registered nurse
anesthetists, Mr. President, say
are the breath of the state
here. I want to recognize in the
gallery and I'll get them all
out and then we'll recognize
them, Mr. President. uh, Brian
Wilson from Sandoval County,
uh, Kim Brandt, uh, no relation,
I don't think to Senator Brant,
but from Taos, Sarah List from
Bernalillo, William Morland from
And uh we also have some
students with us as well and I'm
gonna ask them to stand if I've
called your names and go and
stand or or we can, um, I'm
gonna introduce these students
as well from Bernna Leo Zachary
from Bernalillo, uh, Christa
Brooks, and I'm just gonna ask
them to stand, they're all right
behind me, members of the body,
and these folks represent the
certified registered nurse
we please welcome them to the
chamber, please.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you
Senator Padilla. We do have
said. They provide an incredible
service throughout the state.
They basically enable our
smaller hospitals to be able to
survive economically so that
they can do surgery where you
there, so I just want to speak
very highly of the service that
they provide and
how competent they are and how
lucky we are to have so many in
the state. Thank you, Mr.
President.
See no further announcements, I
yelled to Senate Majority floor
leader.
Peterworth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
we are gonna go to that order
Senate Tax Business
Transportation substitute for
Senate Bill 169 as amended.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. We are
on that order business they're
doing the legislation. I'll y to
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 is amended.
Um, on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
of our economic development tool
kit, Mr. President. uh, the
primary objectives of this
legislation are to enhance the
state's economic development uh
uh programs by identifying,
capable of, uh, strategic
economic development site
advisory board will be put
together with various
departments within state
government and various experts,
uh, a site readiness fund will
we want to do this? We want to
do this for accelerated
economic growth. We want to be
ready, willing, and able,
essentially, Mr. President,
whenever an economic development
project looks at New Mexico or
I do have an amendment, Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
We do have a floor amendment.
The reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number
by Senator Michael Padilla.
Center to move the amendment.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I just want to say
that Senator Shindo, Senator
Shindo actually offered a great
include uh includes Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos, and
that's all the amendment does,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Padilla.
Senator, just a reminder, we are
in 3rd reading if we can keep
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment, Senator Padilla to
close. Uh, thank you very much,
Mr. President. At this time, I
move Senate floor amendment
number one.
as already amended once. Once.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senators there's been a request.
To adopt Senate floor amendment
number one and Centator Padilla,
if you can please let us know
how would you like that vote
Senate amendment number one has
been adopted to Senate tax
business transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 is now twice amended.
We're back on the bill senators.
this is the first time I see the
bill on the floor, um, and so I,
I don't know that I.
Um
I guess I'll just start.
that, Mr. President, or will the
sponsor yield? I'm sorry, will
the sponsor yield Lopez before
we yield, Senator Hickey, if you
can please take your seat.
hypothetically own some property
or had some other financial
interest in uh the site
selection, um, what
What safeguards are there
against this, Mr. President?
every year if you're a member of
a board commission or otherwise
you would have to do that as
well. And that would be, uh, the
disclosure that you, you'd have
to put out there. It would
likely uh disqualify you if you
Thank you, Senor Lopez. Senator,
Mr. President, those would be
taken on a case by case basis
depending on what that uh
violation would be.
Thank you Senator Paria. Senator
ago and the, the issue with site
selection and there was so much
self-interest and self dealing
and to be frank, Mr. President,
President.
Thank you, Senator C Lopez.
Senator C Lopez, was there a
question?
Um, so Mr. President, I guess
I'll just go through some of my
other concerns, um.
Senator Padilla.
Uh, Mr. President, if the, uh,
uh, senator would repeat her
question, please,
it's a variation on the last,
Uh, Mr. President, no, it is
not.
Can you say Mr. President, could
you show me in the bill where
that is?
Uh, Mr. President, that would go
along the um in the um
President, um, again, I don't
see any anything in the bill
that would stop that and
disclosure does not stop that.
selected are are the best sites
for the community.
Thank you, Sencia Lopez. Senator
Padilla, Mr. President, uh,
yeah, so on the site
characterization that's section
page 3, line 8 environmental
limitations would be looked at,
um, other things related to
access water, wastewater, uh,
So Mr. President, I don't see
anything in the bill that
requires the community affected
to have any input
Is that correct?
added an amendment just short, a
short while ago that ensured
that Indian nations, pueblos and
tribes are also included in this
process. So we want to make sure
that everybody had a seat at the
table.
OK, Mr. President, uh, if
you'll, I'll draw your attention
to, uh, page 3 starting on line
19, the strategic Economic
Development Site Advisory
the Secretary of Transportation,
uh, the director of the Economic
Development Department, 5 on
page 4, line 12, 5 public, I'm
sorry.
and that brings the public
directly into it.
Mr. President, I see on section
75 public members appointed by
the Legislative council who
shall have experience in law,
selection.
Uh, Mr. President, the, um,
public members would be
representing the community.
the table.
Padilla, yes, Mr. President, I
do believe it does.
Center Lopez, thank you, Mr.
President. Will the committee be
working in conjunction with the
in the bill where that's
required.
Uh, Mr. President, all over
section
4, which I just reviewed with
you this advisory council, uh,
selected by members of this body
and and members of this body are
are a portion of that.
Thank you, Senator for the uh
Senator C. Mr. President,
opinion does not give a seat at
the table for either the
community affected or local
governments.
aseques or anyone else any other
governmental entity affected by
the site selection, um, have a
seat at the table.
Center but, uh, Mr. President,
point to make those so.
Center seal of us. Thank you,
Mr. President. I really
appreciate the sponsor answering
my questions.
affected by that equal economic
development and it has to be in
consulting consultation with the
local governments and without
those provisions I don't feel
comfortable voting for this uh
particular.
Senator Lopez. Senators, we are
on 3rd reading of legislation.
I'm gonna els to Senator
Townsend, followed by Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the gentleman yield
like a lot of money, but when
you start trying to help, um,
All of the communities in 33
counties that gets divvied up
will projects be ranked? I mean,
there's gonna be a rush of
projects come into this bill and
the idea, quite frankly, I
support.
Um
Allocated across the state with
some fairness.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you to the senator. Um, I
that's one thing that'll happen
too is, you know, you're right.
I mean, $24 million to us as an
individual is, is just is a life
changing if you will, but to
this effort, it might, it might
the barn and just, you know,
have unlimited uh capital there.
I think this is the right timed
to approach. It's a smart way of
starting this project, and I'll
say, Mr. President, um, we have
the country, but we certainly
have to find a way to work with
it and make it work for us, and
this is absolutely gonna make it
work for New Mexico.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator Townsend, thank you, Mr.
municipalities across the state
are notified, uh, at the same
time so that as so they can have
the opportunity to get on the
something in education that all
the schools know that this is
available to them. Well, um, if
you're the economic developer in
your town and it might be the
smallest town in New Mexico that
you're assigned with that duty
that you're on top of that.
There will be, I, I can't tell
you how it'll work, but, um, the
advisory council and the
department will certainly
broadcast this as they normally
volume down to a minimum.
Senator Townsend. Thank you, Mr.
President. Also, Senator
Padilla,
Do you foresee this mostly being
today across New Mexico, but
Is, is that the intent, uh, for
Utility infrastructure built
out, is that, is that kind of
could potentially be feasibly be
part of this effort, but, uh,
this will be a compliment to all
the other wonderful things we've
done as a, you know, this
legislature in, in more recent
for, you know, actual uh
acquisition of companies to come
into New Mexico and then on the
other side it makes dollars
available.
For workforce housing, which can
support projects like this as
well.
think it will help build out and
get some things moving, that's
what it's intended to do. I
worry a little bit that
equal opportunity to apply for
it, but I appreciate it and, uh,
tend to support it based on what
I know right now. Thank you, uh,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Townsend. Senator Scott,
followed by Senator.
Uh, Mr. President, 24 million is
a little bit of an odd number.
Have projects already been
identified by the
administration.
idea with an ask of $50 million
and as it made its way and
weaved through the roundhouse as
we all know things happen to
things along or to to
legislation along the way. It
know we need this type of, of
ability to have sites ready to
rock and roll the moment folks
take a look at New Mexico.
OK, thank you very much Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
senatory for Christians, please.
I yield, Mr. President.
Mr. President, thank you very
much, Senator Padilla, I was
And it states Senate Bill 169
allows the secretary to solicit
proposals from both public
partners and private partners
for pre-development project.
violations to the anti-donation
clause.
I would like to hear the
senator's thoughts on that, Mr.
President.
New Mexico. And, and I think
that those have all been uh
tried, true and tested, and this
would simply place a database to
build a database out there on
what's available to potential,
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator is out, Mr. President,
thank you very much for that
response, Senator, uh,
whenever I read that site
certification whenever we
whenever these companies are
coming in wanting to get things
shovel ready and all.
wording in your bill where if
somebody objects to what is
being built or whatever the case
may be, is there any place in
there are other remedies that
already exist in that vein, and
we, we see those all the time
when a community has the ability
to take a look at, say, I'll,
I'll just draw for as an example
resolved, Mr. President, and now
we have a, the largest uh
Facebook data center on the face
of the planet.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator is out.
And I think it was on a 10 acre
plot of land that he wanted to
put up a solar farm there.
And the neighbors did protest it
that happen so that's why I'm
bringing this issue up, Mr.
President, there is concern
there for an appeals process for
any neighboring, um,
See no further debate.
Senator Padilla to close on the
bill. Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Again, I will say
this is going to be a terrific
economic development tool for
Transportation Committee where I
served 9 years. I can't believe
I can't say that, uh, substitute
for Senate Bill 169 is twice
amended. Do now pass and I ask
your name's consent to the
Senate that the records show
defense. You served on it for 9
years with the title has changed
about 4 years ago, so that's
your defense there. If you wish
to vote no, please raise your
hand.
in the negative. Senate tax
business, Transportation
Committee substitute.
percent of 169 is twice amended
has passed the Senate. Senator
Padilla, thank you very much,
Mr. President, members of the
Senate.
unanimous consent. The record
show that all actions for
placing Senate tax, business,
transportation committee,
substitute for Senate bill of
353 to now be put on final
is a really important bill, um,
being brought on behalf of the
search and rescue organizations
of New Mexico. This bill
essentially
adds one new adds one
requirement, which is that when
addition to local first
responders being dispatched.
Right now, under the New Mexico
Search and Rescue Act, search
and rescue organizations who are
volunteer organizations can only
requires that that state police
be called for a search and
rescue situation, so yeah, that
your local search and rescue
organization can be dispatched
for somebody who needs rescue
needs to know that search and
rescue has been dispatched. So
it improves the communication
going that direction too. And
with that
Mr. President, and I stand for
any questions. Thank you,
Senators. We're debating centers
Mr. President, I absolutely
yelled and I, and I asked for
unanimous consent to bring my
expert onto the floor with me.
Thank you, Senator, if you'll
identify who your expert is, I
Seeing no objection, Sergeant
Rosville, please escort our
expert witness into the chamber
and provide seating.
Senorel, once our expert
awareness comes in, if you can
ask your question.
Sinners out
Mr. President, thank you very
rescue situation whether or not
a local dispatch or even makes
that call. Far too often that
call doesn't get made until a
person has been lost remotely
people are dying, and so what
this does is this makes it
Mandatory that a dispatcher when
they get a call that meets the
criteria of a search and rescue
search and rescue component.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn.
Senator.
Mr. President, I guess I'm.
Kind of confused over what you
And therefore everybody is
notified, including state
police, the sheriff's
department.
Local police forces in the in
process right now because as far
as I know, once those
dispatchers do get that call,
the call is relayed on.
There's lots of problems we're
aware of in many places. I could
cite locations. Senator Schendo,
Mr. President, I'd like to
acknowledge he's the co-sponsor
of this bill and maybe your
picture should be up there as
it's simply not working and um
so this is going to improve it
in most places where it's not
happening very well. Thank you,
Senator Steinborn. Senator.
missing person and needing the
help of the search and rescue
teams from the various areas
throughout our state.
Until they do get their call,
Mr. President, thank you very
much. What I'm saying here.
Whenever there is a call into
it seems to me like to put the
call out for assistance. Am I
understanding that correctly?
Mr. President, Senator, that's
correct.
So Mr.
President.
Where a dispatch can be.
Put in place, can you tell me
what that time frame is prior to
that person being put on a
missing person list.
about a missing person list so
much. This is about the
timeliness of search and rescue
dispatch. So I unfortunately, I
don't know the answer to your
question about how much time has
timely um re timely dispatch of
somebody who's in need of urgent
immediate rescue who's in the
search and rescue situation.
And Mr. President, I do
understand that Mr. uh, Senator
person. The reason they started
this search and rescue earlier
than normal. This person was a
diabetic, a serious diabetic,
people going through our ranch,
going to the west, trying to
find this person. I do
understand the timeliness of
we have good people that are on
the search and rescue teams and
they do respond in a timely
manner and if they're not
responding in a
timely manner
I'm kind of concerned if we get
but how does this bill actually
fix it, Mr. President? Well,
thank you, Mr. President,
Senator. So it fixes it by
making it mandatory that they
um, is search and rescue is not
called Search and rescue groups
are literally, they could lose
their credentialing if they do
not get the call from the state
police to activate their
mission. This is the way New
never comes and it's voluntary
right now, and many of them do
not make the call until hours
have lapsed.
A person can get hypothermia,
they can die, maybe a diabetic
definition and criteria of a
search and rescue emergency
situation that they then make
that call to the state police,
and that's all that it triggers,
really, is a call.
this problem we have if a
dispatcher is not putting that
call out.
Mr. President, Senator, I'm not
rescue can be activated.
I would note, Mr. President,
search and rescue.
Hats off to them. They are
volunteers. These are people who
work free of charge. I mean,
dispatch, it seems like that
local area might be able to say,
hey, there's a problem here.
We've got people's lives at
stake. It's imperative that we
get out there, that we have the
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
they could have that option,
however, um, it's a matter, some
don't think they need the
assistance, and then they get
hours into a situation and
search and rescue groups
capability is so technical. I'm
talking about drones rappelling
the assistance. And there have
even been situations where
the first responders at the
local level then need rescue
because they get in very deep,
and now they've been out there
for hours. So, so there are
Mr President, I do understand
the urgency and safe and
potentially saving somebody's
life if there is a dangerous
situation that is presented so
So if the dispatcher does not
immediately make that call for
somebody to go check the
situation out.
Wouldn't that be grounds enough
for that dispatcher dispatcher
This bill is needed to establish
criteria to establish timely
response, um, so that there is
that expectation right now, it's
again there is nothing in law
they're not trained to do, you
know, uh, this bill, however,
would require this new.
Mr. President, thank you very
you very much. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
with the, uh, sponsor yield for
a couple of questions.
Is there a is there currently a,
a statewide training issue with
our dispatchers or uh.
mean, there is to the extent
that we have this disconnect on
search and rescue policy where
this communication needs to be
improved and our protocols need
to be improved and hence the
bill.
sadly, I can give you multiple
examples including, um,
In Taos County.
Where, um, where there's delayed
Senator Pinto can speak to, um,
but we certainly had others
around the state as well.
Thank you, Mr. President. So,
uh, in regards to either
what went wrong and what, what,
uh, what they can do better.
Um, Mr. President, Senator, my
um expert says yes.
Center Block, thank you, Mr.
Um, is that at Kirtland Air
Force Base or is that with the
Air guard or is that another Air
Force base in New Mexico?
OK. Thank you, Mr. President, of
course systems existing law, um,
in the search and rescue Act.
This is not new language we're
proposing, but it says there
that it means the Air Force
rescue coordination Center.
Senator
Senator Steinberg, did you wish
to clarify?
This US Department of Defense.
Thank you, Mr. President, let me
make sure I understand that.
It's, that's out of Tyndall Air
Force Base in Panama City,
Florida.
Tyndall Air Force Base for
search and rescue in New Mexico,
my expert, Mr. President,
locally?
I think Kirtland Air Force Base
is closer than Tyndall Air Force
Base, uh, isn't it?
connected to Kurtland then by
this law and protocol the state
police has to go through this,
uh, Air Force base.
Kendall. Senator block.
revisit this in the bill, um,
because Tyndall Air Force Base.
Uh, Senator, that's the 325th
fighter wing. They fly F-35s.
And I'm looking on their
website, Mr. President and
Senator and
engineer Center.
That's not search and rescue.
Tindo program management office.
That, that ain't so.
evaluation group.
They got a 44th fighter group.
Uh, they have an office, a
special investigation.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, I appreciate the
concern. Again, this is existing
law and if there's something
that needs to be updated,
of Tyndall's mission, his office
is directly responsible for
communicating with, as he said,
over a dozen times a year and as
we know, Mr. President,
sometimes our military bases
have many, many missions, some
of which may be minor missions,
Steinburn. Senter Block, thank
you, uh, Mr. President. um,
Well, those are called, you have
a host wing in the Air Force and
then you have Mission Partners,
Patrol unit, uh, that's out of
Kirtland. Have we used them
before?
Mr President, I believe the
answer to your question is yes.
Does, does the state police, do
they do tabletop exercises or
Thank you, Mr. President. So
when we look at, I just wanna
make sure I understand the
process now. So, Mr. President,
Senator,
What's
what would that be exactly?
Thank you, Senator Block.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr. President, yes, it could be
the state police? Is this a, are
they called the state police
search and rescue, um.
Office or or something?
uh, assistance officer for the
state. It's a position created
in law actually in the same act.
Thank you, Mr. President. And
how many, how many people are,
are in that organization.
OK, Mr. President, it, it, it
involves, well, it involves one,
this one employee in 980
volunteers, which are the search
and rescue people that fall
under this.
President, Senator, so I, I
assume um.
All these volunteers are
certified in search and rescue
tactics.
Mr. President, Senator, that is
correct.
Well, thank you for asking that
question. That is the whole
point of the bill, Mr.
President, because it just
depends. They search and rescue
can only be dispatched if
they're given a mission by
Oh, Mr. President, Senator, does
this office lose any type of
federal grant monies if they're
not getting, um, called a
certain amount of times or
Mexico search this is Senator
Steinborn Center Block.
OK. And I, I think lastly, uh,
Mr. President, and Senator, it,
because I talked to my um
exercises, um, in some time. I'm
not sure when, uh, are they
required to participate in, in
field exercises on a yearly
President, this is some one of
the real positive things that's
going to come out of this bill
is going to be increased
communication with search and
rescue organizations, increased
training, increase.
Effectiveness, etc. etc.
however many there are, do they
have their gear and everything
on them ready to go?
Mr. President, um, yeah.
on-scene commander, which would
probably be the
Uh,
county fire chief or um the
county sheriff.
OK, thank you, Mr. President. I,
I, I guess I don't understand
the, the unity of command here,
so you have 22 on-scene
commanders. You have a search
and rescue on scene commander
then you have the.
simplify by just a senator that
you have local, local, obviously
primacy of of the jurisdiction
where the incident occurs, and
then in this particular case,
you're going to have the command
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
What, what happens if, um, the
dispatch centers don't call.
They, they don't.
They just don't call. What, what
type of uh accountability is
there.
built into this, into this bill
if they don't make that call,
but certainly they would be
violating the state law, if they
don't make that call.
So Mr. President, Senator, if
Um, I'm not sure I understand
the question. Would you restate
it, Senator, please, Mr.
President, Senator.
So are, are you telling me if I
understand it correctly, that
Mr President, Senator, I'm sure
that they do, you know, on
occasion, and I, I can't speak
to your community and how good
the communication is, as I
mentioned, it really varies
communication flows and
And there's no problem at all.
So it's just various community
by community.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn
Center Block.
Um, nothing happens to them. I
understand, you know, we have
about 980 volunteers, but we're
not really utilizing it. I don't
a lot of issues with, with the
bill, and I, I don't see any
data in the analysis that shows
gaps in training or capabilities
from
From the uh
Well, Mr. President, I'm not, I
don't know what data you're
referring to, but you're
definitely, um,
Not apprised of the situation in
the state of New Mexico as it
relates to this, um, and I don't
state. And in fact, there's
major problems and deaths
occurring because
This, we, our laws is as loose
as it is, and that's why this
bill has been brought forward.
come, Mr. President, hours have
passed and now search and rescue
are being sent out in the middle
of the night when situations
were even worse. And it's worse
on everybody, and it's worse on
the local first responders. So
analysis showing uh systemic
training, training gaps. And
those are very serious issues
you brought up and if they're
that serious, then there needs
to be some type of
search and rescue um operations
which I don't see, but I would,
I would love.
to see the analysis uh from the
state police in here that shows.
had a timely, um, augmented
response on search and rescue
from the state police.
Um, how are our federal partners
involved in this as well, and,
rescue, and, and I think I, I
could support the bill on that.
I could also support the bill if
there's a little bit of
accountability, but the, the
bill has no teeth, Mr.
President. It's like, well,
A timeliness of a response, but
um, I definitely appreciate uh
you working this issue for
several years. I, I've been
around it a little bit, maybe
about 8 years or so, uh, at the
Thank you, Mr. President. Just
want to, um, let the body know a
little bit about.
The Air Force rescue
coordination Center, uh, it is
actually at Tyndall Air Force
Base, actually had a friend that
have, um, you know, local
emergencies just calling the
Kurdlin Air Force Base or the
units, right? They're able to
coordinate that through all of
our states and actually even in
in Mexico and parts of North
help. So just want to let the
body know, and I know my
colleague in the Air Force, we
don't know, know all the units.
I don't know all the units, um,
I've just been familiar with
this, so just wanna let.
body you know that I don't
true. Senator Steinburn do you
Thank you, Mr. President. I
yield, and I would just say, uh,
you know, I appreciate him
bringing his expertise and his
own research on that particular
bill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. I, I apologize,
Senator Padilla did ask, uh,
before we go to close Senator
Padilla did request. Uh thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Senator Steinborner close. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
colleagues for the good
questions. Um, this bill is
about saving lives.
pressing need so this bill is
going to support those lost and,
and urgent need of rescue, but
it's also gonna support those
groups that are training out
there, um, and investing in that
President, um, I do now move
that Senate tax and business and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 353,
um, do now pass, and I ask
youA's consent in the Senate.
raise your hand.
I vote of 31 in the affirmative,
3 in the negative Senate
taxusiness Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 353 has passed the Senate
Senator block to explain his
vote.
solid, solid numbers and there's
no teeth in the bill.
This bill doesn't mean anything
when it goes down to the lower
levels to the counties and
Uh, a field training exercise as
well, which I think is needed.
So thank you, Mr. President. uh,
I think senators, uh, the
sponsors.
Senator Senator Steinborn, thank
you, Mr. President.
President. Uh, I ask unanimous
of the Senate that the records
show all action replacing Senate
Bill 81 as twice amended with
the emergency clause on final
pass has been taken. It's now
Bill and then we do have an
amendment that I'll come back
and put on, uh, which I think
will help address some of the
issues that we experienced
during the journey of this bill
insurance program that's been in
law since 1969.
And it kicks in when a homeowner
or business, uh, has been unable
established in 1969, uh, the
rate for
Residential homes was $250,000
properties. Uh, this bill as
presented, uh, proposes to raise
the rate to a million dollars
for residential properties and
morning, I ran a, an inflation
calculator to get a sense of
what $250,000 would look like
today. And it was interesting
down, uh, in, in the amendment
to $750,000.
Uh, why is this important?
interest in effective June 5,
2025. And I'm just gonna read
it. You are hereby notified in
accordance with the terms and
conditions of the above
mentioned policy and in
accordance with law that the
longer meets guidelines due to
property and high or very high
wildfire region.
This is a property in the city
of Santa Fe off of old Santa Fe
Trail.
the two house sponsors,
Representative Vincent and
Representative Anita Gonzalez
have had.
Disasters in their districts as
a result of fires and so they're
purpose of this bill is to raise
the limits, uh, restructure the
board, uh, and basically provide
for mitigation so that when you
insurance or not. So what I'd
like to do, Mr. President, is
yield to Senator Ramos and then
we'll put this amendment on and
then we can open it up for
debate. Thank you, Senator.
We're centered almost, Mr.
before I came up to the session
I had customers calling from
other uh companies saying that
they
can't get insurance, which is
really, really, uh, uh,
covered. Um, when I was here in
session on the 2nd, uh, 2nd week
that we were here, I had 3
people call me on the same day
saying, Gabe, you need to get me
hard to make sure that we met
everyone's needs, but the bottom
line is we got to do what we can
for our New Mexico residents to
get them some kind of a policy
the mountains and, and we got to
make sure that they're taken
care of, uh, Mr. President, so,
uh.
Oh
Uh
Floor leader, I, I, I thank you
With the emergency clause.
A Me sponsored by Senator Peter
Wirth.
Senator worth to move the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
Senate floor amendment number 1,
the Senate Bill 81 is twice
amended with the emergency
uh, in the rates, as I
mentioned, the bill has the
rates at a million and 5
million, a million for
residential and 5 million for
commercial, uh, during the
journey of this bill, the fair
agreed to come down to that
number. So this amendment, uh,
lowers the residential rate to
$750,000 and lowers the
commercial rate from 5 million
to 2 million.
helping kind of come up with
something that's balanced and
fair. I know in Senate Finance,
Senator Munoz pointed out some
of the challenges with the
current board. So this amendment
industry, one appointment by the
House minority floor leader
represents consumers. One
appointment by the Attorney
General representing consumers.
One appointment by the president
risk experience, the
superintendent or her designee,
and then the 11th member is the
fire marshal or the fire
marshal's designee, we also
changed that under this.
Again was accepted somewhat
reluctantly because again, I
think the issue with the, with
the, the, the, the rates is
morning on the new $750,000
rate. She provisionally approved
it until June 20th, 2025. So as
of right now, folks can go get
Senator Ramos. Thank you,
senators. We're debating Senate
floor, ma'am, number one,
Senator Ramos, Mr. President,
again, I, I just, I'm just glad
that we're able to meet in a
I'm real happy.
with it and I urge the body to
vote uh uh yes on this
amendment.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. We do
have debate on the amendment,
Senator Padilla.
Send her to work to close on the
amendment. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. I move Senate floor
amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 81, uh, it twice amended
with the emergency clause and
asked for a voice vote.
Senators, we are voting on the
The eyes have it. The Santa
number one has been adopted to
Senate Bill 81 as now 3 times
amended with the emergency
clause. We are back on the bill,
senators to Senator Townsend.
yields to Senator Ramos Ramos,
Senator Ramos to yield to
Senator Townsend. Yes, Mr.
President, I do yield Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, um, Mr. President.
A homeowner side, but we moved 3
million down on the business.
Can you explain to me that
rationale. Thank you, Senator
Ramos before you do, if you can
Welcome to the Senate,
Representative.
Senator Ramos, Mr. President, we
just thought that this was a
good uh place to meet. I know
it's not in the middle, but a
permanently and, and go back to
a regular policy through through
another company um because we
really feel that the fair plan
should be for emergency purposes
have, so, um, we felt that this
was a a good place to meet and a
good place to uh to uh to stand
off on, on, uh, on our, on our.
Amounts.
of, if, if you look at the
historical use of the Fair Plan
Act.
Businesses versus homeowners who
uses it most, one, by number,
Mr. President, I'll go ahead and
yield to to floor leader.
So Mr. President, I'm happy to
get my expert in here with
That's the really important
thing. This is not some kind of
discount program and, and
Senator Ramos is.
Absolutely, we, we want to get
folks in here until the
insurance industry really comes
I'm happy to bring in an expert
if you want me to try and get
some specifics.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. So Mr. President,
unanimous consent to bring in
Senators have been unanimous
consent requests to
Bring in the expert witness into
the chamber, seeing no
objection, Sergeants, if you can
please escort the.
have the exact numbers, but I
think this will be helpful,
about 90% of the policies are
residential. So the majority
have been residential, but I
think as we saw in the Riodoso
fire that's that represented
If they want to rebuild, have an
option too.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Um
When does it become uh available
to them? Are there provisions,
uh, when they get kicked off of
this fair plan and have to go
back to a regular insurance.
What, what are those guidelines?
rejections to be able to qualify
and then once I bring those
three rejections, I can get a
policy at the fair plan and at
the end of 3 years, I got to go
transition away from this as
soon as possible.
Senator Townsend and
Senator Wirth.
Mr. President, the answer is no,
and I think uh Senator Ramos
during our journey with this
increases, and it's only if
you've received the outright
rejections that you're able to
go this direction.
Mr. President, um, Senator
Wirth.
Um, I could probably filibuster
on that issue for a long time.
I have a home in, uh, Paula and
I have a home at Alto, and the
now, who
Have suffered complete
devastation of the forest. There
is nothing left.
I mean, you couldn't start a
fire if you wanted to.
So I think, um.
I think some, I, I'm never, um.
My tendency is never to.
hate that we have to get into
this type of business.
But another question about
loans. If, if a
Will they accept within their
mortgage policy, this.
Insurance.
Senator Worth, Mr. President,
yes.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, my experts are
saying Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.
Thank you, Mr. President.
When you look what happened, um,
in the Northwest.
And certainly in the Southeast
with devastation.
Um
And then you look at
have allowed to impact our
communities.
We have not addressed that. I
mean, um, very well within the
legislature, but we're gonna
that's the risk of the fires in
the communities. So I, I'll,
I'll continue to listen to the
debate, um, Mr. President, and
um.
Uh, this is not a state program.
So these are the insurance
companies that are, that insure
around the estate that form a
pool.
situation where there's a loss,
as there was in Riodoso. They
can go out and put an
assessment.
Out to their policyholders to
bring up any deficiency.
clarify, there was a $50 million
appropriation that was stripped
out of the bill. There's money
in the budget for fire
mitigation, which is super
important, and I couldn't agree
And I know, I always think of
Senator Scherer back in the day
when I chaired Senate
Conservation talking about the
need to thin forests. I agree
with that. Again, we finally are
bills and Sarah Stephanics had
one too to do exactly that. So,
I just want to clarify that
though, cause I don't want there
to be confusion that somehow
we're gonna go out and
Mr. President, I'm glad you made
it. I, I had misread what we
used to, but
Mr. President, I think it's
really important that
several questions, uh, emailed
to me, and I want to make sure I
have been answering them
correctly. So if I cannot.
And, and they cancel me. I go
out, I can't get the insurance,
then you say I'm going to a pool
that's sponsored by the same
guys that canceled my insurance
the requirement that exists for
them to be licensed to deal with
this exact situation. So in
effect what they're doing is
sharing the risk.
But they'll all sit down as part
of this pool and, and part of
the reason that they're part of
their license is that they
participate in this, so that we
district and in and back up and
alto for all those folks that
have lost their house, they're
not gonna get insurance except
through this. So if they want to
go build again and go get a
loan, they have to have an
Mr. President, can Senator Wirth
tell me what a $750,000 policy
would cost, uh, on a piece of
property today under the fair
Mr. President, my experts
telling me about $4000 is what
that policy would, would cost
and would include the contents
they're at where the risk needs
to be, uh, because again, folks
need to be able to pay, so the
pool's solvent, so we don't end
up in a situation where there's
an unsolvent or a fund that
needs to go out, it's.
Just for grins, what do you
think of $750,000 full coverage,
uh, deductible policy costs.
Mr. President and Senator
Townsend, my experts are telling
me that rates for all of us have
been going up about 40% over the
last two years.
Senator Townsend.
my personal experience. 3 years
ago, I was playing $1300 per
year on a $650,000 policy.
I, Mr. President, um,
I, I was paying $1300.03 years
ago for a full covered home.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, I think this.
Causes me more concerned the
in the board are being um
recommended.
Center Ramos, yes, Mr.
President, the board members
will consist of the following.
premium out of all members
member insurers. One member
representing an admitted mutual
insurers, one member
representing admitted stock
insurance in New Mexico. One
member appointed by the minority
floor leader.
Of the Senate representing New
Mexico.
One member appointed by the
One member appointed by the
President pro temp of the Senate
with actual experience.
One member appointed by the
superintendent with catastrophic
risk experience.
The state fire marshal or the
fire marshal's designee.
And last, the superintendent or
the superintendent's designee.
Mr. President,
Thank you Senator Ramos, Senator
Townsend.
Uh, process today for the board,
but there's a, there's now a
change being implemented. Can
you tell me why the change?
That's what I'm trying to get.
Is there a problem now? And are
we trying to address something,
has been a problem and a
challenge with the board. The
board is consisted basically of
all the insurance companies. And
as I noted, the residential rate
that this somehow was created as
a low income plan, which I was
pretty surprised by, uh, you
heard my opening with inflation.
And we, you know, that would be
about the board, uh, the
superintendent went to the board
after the situation in Rio delo
and asked them to raise the
rates to $750,000. Uh.
frustrated trying to represent
his district. Uh, he had one of
the great lines I've heard in
committee. He said we need to
sprinkle a little on delay on
this thing and get it moving,
and I think this is more
that they're bored, uh, it's 9
members, but all appointed by
the governor, and we didn't like
that.
Uh, initially, this board and
this bill had a number of
different appointments that
up with a balanced board, uh, 5
on industry, 5 that are gonna be
more consumer oriented, and then
the fire marshals really the
deciding, the deciding vote. And
Two state reps have experienced,
uh, this is gonna become in a
critical board, and it's just,
it's gonna need to be proactive,
and there's gonna be things
interests.
Thank you, Senator Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Did the current board, um, to
simple calculation when you go
through the, trying to get
You know, 350,000 or 250 up to
today's, it seems like it would
have been really easy to do, is
that it, it was a big deal, and
they actually came to the
legislature and their council
represented that the position
that somehow this whole program
You know, disparage the board
because they did come up to 750
after this bill, and you know,
the superintendents come down to
750, and that was not easy.
Really focused on what, what
we're dealing with here and able
to address what's going to
become more and more, I mean, an
issue, I think for 50 years,
Like center where Sarah
Townsend.
Mr. President
Uh, Senator Worth, um, I think
Uh, once the, the coverage rates
are increased. Who, who decides
here. So they need the the board
itself will submit proposed
rates to the superintendent for
approval. Uh, they need to be
Senator Ramos with his situation
and what we're all seeing with
our own policies, uh, it's gonna
be more important than ever that
the rates that are assessed for
what we're trying to do is make
this thing sufficient, just like
any other.
insurance company wants to make
sure their rates will cover
their liability.
Senator Townsend.
that did not have the ability to
insure their homes, uh, would
exist today.
Senator
Senator
So the answer is yes.
So, Mr. President, it causes me
to think, have we allowed,
of people that can't get
insurance under current rate
structure for some risk
associated, but now they can
charge.
not put the fox in the chicken
house, and now they're able to
charge them a, a higher rate
than they might normally.
So, Mr. President, the idea,
it's not gonna be a higher rate
not to go charge higher rates
for these folks, but it's also
not to charge lower rates,
because that's what was
happening. It was about 20%
under underfunded and so I do
effort on this. It also came to
me because I had a chamber town
hall in Santa Fe, had a farmer's
agent come up to me and say he
cons
constituents know that there is
a default, because otherwise you
truly are in a place where you
can't sell your house, if you
don't have insurance, your
mortgage company can try and
Until such time as you can get
back on regular insurance, and I
think once we also work on the
forest mitigation that you
talked about, that's gonna help
the insurance industry as well.
to do the hardening if you're
close to any kind of, you know,
for a situation.
Mr. President, I'm trying to
understand if it's actuarly
sound.
When it seems to meet the.
The threshold of being sound
business.
So, Mr. President, the problem
is the reinsurers.
reinsurers have, have been quite
frankly,
They've been paying out
something they don't.
Do a whole bunch. They don't
like that, and they've been
doing it, and so all of a sudden
these insurance companies are
have agreed to be part of this
in the pool together and to make
something work. so New Mexicans
don't end up without insurance.
I appreciate that, Mr.
based on the amendment. And so
he's concerned about it. And Mr.
President, I, I have concerns as
well. I understand. I understand
because I think they
They have enjoyed the good
market in New Mexico. We were
And just because they suffered
at one time, there's no right,
in my opinion, to treat New
Mexico like they're treating the
Mexico today and, uh, uh.
underlying issue is to fix the
forest. So,
Mr. President, Senator Ramos,
Senator Wirth, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend. We
do have further debate. We'll
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm sorry
that I was ignoring you, sir.
The, the question I have.
The, the question I've had all
didn't want the state to spend a
lot of money in this because
that would create a state
agency, so you say that the, the
appropriation has been stripped
And I know that before it was
just all insurance company. So,
uh, those are the three things
that I was very concerned about.
Um,
When I was talking to uh the
fair board. They told me that
had to be so close to a fire
station or a fire hydrant. And
if it was further away from
that, then they could only
insure for 25,000.
They can still get the 750,000 I
understand that's the new scheme
of this and, and.
Do like this if I'm doing
something wrong here. OK, so,
Uh, if one of the senators will,
uh, it's about mitigation.
OK, we're, we're, we're going to
require before you get this
No, OK, Mr. President, if, if
that's wrong.
Please say no.
Thank you, Senator, Senor, Mr.
President, yeah, let me correct.
are, you're losing your policy,
so you could lose your mortgage,
so the policy goes on, but there
is a requirement during that
first year that you harden the
property.
sees if that is adequately done.
To satisfy the limits of the
policy, Mr. President.
Sanalworth.
there's actually a process to do
that which they've got to bring
back to the fair board to show
that that has been done.
Third party, Mr. President, from
I don't see how any of the
policy here
Um
Has anybody to do that. I mean,
the fire marshal is in there,
And
So the mitigation on that.
would be
far are we gonna go on the
mitigation there.
Uh, for hail and Wynn, Mr.
President, or is that all yet to
be decided, Mr. President.
will, will look at and make that
deter OK well.
The, the last statement, Mr.
President.
From what I understood, there's
would, that would accept this
insurance for a mortgage. Has,
has that changed?
So Mr. President, the two big
just one company, it's the big
underwriters, so I think, I
think it's
Yeah, 90% of the market. They,
they, they write the mortgages
on. So I think this is pretty
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods. We have further debate.
We have Senator Munoz followed
by Senator Scott. Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
may ask the sponsor to yield for
some questions, but let me just
ask him right now, but the
going to rebuild your home
because of a fire catastrophe,
for whatever reason.
The insurance market is mainly
run by hedge funds.
And center Ramos and maybe the
senator will respond. I didn't
ask him to yield, but I'll
include him in that yielding
question.
They want to return.
The first time you make a claim.
couldn't make another claim for
5 years. He said, you already
made a claim even though
lightning hit your house.
They're gonna look at every
house and, and say, what's the
risk and what's our return?
government and others.
Now they're coming back and
they're saying, well, we won't
insure you.
Because the claims are too big,
and you had a massive loss.
still here. Everything's still
here. We don't have a home to
live in.
Because you can't borrow money.
Unless you have insurance.
And insurance has determined
system is bunded on insurance
premiums across the state to
reduce the premiums on other
people.
Uh, they said, let's create a
class. So when they decide they
can do that, that they can
afford to buy their American
dream.
And, and how to do that. But
board makeup, not in the bill,
but currently. And so when you
have the foxes in charge, the
foxes are not gonna let anybody
else have any chickens because
they got them all. And, and
they're gonna control what the
because I was in a high-risk
fire area. And when I said,
well, why, why you?
Denying that policy. Well,
you're in a high risk buyer. OK.
Then why are you renewing the
policy right next door?
They're picking and choosing
where they think their margins
are and where their claims are.
I never had an insurance claim
on there ever.
But they're gonna determine what
they want and, and how to make
their money in the best possible
say, where's your insurance? I
don't want insurance. Well, if
you're gonna borrow money from
us, you have to have insurance.
Somebody's got to pay us.
And and so that's the model
we're forced into. If you're
And if you want to remain a New
Mexican, here's a way for you to
get insurance and remain in New
Mexican.
Me not like it all.
I think the good center for
Marti just said that he had a
he made a claim because of fire
damage that wasn't caused by
him.
But this is the model we're
forced into.
Do we want it? No, we had it the
other way.
function since 1960 something or
1970. This is never gonna
function in New Mexico.
And if you want your kids to
come home and build a home next
And, and if you want them to
come home and start a business.
Pay taxes in New Mexico, be
successful in New Mexico, state
to state they were raised in,
It's because the world
environmentally causes.
Mother Nature caused a lot of
this. Some of it was man-made,
but we gotta adjust and in this
model, I don't know why
unless you have insurance.
And this is the only way they're
gonna access insurance in this,
in with this model. Thank you,
Mr. President.
And you're Scott would that be
Senator Wars or Senator Ramos?
Uh, maybe both of them.
Both senators yield.
Yes, Mr. President. Yes, Mr.
President.
account and is this $50 million
going to add to that reserve.
Senator Scott, first of all,
lot of that would be to help
lower income folks with
mitigation.
Which would have been good and
potentially it could have been
used as an additional amount as
money though after the Ruidoso
situation and had to go out with
an assessment for $10 million
because they had not had the
rates up high enough, and they
Vinson had in his district.
That's really what we're trying
to do here.
But no state money going in out
of this bill.
Thank you, Senator Scott. OK,
participating in the fair plan
are going to pay whatever rates
are required to keep the plan.
Actuarly sound.
here. That's what needs to
happen for this to work, and I
think it's more important than
ever.
That moving forward, this new
board should this pass.
the money, they've got to go out
and do an assessment, which is
the option now, but I also think
that, you know, this is
something we're all gonna be
dealing with, and I really
appreciate Senator Townsend
ive of what's needed to ensure
that it's solvent when there is
a claim, and that's why it has
to be actuarly sound.
What
insurance commissioner who is
not allowed rates to go and be
actuarly correct, which is part
of the problem. They've also had
just a catastrophic situation,
You know, loss situation, I
think we're all gonna be
With the, with the, with us that
that are not in the fair plan
are gonna be working with our
statewide assessment to address
that situation, and that's what
they had to do just recently
with the $10 million shortfall
that they had.
And Scott.
30% this last
year.
So Mr. President, surcharges
haven't happened, so, not yet. I
am afraid that 30% is because of
might be better than we are. The
rest of the state.
Uh, Mr. President, not many
trees in Hobbs, New Mexico.
Thank you, sir. That's all I
had.
Thank you see no further debate.
that, uh, people in Riodosa for
the last couple of weeks, have,
I don't know how else to say
this, but they have not been
waiting for this bill to pass.
Can you ask her to address that,
uh, Senator Wirth?
And so there have been some back
and forth. There was another
letter that went back from the
superintendent, I believe last
week that did lay out a couple
of conditions that caused some
approval effective until June
20th, 2025, which means that as
of
Today
Everyone can go out and
going to happen after June 2025.
Well, I think we all get a
chance to make that decision, I
think, uh, if this bill passes,
uh, if it passes with an
Again, I think the idea is to to
codify this and get something in
place so that we do not just a
rate at 750, but a $2 million
bringing up, that's in this bill
and that we've got a board that
still has 5 members from the
insurance industry, 5 appointees
that are on the other side and
the fire, the superin
Uh, the
fair. I know there's been some
frustration, but we're here
today with a number of 750,
which again,
What we're doing here. We
started at a million after
working with Representative
Vincent and we brought, and then
we've come down to 750 because
it's because in recognition and
respect for where the fair plan
Vincent today that leave their
home today.
With absolutely no insurance,
and they, they, they can't
obtain it in the market. They
home when I get back because
everything I own.
Is in that house.
And they have
No insurance, and that's a
See no further debate.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
really appreciate the
about this as it moves over to
the house. We're committed to
doing that. I want to thank
Senator Ramos for helping work
on where we've gotten to. And
with that, Mr. President, I move
that Senate Bill 81 is 3 times
We're voting just to remind our
senators this need this has an
emergency clause. If you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Townsend, if you can
please report to your seat for
your vote.
President. Thank you, ladies and
gentlemen. Senate. Thank you,
Senator Ramos. Thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you, thank
you all for your help. Thank
you, Senator Ramos. We're gonna
go on to item number 4, that's
Senate Education Committee
action by place for placing
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
no objections, and Nova, if
for Senate Bill 480, um, is
essentially a bill that would
require that every summer the
public education is department,
uh create a direct a directory
available for the higher
education department public
postsecondary educational
institutions.
School districts or charter
schools and New Mexico-based
adults adult basic education
credentials, essentially, Mr.
President, the hope is that with
a specific list of students to
recruit from the state funded
programs that were created to
work with students who did not
hovered between 75% and 80%
since 2016 and we know this has
been an issue. We know how
important opportunities are for
our youth who struggled, and
this is one step in the right
To ensure that we have a list of
students to recruit from and
these programs can be even more
successful than they've been in
the past and we can streamline
look at graduation rates we can
also acknowledge that
economically disadvantaged
students fair uh lower chances
of graduation rates right now
economically disadvantaged
student.
45% graduation rate, Mr.
President, um, and this, this
bill would really help us get
into the right start
streamlining into the right
direction and at this time, Mr.
me be a co-sponsor on this. We
all know that education has a
significant impact on breaking
the cycle of poverty and is the
first time, first generation
know that education has a huge
impact. So whether these
students are, are entering back
into a program to get their high
school diploma.
or to get an alternative high
you, Senator for letting me be a
part of this bill.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator, uh, Mr. uh,
unanimous request for an expert
witness to be allowed in the
chamber.
Seeing no objection.
Nova
Thank you Mr. President. I'd
also like to point out, Mr.
President, that this is a
bipartisan group effort, uh, in
wanted to make sure that we
share that with folks and I
yield.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
We do have debate. We'll have
ask if, if the sponsor would
yield for a question, either
sponsor
I yelled, Mr. President.
Um, what is, what information in
supposed to do. uh, Mr.
President, Senator, uh,
typically directory information
includes information such as
name, address, telephone listing
date and place of birth,
Mr. President, why is place of
birth relevant?
Mr. President, according to my
expert witness, it is just what
FERPA defines um as directory of
bit concerned about releasing
place of birth.
To certain organizations, so my,
Mr. President, um,
public postsecondary educational
institutions, school districts
or charter schools in New Mexico
adult?
Workforce development.
Mr. President, I will just state
that I don't know why, um.
provided to the institutions
that could only help the
students, um, I intend to
support the bill. Thank you, Mr.
President Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
much. Will the senator Yie
please.
I yield, Mr. President.
Mr. President, in light of what
enrolled in our schools.
Well, Mr. President and Senator
Nova, I know that a lot of
foreign exchange students that
do come in through that
would be hard to track, isn't
that correct?
That is correct, Mr. President
and senator.
And Mr. President and Senator
Nova.
gonna take place is PED geared
up to be able to handle all
this.
Yeah, Mr. President, Senator,
yes, PED supports the bill.
have.
Mr. President, uh, senator, we
consulted with Department of
Workforce Solutions and they
didn't see a problem with this.
And out.
find the numbers right now, but
I thank you.
touched upon it whenever we were
in committee about how many of
these students that did not
Mr. President, uh, Senator, I
don't have the exact number that
I gave you in committee, but my
expert witness is telling me
that it is about 6000 a year.
follow through with that and get
them employed, get their GED or
whatever the case may be, I
think it's nothing but a benefit
to the state of New Mexico, Mr.
President, Senator Nova, thank
Senator Nava, to closing the
bill.
Mr. President, I move that
do now pass and I asked for a
roll call.
Senators, to your seats, we're
voting.
Center block votes, yes, Senator
Boone, yes, Senator Brandt.
Center Brandt votes yes Cent
Sent to Charlie votes, yes,
Senator, Senator Eel.
Center is votes yes. Figueroa
Salmon votes yes, Hickey
Sano votes yes votes yester
Santeros votes, yes, Senator
Nova.
Senator Nova votes yes Cin
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes yes.
Yes. Senator Pope votes yes
Santa Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes
But yes, Senator Scott.
Center share boats, yes,
centerendo soulseponics.
Senator Thornton votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson.
Santer Tobias in bothent
Recorded by a roll call.
Of 36 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Education
Committee substitute by Senate
Bill 480 has duly passed the
We're gonna go on to the next
item that's gonna be item number
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
placing Senate Bill 39 as
amended on final passage has
prior authorization, uh, bill
that makes some exceptions for
pharmaceuticals and there have
been uh 2 bills in the past that
the next bill had to do with
immunologic uh diseases.
and this bill, Mr. President,
would take away the
might have this disease and um
Mr. President, it was amended so
that if there is a use of
off-label prescription, it would
it has to be less than 200,000.
So we heard Mr. President, from
a former legislator who has a
hemophilia B with less than
33,000 people in the United
States and I personally have a
friend with Gauthier's disease,
debating Senate Bill 39 as
amended. I'll yield to Senator
to bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I just
wanted to stand and support of
seen delay after delay, um, for
certain drugs or therapies, um,
to be pre-authorized and if you
death, and I think it's vital
that as a body we really listen
to any questions or debate on
this matter because it is really
people's lives at stake.
legislation forward, um, it's
critical for people here in New
Mexico and it hits homes
specifically with me and my
family, so thank you. I am in
full support.
I move that Senate Bill 39 is
amended do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
raise your hand.
We're gonna go on to the item
number 6, Senate Bill 252 as
amended and I'll yield to
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you Mr. President, I ask
252 is amended on final passage
have been taken that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution
Senator Figueroa to explain the
bill.
this spring a new interpretation
that caused all of our licensed
masters, social workers to be
shut down for providing
telehealth services across the
state, um, so this bill will
Senate for Amendment number 1 to
Senate bill 252, as amended.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Figueroa to move the amendment.
Senate Bill 252 as amended be
now adopted.
See no objection center, if
you'll explain what your
amendment does.
My amendment uh erases some
Floor A amendment number one.
See no debate. Senator Figueroa
to close on the amendment.
adopt Senator Amendment number
one. All those in favor signify
by saying I.
Those oppose.
The eyes have it. Senate floor,
number one has been adopted to
Senate Bill 52 is now.
Twice a minute.
the bill, Senator Woods. Um, Mr.
President, I did hear this bill
in committee and, and I did vote
against the bill.
And the reason I voted against
The community, the home, the
circumstances without being
there in person.
And I know that this calls for
a, a telehealth.
life of me understand how they
can get a full scope of the need
without actually walking in the
home, the, the circumstance, the
I would be happy to have a
response from the senator if she
I yelled. Thank you. Would you
wish to provide a response,
workers and all the medical
providers included in the
telehealth Act is determined by
their board of examiners. So
what they're allowed to do, what
kind of counseling or services
uh, licensed clinical.
social workers are licensed
independent social workers we're
already doing this kind of work.
through telehealth.
Mr. President.
Mr. President, that's exactly
the problem that arose this
spring.
worker has been part of the
telehealth Act for quite some
time. Um, we have 3 different
licensures of social work in New
Mexico and licensed clinical
licensed masters have been
providing tele and due to a new
interpretation, a reading of the
law.
Uh, it was decided this spring
that licensed master workers
down services for a lot of
veterans in our rural areas in
the state.
Um, they got a temporary
permission, Mr. President, to
continue work.
We have further debate, Senator
Lopez.
Actually, Mr. President, I just
wanted to stand up and support
this bill and to say my nephew
upset that he could no longer do
uh telehealth, um, with his
social worker who had moved. So
I'm very happy to support this
bill, uh, it, it is a response
especially to rural communities,
so I'm very happy to stand in
strong support of this bill.
Thank you, Center Cio Lopez.
See no further debate. Senator
Figueroa.
To close on the bill.
That the record show that the
role has been called in those
president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
Thank you, Mr. President, thank
you, buddy now to Senate
Majority Leader Peter Worth to
take us to the next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent. We
go to that order of business.
has passed House Bill 175 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted,
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 161 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted,
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen, chief
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 9.
And requests the concurrence of
the Senate, respectfully
The journalists show that the
message from the house has been
received. Senate Majority Floor
Leader Peter Worth.
I was about to try something,
Mr. President, your tax business
and transportation committee, to
whom has been referred Senate
Senator Carrie Hamblin, chair
Hamblin.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
least one was this from today's,
there's at least one committee
report in there that
I think I want to question.
business, and transportation
committee, to whom has been
referred. Senate Bill 118 has
had it under consideration and
do pass, respectfully submitted,
Senator Carrie Hamblin, chair.
So I have, I have recently
President. Senator Scher doesn't
want to hear me repeat over and
over again, I moved the adoption
of the committee reports. I
don't either.
So the motion she made.
the community reports, all those
in favor signify by saying I.
Those oppose me, the eyes have
it, the report has been adopted
and the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually,
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually objection.
The reader will read.
Senate bill, 352 do pass and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee.
committee Senate bill 408
do pass and thence referred to
the judiciary Committee.
Senate bill for 22 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 66.
Oh, Mr. President, I move the
adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those oppose the eyes have it,
the community board has been
referred Senate Bill 159 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
We adoption of the committee
report.
the general reflect they voted
on independently.
You were almost on point,
Senator almost well I'll get on
acted upon individually since
nobody in judiciary is paying
attention. Thank you.
Ms.
Reader to read.
Senate bill 267. Do not pass,
Senate bill, 279. do not pass,
but that Senate Judiciary
we've adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
our business introduction of
legislation. And no objection.
The reader will read.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
To our reader, he was doing so
well. We'll try that again.
House Bill 161, introduced by
Rebecca Dow, Jay Block, Alan T.
providing to veterans residing
in the state one day use pass
for unlimited entry into state
parks or recreation areas and
resources department. House Bill
161. 161 having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate Conservation.
That's House Bill 161.
public safety and acting the
immigrant Safety Act prohibiting
public bodies from entering into
agreements used to detain
Bodies from otherwise using
public property to facilitate
detaining individuals for
federal civil immigration
Judiciary Committee, that's
House Bill 9.
Senator Rand, for what purpose
do you rise, Mr. President, I
think that bill needs to go also
to Senate Finance Committee, um,
uh our budgets and it is going
to affect local governments'
budgets where the federal
government will not be allowed
to pay to house immigrants in.
Their detention facilities even
about this. It's going to two
referrals at this point. Uh, I
think it is important that it be
in the two committees is going
to, uh, it's gonna go through
Senate Judiciary where it's
You know, we've got what, 2
weeks left, so again, I would
respectfully ask that we stick
with the referrals that
Thank you, Senator Worth.
when we're allowing these bills
to be moved through without even
seeing them in Senate Finance
Committee. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Brent.
The Reader to read.
Ortiz, Luis M. Tarazas, Rebecca
Dow, an act relating to natural
resources, amending sections of
the forest and watershed
From forest land protection
revolving fund. House Bill 175
been read twice by title is.
Worth, take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
objection. We are in that order
of business announces a
miscellaneous Senator Worth, uh,
in at 11 o'clock on Monday, so
committee chairs can make their
announcements, but before we do
that, I deal to Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
worked for all of us at some
point during this session, and
you might recall, Mr. President,
that, uh, you were up in the
chair when we had a joint
session for Hispanic Culture Day
and it was the first time in
recorded history, all the way
spend her birthday with, I mean
she was dying, Mr. President, to
work in the state senate on her
birthday and uh she has worked
in my office off and on in
different times. I literally
job. She's 20 today, but so, Mr.
President, with your permission,
may we sing Happy Birthday to
Veronica Davenport. Absolutely,
Senator Padilla, will you lead
us in that birthday wish.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Education will be meeting at
8:30, room 311 on Monday. Uh,
we've got about 3 or 4 house
bills that we'll get done and
know, Senate Finance couldn't go
in this morning because it's
late and something happened on
the 4th floor. Do you know what
happened? I did not know what
happened on the 4th floor of
Sanator Munoz. I don't know a
pipe broke or something, and so
And so it, it came downhill, so
I may have to go to Lowe's and
get some plungers over the
weekend.
So you guys have those available
on the 4th floor.
building, then that would be our
4th floor. Then you could blame
us, or we're waiting to build
that new building to move the
executive offices over, uh, so
as soon as we get that done,
we'll let you know and then you
can move over to the new
finances still working on the
budget. We're working pretty
diligently on Capitol today in
the back row over here. And so
Senator Shindo's got a red
issues today. Uh, those members
that have CYFD bills, uh, let us
know because we're gonna try to
do a rack up and scoring and
what they
uh, the secretary was in front
real accurate accounting on CYFD
with people's bills as we move
forward. Uh, so that'd be very
helpful to us before we really
close out the budget process,
um, Monday morning, I will talk
we're working pretty diligently,
Mr. President. um, other than
the plumbing issues on your
floor that we have to deal with
and it all runs downhill and
We'll be here Monday. So, uh,
morning at 9:00 a.m. in room 321
will be doing the confirmations
of uh the Ebner secretary
designate and the state engineer
Public Health, um, and wait,
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow
Sunday at one o'clock in room
311, and we will start with the
carryover. My understanding is
like to congratulate all the
Mexico high school teams that
made it through the first round,
especially my Nash do it so, the
cougars.
girls and boys. Thank you and
congratulations and see you next
conference this year, so they
are conference champions on
their way to the big time, but
Mr. President, uh, Senate
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tonight, Saturday night,
Bill 78 Padilla Trujillo Senate
Bill 105 Trujillo and Sio
Lopezenel's 30.
2 and 303, Senator Paul.
Thank you Senator, Mr.
President, one real question
about the lobo game. This is a
very interesting fact to me.
That out of all the basketball
teams in the nation, right?
their attendance ranks 25th.
That's pretty amazing to say
that there's some loyal fans in
that pit. Um, that was an
amazing thing to to learn that
in the game and then, then to
there, Mr. President. I saw the
governor there.
I, I was, uh, down on the, on
the lower levels there.
Mr. President, I was also on the
lower level. I didn't see on the
lower level.
you.
Mr. President, uh, uh, I wanted
to share that, uh, I just
chatted with Senator our
majority leader about something
who serve here not only as our
senators, but all of you who sit
up here as staff, um, and all
the women that make things
happen in this building.
Congratulations to you all.
Uh, Mr. President, I've got the
distinct honor to, uh,
To thank the staff today for all
The legislative Finance
Committee, legislative education
Study Committee legislative
building service, including
rostrum, the calendar, the copy
room, the ENE IT staff, the
journal, the maintenance, the
committees, including analysts,
secretaries, and Zoom operators,
the telephone operators.
The member secretaries.
legislative assistance, the bill
room staff, the state police,
and the print shop staff, and I
would like to give them a very
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
no one has announced today. This
colors, but let's all give a
hand for international Women's
Day.
we go back to our strict dress
code, uh, starting on Monday. So
just a reminder on that. Senator
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, and a real thank
And Mr. President, just a
we'll be in.
At 11 o'clock, so unanimous
consent to Senate stand in
recess until 11 o'clock on
Monday morning with the time
change. See, no objection to
