Senator do heck.
Senator Gonzales present center
going.
I across.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Etcetera now.
Senator to the piano.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth Senator Woods.
third generation Comanche
ancestral artist devoted to St
Francis and former New Mexico
house of representative
assistant sergeant at arms
please remain standing for the
Father mother god great spirit
and creator of all I ask for the
light of the Christ and the Holy
Spirit to fill surround protect
and guide us.
As we hold in bless this land we
anchor light into the very core
of the earth it is beautiful
penetrating illuminating all the
people and situations.
themselves and to all those
around we see a clarifying and
purifying of our land so there
is greater and greater beauty
and cleanliness in the order of
living love.
We continually left and as we
are lifted we are aware and
grateful for this opportunity to
be of service.
Every space on a man.
and join me in the pledge of
allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
As.
I just think the state of New
Mexico.
morning everyone unanimous
consent we go to that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous during no
objection or on that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president and thank
have here to serve and the rest
of that service and so I just
appreciated how you frame that
and again appreciate you being
here very much.
unanimous consent to remove
sentiment memorial thirty for a
chilly day from the president's
table in place on today's
calendar year no objection will
that memorial and we'll do that
one first and then do the four
H. second so unanimous consent
we remove senator Morrell thirty
nine for each state from the
president's table place on
Senator Pirtle and Senator
Diamond on that memorial that
one is going to be a red as well
and then after we go ahead and
pass out there's a number of
I see no objection.
Thank you Mr president of the
Senator souls and that was that
memorial will not be read will
Thank you Mr president that'll
be Senator Gonzales and again
that memorials not going to be
read but he he'll certainly
present it then after he were
state and community college day
and Kate Carson electric energy
independence day at the capitol
and their exhibits up in the
halls of history upstairs
jobs every day I had forgotten
that that of course does not
apply to joint resolutions which
can be introduced at any time in
the sixty days and memorials as
in center for the I think have
some gas up front I think we'll
do the gas up front I think also
Senator Griggs has an
announcement he'd like to make
and once we get done with the
independence reception at la
Fonda in the Lara as a room from
five thirty to eight by
invitation only and the league
of women voters of New Mexico is
hosting its legislative
reception at the director
Schlegel's home from six to nine
by invitation.
the New Mexico land office from
ten AM to twelve thirty PM so
that's different for
announcements up front I would
ask that those members who have
guests here that are not part of
Michael by the S. center for the
thank you very much Mr president
do have some guests but prior to
that Mr president your
permission unanimous consent to
excuse under Lopez does return
to the chamber except for the
just consent to allow cameras in
the chamber and in the gallery
see no objections cameras will
be allowed in the Senate chamber
and in the gallery center for
them and thank you Mr president
that should that need arise.
Seeing no objection thank you
center for the.
Very much Mr president so I do
have a some guests joining us
with members and others to I
hope I said that correctly or is
it Center for legislative
strengthening their we got it
right thank you Mr president so
would like to recognize and just
Clark at the body can help me
welcome my guests today.
Senator by the thank you very
this body have been extremely
helpful and have been very much
part of pulling all this
together for our people we know
that broadband brings us things
of the body and and that the
entire legislature and the
governor and and especially
folks that are working rolling
up their sleeves and doing a
great job in the office of
broadband access and expansion
us to proliferate broadband in
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you senator for them we do
have further announcements we
have Senator Griggs followed by
Senator o'neal Senator Steinborn
Thank you Mr president in with
all the staff is going on today
it's also golf day in the
legislature and all of you will
come from out of state.
In twenty twenty to twenty four
The women's event was featured
on the golf channel in December.
Twenty twenty twenty three in
April and may will also host the
be broadcast on the golf channel
Mr president members golf.
Offers a lot of benefits for
people to get out and
participate
been alive but of but I've done
that and it's been it's been a
source of great joy and great
frustration to me over the years
them about the value that golf
is to their community so thank
you Mr president and thank all
of the members of the body.
friends visiting from this in
California I'm here and just so
happens film immediate is
perfect for them it's
so Bruce is a writer I am a
professional writer and he has
he has the rights to a story
many of you know the house that
Bruce the years ago an acting
class actually but we won't talk
about when that was but I've but
anyway these two brothers or
some else so Bruce's the writer
them out here and so with the
with the body give them a warm
welcome thank you.
might of remember that I share
the great news that Los crucis
was just named by movie maker
magazine as one of the best
places to work and make movies
organization there that's been
working for years to try to put
the whole package together to
grow film production so it is my
and hada associate lays on guys
get more out of a plus.
So if you need a project maybe
you know who to call but but I
these guys behind me and they
will gladly be of assistance to
your community thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Steinborn we have Senator Ingle
followed by Senator Duhigg
guests from the four H. here in
New Mexico and Mr president I
I'm very privileged to have two
president.
And Kaylee Stevenson.
She is the New Mexico state four
H. reporter.
ghosts here's New Mexico four H.
ambassador.
Addison Olum he is New Mexico
Thank you Senator Ingle just
reminded committee is that we do
have to memorials that will be
read today that's going to be
Thank you Mr president I
unanimous consent to introduce
my guest no objection proceed
Senator thank you Mr president I
have here with me and Nelson in
students state Senate other at
New Mexico highlands and also
president of the international
students of New Mexico and she
is a double major in the
the body help me welcome Nelson.
Thank you senator Senator Burt
thank you Mr president to
today is Josh be you Josh is the
CEO of telling Tularosa basin
telephone company it's been with
the company ten years he is the
With the today's community
college days so we have some
folks from eastern New Mexico
university in a primarily from
the reduction campus and we have
Woodward she is with the early
head start education program
Fernando violent Valdez she is
and adult educator in the
Mexico cleo now working with the
department she's the department
chair of education Jesse Taylor
is the navigator and as I was
told the navigator is is Kelly
that and she navigates very well
we're glad to have her on board
also Jessica Garcia from eastern
New Mexico Ruidoso she is an
advocate working with the
students here as well as with
much.
Thank you senator Byrd Senator
Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president just
wanted to remind the body that
in now and it's starting to
happen so hopefully we'll know
more later on in the day but
just take a moment at some point
today and just think about them
and and give good positive
thoughts their way thank you Mr
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent introduce my guest today
hearing no objection proceed
center.
Are with us today we have the
coach Bryce Byerley.
He's a coach of NMSU rodeo team
brother not sit Landon when yes
the.
Serik Santa.
This is my neighbor and a friend
that we decide sorry here this
is Lindsay or just.
Senator Sanchez thank you Mr
president.
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business third
reading of legislation and ideal
first to Senator diamonds for
We're in that order of Business
their green legislation and I
you'll to Senator Diamond for
seven memorial thirty four.
Chilly day.
thirds full reading preparatory
to its final passage.
I see no objections Senator
Diamond thank you Mr president
will the reader please read the
memorial.
New Mexicans have perfected the
art of growing delicious Chiles
from New Mexico's rocky rugged
soil and we're as the Mexico
Chile has an unparalleled what
located in Deming and whereas
the Chile pepper institute at
New Mexico State University is
the only international
organization dedicated to the
Mexico nine the first to Mexico
via variety chili and whereas
New Mexico State University has
developed numerous chili
varieties including Sandia New
thousand tons of Chile produced
in twenty twenty one of which
forty six thousand five hundred
tons were green chili and four
thousand five hundred tons were
value added products such as
powders salsas and sauces with
nine percent sold on the fresh
market.
million dollars for to the
state's economy according to the
New Mexico Chile Association and
whereas New Mexico's New
Mexicans immortalized chili at
were inseparable when served and
whereas the legislature also
passed the house Joint Memorial
declaring red or green as the
official state question
making such a difficult choice
has many people ordering
Christmas both red and green the
best of both worlds and whereas
the during the legislative
session lawmakers are even
of New Mexico and we're just
adding to the Chiles lord New
Mexico State University
developed new Max Espanola
improved which was grown on the
space station and is the longest
it is tradition now therefore be
it resolved by the scent of the
state of New Mexico that
February fifteenth twenty twenty
three be declared chilly day in
the Senate and be it further
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
the executive director director
of the New Mexico chilliest.
sherry do Lujan chief clerk New
Mexico state Senate.
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president I move that sent a
memorial thirty four we put on
we have an opportunity to
express our appreciation for
those who work and making
joining our state's signature
crop possible The New Mexico
president we need to understand
that the industry has declined
over the past thirty years in
the late nineties New Mexico
harvested over three thousand
thirty thousand acres today we
The New Mexico Chile Association
who is here with us today is
working hard to protect and to
promote the industry through
advocacy innovation development
and marketing they work closely
we also have an activity for you
homework assignment including in
your bag is a chilly Association
contact email address and we're
asking each member of the Senate
be completed by next year that
was actually the brain child of
Senator Hamlin we want to thank
you for that idea please when
you email that chili recipe you
so the deadline is last day of
session this year also the
settlement pro.
Ten Mr president mentioned in
years previous that there were
chili cook offs between the
debate on some of our thirty
four chilly day Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr present that thanks
to Senator Diamond for bringing
northern to meio Chile and the
southern hatch Chile so in the
north representative Debbie Rowe
hatch chilies so that was so
much fun and we always went back
and forth between the north and
the south but chilly chilly
daughter asked me to Center
Chile all the my step son asked
me to sentiment chili's so we've
got the best here thank you for
the memorial.
Thank you Sir Senator Stuart for
was really the inspiration for
this conversation it is the whoa
that's a cheese ball recipe.
Two packages of whipped cream
of shredded sharp shredded
cheddar cheese ansible cons mix
that all together and then pack
it with a with the cons on the
outside as a cheese ball or you
cooking for the college student
this was inspired by Kelly but
it is the whoa that's a cheese
ball recipe I'd like that in the
records I think and I can go
ahead and find that recipe but
that's just that's just the
my apologies to all of those who
follow the traditional recipes
of the chili Reno's but I will
guarantee you that they will be
really good the second day as
well so thank you Mr president
thank you sponsor strongly
coming from Travis county we
actually grow the best green
chili in the state and that
comes from grades farm and
garden down on graves road
realize how addicted you are to
green Chile until you leave the
country for couple weeks one
time I went to Australia for
forty five days and when I came
missed it missed home Mister
president so it is a big part of
our life part of our culture and
and I don't know what I'd do
without it thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle we do
said last night.
So I had him in the kitchen
yesterday and we snuck out of
here for awhile and I made beans
in chili fresh beans off our
farm and I made an old recipe
outside that too is pretty good
Senator Pirtle.
But I strongly I rise in full
support of this This Is brings
the jobs this is our culture you
know Chile is been here as well
assistance center Baca thank
you.
Thank you Mr president as I've
told the governor before I'm
from Espanola we're we're brown
we're down and we're low to the
ground but in this case.
international space station that
now the peppers are part of
their stable because of how the
group the papers were from the
species the Espanola improved
pepper down south but then they
realize they take the pepper
from up north and they wanted
the Espanola improved because it
grew in higher altitudes and had
a shorter growth period now NASA
station just so you know Mr
president Jacob Torrez is a
proud son of the Espanola valley
is a NASA scientist who are
brought the chili seeded and
the country and throughout the
world and students document how
the Chiles grow in different
temperatures climb it's in
lighting so with that Mr
president device but you know
think the education that's
happened nationally because
maybe you know ten twelve years
ago when you would have a
beautiful styrofoam container
with dry ice and green chili you
now you can take green chili
anywhere in the country without
delay so thank you thank you
senator Masta Senator Baca.
some of the other parts of the
state but we really all know
that the best chili comes from
central New Mexico and and I
think most of us can agree on
that but so I had to give a
a very close call so I would
fault anybody for for a giving
credit there but anyway if Mr
president I rise in support of
happen when it comes to Chile we
are the Chile capital of the
world and thank you senator for
bringing this forward.
with Senator dynamin of being
the senator for hatch New Mexico
and it is truly one of the
coolest things being there
Senator and going all over the
country and saying hatch Chile
tomatillo pepper or some cheap
knock off but welcome to our
ambassadors for the chili
industries that are here today
and thank you senator for doing
this memorial and for those who
it shall remain thank you very
much thank you Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president in full
have to worry about where I get
my green Chile I can sample it
from all over I will tell you
that course hatch Chile is kind
of the the leader of the pack
oftentimes but being born and
know my quest goes on for the
ultimate windows rancheros and
green Chile so I will continue
to look for that in every
There is present mysteries we do
have so much fun with this issue
what one of these of course is
my good friend certainly knows
who I'm told is the chili king
etcetera etcetera when you know
this has a nickname and you all
know does it in Chile picking
right which is a of a variety of
the many hundreds of of Chile
duration but but Chile became we
grow a little bit it's it's a
it's a small pepper but it's
very hot it's about eight times
of the heat of the Scoville
friend short hot and a little
money and hopefully get a chance
to see more from and to the team
and king I think it's important
that we you know we have this
a crop that didn't really rise
to the top of our discussion
debate a generation ago this
isn't something new really as a
and in New Mexico State
University because what I've
seen him in my time with with
the farming family is a
transformation of the industry.
with maker to in order to Mexico
as a beautiful wonderful thing
to celebrate the heritage of the
State that's within that family
and then on the flip side of
become so the such a large
product and crop that we're
actually action out of vinegar
plant that we've built to
produce the vinegar that's then
mixed with the chili that now if
otherwise don't tell anybody but
it's coming out of Missy of Alex
coming out of Las Cruces have
had it is that's coming out of
right there in center handle in
my district my my dad began a
people knowing that most that
hot sauce is coming out of New
Mexico of the the there's a
there's a branding to the
Louisiana hot sauce but it's
also coming out here so I I
think it's important we
the of insecticides and
fertilizers all of those things
are really something that New
Mexico State University has
really been the leader on in the
last several decades and that's
Deming Chile the Chavez county
chili all these little local
varieties and specialties and
states to compete with them we
don't have to of follow film and
all the other things we have to
do to compete with other states
chili's here will always be here
New Mexico will always be about
An active attention of the body
is Senator month is is correct
we are amongst royalty today
across the country celebrate the
jingle rock queen of soul king
of pop and today we celebrate
I believe senator Munoz wanted
to speak on this memorial so
we'll give him a moment to go up
to the to see to speak on this
memorial.
about really about what Chile
has to New Mexico because in
every New Mexicans hard where
they live here now are moved
away they all want but a couple
years we put a lot of money in
the chilly industry LA lot of
families have made their entire
living.
can say that that they farmed a
hundred years in their entire
history and build a family
history in the family legacy
from that.
the farmers and could make their
money.
But as we grow New Mexico into
drought it's even harder Chile's
gonna get more expensive it's
gonna get harder to produce and
to save an industry we have to
help an industry
and so as one of the authors of
New Mexico certified chili the
past several years ago to make
chillier the Santo army said the
low Browning's ins and lower the
ground farmers from the north of
where the best sailings.
Where families meet and talk
during the holidays.
Senator Sanchez had is a little
chilly vest last night and had a
little conversation about a lot
together we don't realize that
but what other food brings us
together in that way shape or
form it's very ingenious it's
very creative industries not
question for the sponsor of the
amendment are the memorial right
Senator Diamond deals I do is
a friend behind me but but
Senator Senator then yes it is
technically a fruit.
Semenya's until it.
ago and we tried they tried the
tortilla Tax in those of us that
were here no nine we put an
amendment on that green Chile
was taxable because of fruit was
tortilla tax debate in Senator
Wirth remember this O. line or
ten and and so but this is an
industry that everybody should
be proud of when the but Khan
industry is growing they're
taking over some of the foreign
should be a very.
Well known item in every house
hold in New Mexico so Mister
president I know that the good
center from Los crucis likes to
ruling of the chili court and I
can confirm with my king queen
who is Landeros dollars from us
to coral as was all those chilly
but I think we can banish him
however you might want to send
as many of you it may be heard
there is another one that SB one
eighty eight on the aroma of
Chile in New Mexico so we'll get
another date I'll tell our chili
stories of as I've done some
Chile to our cuisine to our
culture and to our identity one
of the chilly stories I get to
tell it was actually this summer
in Mexico and so I immediately
brought it to the attention of
the of secretary Wendy are
secretary of agriculture who was
not aware but quickly put in
motion and they put out a cease
think they actually change their
provenance of where they were
getting their chili to actually
start getting New Mexico Chile
and hatch Chile as a result and
so I think it's incumbent upon
secretary of agriculture or to
the chilly institute to ensure
that we maintain New Mexico as
the king of Chile's and in spite
of what Colorado and others
because you know they really
don't produce very high quality
chilly up there and so we don't
even want to give them any
recognition to up to our
wonderful chilly here but we all
down in Los crucis they're going
to be gathering lots of the
chilly stories about potentially
putting out a book not as a
fifth graders book but as an
skills collecting editing all of
those so again we all know how
important Chile is to our
identity to our culture the rest
of the world is just now
catching up thank you Mr
memorial Mr president a quick
reminder to the king that
intelligence is knowing that
it's our fruits wisdom is
knowing not to put it in a fruit
salad.
We have also I've also just
On a serious note I'm a hot
green when I order but Mr
lieutenant governor I know that
you prefer red chili and so
because of that we're going to
close with moving the Senate
memorial number thirty four do
forty three in the affirmative
zero on the negative Center
moral thirty four chilly day has
passed in New Mexico state
Senate Senator Diamond thank you
Mr president.
a board member of the New Mexico
Senate chili Association from
dimming New Mexico producer
himself Mr been at it's a very
if you would please welcome my
We're still in that order of
Business third reading
legislation.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president next up I
would yield to Senator Pirtle I
believe is going to do said a
full for the third time
preparatory to its final passage
say no objection the reader to
read.
Senate memorial thirty nine a
memorial to carry February
whereas for its sponsors clubs
in rural and urban areas
throughout the state and whereas
more than fifty thousand youths
between the ages of five and
eighteen participate in four H.
responsible citizenship critical
thinking problem solving
decision making conflict
resolution and communication
positive self identity stating
that they have greater control
over events in their lives and a
better ability to make decisions
on their own that they set goals
be resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
February fifteenth twenty twenty
three be declared for each day
in the Senate in recognition of
Mexico state university's four
H. youth development
organization signed and sealed
at the capitol in the City of
Santa Fe senator cliff Pirtle
state Senate Senator.
Miss present move this in a
moral third line be put on final
passage subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
has an extension agent and I I
would ask that each one of you
if you have not met that person
within your county please reach
out find out what's going on
meet these groups meet these
things like that these these
kiddos are out learning skills
learning technical trades
learning how to be responsible
gun owners learning how to be
responsible for animals raise
wasn't part of four H. but I
will say the money fondest
memory for ages four stances
that they used to throw in
Roswell and I I I'd like to
going in and cutting a rug with
Thank you Senator Pirtle centers
we're debating Center memorial
thirty nine.
Anyone wishing to make Senator
Diamond.
Thank you Mr president it was
ironically those are the motto
that is clued in the four H.
statue they put their heads to
clearer thinking there are parts
to greater loyalty their hands
skills and qualities leadership
and teachers personal
responsibility we thank you guys
for being here we we appreciate
all the work they do county wide
on out to support their valuable
programs I want to take a moment
and welcomed the Sierra County
four H. shares that are here
with us today we have she merely
forward thank you senator I mean
we do have further debate with
Center Perea I thank you very
much Mr president I just rise
and support of for each day I it
these life skills that you came
there are just tremendous I
thoroughly enjoy the time that I
was a member of my son's
actually joined the for H. in
the county where they lived at
that age as well and they were
the any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
excuse me senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr president just
brief.
And so many of them are glued to
the screen.
And that influence is not always
the best for them.
If you ever get concerned about
Talk to them for five minutes.
You feel so much better about
where we're headed in this
country because these guys you
can be the foundation over the
Sanchez bringing this forward.
And thank you for all the kids
involved in four H. thank you Mr
president thank you senator Byrd
we do have further debate we
have senator Sanchez.
I started pry about five or so
just going to my older brother
stuff and all the way until I
went to FFA when I got into high
school but showing cattle all
that are you know stay in
contact with for rates and like
senator Burke says it's just you
know our generation's coming up
is the future thank you guys
thank you Mr president thank you
sentiment memorial three nine
forward I had a real good
opportunity this morning to
speak to those from southeast
and for H. and also with the
Fe that tells about what he does
with animals in its walls things
that this is our next generation
and to see that there is some
really good possibilities I was
on a value system that we're
starting to lose in our state so
I do think the center for
bringing this forward in stand
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciated by that that stood
up today for for four H. state
is one of the highlights of New
Mexico one of the things that
makes a real difference in all
of our communities and I had the
to do what they're doing because
it won't be long seven years ten
years before hopefully they will
have our jobs or or jobs within
the community where they will be
the leaders moving us forward
forty two members and the
lieutenant governor be shown
voting in the affirmative thank
you Senator Pirtle.
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
Leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
that we go that our visit
downspouts a miscellaneous we're
on that order business.
Dolla sentiment oil forty two
those will not be read but I
just want to take a break and
give everyone a heads up we're
gonna do items one through five
on the calendar today in that
yield to senator souls for
Seminario thirty six we're in
that order business they're
doing legislation center sells.
Thank you Mr president I move
amendment substitution saying no
objections Center souls to
explain thank you Mr president
every year we have a day or
memorial where we support our
two year schools are community
getting our students the the
things they needed CTE career
technical education industry
level certificates and support
the local communities today
because of the weather we did
state of New Mexico is there any
I don't know if there's anyone
who did make it in today for
those programs looks like there
might be a group of them
upstairs but just this will be a
community college that has a
very large footprint both in
physical space but also in the
community working with our
schools with dual credit as well
Si no further debate center
souls to close thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
memorial thirty six do now pass
and pass is consent of the
part Senate president
Lieutenant governor unanimous
consent thank you for the
inclusion Center still saying
no.
communities essentials we are in
that order business serving a
legislation.
memorial Senator Gonzales thank
you Mr president and thank you
a members and
I move the memorial the memorial
preparation for its full final
passage.
Proceed Senator.
I move that's the more Senate
memorial forty to be put on the
K. Carson.
Espino.
Q. Carson Cooper has been a of a
very strong visionary you know
that it's service and why is it
being you know
With the building.
Declared as February fifteenth
twenty twenty three just get
this is put in and a plan in
action you know as part of the
K. Carson electric coop and it
Carson Cooper went completely
into one hundred percent during
the daytime of using renewable
energy and not.
its existing provider with a
debt of thirty seven million
which has been completely a
already paid off to the members
memorial that we have here is
so.
It has also develop some vehicle
charging stations is way ahead
Also it has expanded to serving
the members that wish to with
propane.
And also the strongest component
we're facing with the Corona
virus with the.
This so provided.
K. Carson coop to bring this
kind of services to schools to
Now with the building with the
goose mon as the provider.
Kid Carson has.
number so it's been a very
strong component you know and
what has been done and what I
meant.
and really put in the.
Compliance and also in an
implication off you know having
debate a cinema Center memorial
forty two center for the thank
you very much Mr president I I
also rise and support of Senate
memorial forty two Senator
experiences with with the the
governing board and learning
more about them and and you know
really a lot of people in New
Mexico could learn from what
these folks have accomplished
you know they have very tough
remarkable when you think about
broadband in the goal of of
bringing broadband to people in
New Mexico Mr president this
sort this this group and this
team has rolled up rolled up
help it to remain beautiful all
the while delivering some of the
highest speeds of broadband
anywhere in New Mexico and that
truly affordable rates Mr
president so I I just hope that
there and I'm very proud of them
part of the work that they do
and then you know I mentioned
there there cooperative board Mr
president.
If you spend any amount of time
tremendous economic impact for
the area and it is really
impressive just the work that
they do and how they do it Mr
present I support this fully
thank you thank you senator the.
volume down to a minimum so
we're able to hear.
The debate we have senator Wirth
followed by Senator Ortiz Pino
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
to go where others were hesitant
and it just shows what can
happen when you've gots a
usage and energy policy
throughout the state I really
talk about them all the time and
rural part of the state and in
into rural areas and it does
it's it's it's an example of
what can be done and so I also
just want to stand up and think
Senator Gonzales for bringing
able to extricate themselves
from the the commitment to tri
state that was holding them back
from going fully solar has
become a model for other
when we when we're in our home
and and Dixon we belong to them
just months electrical up and I
know that the board there is is
relying heavily on your
you senator Ortiz Pino any
further debate.
Senator the.
Thank you Mr president it is
consent to skew Senator
once we close will come back and
introduce our guest on the
rostrum Senator Gonzales thank
you Mr president with that I
move the amendment Senate
memorial forty to do now pass.
the rule has been called and
that all those present voting in
the affirmative on the Senate
memorial forty to accept those
voting on the negative by a show
The make the motion that we do
have the forty two members and
the ten the governor voting on
the affirmative thank you is
Thank you Mr president and I'd
like to
Introduce my guests that are on
the rostrum.
If we can have them stand and
then we can have a a plus for
and we have Mr Jeff Hyatt
director of goose mon Energy.
And I also see to other members
so Mister Bernie thoughtless.
you.
Wirth to take us to the next
order of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection or in that
order business announcements and
middle go ahead and and yield to
you I'd have to catch our breath
there for a moment Senator so
give me a lot of equipment and
how to mail thank you Mr
president so this isn't an alien
with me today joining me right
here on the floor are make up
artist John shore here Derek and
I and our model Joseph Gavin who
are part of our local film
and is an active and regular FX
artist and Derek is due to our
local film you and is an up and
coming FX artist continued on
guests to the New Mexico Senate.
Thank you senator how to mail
we're in that order business
for now so we'll start with
Senator Padilla first then
Senator my Estes Senator o'neill
and then I'm going to do that
item number five so Mister
business serving legislation.
Center for them I thank you very
much Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules we suspend the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate Judiciary
explain I thank you very much Mr
president this legislation
really is a follow up to the New
Mexico telecommunications act
that we passed in two thousand
seventeen I was a six Senator
regulation in terms of how we
look at the various companies
that provide the services these
lines Mr president need to be
maintained they need to ensure
that those companies can make
result you know this legislation
really does bring the quality
and fair fairness protects
consumers by maintaining the
competitive
positions that we're taking here
it does promote to competitive
broadband and bring additional
investment in broadband into New
Mexico it's going to continue to
help us create jobs and and the
the times that we've gotten to
the point where it is now by the
ten rural telephone companies
that make up the New Mexico
exchange carrier group which
represents a lot of the areas
that that a lot of this work and
Rancho chamber of commerce New
Mexico serve.
And Kelly table so a lot of
folks have stood up to help us
get this done in this is a move
that is going to help us
continue to move New Mexico in
the direction of great the
share.
Thank you Mr president I also of
want to stand in support of this
again.
Strange that we're gonna have
dial up telephones on our
kitchen.
Just like Senator Ingle still
has.
But the rest of us now don't
have those well we've progressed
regulated by the state by the
state so we have arbitrarily.
Type one company down.
people another company to get
out there and do the things that
they want to do anyway without
undue regulation.
I think this is pretty important
so it's a matter of fairness
Thank you Mr chair sorry Mr
president with the senator yield
for a question to center by the
deal thank you Mr president will
yield thank you this presents
happy to do that I mean I
disliked legislation is not just
for a particular company or for
a particular companies lumen
formerly CenturyLink formally
I would imagine this will create
a competitive environment for
just anybody that wants to do
this type of work and make this
right kind of investment.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr president so per previous or
prior to two thousand seventeen
we had various regulatory
requirements that required
carried through the legislature
that you're we did a collapse
that to approximately two sizes
of companies this legislation
you know fast forward five six
years later these companies have
all the way through say a
hundred and twenty five hundred
fifty thousand carrier customer
company.
So Mister president if you're
creating parity between a small
Thank you Mr president Senator
Steinborn actually it's the
complete opposite not nothing
changes for the current
companies that are currently
regulated by the rural
telecommunications Act none of
those
not changing it so for new
companies that aren't regulated
is that who it's kind of geared
to get after them Mr president
Senator.
Center for them thank you Mr
Senator Steinborn okay well keep
reading thank you Mr president
thank center.
Thanks Senator Steinborn any
further debate.
Senator Stewart.
iteration certainly Senator
to the Las has persistence this
bill I think is the best of the
bunch and it's why it popped up
passed out of committee it
all of these companies so on the
fact that they all are in
support of that I think is
significant so I urge the body
to support it thank you Mr
president thank you senator
present level so let me see if I
if I get the point here Mr
president Senator Padilla the.
The public Regulatory Commission
would they continue to regulate
else going to begin regulating
these companies.
Mister president senator Ortiz
Pino I you had absolutely
correct yes that they would
continue to be regulated by the
public regulation commission
include to Senator billion this
includes the analysis indicates
it includes broadband as well as
telephone or is that the same
thing I did at this point I've
the wire line services that are
provided so essentially the dial
tone on your wire line phone
that comes into your home.
broadband act has already been
introduced by president Biden so
I did not know of.
How that might affect your bills
are.
president of the I don't really
I don't want to touch the
federal stuff for the broadband
regulatory work that's being
done at the federal level but
this simply affects the wireline
three percent of New Mexicans
still have land lines for their
residences that is that
consistent with your
understanding and is that all
that this bill will affect at
CenturyLink is that the case.
Thank you Mr president senator
the that is actually correct
The proliferation of cell phones
voice over IP so internet phones
it to strikes me that this is
probably is a good idea to move
ahead with this but that is
really not going to have a lot
of impact on anybody but the
people it's still have
I am one of these three percent
I guess that have a land line
and the reason I got this land
line was because I need to be
available for my patients when
don't have reliable cell phone
reception and and there's other
options you know there are other
options out there but it it
really is a crucial public
safety thing even though it's a
small number we can have
so I just wanted to bring that
to the attention of the body of
support this bill thank thank
you senator maintenance any
further debate senators.
substitute for Senate bill forty
one do now pass and I pass is
consent to the some of the rules
we suspended the record show
that the rules been called in
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
Senator voting no.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative one in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
the next item on the calendar
will have Senator masses thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent.
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
Center my sister explained the
bill.
Thank you Mr president on behalf
of my out of the co prime
sponsor Senator Moores
who's got more important things
to do today.
cutting edge back in twenty
twenty one passing are and I. L.
legislation which went into
effect July first along with
Georgia Mississippi Alabama and
Florida because of the pressure
policies to allow an A. L. now
are are this is an attempt to
modernize our statute to bring
it out further further along
because there's certain things
that the NC double a allows that
obtain professional
representation from whoever they
choose with that I'll stand for
questions thank you senator
Maestas.
We do have debate.
Thank you so much Mr president
gentleman I mean the in Santa
Fe.
Became multi million dollar now
college maybe a stipend for
books and that's it so
essentially the they don't get
paid for their labor.
Despite this huge contradiction
over the decades the NC double a
tennis Pam to alors.
That would appropriate the
instead of a within strip that
athlete of their scholarship so
they could not even make money
on the side much less get paid
college students to make a
living off of their name through
endorsements their image or
likeness but California's law
didn't go into effect till
twenty twenty three so this
a forcing then Senator a to a
changes policies.
Mr president just one last
question as a former university
athlete how will this help
we're ahead of the curve with
surrounding states colleges in
our our conference it would help
the students because they can
then market themselves the you
know the the quarterback of
athletes in the state can market
themselves they can advertise
for the local car dealer they
can do summer camps for kids and
get paid and they just have the
the freedom as an American to
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate center my
SS to close on the bill.
Of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Senator Padilla all units
consent to skew Senator Sedillo
Lopez until she returns the
chambers that for purposes of
the call see no objections
Senator Brandt was present
We are voting centers if you
wish to vote now please raise
your hand Senator Baca is
present like to excuse senator
pirtle Senator purpose of the
call.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members.
We are on that order business
starting a legislation and I
yield to senator o'neill.
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four
explain the bill okay members
this bill as amended revises the
system governing violations of
probation or parole and parole.
In our current presence in part
state facilities for.
Of the fifty three hundred
prisoners incarcerated nine
hundred and eight of them are
when you're on parole you need
to be responsible for living up
to the conditions of your parole
translated you know no using
many of so much of the time is
filled by addiction so the trick
here is to hold these parolees
accountable and yet not send
Senator my S. this is work on
this and so with that I stand
for questions.
Thank you senator nail.
I have a floor amendment where
we're getting that a member
prepared Senator.
the next person that will come
back and things remembered
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president with the sponsor yield
Senator yield Mister president I
out on understanding the change
in the probation violations so
first of all and I'm not this is
Yes.
And so is in a technical
violation that you're not
actually fulfilling your
contract agreement.
just from working with these
individuals if in every every
other part of their life you
know they got a job there
when our residents would that
this was house would violate
their parole is always almost
always known as a dirty urine
no the patrol officers in the
will give a certain and probably
a breaker to but the problem is
they don't have the leeway once
it once it reaches this point
know scale of violations and and
and and at some point yes they
will go back to prison if they
can't state you know if they
can't abide but it's in NYC
soft on them this is really
understanding a relapse is a
part of recovery and if we can
like give the parole officers in
the field more tools to work
for new felonies and you know
other other bad behavior.
required to go to rehab when
they get out and and you're
right most of a lot of its
addiction but there some that
isn't but are you are you.
chairman Mr president and
Senator yeah I mean this bill
allows for certain like scale of
you know remedial actions
sanctions up until the point
gives people now is the at
parole is in question a chance
to to like really really be
this and that but it's it's
basically you know this is a
problem that we've talked about
on the CCJ for years it seems
corrections in the dust and the
stakeholders and we feel really
good about this approach.
Senator right thank you Mr
president and senator I
I I just your concerns me you
talked about that you know the
technical violation is mainly
because of addiction but that's
not what it says so this is one
intention is.
And so I'm I'm trying to make
sure that your intention is what
the bill is saying because the
bill doesn't say anything here
about technical violation being
or alcohol test maybe the some
like it support but there are a
lot of other issues that this
technical violation would
include Mr present thank you
senator I don't mean to simplify
not going to meetings etcetera
so it it's so it's I I think
just because I know it from
working personally in this area
that wouldn't all of those that
you just mentioned be technical
violations of probation or
parole.
Senator president yes and so
that's again this bill of of
and also again I mean I don't
know how you feel Senator but I
am I'm really disturbed by the
fact that seventeen percent
that's almost a thousand of the
not Mr president does that not
bother you in some way that
we're spending money we don't
have to spend taxpayer money and
at the same time it's not at the
you know if if they were all
what you said at first dealing
with drug or alcohol
you know violations and maybe
the judge the first time said
supposed to the now.
That's I think that would
qualify as a technical violation
under this so you know.
I guess it depends on what the
they're gonna buy by these
rules.
And then they don't so how do we
know they're not committing
other crimes they just haven't
been caught for.
officer's that here these
technical parole violations and
it's it's and you know it is
starts with the conditions of
parole that the very
lose sleep over over some of
these conditions of parole so
it's it's not a lake people are
getting a free pass it's just
being you know I there's that
states are moving in this
direction and I think we could
do really well by passing this
bill and again it's you know
it's like it's just not so black
abiding life it's not so simple
you know this is why we need to
address that with some
complexity and nuance without
sacrificing public safety.
hands because we can actually
debate on the floor we can
disagree without being
disagreeable and that's just one
of the things I love about you
relationship that we should have
here
and you know remembering that we
always go through the president
so that it doesn't become
personal but that's you know I
just really appreciate that
Absolutely Mr president Senator
so you know I I think I
understand why you want to do
this and and I really do
appreciate your passion on it I
think this is a little too broad
four chances after that before
you finally go back and and and
it just it encompasses too much
so you know my concern you know
and and those types of issues
and what we know is that a lot
that that they just don't stop
just because they get out on
parole and.
violence situation you know
they've been told you know they
have an order of protection so
have to stay away from the
person and that means like a
hundred yards and so they stand
a hundred one yards off.
you were saying you know the
probation officer you know if if
the person is in you know if
they believe the person is
you're going to relapse more
than once even when I quit
smoking which is not you know
yeah I haven't smoked the on
thirty five years with there's
the occasion that I would pick
and and so you're less we can
tighten it up.
I I would have a really hard
time supporting thank you very
much for the debate I really
appreciate thank you Mr
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four amendment
judiciary Committee sub for sh
backs up for Senate bill eighty
four.
Senators maybe zero explain what
deal with the technical
violations you can still revoke
parole in in other circumstances
however I truly believe there is
an unintended loophole for
sincerity but this this is the
problem here and I hope everyone
understands this
I I support the bill with with
with this exception we are just
the systemic oppression of women
in our society.
And in this bill I think in
unintended way does so so what
this what the bill does right
now.
Let's say that there is a.
No contact as a conditions of
release okay I'm gonna call this
the no means no amendment No
this issue domestic by those of
these abusers sometimes perform
these crazy that they think on
these big swings in the in the
there the the people that they
Can violate a no contact
condition of release sent a text
message for example Happy
Birthday honey.
these men off easy or they can
still bother their victims and
all of a sudden now it's just a
technical violation.
That's the one remaining problem
I have in this bill.
I've had enough of it.
And I think this bill is very
fair I think this ammendment
very fair Mister president
because these these these people
I'm okay with those being a
technical violation but I am not
okay if there is a no contact
condition of release I'm not
president and so I hope to hear
from the body I I I I believe
this ammendment does not take
away from the spirit of the bill
I believe I truly believe
Thanks committee we are debating
the amendment senator member
number one Santonio.
All right
and we can actually say this is
a friendly amendment how about
that so I'm counting on your
passionate support of this bill
thank you senator nail we do
there has to be one word that
has to be eliminated from the
proposed amendment and you know
a lot of times in judiciary
people will wonder well why do
you guys debate work comic goes
really makes a very big
difference so your your second
paragraph near proposed
amendment would strike the words
or does not.
And I'd ask you to very
seriously given thought to
violation you have to have both
something that is a threat to
the proposed probation or parole
evening goes on state or others
he was straight does or does not
what you mean I think you mean
it could be one or the other of
those two things but when you
strike out the word or then
you're requiring both of those
difference and I think it arose
what your intention is by the
amendment so I've just Senator
Ivy Soto to see if he reads it
the same way that I'm reading it
and I think he's actually
believe that this one this one
change would honor the intent of
what you're trying to accomplish
and I believe the sponsor wants
to accomplish and I think if you
don't make that change year
eroding what you're trying to
a I go to the sponsor the
amendments and o'neill yes and I
think a friendly is one thing
but it just be the right kind of
friendly has to be tight and I
would urge
Thank you senator now.
Senate committee what do you.
Wish to do with this amendment
that you proposed.
Thank you Mr president and and I
certainly I I agree with the
chairman of judiciary this is
not what I'd like to intent on
that and I'm I'm I'm gonna look
more difficult in any way to to
say that this is only a
technical violation so I'm gonna
keep reading it
I I don't know if that was just
Soto this bill.
So thank you Mr is it is would
you would like to withdraw this
amendment and bring it back in a
different form yes Mr president
of make that motion seeing no
objection the amendment has been
Mr president are sex offenders
and violent offenders excluded
from this bill.
Senate Mr president no there
do the carve outs exceptions
Senator smitteez has as done a
carve out with the with the
domestic violence to see here's
my deal with this like the
violent offender so so no the
answer is no.
Center how to mail thank you Mr
president what happens if an
individual is on probation on a
serious serious violation okay
having a firearm so that's
that's something that again this
this bill accommodates the range
And Mister president and all
agencies involved agreed to the
bill or did you have a
discussion with them on the
bill.
We have we've talked a lot to do
didn't raise any any of
any objections with the D. O. C.
and I I can't tell you how much
I respect those folks but I
think there's just a lack of
box so to speak and of so to
answer your question
you know we have definitely made
it a priority to reach out to
dust and the D. O. C..
Thank you Mr president thank you
Any further debate on the bill.
On the bill yes senator Neville.
colleague Mister president
senator one of the issues that
as an old county commissioner
that comes up quite readily is
because that is a continuing
problem with counties getting
reimbursed for state prisoners
Mr president Senator great
question I'm not sure who would
they're back back in prison but
it would seem kind of weird
wouldn't it to have the state
pay for the county inmates.
by the local sheriff's
department for some parole
violation and they're back in
the county jail for violating a
state sentence right but Mr
president there in the county
I can look into that I was kind
of anticipating that as a
question and but I didn't hear
from the counties but but it's
Senator Mister president senator
I think the.
Tradition has been that the
state is obligated to pay the
tab for probation and parole
violators and.
your co sponsor like to weigh in
on that Mr etcetera etcetera
Maestas.
Mr.
President Senator o'neill
Centerville I I believe you're
is so is so is so timely is that
that we don't waste resources by
putting nonviolent offenders or
or folks in in jail for tech
what we call technical
violations but I believe there
that this would help certainly
would help with the overload
that some county jails the
experience but I want to make
sure that it is well known by
the legislature that County
thank you senator we do have a
floor amendment.
The reader will read.
We're going to read it out and
then we'll have that passed out
before we go into moving for
that.
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four amendment
sponsored by Senator Ivey Soto
Page three line three strike
create a threat to others three
violates a condition that the
probation or parole the refrain
from.
Senator Ivey Soto to move and
explain the amendment Mr
president I move Center for
member number one to Senate
Judiciary Committee steps to to
Senate health public first but
is substance and ability for
but what Senator how to meal was
raising.
Right is that the way this is
written so that are going to
encapsulate what center how do
we was talking about is that
include any kind of a charge
where a judge says you shall not
have contact with these people.
and and so it also it also
is is a is a violation here
and so and so that that actually
I put the I started striking two
words too soon.
As president I should have Is
instead of stopping and starting
Senator said if you wish to
withdraw this amendment and have
every written
Yes Mr president with the
indulgence of the body I would
love to rewrite this Senator
just want to stand up and think
Center serve on to us
just in his experience for his
I. to detail.
original car out because as as
previously stated I think there
are some other circumstances
do it just it just reminds me of
of the legislative process
Mister president how one person
may have kind of half a good
idea and then the strength of
and for their for their I. to
detail and and I certainly hope
and and also think center
o'neill for his his willingness
president I yield to my
colleague this committee thank
you Mr president center we we
did discuss very briefly
we as as this relates to
does is still considered a
friendly amendment.
Etcetera etcetera now Mr
president I'd Senator you know
my advocates and slippery slope
slippery slope and here's where
the slippery slope is but
support of this very this is
quite innovative by the way this
is really a landmark legislation
so every great to have as much
bipartisan support as possible
Thank you Mr president and and
on the bill I I've said that I
I'm just repeating be clear that
I I certainly support ninety
I'm certainly happy to support
the bill.
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator committee centers we are
on the bill.
We're debating the bill.
Senators will stand in place I
know that there is an amendment
coming forward.
All right well let's see which
one how about.
How about because you know the.
The game is so important.
Is this okay.
Well let's see here.
This.
here Senator the state to cater
to Senators sapiens K. so very
much part of our world and we're
really sorry about the passing
of his father
but anyway this is called Cesar
morning.
Slippery like mercury he is with
his eyes on his Rolex it is
boldly teasing way he is
himself from his own
achievements but he can't help
himself it has been this way all
of his life.
But his modesty is never quite
convincing as rehearsal is just
makes eleven buckets he says or.
Who wants to truncate I don't
want to truncate.
Or we cannot allow the camel's
So go ask your mommy had a vote
next time he confronts me in the
hallway against your own chair
you voted.
He rises from his seat and
That's for Senator sake thank
you senator nail.
the will move forward with the
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
from either to the end of the
line and insert a colon followed
by one create a threat to the
probationer or print or parole
the victim or witness or for
constitute a new crime.
Thank you operator.
Senator so to remove that
amendment Mr president's.
I move.
Senate floor.
Amendment one.
Senate health.
And public affairs committee
substitute.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
The amendment is now being
Centers Rogers who to think I
could just simply instruction or
instead of doing one two three
four however this does this does
clarify I do think I do think
ways that that people will.
Terrorize victims in a case that
may not rise to the level of
creating a threat per se but
people had pagers and
I had a.
At a case where
pagers and and spent all day.
Having people.
Call her at her desk thing I
received a page I received a
page I received a page that
to get any work done and and it
make sure that that she knew
that he knew where she was and
so and so I I do very much
appreciate Senators committee
raising this issue I do think
think everybody has a copy of
the amendment of the happy to
stand for questions thank you
center so that we are debating
Center floor member number one
percent health public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty for anyone wishing.
To the right.
Senator Hernandez.
Thanks for the agency present I
Senator the Arizona and I have
different sometimes different
solutions to the same problem
might my solution was to strike
one word his solution was to add
briefs and the documents that
would right we do charge more
for a longer document I come
from a little different
generation and and I'm like
Thank you Senator want this we
do have further debate with
Senator Lopez followed by
Senator Sedillo Lopez we are an
amendment Senator Lopez I thank
twenty sixteen we passed law
that actually was called
Rachel's log back in the day
Senator Ivey Soto may remember
this back for an of we work on
this and Judiciary at that time
and what this did is
jurisdiction over the offense
the the offender
and primarily this dealt with
criminal sexual penetration that
The victim would like to
continue that order of
protection the victim can then
go and petitioned the court just
to make sure that there is no
to some of the discussion we're
having on this particular
measure so I just want to
mention that thank you Mr
president thank Senator Lopez we
do have for the debate on the
amendment Senator the Lopez.
Ivey Soto and everyone who's
working on this because it kept
it keeps survivors safe and it's
another way I really appreciate
prove their credible fear or
credible threat this one makes
it as a kind you know if if it's
a condition which it will be
imposed if there is a credible
threat
Is present etcetera I do also
stand in support I think Senator
Lopez for bringing
appropriations law and I also
this for national bill it never
happened but I think this has
the same type for appeal because
you are looking at protecting
those are already afraid of
amendment Senator Ivy Soto to
close on the amendment thanks
very much Mr president and and
thank you Sir Lopez for for
reminding us of Rachel's law and
actually one of the things about
victim.
Is that because there is a
conviction they don't have to re
prove the case and they didn't
have to going to court
themselves they could have an
who've been victimized by others
that we that we've been doing in
and our laws and and I think
center K. was propped up first
and Senator Lopez I think you
would move adoption of Center
for member number one to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for the Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill eighty four and I
saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it Senate floor amendment number
one has been adopted to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
you thank you Mr president Mr
president I move that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands Senators tier
seats where voting.
Baca voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Byrd voting no.
By a vote of thirty one in the
thank you thank you bye for
great debate and.
Thanks again.
Thanks Antonio we are still in
that order business serving a
legislation that we owe to
Senate floor Majority Leader
passage been taken is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
I see no objections Senator
Wirth to explain the bill thank
you Mr president this bill
election with an exception for
peace officers Mr president this
puts in place the same rule that
already exists one of polling
places at a school currently
when a polling places at a
Where we are in our.
political discourse I would say
that elections and firearms
bill forty four.
We do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senator Pirtle to moving explain
the amendment Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill forty four thanks in part
of explain with that amendment
as essentially Mr present all
this bill is so that people
aren't brandishing a firearm
trying to intimidate we can
intimidate somebody if it's
concealed this will keep our
polling places safe in case
can be there to help keep
everybody safe.
Thank you Senator Pirtle centers
we're debating Senate floor
amendment number one anyone
wishing debate on the amendment
Judiciary Committee I certainly
understand you know the position
of the argument being made I
respectfully disagree with its
and again what we're doing in
Senator Wirth we do have further
debate on the member we have
Senator.
thank you Mr president I
actually support the amendment
if we look at the places where
That's just the way the crazy
shooters operate.
The crazy shooters don't want to
get shot back at.
That's why they're crazy
shooters.
And I don't understand why we
don't.
All of the evidence shows that
there have been people that have
walked into places and try to
shoot people.
Okay there's a bunch targets
have at it nobody's going to
stop you yes a.
And frankly I don't want to be a
target.
Potentially.
Will stop them.
Consequently the crazy shooters
only show up at gun free zones.
those people irritate me.
We don't need people with a big
old pistol strapped on their
like costs and.
from from whatever.
that and I agree with that those
people here take me.
But we also don't need anybody
carrying a sword or big bully
knife or.
There's a lot of things that can
The possibility of of just
driving people away because
they're afraid of the crazy guy
with the rifle so this is a good
amendment and I would hope that
have center serve on this next
on the amendment Senator mantas
thank you Mr president I rise in
opposition but I do think as
we're hearing this narrative
over and over again including
gun deaths in the current says
the law but I would just have to
challenge that thinking by
reminding members.
Of the sixty one people who died
think it be hard to argue that
that was a gun free zone and.
And that the mass shootings a
sixty one deaths took place in a
restricted area.
Paso Texas were a gunman killed
twenty three.
Raval dove many hours to el Paso
to a Walmart specifically to
target target Hispanics of who
well too so we're hearing that
narrative a great deal I I think
when we talk about guns and I'm
a gun owner in fact I'll be very
candid with all the something I
don't want to talk a lot about
I'm a concealed carry permit
comes to gun responsibility in
gun safety and so when the
narrative.
Is suggesting things that I
think are inaccurate I think
it's important for those of us
that are gun owners to point
examples in recent memory of
mass shootings and so all all
ask members to to keep the
debate accurate when we talk
about gun safety thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator about this we
the the shooting did not to take
place from
a no non gun free zone all state
the shooter was in a hotel.
but I would argue that the
and you there's posted no
weapons on the outside concert
venue so I guess it's accurate
that that shooting in Parker.
Additionally I would I would
point out that on at least a
Walmart I live at live by and
the ones in Albuquerque all of
them that I have seen have
that a gun free zone maybe not
your might be guns in there but
if you're law abiding citizen
you're not one of them that's
carrying a gun so I would point
that out and I appreciate the
terrific amendment Mr president
and the reason is is because it
provides a deterrent effect
essentially think about this if
you put it inside your jacket
you put it where somebody is not
going to see it.
To commit your crime but.
Individuals inside were
carry allowance in this bill.
You have.
At least a hesitation by a
person going in there that
somebody in there might be a
that's question I'm gonna have
how many concealed carry holders
actually commit these crimes
with legally acquired firearms.
And.
But all of a sudden we think
that they're going to follow the
law in this one instance in a
polling place and walking with a
consider a walk walk in and and
you Mr president.
Think centre back we do have
further debate on the amendment
we have Senator here.
Thank you Mr president I also
stand in opposition to this
Some data on that and apparently
of the one hundred fifty six
mass shootings that occurred
between two thousand nine in two
thousand sixteen only ten
I just wanted to add that and
hand again reiterate what the
sponsor said that
is Mr president elections and
guns just don't mix whether
amendment we have centers
committee thank you Mr president
like to point out that there is
there's a bit of a kind of a
strongman going on and I want to
Every Democrat in a Republican
in this chamber would agree with
that statement so we gotta stop
straw manning here we've got to
get back on the topic of what
we're actually debating.
respectfully do bonk some of the
information I was just presented
from every town they have this
narrative going around it says
ten percent and I'm gonna give
go over the FBI definition of a
public shooting.
Okay the FBI definition
specifically excludes shootings
examples of this Waco Texas may
eighteenth two thousand fifteen
nine kids so when you hear the
ten percent number that is
public shooting that was in that
was not in a gun free zone.
was was a gang fight and
according to the FBI that not
gun free zone let me give you
another very silly example that
was deemed not a a gun free zone
okay San Francisco.
FBI definition used to include
full for was the threshold okay
if you went into someone
somewhere new to shut one or two
But that year of that shooting
that so called shooting that was
not a gun free zone.
There were a guess how many
concealed handgun permits issued
official that's point zero zero
zero five three percent of the
population so I would actually
argue that's this kind of
statistically gone freeze on a
free okay but once again this
case those four people that were
killed goes into the statistics
that was just mentioned in this
chamber and and I I just have to
vote for this bill if this
amendment is the opted we need
bipartisan gun legislation going
forward to address gun violence
could not have the fear of going
into a gun free zone they should
be have have you know of freedom
not to go
statistics that are thrown out
when you hear the number ten
percent one other example
a shooting in Terrel Texas in
two thousand thirteen.
What what happened was this
But because in the shooting
spree there was more than four
people that were shot.
What what what this does this
the people that are trying to
that was not in the country's on
because this market they said
that the test they would allow
people to come into their their
market and and and carry
the F. B. I. definition of a
public shooting and therefore
should be excluded from that
data.
So just I wasn't talking this
specific example why that ten
percent number is completely
inaccurate the actual data if
you look at the F. B. I.
definition is closer to ninety
four percent of people are
Thank you madam president only
the Sanchez deal but I'm gonna
give you guys some personal
information you know the Gabby
Giffords shooting the daughter
that died was Johnny green's and
kids who we flew home.
You talk about gun violence you
talk about gun safety.
But until you have that happen
People are not the ones are
going to shoot up the place.
If you look back at some of the
history in the statistics will
show this is his when there's
How a gun violence and how all
this happened in Vegas and that
happened in Vegas but until you
get in a player playing in the
morning.
And so I just my point
appropriate is don't use remarks
lightly and think that
statistics and things don't
matter in people's life because
it's real in my life.
specifics all the time but the
number one thing isn't into you
got to do that.
As a friend and as a our
legislator and go to those
But I know there's a place in
the time that when I look around
do I feel on the state for do I
feel safe I don't think I've
ever felt unsafe at a polling
see that and I don't feel that
threat there
to carry my concealed carry to
polling site maybe don't live in
Albuquerque where there's gun
violence every single day and
mean my my point is.
A personal experience will make
you change your comments reflect
when you just say all of the
shooting here in that shooting
sorry Senator Pinto debate the
amendment thank you thank you
madam chair and I think it's
more of a COVID we talk about
concealed carry because this
end of the city that caused the
community to go on lockdown and
they were very concerned about
their then having the ability to
get there in time so I don't
know if there's any
and cast your vote.
And even here at the capitol we
have the
Of the.
The metal detectors you talk
about concealed carry and all
already in the building all
these other places we are
talking about are exposed areas
and you can probably talk to
some security experts and they
there are real concerns in our
community about that that have
not been addressed
so I I think there's still a lot
more that needs to be considered
it's something that does need to
occur thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator any other
debate on the amendment.
Saying not Senator Pirtle to
what we don't hear because
thanks to the media the only
hear one side of the story
that's always when there's not
somebody there with a gun to
stop the violence.
the clerk or has a gun in an
ex's face within a target and
that person is able to take that
person down before that that
individual can do harm you don't
hear that story because it
We don't hear that part we don't
hear about the good guy with a
gun the good person with a gun.
And I will tell you I consider
volunteers to jump out of
airplanes with a gun to go save
the country and he always had a
state saying madam president.
It's better to be judged by
twelve than carried by six.
a responsible gun owner and I
understand that it's only up to
me madam president for my own
safety and protection.
I had somebody try to kick my
door down at my house and try to
enter my house.
to do whatever I had to do to
protect my family because I was
a good guy with a gun.
They're to keep myself safe.
And I understand that's that's
intimidation with a firearm
that's not what responsible gun
owners do but what I will tell
you is a lot of times I don't
feel like I need to carry a
firearm into a polling place
because Hey I'm from Travis
But when we make these laws we
we we basically create a fission
a barrel situation for people
that we shouldn't be doing.
What if somebody came up in the
gallery behind us and started
firing that thing would be out
of that boot so quick I would
skin that smoke wagon so fast
And that's what this ammendment
is about.
Madam president and with that I
move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill forty
one to Senate bill forty four to
your seats if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand Senator
Padilla thank you madam
Alright so Senators tier C.
we're voting on the amendment to
Senate bill forty four if you
wish to vote now please raise
your hand.
Senator pope voting no Senator
Campos voting no Senator Sedillo
Lopez voting no Senator McKenna
Gonzales voting no Senator had a
meal voting no Senator Duhigg
voting no Senator Stewart voting
Lopez voting no Senator souls
voting no Senator Stefanics
voting no Senator Padilla voting
no.
Senator Pirtle still has the
floor just thank you madam
president members of the body
thank you.
So other debate on the bill.
Senator Schmedes to move the
floor amendment.
one to Senate bill forty four
amendment sponsored by Senator
Griggs committee.
Senator Schmedes to explain the
ideologically of disagree about
gun free zones
I think you can at least respect
that there are large amount of
people in New Mexico including
lives but threaten the ability
and the comfort and safety of
people to go vote in person.
secretary of the department of
public safety if there has been
a shooting at a polling place
after this bill is adopted and
signed into law by the governor
is the governor signed this into
law and a year or two later we
have a shooting yet again in a
gun free zone that we've
created.
That we would say hold on.
Thank you Mr president so madam
president madam president my
apologies so this is an
unfriendly amendment
polling places and school
already has that rule the second
thing we focus so much on
concealed carry that everyone's
forgotten that I did put an
certainly can be there with a
firearm to provide some
protection so I just again I I
understand what this the senator
Who's trying to get my
attention.
Can you wait just a minute
because we have debate.
Did you just did you just the
will will will come back to you
but not now unless there's an
issue certain issues yes members
I have a I have a force of this
bill I I think because this is
amendment.
All right seeing no objection we
have that amendment said
apartment number one will be
withdrawn.
Further debate on the bill.
that we had an opportunity
today.
To probably have a unanimous
vote on a bill to stop
intimidation.
Mexico it could be a win for the
voters.
We decided that we needed to
have a.
Partisan vote.
it's going to be Spahn
incorrectly the Republicans
don't want to protect voters.
That's not true for all you that
might be listening out there we
do.
boggles my mind madam president
we decided to take something
that could have been a super
strong message to the entire
state intimidation.
Will not be allowed.
We need to have a win win we
need to stop with the slide with
that with the partisan.
But we chose not to thank you
madam president.
Senator Wirth to yield madam
president yes yes madam
president sure you talked
earlier of the larger areas
consider giving the authority to
the chief clerks for the for the
county to be able to choose the
following locations so that way
we wouldn't have to have this
simply create a uniform set of
rules for our polling places and
align.
The polling places that
currently are not in schools and
guess my next point was
understand Arizona is one of the
few states that does this and I
it hasn't happened to the TIRS
madam president the same way
it's already enforceable in a
school polling place again to be
the same rules that would apply
and if someone comes whether
there or or by a poll worker to
a sheriff and then you'll note
here this is a petty misdemeanor
so it's a six month
Senate then present Sir thank
you and I guess because my next
question is because they have
little to petty misdemeanor and
I hope they would allow catch
for the be allowed to do that
and presents her.
madam president center I I don't
see why not that's exactly what
they would do if they're going
Thank you for that madam
president center that brings me
to my last point we seem to do a
lot to put the.
that choose to looking for
vehicles are broken into in our
farm stolen and used in a.
In a robbery or anything else on
the murders and we would be held
debate on Senate bill forty
four.
I see no debate.
Yes so you if you'll move the
floor substitute thing then
present like to moose and four
percent for substitute for
Senate bill forty four.
floor substitute be put on final
passage thank you madam
president mused to running
amendments and this may be the
first to floor survive of run in
I thank you that is my first
but I think that the approach
we've come up with in the bill
is the one that makes sense
again it just is doing the same
thing that we already do in
substitute will potentially have
again guns on the polling places
creating a crime for that
happening so again it's not a
Other debate on the floor
substitute.
present the main purpose of
running this is to show the
public initial media that
Republicans are dedicated to
offering bipartisan solutions
agree that not to open carry in
a polling place that's
bipartisan the this what this
does is we we have a couple of
explicit language with farms and
that I think it's unnecessary I
think if you branch firearm you
could be charged with voter
intimidation of a poll worker or
someone else that's a fourth
degree felony electioneering is
as he what he was trying to
accomplish and so what it does
is we we have election hearing
okay you can't go you know
display campaign literature and
things within certain distances
again I think this is a
bipartisan offering a
bipartisan and solution and to
echo what center Here said as I
I I would you know I think the
want what we are missing to
potentially show not not just
New Mexicans not just our
constituents but our entire
country is that we could have a
chamber that stands out
there's a lot of truth to that
we can go to any red state or
any blue state and we can get
partisan gun legislation all day
long right.
That's not new well the new
how did you guys do that have
you guys reserve them Tatian
just same thing over and over
again so so once again this is
senator any other debate on the
Senate floor substitutes Senator
work to mention just just one
more thing I think is important
here it would only apply if
someone's actually election
hearing and so again there's a
flaw within the amendment
so someone could walk right in
if they're not election hearing
Baca thank you madam president I
would I would point out that
intimidating somebody or walking
into really any location the
focuses on the issue that we're
trying to resolve here which is
the occurrence at the polling
place it is rivers also down to
situation so what this does is
it seems like it focuses it to
what we're trying to really get
out which is the election
banning all weapons within the
polling location thank you madam
president thank you any other
debate on the Senate floor
substitute.
close of this is our voter
termination laws would ban open
carry if if you are doing so in
intimidating way that's why that
did not choose to modify that
part of state statute that's why
consent the records show the
rules and called and all those
present voting from it except by
those in the native assurance.
Centers we are on a motion for a
do pass on the Senate floor
Senator said run yes voting no
Senator Steinborn voting no
Sedillo Lopez voting no Senator
my Estes voting no Senator Ivey
Soto voting no Senator Pinto
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Stewart voting now Senator
Hamblen voting no Senator Korea
souls voting no Senator
Stefanics voting no Senator
Padilla voting no.
By a vote of eleven in the
affirmative twenty not twenty
five in the negative the Senate
sponsor for the discussion thank
you other debate on Senate bill
forty four.
Seeing none senator Wirth to
close.
voting in a negative by show of
hands.
Centers we are voting on Senate
bill forty four to your seats if
you wish to vote.
There's been a request for a
No Senator Baca votes no center
Brandt no Senator Brandt both
snow Center Burke.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond both CS Center
do heck Senator Duhigg both CS
Center guy hosts Newman center
guy because votes no Center
Yes Center happened both CS
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill both CS Center
Hickey.
Senator Hickey both CS Senator
Ingle.
Etcetera Lopes's.
Senator Lopez votes yes center
my Estes Center my Estes both CS
interment cana.
Senator Neville both CS Center
o'neill.
Center to the Pino center to the
Pino both CS Senator Padilla.
Senator Pirtle both snow Center
pope.
Senator Popo CS Center Rodriguez
center Rodriguez votes CS Center
DO Lopez votes yes center share.
Center share votes no center
Shendo.
both CS interview Tom in.
Etcetera Thoman boats yes
senator Wirth Senator Wirth both
CS Center what's.
If.
Twenty.
Buy photo twenty eight in the
affirmative and nine in the
negative Senate bill forty four
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Wirth thank you madam
Senator menu Senate bill one oh
two as amended.
Thank you president.
Has consented the Sherlocks in
objections senator Munoz to
explain the bill thank you.
Do you quick looks Madam
presence was changed to Mr
president.
or twice and it's very important
as you live in rural New Mexico
to travel the actual numbers of
truck semi truck crashes have
fail fatal and and the other
person is being
just minor fatalities with
that'll stand for questions
thank you so we're debating
Senate bill wanted to as
amended.
semis and and operators of semis
but really I think as a society
we've forgotten how to drive
around these large vehicles and
their their hybrids and things
driving crazily around these
vehicles that that because most
of the accidents but I do
appreciate Mr present the
sponsor trying to make some
effort to make our highways
No further debate on the bill.
Senator Munoz to close thank you
Mr president I move that Senate
bill two as amended do now pass
Senator chair seats we're
voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator sweeties voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
I have a lot of thirty in the
affirmative six in the name of
Senate bill one or two as
amended has passed the Senate
business messages from the house
or on that order business
message from the house the
reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
clerk.
The general show the message
from the house has been received
the reader to read Mr president
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the house has passed
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
order of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
committee reports we're in that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
This president your health and
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I think there's just one Mr
president I move the adoption of
report is been adopted.
Reiterate Mr president your
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee to whom has
been referred Senate bill two
respectfully submitted Shannon
D. Pinto co chair Senator Pinto.
I move adoption of the committee
report centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee report
The reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill twenty six
has had it under consider
Senator many of us.
Mr president I move that the.
Hold on one second.
I move in ask Miss can the
Senate the re to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
in the vote on the the one
motion of the General reflect
their acted upon independently
Senate bill ninety six do pass
respectfully submitted George
when you also chairman sentiment
us food option the committee
report centers we have a motion
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it committee
report is been adopted a journal
reflect their acted upon
individually the reader to read
this present your tax business
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chair chairman.
Senator Shendo.
them we won motion that the
general fund they were acted
upon individually see no
objections to reiterate.
Senate bill ninety seven do not
pass but that Senate tax
businesses and transportation
Has had it under consideration
and report same without
recommendation and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill one fifty to do pass
and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
part has been adopted as journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
The reader to read.
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. souls German
Center souls Mr president I ask
unanimous consent in the Senate
agree to be allowed to read all
pass but that Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one fifty one do passed as
amended and that's referred to
recommendation and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill three forty seven
without recommendation and
committee report Senator is we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
Well.
The reader to read this presents
your rules committee to whom has
been referred Senate bill two
eighty has had it under
consideration reports say with
recommendation that it do not
chairwoman Senator Mr president
I move the more part centers we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
has been referred Senate
memorial twenty eight has had it
under consideration reports that
same has been duly rules and in
gross preparatory to signing by
president move adoption of the
committee report centers have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation we
are in that order business
introduction legislation.
amending the medical malpractice
act requiring the superintendent
of insurance to approve proposed
settlements paid from the
patient's compensation fund
limiting recovery of past and
solvency Senate bill for forty
five.
Senate bill for forty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
species and act relating to
medical malpractice amended the
mental medical malpractice act
to update the definition of
occurrence Senate bill four
Senate bill for forty seven
introduced by senators committee
and borders and act relating to
medical malpractice directing
adjustment of recovery amounts
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
Affairs Committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
four four seven Senate bill for
forty eight introduced by
to include receipts for the
payment of copayments and
deductibles Senate bill four
forty eight Senate bill for
forty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by senator Ortiz Pino
an act relating to real property
and acting the real estate
contract act defining terms
providing requirements for
record recording real estate
Senate bill for forty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
affairs committee thence Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
to cardio pulmonary
resuscitation and trained in the
use of automatic automated
external defibrillators making
an appropriation Senate bill
committee Senate bill four
fifty.
Senate bill four fifty one
introduced by Senator Pirtle and
act relating to parole requiring
the corrections department to
review a prisoner's recent phone
patrol border parole board to
webcast parole hearings Senate
bill four fifty one Senate bill
four fifty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
an act relating to broadband
amending repealing and acting
sections of the department of
information technology act
authorizing the lease or sale of
clarifying the bases for cell
service rates providing
definitions amending sections
sections of the broadband access
and expansion act requiring
Senate bill four fifty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
Affairs Committee then Senate
care purchasing Act to update
publicly funded health care
agency obligations Senate bill
four fifty three Senate bill
four fifty three have been.
Senate bill four fifty four
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and act making appropriation to
help professional loan repayment
fund to increase funding for the
health professional loan
Senate bill four fifty four
Senate bill four fifty five
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and act relating to public
safety amending the search and
fifty five Senate bill four
fifty five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate finance
suspense game and act relating
to public utilities creating an
energy storage development
target requiring energy storage
procurement and deployment to be
addressed as part of the
committee and Senate tax
business transportation
committee Senate bill four fifty
six Senate bill four fifty seven
introduced by senator share an
constructing repairing and
extending streets establishing
lien priority Senate bill four
fifty seven Senate bill four
fifty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
In.
Senate bill four fifty eight
introduced by senator serve on
this and Diamond and act
relating to water eliminating
forfeiture of water rights for
non use reducing the period of
time that municipalities
the strategic water reserves for
certain threatened or endangered
species removing certain
restrictions on the Interstate
Stream Commission sale or lease
of water or water rights from
seventy nine seventy eight being
laws nineteen oh seven chapter
forty nine section forty two in
laws nineteen thirty one chapter
conservation committee vents
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill four fifty eight
Senate bill four fifty nine dues
by Senator Baca and others and
act relating to abortion
prohibiting the late term
abortions providing an exception
under which late term abortions
may be performed providing
penalties Senate bill four fifty
We're gonna have that read once
again.
It's Senate bill four fifty
nine.
partial birth abortion ban Act
prohibiting late term abortions
providing an exception under
which late term abortions may be
performed providing penalties
Committee that Senate bill four
fifty nine.
Senate bill four sixty
introduced by senator Here and
others and act relating to the
legislative finance committee
four sixty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee that
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill for sixty.
An act relating the legislative
finance committee allowing
minority floor leader so point
the minority members of the
committee declaring an
emergency.
Pro ten that I was looking for I
don't think she here that get
read out I think we ought to
give that a for referral to
finance to see if we can appoint
amount of finance somewhere
The reader to read.
Senate bill four sixty
introduced by Senator Hamblen
and act relating to licensure
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to Senate health public
affairs committee and Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
four sixty one.
sections seventeen dash three
dash thirteen dash four NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
laws two thousand one chapter
two thirteen section to to
Senate bill four sixty two
Senate bill four sixty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate Judiciary
emergency medical services
establishing a Medicaid cost
based.
Supplemental reimbursement
program for eligible public
emergency medical service
providers making an
appropriation Senate bill four
sixty three Senate bill four
sixty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to Senate
and diamond and act relating to
tourism and acting the
agritourism promotion act
limiting the liability of an
Senate bill four sixty four
Senate bill four sixty five
introduced by senator Maestas an
act related to data collection
requiring certain educational
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill four sixty five
Senate bill four sixty six
introduced by senator Maestas
authorities Senate bill four
sixty six.
Senate bill four sixty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
by the out and act making
appropriation for Special
Olympics Senate bill four sixty
seven Senate bill for six to
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
introduced by senators Lopez
Sedillo Lopez McKenna and others
an act relating to public
affairs declaring April tenth as
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee Vance Senate
finance committee that Senate
bill four sixty eight.
Senate Joint Memorial ten
equal rights amendment as the
twenty eighth amendment to the
constitution of the United
States Senate Joint Memorial ten
Senate Joint Memorial ten having
Senate memorial fifty introduced
by senators Wirth and Rodriguez
a memorial honoring sixty six
years of public service and
declaring February seventeenth
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed not refer
to committee to be placed on the
president's table etcetera
Morial fifty.
file notice with proof of
publication repealing section
forty dash eight dash to NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
laws in eighteen eighty nine
Senate Judiciary Committee house
bill thirty one.
House floor house floor
substitute for house bill sixty
vehicle by a non owner who is
not a motor vehicle dealer house
bill sixty two house bill sixty
two.
bill thirty one thirty one an
act relating to health care
coverage and acting new sections
of the health care purchasing
Act and the New Mexico insurance
practice on the basis of
disability House for substitute
for house bill one thirty one.
Also substitute for house bill
one thirty one.
One thirty one.
House bill one or three
introduced by Representative
McQueen an act relating to
elections to include any
contribution or pledge for one
thousand dollars or more
requiring the reporting of
monetary contributions received
during the legislative session
twice by title is referred to
the Senate rules committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee house
bill one oh three house bill one
of six introduced by
Representative Alcon and act
act house bill one oh six house
bill one of six having been read
twice by title is referred to
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate finance
out of business was
miscellaneous for that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president is before
we go to a committee chairs we
did have a momentous event occur
the floor of the state Senate's
and I think let's give him a
huge round of applause and a
welcome to our chamber.
senator my Estes for committee
chairs will be in at eleven
o'clock tomorrow so ideal the
centre Mestis SMSS followed by
senator Munoz S. S. thank you Mr
hundred bill party the hundred
bill party is set for Friday
February twenty fourth Friday
February twenty fourth from six
one is there first a non comment
session that that hundred bill
party is house and Senate
combine the sponsors are Linda
set up though from Santa Fe
representative Linda Serrato
that make the legislature go up
so I would ask the committee
chairs to consider that on the
twenty fourth maybe an hour or
so early and then maybe on the
twenty fifth maybe start an hour
party hits nothing but work
after that so thank you thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Maestas we do have
further announcements will have
Senator when you also Senator
four million one hundred and
seventy thousand per member so
start filling out your forms I
get that ready four million one
hundred seventy thousand dollars
so remember that it's going to
go pretty quickly member of the
executive still wants to partner
on big projects as much as we
can to reduce the number of
today at I got a couple bills
are gonna get out there here few
more agencies we're waiting for
House Bill to come over.
just remember there is not a lot
of recurring capacity in house
the house spend it all in and
you have to figure it out
so remember that capital.
What's the number Mister
president.
Four million one hundred seventy
write that down make sure you
fill it out to the exact dollar
amount the good Senator for your
We have zero and everybody was
waiting for capital we're like
we don't even know what that is.
And it came and we got a million
gonna get rolling as quickly as
we can so we can be either by
five.
Thank you senator Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president just want
to inform the body that the
rules will Chavis county
economic development corporation
thank you Mr president to
announcements of first the.
Religious coalition for
reproductive rights is meeting
Second the health and public
affairs committee is going to
meet at three thirty in room
three eleven we have a of a
lengthy but.
Hemphill yes.
Ingle encompass and with that
have received an email from me
saying that I was out of the
country and that I needed help
and please buy an apple chart to
give me so if in fact you have
committee tomorrow is going to
change their agenda a bit we're
going to do all the finance
bills first a two seventy two
Senator Campos three fourteen
go on to Senate Senate of twenty
two twenty two Senator Pirtle
two sixty six Stefanics and
who represents us in the
Colorado River agreement we will
have in our presentation and
questions and answers with
Esteban Lopez starting at eight
to invite everyone to more to
visit Los Alamos national
laboratories and you traveling
hands on stem experience for New
Mexico students and adults it's
tomorrow from nine AM to twelve
PM outside the east entrance of
directly outside the roundhouse
now it's a great opportunity for
kids and adults to have fun
hands on stem experience
interacting with real scientists
and other professionals from Los
Alamos National Laboratory you
Senator Pinto thank you thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate to move
Senate bill four fourteen out of
the Senate health public affairs
who's a sponsor on that the
Senate is the bill.
Mr president to Senator Pinto
asked me about that earlier and
I said it sounded fine to move
Affairs Committee will be
reading meeting at nine AM in
room three oh three thank you
thanks senator Senator.
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to point out that while
something like that.
If we are not absolutely
thrilled with the oil and gas
industry then we need to just
not use that money in your
Seoul absolutely I would ask
unanimous consent that any
district that doesn't want to
oil and gas money should give
the money back.
Can I make a motion.
No objections we have an
objection sorry Senator there
has been objection no unanimous
consent Senator.
announcements centers about
this.
Thank you for the money may take
issue again with my colleague
that love that money came from
oil and gas we need to recognize
I would say all of it came I'm
gonna write a check on April
bring bring bring it along that
said though the Senate judiciary
committee will meet at three
thirty that's not long from now
about fifteen minutes and we're
gonna have to be quick and on
States Supreme Court has come
down with the ruling we hadn't
had a ruling from the U. S.
Supreme Court about the last
five or six years on the topic
of gun safety gun legislation
gun regulation anyway shape or
form I encourage you to come to
the presentation because we're
going to find is the Supreme
Court is giving us a lane and
and we're gonna be working in
the Judiciary Committee to stay
a presentation by the NRA and we
will have a presentation by the
Giffords group another so we're
gonna hear balance on this issue
and then we'll trying gets built
her will have to stop hard at
they'll be a good presentation I
encourage you to join us them.
Thank you Senator about this
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I was
gonna ask the chair of finance
built so thank you Mr president
and answer appreciate yielding
and I have a couple questions
yesterday the chair finance talk
about how the governor wanted us
are when we gonna get those.
Senator Brandt you're still
working with her to get her
listed down to us we don't of
will hopefully get some members
to to look at projects that you
need and hopefully I'll be able
to working combined some
projects with those that she has
planning I'm gonna spend my
Cappelli today the ninety north
those projects are we need those
projects yesterday so as the
finance committee giving her
giving her deadline and has she
fully funded maybe somewhere in
my district that don't have
fully are fully funded my might
want to give to them are we ever
going to get those lists are we
just supposed to blindly fill
be able to get our sponsorship
Liz those are the list there
reach gonna get like three
copies we seinem we introduce
them formally those are just
between now and next week next
Thursday we must have the
governor's list in her projects
so that we can incorporate them
the governor yesterday because
when I fill out my sheet there
may be things on there that I
didn't think about that are in
my district that I might want to
put on that she I won't be able
to do that because I don't know
information as body we shouldn't
be expected to get that
information at the last minute
and then vote on the bill you
know let's run the finance
thank you Mr president a check
that on the date of Friday March
third Friday March third will be
the evening of the one hundred
bill party thank you.
Thank you senator my SS.
consent the Senate stand in
recess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning see no
objections the Senate to Senate
recess to eleven AM tomorrow
