retirement, providing for
appropriations and income
derived from investments to be
credited to the magistrate
retirement fund, adjusting years
of service credit required for a
certain magistrate judges,
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee House Bill 183.
House Bill 219 introduced by
Representative Small and act in
of holdings in certain parcels
of the park, making an
appropriation House Bill 219. 29
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee House
Bill 219.
An act relating to public
employees, expanding the
definition of peace officer to
allow retired members that are
is referred to the Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee.
House Bill 336 senators, I, I, I
love the bipartisanship, the
discussions that are taking
place, but I do want to remind
How's commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 346, an act
relating to hemp changing
rulemaking authority from the
Department of Environment to the
advertising, marketing, or sale
of semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids in New Mexico.
Requiring the environmental
improvement board to adopt rules
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill 346.
Commerce and Economic
Hospital 433 introduced by
representatives Gonzalez
Garrett, and Dixon, and actually
relating to education.
Study Committee to conduct a
comprehensive study regarding
the availability of career and
tech technical education courses
and course instructors and the
salaries and compensation
House Bill 433 433 having been
read ice by titles referred to
the Senate Education Committee.
House Bill 433.
House Bill 444, an act relating
to athletic competition.
Transferring New Mexico Athletic
commission authority to the
regulation and licensing
department.
Adding licensing categories,
amending the types of fees
dedicated to the Athletic
Commission fund.
Amending and repealing sections
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
government elections and in
affairs Committee substitute for
government elections and an
affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 444.
House Bill 553 introduced by
representatives.
Vincent Mason.
Providing for in-state
structural timber grading
certificates.
Providing for the use of
structural timber that is graded
and labeled in state, making an
House Bill 553.
Senator Wartz to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go to that
on our business announcements
and miscellaneous, and I yield
missing senators. We have been
unable to locate them in the
building. I, uh, Senator Shindo,
his mailbox is full. I could not
leave a message with him, a
some miscellaneous senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. So we
are pursuant to Rule 74, able to
do more business and so you've
been handed out Senate
supplemental calendar number 2,
on that order of business of
announcements of miscellaneous.
Senator Tobiasson wished to make
an announcement. Senator
Tobiasson, thank you, Mr.
President, I just wanted to
point out maybe the obvious we
Unanimous consent. We go out of
business. 3rd reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
Cervantes for House Joint
Resolution 2. Senator Cervantes,
thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I ask youanimous
consent of the Senate. The
records show that all action
business. They reading
legislation and this is House
Joint Resolution 2 as amended
Senator Cervantes to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President. It's a
very straightforward effort
here.
to place before the voters a
have the best possible
communication with the governor
and that we address concerns
that the governor may have with
legislation so that we can
perhaps modify amended or
debating how joint resolution 2
is amended. I'll yield to
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. Again,
I don't need the sponsor to
yield, but
I've had uh several questions
vetoing a bill, never calling a
bill up, never giving an answer,
never giving any comments on it
and doing the exact same thing.
Or the sponsor yield, I know he
really loves answering
questions, so I, I just got to
give him a chance, you know, Mr.
President, I've been kind of
missing the fact that most of my
one question, um, I, I like the
idea of the bill, but in, in
house judiciary Committee,
apparently they're starting to
act more and more like Senate
like it.
Or does that mean they have to
have a full paragraph, um, are
the courts gonna have to figure
that out? Is that something
that's gonna have to go to the
there is no way that we can
anticipate what would be
inadequate explanation by a
governor in a veto message. I, I
can't think of how we could
possibly put into the
substantive.
And I would agree with you,
Senator, that's an ambiguous
undefined term and ultimately if
there was a challenge, the
uh, so that we can rely upon
that veto message and
understanding the reasoning
behind the veto.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Senator Brent, thank you, Mr.
President, and, and, you know,
like I said, you know, we've
during the session didn't give
us a message, uh, she just
vetoed them and didn't even, you
know, something as simple as
don't like it would have worked.
here, um, or trying to say, you
know, it needs to be
substantive. I'm not sure what
that's really gonna mean, and I
really don't think we need to.
Right
Senator Brant. We do have
further debates.
We have Senator Scott followed
by Senator Trujillo and Senator
Cee Lopez. Senator Scott.
is currently in effect.
For
The circumstance when the
session and where we're at. So,
uh, within the last 3 days of
the session, there's a specific
requirement. There was a
reference by Senator Brandt to
Martinez successfully
challenging that her vetoes were
ineffective. This was state XL
Stewart versus Martinez and she
successfully challenged the
of the session, the governor has
the 20 days that follow to act
upon that, but currently there's
no veto message requirement uh
with bills in that, in that
If I've got the process
correctly, the governor has to
offer.
Some excuse or
Today, if she, if she vetoed a
bill that we had submitted 3
days ago.
Mr. President, Senator, you're
almost right. Uh, she doesn't
veto message that's what
happened to Governor Martinez.
All of the laws that she thought
she vetoed were not vetoed
correctly. And so the court
rejected her vetoes and the
bills became law.
that requirement for an
objection. Is that accurate?
Senator Cervantes.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
if you're, if you're looking at,
bill and I'm looking for where
you're, where you may be
looking.
I'm trying to, I'm trying to
understand your question and
interpret the way you are,
Amendments in context, but then
The original proposed amendment,
it was line one of page 2.
with what your question is about
and what language is being
changed. If the governor
disapproves, the governor shall
veto it and return it to the
house in which it originated.
Amendment
And, and Mr. President, Senator,
the, the reason for that again
is because we're adding the
requirement of a veto message
bill in whole or in part, so
this would not be dependent on
when the veto was done or the
timing of the veto when the bill
reached the governor. This would
Senator Scott, OK, Mr.
President, I actually overlooked
the fact that we were now making
correct?
Mr. President and Senator,
that's correct. I don't know
that I agree with the note from
the teacher, but otherwise, I
agree with your assessment.
the senator yield Cervantes do
you yield? Are you?
Senator Trujillo, thank you, Mr.
President, so I, I noticed that
the, the 20 days hasn't been
executive, um, those 20 days
after the end of the session can
be really hectic, um, and I'm
wondering, um, Mr. President,
number of bills that get through
both chambers and up to the
government.
Governor. Was there a reasoning
behind not changing that 20 days
to maybe 30.
respond that actually very few
bills, in my experience,
actually get upstairs, um, and,
um, and we have to rely upon a
governor to give them that
attention in those 20 days to
speculation as well too, and we
may find a governor down the
road saying they want more time
than the 20 days, but that has
not come up, uh, from this
governor.
Senator Trujil, thank you, Mr.
come to her staff or his staff,
um, because that is definitely a
time that no time is allowed off
and it's all hands on deck, even
more so than during the
Thank you, Senator here. We have
Senatorio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the sponsor of the bill yield?
Um
publicly disclose sensitive
information in a veto message.
What kinds of sensitive
information, um.
sitting governor, um, if this
was to be enacted by the
legislature. He goes on the
ballot with or without her
signature. She doesn't
participate in a constitutional
amendment and then this would
Mr President, Senator, um, I
don't know how to address the,
the concern of the governor that
this may be a burden on her, uh,
apply for her, but I, it just
made me think, what, what is
sensitive about a veto message.
Um, do you have any experience
with that, Mr. President?
secretive for any reason. I, I
can't envision any bill that
would have been through the
debate process that we have
here, uh, the open debate in our
two chambers on the floor in our
Thank, thank you, Mr. President.
um, I appreciate that the
sponsor answering my questions.
Thank you. Thank you Senator
Lopez.
Seeing no further debate.
stronger legislature and part of
being a stronger legislature is
understanding the relationship
with the governor well and
having the governor explain
reasons for her veto. It
empowers us and it gives us an
that, um, Senate joint, I'm
sorry, House Joint Resolution
number 2 as amended.
I pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate, the
record show the role has been
Please raise your hand.
Mr. President, explain my vote.
My vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Joint Resolution 2 as
legislature in New Mexico is
weak, and I agree that this um
does make the legislature a
little bit stronger in
understanding why the governor
exercises this, uh, this power.
floor leader Peter Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous
objection that business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Uh thank you, Mr.
the call will remain on Senate
Bill 318. And so again, tomorrow
we can check in and see where we
are on that. We'll see what our
little signs say tomorrow. Uh,
Probably we should let the
sergeant at Arms know that at
this point, we're not going to
proceed to stay here all night,
waiting for those 4 members, um,
which I think is a proper.
Si.
Um, thank you, Mr. President. I
just wanted to just address a
couple of things in tonight's
debate, um,
state here and that we get to
say whatever we want, it can't
be held against us. But I also
think that what we talked about
tonight were birds.
Fish.
Things like that, um.
you know, some very blunt
attacks on me, uh, and, and some
others and.
So I just wanna, I wanna make it
clear that I don't think that.
Uh
I don't think we that we got
there. I certainly tried not to
get there. I think that the
members tried not to get there,
but we, but we had important
points to make.
And I think we did that. Also,
And the answer was no.
I wanted to debate. I wanted to
debate the sponsor, and the
sponsor said no.
And, and that's perfectly
acceptable. We don't have to.
But the
not, and I think that's just
fair and was tonight a little
different? I hope so.
I hope it was different. I hope
tomorrow night will be even more
different. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Mr. President, the Senate Rules
Committee will meet tomorrow at
9 a.m. in room 321, we have 33
countries will be going through
uh, my Senate colleague Senator
Scher said that the sponsor of
the bill gets the last word.
He's wrong.
The Senate, all 42 of you get
the last word, Mr. President.
Senator Pope
bill and 4 House bills. Thank
you, Mr. President, Senator
Pope. Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
the Senate, uh, Health and
Public Affairs Committee will be
Bill 176. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Hickey. Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
uh, I was informed that uh there
was quite a few members that
uh, the New Mexico, Thai that is
recognized for our state, so
we're having a contest on
Saturday and then the winners
And um I think Senator Campos
has offered to maybe uh um.
Lend someone with the members
some of his ties that he has,
ask Senator Gonzalez what the
price is for winning this bolo
tie contest Gonzalez.
Mr. President and uh senator, we
are still working on it.
Mm.
would also like to ask the
senator, are there different
categories that one can win for
their bolo tie. Senator Tobias
and I'm not sure if it's a bolo
tie contest or anymore or if
the bolo ties.
Mr. President.
This is the first year, so all
we're asking is just to wear a
bow tie, then that might be
tie as a state, the state tie
for our state.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
would suggest for those of us
who are just now hearing that we
have to go shopping for a bolo
really have a bolo.
Well, uh, Mr. President, if, uh.
You know,
If having the weekend would give
I am, uh, you know what, but
I'm, I can shop on a moment's
notice, especially now that we
still have Amazon shipping to
New Mexico, so I will make sure
Center Pinto, Mr. President and
Senator Gonzalez, is it in
budget?
And there Gonzalez.
Uh, Mr. President, the chairman
of finance is not here so we're
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
With that unanimous consent, the
Senate stand a recess until 11
o'clock tomorrow morning. See no
