Hi
Santer Boone.
Senator Brant
Sandu Hick.
Senator.
Senator Figueroa.
Santa Gallegos.
Saint Lanier San Lopez.
San Maest here.
Centeragos.
Santa Pinto
Senator Pope.
Senator Ramos.
Central line, oh sorry, Senator
Sher.
Santo Sendo.
Senator Souls.
Center Townsend.
Center Trujillo.
Santerworth.
Senator Woods, you do have a
Institute, D Bazar Institute
Vicente water flow in New
Mexico. Please remain standing
for the Pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator Paul.
Pledge allegiance in espanol to
be led today by Senator Padilla.
sindo
novel preparatory school ages
This.
Hai
very honored to be here,
senators, um, this is a great
is what we call a balance song
and that Mother Earth and Father
Sky may be two distinct
entities.
And at times they may be very
different.
And in our and for many
indigenous tribal nations, the
eagle is our spiritual guide and
our leader.
And so the right wing.
not.
Diego.
is
it is
a
it's a lie.
Yeah,
yeah,
is.
yeah,
And none on
the,
it's it's a,
it's a lot.
And uh
So
she na it kind put up and
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it
Rometo Lead a la bandera de los
Estados Unidos de America Yala
republica quea union anterios
indivisible con libertadia
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
You may be seated.
I'd like to welcome you today.
To today's session of the New
Mexico State Senate and now you
also to Senate Majority Floor
objection, we are in that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. Just
before I yield to our two whips,
um, I wanna thank director
both sides working together are
noted and appreciated. I think
we really try and and do that in
this chamber and so uh again, I
Senator Padilla, uh, good
morning, Mr. President, and I
have to echo our majority
leader's words. I feel very
peaceful now. Thank you so much,
uh, with that, Mr. President,
youanimous consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor and
consent to excuse Senator
Cervantes until he returns to
the chamber. There ain't no
objection.
Senator Padilla, thank you, Mr.
President, and just a friendly
reminder to the clerk that
Senator Hickey is excused for
excuse Senator Sanchez and
Senator Boone, uh, in, uh, a
quick prayer for, uh, Senator
President.
Thank you. Here, no objection.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
And, and Mr. President, uh, I
Jesus Christ, talked many times
about, uh,
Love your neighbor as yourself.
And, and
for asking our Holy Father to
come down to us today in this
chamber and lay upon us the Holy
Spirit is here, Mr. President.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
that joint session. Today is
also Otero County Day at the
legislature, and there's a
chamber of commerce reception at
El Dorado Hotel 6 to 10 p.m. Uh,
her granddaughter, so when they
come in, we'll get them all
introduced. Uh, there is a
certificate of condolence for
representative.
Leo and Senator Woods and other
uh, has a certificate for autism
Day. We're not gonna read that,
and we, that was yesterday, but
she does want to say some words,
uh, when we get to that point.
going to continue its workshops,
uh, Monday, room 307, 7 to 8
a.m. and it's new members and
current members, uh, up Monday,
With that ideal now to other
members to introduce their
guests and just as a reminder,
if you've got guests here on any
certificate, let's just wait
let's do some other, other
announcements and then I will
get everybody lined up here and
see exactly how this is gonna
work and then I'll come back and
get all the kids introduced.
Thank you, Senator Worth. We
have Senator Steinburn followed
the state and in my district,
um, the Cacique, the tribal
leader, um, Ed Royal of the
Pitto Manso Tiwa Nation.
of San Juan de Guadalupe.
colleagues, the um historic town
site of the city of Las Cruces,
which is a district we call the
Mesquite Historic District.
If, uh, Mr. Speaker, can I get a
little, a little quiet?
definitely someone I turned to
for guidance and wisdom and
support during good times and
bad and uh just so honored to um
support them and, and, and
certificates for the
Romano and for you, Kaique and
your and your leadership and
family. So with that,
colleagues, I would just ask
Thank you Senator Steinborn. I'm
gonna go to Senator, uh,
Gonzalez, and I'm gonna go back
to Senator Wirth. Senator
Gonzalez.
February 7th of 2025.
And uh
Stella Susan Trujillo is 15
years old, a sophomore, 10th
grade, at Taos High School.
old nurse.
And she would also like to have
a family, own a very nice house,
and have a very friendly dog, so
Thank you Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
Alvarado. It's one of just 100
schools across the country to
receive a national elementary
and secondary Education Act
distinguished school
designation.
their ESEA funds to improve the
education of all students,
including those who are
economically advantaged. Uh, so,
Mr. President, what I'd like to
daughter is. This is her
granddaughter's day today, so
once I get through introducing
these special students, I would
ask unanimous consent to say, to
sit down, uh, first teacher
here, uh, Anna DeHerrera.
Monica
Yeah, well, let, let's save the
applause because I've got, I got
Miss DeHerrera's class, Aiden
DeHerrera, uh, former Alvarado
student in 7th grade at Explorer
Academy, who's on a term break
and is here today. Jonathan
Zoe Gosline, Madison Johnson,
Kelsey Knight, Rico Rodriguez,
Henry Smouse and Avery Stewart,
who is the governor's
granddaughter, and we're
Jimenez, uh, Mia Martinez,
Frankie Mulvanity, Amea Orozco,
Cecilia Quintana.
Desmond Reynolds, Michael
Debaca, Owen Chavez, Antonio
Espinoza, Fiona Fresques, Alice
Hendricks, Scarlett Ins, Eliah
White, and every Ziegler. So
let's give them all a huge
welcome from the state senate.
grandfather and know how special
it is to have these incredible.
Young people in our lives, and
so with permission of the
Senate, like the unanimous
Um, thank you, Mr. Lieutenant
Governor Madam Protem, uh,
leader worse, uh, distinguished
other guests, distinguished
to do that in two quick but
lovely ways, um, and really
highlighting the legacy of the
work of the legislature.
Grisham Stewart went to grade
school. It is also the school
where her late father went to
lovely kids at Alvarado grade
school, so it is an amazing
thing and in fact my daughter
lives in the house that her
father was raised in and
belonged to her grandparents
generations and that is exactly
what's occurring and in fact my
other special guest, which is my
grandson, Mason Stewart is in
kinder.
What are you looking at, Mason?
community, teachers, educators,
uh, who have been at that school
and do such an amazing job. 2,
this class from kindergarten
landmark decisions about
universal child care and about
universal pre-K. It happened
here and these classes and this
reading and structured literacy
and I probably am not supposed
to tell you this, but I'm going
to.
Senator Protem traveled with me
these education issues. This is
the class that can help you get
that done. Thank you for
honoring them and honoring us
today. I'm very proud of the
Thank you, Governor, Senator
really appreciate you all being
here, uh, with that, Mr.
President, I, I'd like to yield
to Senator Pinto, who I think
has a string of different
announcements that she's ready,
or I can hold off, it's up to.
Thank you. Thank you. I'll go to
Senator Thornton,
uh, thank you very much. I'd
like to introduce, uh, person
who is a native New Mexican. Her
name is Alexis Smith.
m and the 800 m and um so she
and she's also on the cross
country team. I can't run any
further than 100 m, so she's
already beat me.
politics and would like to
pursue that further. So one day,
maybe sooner than we think she
may be sitting here where I'm
sitting. We can look forward to
that.
is the chairman of Small
Business Investment Corporation.
And today she's been shadowing
the state treasurer, so she
already knows she needs to
follow the money, uh, so I look
Thank you, Mr. President. It is
a beautiful day today at the
ancestors are here with us too.
And so what I know about being
in a building where my ancestors
are and others' ancestors are,
guest, um.
Another thing about today is we
are joined, Mr. President, by
dignitaries, heads of state from
Laguna, Governor Harry Antonio,
who is the governor of my tribe,
the Pueblo of Laguna, he was
joining me today, um, in
advocating around, around the,
allowing me and, and, um, if
others would let and help me
introduce and welcome my special
guest Governor Antonio to the
Senate.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President.
Unanimous consent to introduce
my guests no objection. Proceed,
Senator.
Thank you very much, Mr.
um, if I could ask Chairwoman
Jennifer.
He askski.
From the Fort Sill Chirikawa to
please stand and welcome to the
Mexico where the tribe's only
reservation is located.
And we also have here, um,
sitting next to me, Mr.
President Naomi Hartford again
is also a member of the business
committee and if we could please
walk them to the Senate, Mr.
President.
side, my left on the dais is uh
Mrs and Lata Jim. If you could
please stand, she is a Navajo
um, in McKinley County and she,
Mr. President.
Members of the Senate is the new
deputy director for the Navajo
Nation Division for Children and
served and continued to serve,
um, working with the missing and
murdered indigenous people's
task force. If we could please
welcome, um, Ms. Jim.
Thank you. OK, Mr. President,
and before I got several things
like to introduce my guests but
also have uh several
announcements. The first we'll
start with um Molina Healthcare.
Sharon M. Nota, program manager,
Office of the Native American
Affairs, Josephine Barney,
tribal manager, growth and
community engagement. Retiha
me today behind me I have my, my
shutter, my
eldest sister Pamela Cornell,
who is uh gracefully decide to
Carletta Benoli, our program
supervisor.
And I still have a couple more
guests up there but please
and as we move forward to the
and with Mr. Balin, thank you
for those words and in lieu of
American Indian Day, it being in
the neighbors are.
our sacred language in which we
used and was utilized and as we
move forward to make sure that
it survives.
Oh yeah
Since I've been in office, I've
been working with him.
And as things went along and we
broke ground on a couple of
projects.
taking the reins and, you know,
leading the meeting.
But he saw the need that our
future needed to continue.
them and say, you know, it's
your turn.
And this last groundbreaking I
went to for the agricultural
center.
He was sitting in the crowd and
For a gentleman that had such a
heart to bring higher education
and bring the institution into
the community, especially with
what um
agricultural back into our, our
people's lives and as we move
forward. So I'd like to ask for
a moment of silence for Doctor
Monty Russell.
And for his family, um, thank
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President.
and then uh Senator O'Malley and
then Senator Leo Jaramio.
Thank you, Senator Cil Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. It is
my great honor to introduce
behavioral Health Providers
Association during the pandemic.
She has 25 years of evaluation
and grant writing experience and
the way I've gotten to know
Cindy well is she has been
experience, her perspective has
been invaluable, and she really
opened our eyes to some of the
tribal issues, um, it was really
sad to learn that that native
to address that, and I attribute
a lot of that education to to
miss.
So thank you and uh please
welcome her to the floor or to
the dais.
Thank you first to Senator
Pinto, uh, Mr. President, it's
my distinct pleasure to
She is the first woman to fill
this position.
Monique is a proud member of the
Jees Pueblo. She holds a
master's of Business
administration and management
unwavering commitment to our
community make her an an
exceptional choice to guide the
Indian pueblo cultural center
into its next chapter.
And she also represented the US
team, the US archery team in
Slovenia.
Um,
so I just wanted to ask you all
Thank you Senator O'Malley.
Senator Jarami, thank you, Mr.
President. I proudly represent
the pueblos of Okea Winge and
Santa Clara as well as the great
honored to be here. Tomaya
attends Dulce High School and
her title represents the Garia
Apache harvest Goggia, and she
helps represent the Apache
nation at social events.
Little Miss Jicaria. She attends
Pagosa Middle School. Her title
represents the Jicaria Apache
Nation at different gatherings,
events, and powwow and other
pageants. She's a great
of rodeo and the hiaria
Apaation. She's been invited to
attend the 2024 Indian National
Rodeos final national Finals
her trusty sidekick Scotty, who
is her house Shetland and Welsh
pony. And also joining me is my
good friend Joyleta Vicente,
who's a hea Apache Nation
Thank you, Senator Cher.
Uh thank you
Thank you, Mr. President, I too,
means that she's more than an
actress.
Uh, she's from the Zuni red, uh,
running into Water clan and born
for the salt clan, and she's
Hillerman's books. She is the at
least the actress, portraying
the wife of Lieutenant Leorn.
So Leorn is one of the main
characters in Tony Hil all of
Tony Hillerman's books, which
animated series, The Batman.
Uh, by Warner Brothers. In
addition, she has created and
performed in the original short
Mr. President, uh, members, I
very proudly represent the
Pueblo of Sandia and Senate
District 9, and I was supposed
to be joined by the governor and
lieutenant Governor, Governor
wanted to thank my colleague
right here on the back, Senator
Charlie for her beautiful words
and for uplifting our
communities.
Large and I would like to
your roundhouse, um, and Mr.
President, I'd like to tell you
a little bit about and tell the
body a little bit about Governor
Felix Chavez, who has served two
terms prior as lieutenant
tribal government operations
specifically in Indian gaming
and those roles he had the rare
opportunity of interacting with
many of the leading casino
operators in Las Vegas and
worked with tribal leaders,
attorneys, and business leaders,
and he also has helped build um
the Pueblo of Sandia. They built
a hotel which is now Premier.
and he's working closely with
the state and with federal
government to revolve ongoing
litigation involving the tribe's
water rights. But furthermore,
Mr. President, uh, Governor
of language and culture, um, and
all that we do, and I thank him
for his leadership and also I
would like to uplift uh
Lieutenant Governor Tristan
New Mexico. She worked as an
analyst on the house side now
she's on the correct side, um,
and we are, uh, really proud of,
of her.
and of all her work that she's
members uh of Sandia Pueblo.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President.
in in Derrick Watchman who's
been a long friend, time friend,
and we used to work at the
casinos. He's now the CEO for
the Cancio Healthcare Center and
with him also is Kimberly Bruce,
Thank you Senator Munoz.
Senator Pinto, Mr. President.
Giving our people access, giving
our people care.
Seeing them, hearing them, and
being able to represent them
here.
It, it's a list that is long and
guests with me.
Grant Bercher, who was an
attorney.
His license practicing the state
of New Mexico and the nation.
until 2007.
To combat tours in Iraq.
He's honorably discharged from
the Marine Corps.
Grant has worked as a deputy
district attorney in Gallup.
And for many Native American
entities including the Navajo
Tribal Utility Authority and
Gallup's only grass shy
affiliated jiu-Jitsu Academy
teaching self-defense through
street fighting techniques.
So he's one of my honored guests
that is here.
And alongside him also I have
And the gal McKinley County
School District.
That led to the landmark
decision of the first judicial
court in Diazi Martinez versus
State of New Mexico in 2018.
piecemeal educational reform
that proved what had been
suspected for years.
The needs of indigenous students
were not being met.
And that the state had failed to
increased funding and ongoing
improvements in the state of New
Mexico public school system.
There has been a new collection
significance of the case and its
impact on educational racial and
social policies.
The Yazzie case building a
Who seek to understand the
historically entrenched racism
and colonial barriers that
affect all indigenous students
in New Mexico public schools.
decision and calls for trans.
Transformational change to
resolve the system challenges
faced by students in the state
of New Mexico and the public
education system.
Raise the bar for our indigenous
students.
Thank
To both of you for.
tried to improve our, our area
and the quality of life.
So on American Indian Day I
honor you. I'm honored that you
communities to show that there's
still more work to be done and
that they're still brighter
future out there for us and to
give us the strength and unity
that is needed to bring us
Thank you to Senator Pinto for
that.
When I order business and now
It's a backup of House Bill 2,
and we dropped the referral
from, uh,
uh
Health and public affairs
and ask consent.
We're in that order business ann
miscellaneous I yield to Senator
Peter Worth.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh, I
Senator Woods, would you like to
do that now or do you want to
wait till we get on the back
end. I'm getting the thumbs up,
so I would yield to
Senator Woods for the
certificate, um, honoring the
your attention, please, as the
certificate is red.
Senator Woods
Uh, Mr. President, unanimous
consent to have the reader read
The New Mexico State Senate,
having learned of the death of
Representative Elio Lee Alcon
does hereby extend its sincere,
heartfelt condolence and
on January 13th, 2025 at the age
of 74, and whereas
representative Alcon served in
the Mexico House of
Representatives for nearly 16
years, representing House
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, chair of the House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee, a member of
the land grant committee and a
member of the House government
combat medic, and whereas after
his service in the Vietnam
conflict, he
to Sbula County, where he worked
as an infirmary technician for
protection, Native American
sovereignty and rural
communities and whereas
Representative Valcon is
survived by his wife of 50
Quinn. Now therefore be resolved
by the Senate of the state of
New Mexico that condolences be
extended to the family and
friends of former representative
William E. Scher, Senator Peter
Worth, Mimi Stewart, President
Pro Tem Sherry de Luhan, chief
clerk, New Mexico State Senate.
moment of silence for
Representative Alcon, he was a,
he was a, a, a fellow member of
the legislature and we need to
Thank you, Senators.
Mr. President, uh,
I don't know how to say this
exactly, Mr. President, but, uh,
um.
Representative Alcon was't
always real close to me. Fact
feelings, his direction, and,
uh, that's why I, I, I brought
this forward. Uh, I, I truly
believe that the sacrifice that
representative Alone, a veteran,
uh, a.
district judge, a, a
representative in the, in the
United States and the state of
comment on that, I would
appreciate it.
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Woods. We do have some
senators who would like to
speak. Um, I know we're awaiting
the House members to come in to
Representative Alone in here it
says decorated veteran from the
Vietnam conflict.
It's more than that.
He earned a bronze star.
Who I would have referred to as
Doc.
Fellow army
For a combat medic to earn the
bronze Star.
That, that.
is a step above.
What probably anybody else in
this room, or maybe this
building.
Has done.
Munoz.
Mr. President, you know I'll,
I'll do a little bit of Alessio
and I came in together and we
campaigned together every
election and it's interesting
at his house. We, they wanted
like 10 watermelons in Rama Pine
Hill.
And then they wanted ice cream
and some other stuff and so I
said, I'm going south, you go
water, I got, you know, ice
cream I had to pick up at his
house because he only had 30
minutes to get it there before
it started melted and so Alicio
and I made that I never saw eye
I ambatoda chill Todd and Zuni
and, and all those and, and what
a man that respected everyone
and how he respected each
completed their projects and
fulfilled their needs, but
One day we're at this chapter
house meeting and they had a
problem with blowing sand and,
and, uh, he said, well, I, I can
funnier than hell because he has
an idea where to put the sand,
but then he wanted to make a
lake for fish, but I had to do
all the work. And so that was
just kind of Alicia and kind of
and, and so as we grow together
in this body and those that are
new, right? You're going to be
members of our family because
all of a sudden, we know
everything about your family,
place is that we all become a
family in some way, shape or
form, and how your life
lives change and how, how they
go through and watching my kids
and so just Taliio and his wife,
and you know, my deepest
sympathy, um, and he will be
missed. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you. We have
Senator.
Steinborne.
to each other on the floor. And
the cool thing about LSO is he
was a kind of a stoic guy.
thoughtful, he kind of be
thinking about things and like
Senator Woods, he would always
spoke it like it was, and, uh,
best thing I can say about him
or anybody here is he had loads
of integrity. He was the same
person that laughed as he came
this state that we're still
waiting to be cleaned up and he
and I both worked on the
radioactive hazardous Materials
Committee and we're still
fighting that battle. I mean,
to do, but, uh, just my
condolences and love go out to
his family. He was a great man.
He loved his family, um, quite
the family guy, but he was a
real original here in the
legislature and made a huge
today, leaders, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you as we await
the House members to come invite
us into the chamber. I do wanna
make sure that we get it through
the list, we have Senator Pope,
Senator Stewart, Senator
for that long, but served a lot
with him on military and
veterans, uh, interim committee.
Uh, just a, a great man in his
To committee and uh.
I was always really intrigued by
that. I think what was mentioned
before, the fact that, you know,
he got a bronze star, you know,
I.
Is incredible and we've all seen
video footage movies of what
they were dealing with in
Vietnam.
And that metal.
is for heroism being a hero.
really shaped.
What he wanted to do.
What he was about.
And really that selfless service
It's sad. I, I will say that
this, that's one of those
things. A lot of us, we all
don't know each other.
But we're getting to know each
other and whether we disagree on
It affects the song.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pope. Senator
Stewart.
I liked the most about him is
that he just could joke about
almost anything he could make
you feel good about things even
when you didn't. Vote with him
LSO and he asked the organizers
to make sure I was gonna be
there so I could speak on his
behalf and then it, it was too
and I fought a long time about
Impact Aid, um, and we were both
choir.
relieved when we passed House
Bill 6, which was undoing the
you, Senator Woods for bringing
this to us. Thank you, Senator
Stewart. Senator Jarami.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
representative became a very
raised in the Mora area. And I
just want to share one of the
last, uh, memories I have with
the representative. The
representative came to Espanola
for a land grant interim
committee and he told me he
we had a police escorted crews
with every member from the
interim committee, and I can
still see his face smiling as he
got on that low rider, waving as
he cruised town, and when we got
on me, what he taught me about
land grants and he had a true
servant's heart. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Jail. Senator
Lopez.
magistrate judge, so they knew
each other not well or anything,
but they were aware of each
other and so he became
interested in me and, and, and
recently has this summer, he
wanted me to tour the detention
center in Grants.
And so he was texting me and he
we make arrangements to go
unannounced, and he tried to get
that done. Turned out they
couldn't do it, but he spent
time this summer trying to get
He was always funny, um, and the
other thing we did is he liked
to um
I I play around with art and his
grandson is an artist and he one
art, um, just a few memories
that hadn't been mentioned.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
do miss him. Thank you Senator
Lopez. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President.
And uh, and, and that's really
not true. We sat by each other.
Uh, in judiciary for years and,
and although we had very
It is a good thing when
Um, we recognize
members.
Regardless of political
It's a burden on some and an
honor, and we all do that, but
the thing that uh and Alicia and
I, um, texted several times and
after he retired.
Um, how much?
Financial security we have,
what?
party we're at in the final days
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and thank you, Senator Woods for
getting this drafted, um, I also
just want to really thank the
life in all the different hats
that he wore and I loved calling
him Judge because he liked that
and he, again, I think having a
a magistrate judge in the
that always struck me, I guess,
after one of those late, late,
late house nights, uh, everyone
was headed home at 3 or 4 in the
morning and Chairman Alcon
our best not to do over here,
but I did.
When I heard that, I was like,
man, oh man, he took it
seriously and he worked hard in
this chamber and he was
passionate about what he
Pinto, followed by Senator
Trujillo, Senator Pinto. Mr.
President, thank you, Senator
Woods.
So picture him.
Physically
Go in that door and he would be
sitting right there.
But he reminded me of my
grandfather.
Wiymark, where he, um, well
rounded person when you talk
us.
But he also represented part of
the Navajo Nation.
And he took that very serious
um, consulted with me, um,
And
You in there was a couple of
committees I was on with him and
on my committee, but he gestured
hand.
And um he would nudge me and he
would go like this.
And I would laugh because I'd be
chewing gum or something. And
I'm not gonna tell you what it
You know, it, it hurts that he's
not gonna be around.
But um even with uh David, you
know, we text and talk and see
me and say, Dad.
It was that.
It wasn't represented Bob Coe to
both of us it was.
You know, our, our.
Like good dad to us.
As they moved forward, strength
and prayers. Um, thank you,
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you Senator Woods for
And military affairs Committee
and um in that respect he taught
me a lot as a new legislator, he
taught me how to be patient.
He taught me how to ask.
I will miss him terribly. He was
my, um,
Brother-in-law's representative
for many years and so I knew of
strong advocate for military
families and for those who
served in the military.
And I will just say that.
We, um, teased him nearly every
Every week he would every
weekend he would go home and his
wife would have 7 suits with 7
picked a good outfit for you
today. He was a good sport and I
just, I love him. Thank you so
much for doing this, Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Sergeant at Arms.
representative of beta, and
Representative Mejias, welcome
to the Senate chamber.
Thank you very much, Lieutenant
Governor and Mr. Speaker.
here and we are here to invite
the Senate to a joint session in
the House chambers.
Thank you. The invitation has
been accepted, and we appreciate
that before we go over, I do
thank you for honoring, uh,
Representative Alone and, and
the only thing that I have to
say is that when I drafted this,
want to dis
Take away from the great man
that he was.
But Mr. President, I thank you
for the time today for that.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
amazing life. Uh, with that, Mr.
President, uh, I ask unanimous
consent to Senate resolve itself
into a committee of the whole
for purposes of hearing a joint
We will all gather back there. I
