Senator Lopez.
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope to Ramos.
Senator Sheer, Senator Shendo.
Senator Souls.
Senator Thornton
Senator Tobias Townsend.
the invitation to be led today
by executive director Desiree
Bernard.
But the New Mexican interfaith,
power and light here in Santa
Fe, New Mexico.
And that's that you remain
standing for the Pledge of
Allegiance to be led today by
salute to New Mexico flag to be
led today by Senator Linda
Lopez.
Good morning, everyone, and
thank you to Reverend Harry for
the invitation to be with you
Today is Ash Wednesday for those
who observe this uh this
Christian tradition. Last night
I was speaking with my ministers
not God and we need to embrace
with humility the reality of our
human condition.
The quote that sometimes is
spoken when we put the ashes on
our foreheads is remember that
you are dust and to dust you
may be blocking us from the
qualities of love, truth, and
unity and to practice and to
practice turning away from those
through disciplines that help us
get unblocked.
Wednesday tradition. We can all
reflect on the call to humility,
the recognition of our mortality
and the need to turn away from
representative of an interfaith
organization which works, um, it
was, uh, I'll mention founded
some of you will know Sister
Joan Browns founded the
organization. She retired in
faith communities to advocate
for a bold response to the
climate crisis we are living
through.
Voices of people of faith are
particularly well equipped to
reefs and drought and more
intense wildfires and storms and
floods and distressed forests
and so forth.
Talking with Reverend Harry the
other day, he pointed out these
times we are living through,
though distressing, are really a
gift to us all.
We have this opportunity.
crisis, but to create a world
more in sync with what we really
want in the process.
So let us pray.
A blessing for all who gather
here as leaders.
Concerned citizens and workers
in a variety of ways.
Our leaders have already put and
continue putting into the bills
that are moving through this
legislative body.
These careful efforts to improve
the well-being of our
common good that moves us
forward.
We pray that in these
challenging times on earth.
This body may act with great
bright light of hope.
In a time of too much despair.
Especially for the children.
who I, I was just talking with
these friends that girls Inc
about this.
These leaders with deep care and
respect.
May this room, this whole
building.
Their offices shine with the
In a time of many crises, we
pray that this body may rise
above division and cynicism and
alone or our in-group.
But by giving of ourselves in
service to a greater vision of
love that recognizes itself.
In all of the diversity of life.
ripple out to inspire her
inspire greater callings far and
wide.
May the forces of fear, greed,
division, and mockery fall away
Give way to the recognition of
the abundance and generosity
that we can share to repair the
world.
Thank you, holy one, for all who
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
You may be seated.
Once again we'd like to welcome
you to today's session of the
New Mexico Senate, and I'll yell
to the Senate majority floor
Hearing no objection, we are on
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President, again and thank
you, Ms. Bernard, for being
here. It's certainly our honor
Careful work in this chamber, we
really are doing our best to
work together for this whole
state, even though we come from
different parts of the state
with very different interests,
Senator Woods and then we'll let
everyone know what we're gonna
do.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. Uh,
good morning, Mr. President.
Thank you. Uh, with that
unanimous consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor in
the Senate gallery.
to excuse Senator Cervantes and
Pinto until they return to the
chamber no objection,
so ordered.
Senator Woods, thank you, Mr.
President, uh.
But they also ask us not to keep
doing the same dang thing again,
so I, I, um thank you for the
Till they return to the chamber.
Uh, unless
For purposes of a call. Thank
certificate honoring girls Inc.
of Santa Fe, which I'll do in
just a minute, uh, and then that
certificate will be read, uh,
and then Senator Woods has a
heads up that the culinary
students at Central New Mexico
Community College. We'll be
providing lunch for legislators
and staff from 11:30 to 1 p.m.
have up next to you. These are
two honorary lieutenant
governors today, uh, Aiden Rose
Archuleta and Samuel David
Archuleta. Let me tell you a
grade. She's an artist with a
passion for exploring and
creating.
A wide range of mediums,
painting, sculpture, fiber arts,
jewelry making, fashion design.
and major in visual arts or
theater and continue to work
towards her black belt, uh, her
brother Samuel is 11 years old.
He's a 6th grader at Adeliya,
sports and, and really enjoys
doing that. Uh, also is
interested in math, history,
economics, learning about
governments. Uh, he hopes to
attend Saint Mike's and join the
to, but uh I think we've got a
future basketball.
player at Saint Mike. So let's
give both Aiden Archuleta and
Samuel Archuleta. A big welcome
from the New Mexico State
Senate.
guests who are not part of the
certificates, we'll get to those
afterwards, uh, so yield to
other members to introduce
guests. Thank you, senators on
that order business announces
miscellaneous, and I'll yield to
Senator Figueroa.
senior in economics and
philosophy and plans to go to
law school in the future. I am
glad to have her here. Please
join me in welcoming her.
announcement? Seeing no further
announcements at this time while
you also to Senate floor leader
Peter Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, unanimous consent
to have the reader read the
certificate for Girls Inc.
legislature first session 2025.
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to Girls Inc
of Santa Fe be recognized of
services for Santa Fe's girls
resulting in a positive impact
on their lives, families, and
community and world where as
of Santa Fe provides a safe and
inclusive space where
participants can grow.
thrive and discover their
potential and whereas girls Inc
summer camps, and specialized
initiatives that foster
leadership and communication
skills as well as personal
advocacy, integrity, and
quality services and programs
for girls. Now therefore be
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to Girls
Inc of Santa Fe for 70 years of
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Peter Wirth, Mamie Stewart,
president pro tem Sherry
today, uh, and it's a big deal,
70 years, uh, providing just
extraordinary and innovative
educational programming, uh, for
young girls here in Santa Fe to
through its youth-led advocacy
program and really focusing on
issues that are important to
young people. Uh, it's
curriculum insurers continuous
opportunities for girls to build
through, my daughter went
through.
And so I'm very happy to support
this, and I would yield to
Senator Trujillo just for a few
words and anyone else, and then
we'll do some uh introductions.
Girls Inc. um, for a number of
years and, and I was just
sharing earlier that the thing
that they appreciated the most
about Girls Inc. This is odd.
learn, um, but you guys do great
work and, and I noticed that one
of my peers to the right of me
is not in the room today, but I
want to point out something that
difference in the state of New
Mexico and I look forward to the
opportunity of supporting.
Thank you, Senator Hill.
Senators, any senators wishing
to speak to the certificate.
introduce the folks that are
here, if you could stand up
after I call your name and stay
standing. Uh, Kim Brown, the CEO
of Girls Inc. is here. Uh, Sarah
Leandro Romero, and students
Lita Larson, Evelyn.
sand in, uh, mauve and corn, uh,
a.
And Mr. President, with that, I
would yield to Senator Woods for
the next certificate. Senator
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
legislature first session 2025,
the New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to March
districts are political
subdivisions of the state
enumerated in chapter 73 NMS 8,
1978 as a.
local government body to improve
working with local, state,
federal, and tribal management
agencies and whereas the members
serving on the conservation
districts work with leaders in
agriculture environment,
education, and other industries
to assist with voluntary
incentive driven programs that
of the forest thinning projects
and whereas soil and water
conservation districts work
directly with landowners to
assist with restoration.
And rehabilitation from forest
and noxious weeds control, and
whereas the 47 soil and water
conservation districts work
directly with landowners to
improve the soils in New Mexico
landowners and land management
agencies to improve wildlife
habitat in New Mexico.
And whereas soil and water
conservation districts work
closely with Asecas to update
quality and vegetation
diversity. Now, therefore, be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that March
5, 2025 be recognized as soil
president pro tem, Sherry
Deluhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
Senator Woods,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and, and thank the reader for
Many times in the legislature,
we have this, this clause in the
Constitution, the anti-donation
clause, and we can't give money
And that's where the soil and
water conservation districts
play such an important role in
our, our state. They are the
conservation Service of USDA.
They, they are the
intermediaries to, to get that
money on the ground.
And they're so important that
group of, uh, in their district
and so it's a, it's a popular
election to get that done. So,
They give of their time for the
because they get this too wild,
Mr. President.
But anyway, um, I wanna invite
other members to, to talk if
they would, Mr. President, uh,
thank you, Senator Woods, for
bringing this forward. I'm
excited that it's soil and water
days as many of you guys know I
served as the director of the
Sierra So and Water Conservation
SWCD uh operates conservation
practices inside and outside of
their district, and I make this
point because while they're
called Sierra, their boundaries
extend past county lines.
That's just the names, they work
Black fire restoration. So we
thank you for coming in there.
They are represented by really
the front lines of conservation
is, and that is our farmers and
ranchers and so I wanna
Board supervisor Sharon Luna and
Russell Wolf, both big
landowners and ranchers, thank
you for all you do for our lands
and our staff, Taylor Roberts
water conservation, brush
management, and work very
closely with their local 4H and
FFA youth there at Comado High
School. They're working on their
district land use.
the New Mexico Senate. Thank you
for leading the way on
conservation.
to mention, if you will, the
unselfishness that we find with
each one of the soil and water
conservation districts
throughout New Mexico.
It's about 100 members here
with each other, build those
relationships. But the point
that I'd like to make and the
story that I would like to tell
is that as we've gone forward as
an example right now, the soil
go ahead and build a very strong
bond, that's number one.
Number 2, as we go forward,
regardless where the soil water
conservation districts are that
has already been mentioned by
that are with the soilwater
Conservation districts offered
their expertise, offered their
help. So they're not only here,
if you will, for districts,
they're here for the entire
That's what really makes New
Mexico work when we all work
together. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. We do have further
discussion on the certificate.
We'll have.
Senator Gonzalez, followed by
You know, uh, some very eloquent
comments have already been made
and also to our sponsor to uh
Senator Woods and also uh
Uh, one of the parts that I'll
just mention is um they have
been uh very, very instrumental
from uh landowners that uh have
this properties that uh do need
attention and how to work with
them, but the important part is
tau soil conservation program is
um
My understanding is that it's
one of the very few that we do
have a meal levy in place.
uh, uh members uh it's a, it's a
big help. It's a big hand and uh
you know, it's uh almost uh in
so many words, it's hard to
explain, you know, how, how much
audience, so that is uh Mr. uh
Peter Viheel that has been uh.
the director for many years in
Taos. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, members.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator.
in the rural areas of our state,
especially.
Um, one group in particular is
the Dexter Hagerman soil and
Water Conservation District.
The salt cedar has been
instrumental in making waters
flow again. What a concept.
After the floods that we have
been done by our soil and water
conservation districts,
everything that y'all do is
important to every person.
Who lives in your particular
Thank you very much for bringing
them in, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Senator how a meal.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Woods, I also want to
thank you for bringing them in
washed down so much silt that
redirected the Rio Chama. They
came in to help residents and
ensuring that they could clean
out their, their land, help with
into these roles in northern New
Mexico. We have the New Mexico
Youth Conservation Corps. And so
these students learn about
natural resources, mapping
Senator, Senator, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Woods for bringing this
certificate.
Uh, I've been in the legislature
the table to really getting at
the table and getting in a place
where we're all working
together, cause we are in this
thing together and there's,
whether it's salt cedar,
all being part of that. And as a
result, there's a specific
earmark in that bill uh for
recurring funding, and this is
one of our trust funds, and it
just shows what happens when you
you, Senator War. Senator Lopez.
Thank you. I too rise in support
of the certificate and thank the
senator for bringing
I'm not even sure there's one in
Bernalillo County, but there is
but, uh, an area that they set
aside cleared the salt cedar,
just made it absolutely
beautiful and I was really
pleased to support it with some
um, it's just really impresses
me to see the work all around
the state and how important it's
gonna continue to be as the
years come by. So thank you for
all that effort.
before Senator Brownley, I go to
you, I'll go to Senator
Stephanic. Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
stand to support this
certificate. I have several soil
the farmers, and the children in
the school, and I'm very proud
to support all of them. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Spanic.
Senator Brentley, thank you, Mr.
President. I think it's been
to us from a soil and water
conservation district. We thank
you for your work there in that
district and for your work here
in the Senate, Sherry.
Sherry. She was in the saltwater
catcentration district for 19
years, and that's uh
accomplishment, uh, I guess it's
about some of the work that they
do, uh, several years ago, there
was a major project of putting
out drip lines on tree
windbreaks.
shelter them and, and give a
little comfort of life, peace of
life, but they also, right now,
they're putting out uh a lot of
them are using shade balls and
waterways, erosion control, more
to, to go out and educate
farmers and ranchers of the
programs that are available
through the Equip programs. It's
we're restoring these lakes to
further uh water infiltration.
Many of these things have had
silt washed in them and we go in
there and, and take a certain
uh, I would be remiss if I
didn't talk about the savory
grazing systems to get more
beef.
Per acre off the land. So
there's many things that these
Ken stand up, Nina is a manager
of the border soil and water
conservation district. She lives
in aida, and it says our
Conservation with rain
enhancement and shade balls that
help conserve water and we
Monte Marcus, I'm sorry, I can't
read nothing today.
Um, home office is located in
Las Vegas, New Mexico and
provide soil and water
conservation service to
landowners implement erosion
control, thinning, respiratory
respiratory and resources,
noxious weeds, and a psychia
projects. It also has played a
following the hermit's Peak
Canyon. Andy Yates serves on New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts board of
directors and the Colfax soil
soils and capacity building
grants, working with landowners
in our county to do conservation
plans for the healthy souls
grants, implementing, managing,
funding opportunities.
excited to implement in Colfax
County. And last but not least,
Lisa Runyon.
Lisa is the secretary treasurer
has him to initiated a project
to C collaborate with producers
and implementing a variety of
conservation practice aimed at
improving soil health,
control, shade balls, soil
surfing, groundwater monitoring,
additionally,
We actively applying for grants
to expand our support for
I can't say enough nice things
about these people. They are
sure enough on the ground making
a difference, uh, many things is
education, as you know, you're
want to thank you. I wanna thank
the many people that have spoke
in favor of this certificate,
and I just so appreciate these
people and a round of applause
for the whole.
bunch if you would.
out.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I do want to say a few
things about one of the people
that Senator Woods introduced. I
And whenever she and her husband
Mark moved to the Artesia area,
he, he was the FFA instructor
there at Artiia High School.
She was instrumental in working
with I can't tell you how many
4H and FFA kids, especially the
4H kids out in the Cottonwood
Was unbelievable.
Lisa is a good example on why
she believes what she is doing
what we can do to improve it,
and their involvement.
In making our state better and
every one of these members down
here and up there and out in the
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator.
Any further announcements,
senators.
See Nanay to Senate majority
leader.
Uh, 2, I see, and so we'll read
in those committee reports and
do the confirmation, uh, then on
3rd reading, the plan is to do
items number 1 through 5 in that
Senator Jamio, item 2, Senator
Hickey, I think is doing item 3.
Senator Souls, item 4, and
Senator Brant for item number 5
and then
Senator Campos will do that
Oh.
Never mind.
See no objection. We are in that
order business committee
reports.
The reader to read
22, 2024, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
Heather Jordan as director of
the Workers' Compensation
Administration for a term
submitted, Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent to the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that they
vote on them with one motion and
committee report.
This president your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
letter number 30 dated September
September 10, 2024 to be served
at the pleasure of the governor.
Your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment, respectfully
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
That was pone, the eyes have it.
The committee report has been
adopted and the journal will
show that they were acted upon
individually.
confirmations, and I yield to
Senator Harmio. There no
objection. We are on that order
of business confirmations send
her how to me to guide us
through that.
Mr. President, I ask that the
Thank you, Mr. President.
Pursuant to Senate executive
letter number 48 dated November
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
Heather Jordan was appointed as
the director of the Workers'
Compensation Administration in
of the court and implemented
electronic service of court
filings. It saved that uh.
The workers' comp administration
$40,000 in 2018, she was
bureaus ramping up outreach
efforts, and these all of these
executive roles have prepared
her for this you, Senator
Stephanics.
See no debate. Senators findings
to close on the confirmation.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
negative by a show of hands, and
we're voting all senators to
your seats, please.
I'll send this to your seats.
a term commencing on November 9,
2024 and expiring on November 8,
2029 has been duly confirmed.
By the New Mexico Senate,
Senator Stephanics, thank you
Mr. President, I would ask Ms.
Center had a meal.
department. I now yield to
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
Mr. President, pursuant to
Senate executive letter message
See no objections, send a
Stewart to explain.
Uh, Mr. President, we had such a
wonderful New Mexican time and
am so honored to be presenting
uh Governor's appointment for
Secretary of Education Mariana
Padilla. She's one of us. She's
an educator. Her parents are
things. Uh, we had 28 letters of
support, that just doesn't
happen in rules, 10 from Pueblo
governors and the Navajo Nation,
and we also had her whole
family.
her and others. And her mom, we,
we made our mom stand up and
support her, and her mom said,
I've always instilled in my
and her goals are aligned with
this legislature. She focused on
CTE. She understands at a deep
level that with a robust CTE
which has improved about 10%
this last year and how important
CT is to that.
She is focused on kids. She said
present to you, uh, the best
education secretary yet, uh,
Miss Mariana Padilla. Thank you,
Senator, Senators are debating
the confirmation of Mariana
my privilege and honor to stand
in support of Secretary Padilla
for the Secretary of Public
Education, uh, she's been
always focused on what's gonna
be best for our children, for
our teachers, for our schools,
um, it's an honor to, to work
with her.
And I'm glad we can take that uh
unanimously. Thank you. Thank
you Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, and congratulations
Mariana.
years. I won't say how long.
But her commitment to our
children.
To our community.
We had a chance to chat and I'm
glad you're feeling better.
Um, just last week.
But in working with her, Mr.
President, over the years that
just about students, but it's
about how we work with the
family.
And Mr. President, I know in
these days and times when.
There's some uncertainty coming
districts to make sure that the
education continues to move
forward.
And Mr. President, we also had a
good conversation briefly, but
we did have one about our
that the US Department of
Education is being dismantled.
It's still a focus working also
with the office of special ed.
And what we can do, Mr.
So, thank you, Mr. President.
Congratulations in que viva.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
uh, Mariana is not my daughter
even though I've been asked that
multiple times since I've served
here, and I think we're a
roughly the same age. She's
younger, I think, but I have
out of the way. But I, I do have
to say that every time I've I've
weaved in and out of uh
Mariana's life or she's in mind.
We've, we've always been able to
work very well together, very
and things of that nature, um,
you know, uh, Mr. President,
it's a, it's a rare human being
also that can walk into any room
and have a immediate connection.
when she was previously a member
of Congress and uh little known,
maybe it's known, I don't know,
but when we were working so hard
to create the early childhood
education and care department.
Mr. President, you are a
help carry to cross the line,
but, um, I'm just so grateful
that we have a, a new Mexican
here that has so much vast
experience for this particular
and helping to create those
relationships with our local
farmers and ranchers and all of
these other things. So I just
draw, I stand in strong support.
I think we're in excellent
hands.
and I look forward to all the
thank you, uh, Madam Protem for
bringing this forward. I have to
agree with everything that you
said, uh, soon to be Secretary
Padilla is really an excellent
public education or early ed,
she has really been behind the
scenes and pushing things
forward for this entire
administration. So.
Thank you for stepping up and
this is such an ironic moment.
uh, Mr. President, I met Mariano
when I was in at UNM and
Marianna was still working for
the governor in a different
believe representation matters,
Mr. President, and you are a
reflection of of what girls
across the state.
life in 2015. I will never
forget that. I will never forget
your commitment, your words,
your support, and I could not be
prouder to have you as our
President. Thank you Senator
Nava. Senator Munoz, thank you,
Mr. President. I also rise in
support. I mean, in my position,
my role, she's always been so
easy to work with, right? We
And I talked to her daughters
before and so I pulled her
daughters into that interview
about us funding their grades.
6 through 9th.
One is turning 13 and I think
secretary of education. It was a
great thing to see the kids. I
don't think she was that
excited. She's kind of blushing
right now,
but it was a great thing to see
that and, and, and working with
don't give us an answer, or
we're gonna get to you later. I
mean, we talked about fixing
some stuff in in committee on
yesterday and this morning, she,
she gave me an idea of where to
where we lose kids the most and
they lose their graduation rate,
so I.
appreciate her your budget is
still due in September,
irregardless of what you say,
uh, I will state that, but I am
Thank you, Mr. President, as a
former middle school teacher, I
stand in full support of this
confirmation. Now, Mariana and I
had a conversation even while
she was sick and she was able to
rural New Mexico. We talked
about what she would do to
address chronic absenteeism and
how she's going to not only uh
pair up with schools about this,
management makes for a good
classroom and I think good
classroom management.
also ensure that you're going to
continue to be an outstanding
public education cabinet
secretary. Thank you, Mr.
And uh the best of luck and good
luck, but um most important is
from uh one educator to another
educator is um we have had some
asks me questions about
education and we're always uh
sharing back and forth some
ideas and we do have some tough
things coming up to us, you
know, which, uh, some have been.
know, someone from our state,
you know, that understands, you
know, our language, our.
Or different uh districts are
different uh things that happen
Support is in the right, you
know, for supporting this, you
know, what is the best for our
children's education in New
Mexico with that, um, Mr.
Senate, thank you very much for
bringing forward uh this
particular nominee, uh, to our
governor.
As we go forward and those
people that know uh Mariana know
knows, uh, our system, she has
the institutional knowledge as
she moves forward in education,
there's so many things that
she's already undertaken, but
one thing that
Really stands out in my mind
goes back to, she's gonna take
care of her family. She takes
care of her daughters, but let
me, uh, elaborate a little bit
more.
Her family now has become, if
you will, all of the students
We have as we deal with our
students with special needs.
When we develop, if you will,
the IEPs and we continue to
ensure that those IEPs are
followed.
There are so many of these
complex issues that are out
there.
And then as we deal, if you
will, with superintendents that
in many cases on the average
has continued to commit.
And shown each and every one of
us regardless of the role that
she has undertaken.
That she is going to be there
and she's gonna give her best
endeavors, particularly in a few
minutes as we switch over to
become, if you will, our
Secretary of Education. Thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
secretaries and PED ends with
you.
Arguably, I think you were one
of the most qualified that we've
seen here. I wish you all the
luck, uh, not just because you
have confidence that you want
for my daughters a quality
education at just as much as you
want for your daughters. And so
for all the children of New
Mexico, I think we're in good
hands and I look forward to
working with you.
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators, we are voting all
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
commencing on September 10, 2024
to be served at the pleasure of
the governor has duly.
Been confirmed by the New Mexico
State Senate, Senator Stewart.
daughters, Raquel and Dulcinea
in Vior could stand up.
And her husband Pablo Padilla.
Uh, the third daughter, Ariana
and her in-laws, Mr. and Mrs.
Padilla, her brother Julian and
her sister Celia, all of them
educators almost, so help us
welcome the Padilla family.
Thank you, Senator Stewart. Are
you now to Senate Majority floor
leader Peter We to take us to
the next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent, we go without
our business announcements and
legislation. Uh, item number
one, I understand Senator
Scherer is going to do that
Senate Bill 88 as amended.
Item number 2 is Senator
Harramilo, Senate Bill 123, item
Education Committee subsuper
Senate Bill 235 is amended. I
understand Senator Brand is not
here today, so we'll do his bill
tomorrow. So after number 4,
we're gonna jump down and do the
number one, so Mr. President,
with that unanimous consent, we
go to that order business.
Third reading of legislation,
and I yield to Senator Scherer
Thank you, Mr. President.
I move that the record reflect
that all actions for taking, uh,
for putting Senate Bill 88 as
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
this is the Medicaid Trust Fund
and like other trust funds that
we've done, uh, this one's a
$300 million trust fund.
into there. This will continue
to grow to $2 billion.
Uh, there is a trigger in there
that if federal money reduces,
then we can reach in there and
uh, Medicaid today is the state
budget is about $1.1 billion but
from all of the other sources of
money, it's a little over $10
5% off of it like we have the
other trust funds and with that
I will stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
an amendment.
The reader to read.
President, ask me, uh, I move,
uh, Senate floor amendment
number 1 to Senate Bill 88 as
amended. See, no objection,
Senator, if you'll explain what
your amendment does, Mr.
President, members of the body,
amendment does. Thank you
Senator. Senators are debating.
Senator.
number one, I yelled to Senator
share.
Mr. President, that is the 2nd
most friendly amendment we've
had this year. Thank you.
are voting for a vote.
We are voting on Senate floor
Amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 88 as one time amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those are supposed.
Senator Campos. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, uh, the
sponsor does not need to, uh, to
yield, but I wanna compliment
and thank, uh, Senator Sher and
of course Senator Munoz for
particularly as we deal with
with.
Medicaid that will have the
resources to continue to go
ahead and take care of those
needs of the underserved as we
move forward.
And again with that what I also
one of us to proceed with
wisdom, with caution, and more
importantly, to be prepared, if
you will, to deal with some of
these issues that may, uh, be
of that right now, at least some
of the latest numbers that we
have in terms of the federal
resources that are coming into
New Mexico, we're right at about
$40 billion and that doesn't
bringing this, uh, forward to us
because in order for us to move
forward, it's going to be again
crucial that we watch the.
resources that we build the
Thank you, Mr. President. I
mean, we all know what's
happening. Medicaid is our
biggest cost to the, to the
budget other than education.
And, and we don't know what's in
deposits.
Uh, we don't know what they are.
We don't know how much is in,
and we try to calculate that for
our general fund revenue. Uh,
it's a hard number to catch
Medicaid. This is the one just
kind of like the behavioral
health when we, we do a Medicaid
match and if we got $50 million
in return, we would get a $200
million match from the federal
we're really talking money and
really talking savings, uh, but
this helps us stabilize our
Medicaid costs and our Medicaid
funding. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Seno
want to stand, uh, and actually
praise the, the
Finance committee and others who
are really thinking ahead, uh,
some of you last night may have
billion cut in Medicaid over 10
years built into their budget.
But what a lot of people don't
know, and, and they won't call
of Management and Budget, and
those are the tools they're
going to use. We, the end users
are going to feel it, but
publicly they'll say, oh no,
diverted, it will get diverted
and so this is really stepping
up and planning
I had, and I commend all of you
who brought this forward. Thank
you so much.
Uh, June of 2024, 768,000 New
Mexicans are using Medicaid, and
I think it's appropriate to give
a shout out to our former
difference for New Mexicans that
previously weren't able to get
insurance. And so, again, we
need to be ever vigilant, uh,
given the Medicaid match that
New Mex
changes that are happening at
the federal level, and I just, I
was encouraged over the weekend
to see.
Members of Congress, both sides
of the aisle talking about how
important Medicaid is in their
but across the country. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
too rise in support and say
thank you, um.
Affairs. I mentioned why wasn't
it put at a billion dollars for
the trust fund.
We did one, of course, recently
for the behavioral health, but
state also brings forward, um,
this is something that's very,
very important.
And Mr. President, you know,
coupled with this, we also have
the federally qualified health
care centers.
Who
support our FQHCs and that's not
associated with Medicaid.
Medicaid is what funds the, the
health care delivery.
But Mr. President, there's,
there's a lot more that we could
back and reconfigure and see
what we can do to make sure that
our healthcare system is whole.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. We
have Senator Stephanics.
wonderful picture of myself and
Senator Scher if anybody wants
to put it up on the wall, we'd
love to have ourselves up there,
but Doctor Mike Richards from
UNM came and talked about how
so UNM was there at the table
supporting.
This concept thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator
Stephanics. Any further debate,
senators?
that I'm all worked up over the,
uh, Medicaid cuts as other
people are. I, I believe that,
uh, federally they're looking
for fraud, waste, and abuse, not
to, to harm us, but this does
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record showed
the role has been called on all
those present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you. All senators,
we are voting. All senators to
your seats, please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative
Senate bill 88 is twice amended
has passed the Senate Senator
share.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
unanimous consent to the Senate
that the record show that the
actions replacing Senate Bill
123 on final passage has been
taken and that it's now subject
to debate, amendment, or
substitution no objections,
officers for regional transit
district buses. In my area here
in northern New Mexico, they're
known as the Blue bus. Now the
blue bus covers over 10,000.
s qua re miles, and it serves
Additional service is provided
to Mota County and Farmington.
What this bill will do, Mr.
President, it will allow for any
of the four existing RTDs to
create their own transit law
See no debate. Senator Jarami to
close on the bill.
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Bill 123 do now pass and
senators share seats.
Mr. President and members of the
body. We to item 3. That's gonna
be Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 119,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Hickey will be doing
that. Senator Hickey, if you'll
119 as substituted on final
passage.
Has been taking has been taken,
and that it is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
Senate Bill 119 was presented
here 2 years ago. It passed
unanimously and passed
unanimously in the house.
Unfortunately, the governor had
some objections to it, and it
the governor's staff, economic
development and others to
address her concerns, and we
think that this year she will
sign it into law.
Essentially what the bill does
Bioscience Authority and that
company invests twice as much as
what the state invests.
The, so at the end of the day,
stock, and when the company
exits the value of that stock
reverts back in dollars back
into the bioscience fund, so
continues to enlarge it over
in bioscience is $80,000 plus.
And
The, um,
The
oversight and in amendments we
have put in a very stringent
oversight authority so that the
investors and folks from the
in a tranche only if the goals
have been made.
So, in short,
dollar industry in the US
economy today and for healthcare
funds being invested about 86%
like to request that I have 2
experts join me in this. First
is Paul Lauer. He
started uh several bio
bioscience companies. He's the
which improves agricultural
products and agriculture is a
significant part of this is a
bioscience and currently is
doing mercury bile, which is in
chief of staff of the finance
committee and if there is no
objection, I would like to
invite them to join me on the
floor been unanimous consent
request to allow expert
witnesses into the chamber.
The reader to read
Senate floor amendment number 1
to Senate Finance Committee
The see if anyone was paying
attention, uh, Mr. President,
this is an amendment we
discussed in Senate Finance
Committee, um, with the sponsor
and uh.
President, uh, the bill lacked,
I thought two things, um, that
it really needed because what
we're contemplating doing here
is giving millions of dollars to
what they called a co-investing
organization, but there was no
definition of that in the bill
and given our history of this
state, we've seen kind of less
had a fairly loose conflict of
interest deal as far as family
members um getting jobs
potentially. There was a
sentence in there to the credit,
but I thought we could make it
family anti-conflict of interest
therein.
Senators were debating Senate
floor remember number one, and
I'll yield to the sponsor,
Senator Hickey.
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
President, I'm going to find
this bill interesting in the
debate and discussion here
today, particularly because
we've talked about lead in
investments and how those go,
but on the amendment itself, uh,
Senator Steinborn, if you would
reading through the bill, we're
creating a, a, a co-investing
relationship between the
authority and a co-investing
organization and you're defining
what is a co-investing
organization, so I think that's
uh, private equity, venture
capital are kind of
Becoming a, a bad name, a bad
word in this chamber, uh, we're
Senator, but you're saying that,
that a co-investing organization
here that may tap into this $25
million may include a venture
capital firm or private equity
firm, is that right?
um, again, I, I think that we
have to recognize that there is
a place in our economy and, uh,
here in New Mexico for private
equity and for uh venture
capitalists and what we're doing
fund as co-investors with the
authority, and I just wanted to
take a moment on the amendment
to recognize we can't have it
both ways. We can't sit here and
disparage private equity,
amendment, but I think it's
important for us to recognize
exactly what we're doing.
Thank you Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, Senator, Senator
Steinberg, we're still on
debate.
Senator Padilla, then I'll go to
Senator Steinbrenner, you can
state your point then.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I, I do, I rise in
support of the legislation.
I've, I've helped us, you know,
I asked you consent to excuse uh
Senator, um.
He's here.
what it says. These are really
for startups. I mean, or they
are, they are, uh, and what this
bill says is that no more than
1/3 of
The state's investment with the
co-investing partner, I think
actually be putting money into
the deal of a startup to help
make something successful as
opposed to taking something
successful and, and liquidating
Committee substitute 119 pass
and uh asked by a voice vote.
Thank you, Senators, there's
been a request to adopt Senate
floor Amendment number one to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senator 119 has
now been one time amended. We're
back on the bill, senators.
Senator Cervantes.
Uh, Mr. President, um, I'd like
the sponsor to yield to a few
was followed by that to Senate
Finance and then there was a
substitute of the bill. And so,
uh, the bill's changed since it
left Senate Judiciary, and
presentation, you said,
The bill is a $25 million
investment of the state and I
noted that that was in the
original version of the bill,
Thank you, uh, Senator Cervantes
for that question and Mr.
President, uh, the, uh, 25
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I'm glad you have
Adrian there and you have the
chair of Senate Finance next to
you, um, many of us here in the
room are businessmen and
bill, uh, specifies a minimum
number of employees over a given
period of time, is that right?
That is correct, Mr. President
and Senator Cervantes and the
and Senator Cervantes. The bill
also requires that each one of
those 5 employees would earn at
least a minimum of $60,000 a
year.
That is correct, Senator
Well, Mr. President, because the
bill only requires $60,000 a
year as the salary. I did an
amortization at $60,000 a year.
And send her, I don't think it
would surprise you or anyone
else to know that if you take
employee earning $60,000. So
we're, we're spending a million
dollars to assure an employee
makes $60,000 a year, Mr.
President, Senator, would, would
More individuals and there will
be many investors in the bill.
Again, the bill doubles the
amount of money. So I think 75
million, not 25 million.
in a moment. My, my question
though is if we take 25 million.
And in the law we say you've got
to have 5 employees for 5 years,
earning $60,000 a year. If you
The bill would support somewhere
between 6 and 10 companies,
Senator Cervantes and Mr.
President.
Senator Cervantes, yeah, Mr.
President and Senator, with all
due respect, that has nothing to
do with my question though, uh,
my question is, and this is part
of our long-standing discussion
requires 5 employees for 5 years
at $60,000 a year. Isn't that a
fair summary of what the law
would require.
Center Hickey.
but again, the, uh, uh, this,
for this rap per round, it would
$5,500,000 to 2 million. So
again, that adds up to a lot
more.
more money than what you're uh
doing your amateurization out
to.
Yeah, Mr. President, Senator,
Senator Cervantes, that's uh
more technical information that
would not be in the bill, um,
again, this will be overseen by
be looking to be sure that the
milestones are being reached
before we, we as a state release
our additional tranche, uh.
in more than just the 2 to 1 as
well.
Senator Cervantes, yes, Mr.
President, Senator, I'll come
back to, uh, the point that I'm
trying to make about that we're
Senator Cervantes and page 6
subsection 2, the authority's
investment in a bioscience
period, making the co-investor
organization, the lead investor
and authority.
And, and thank you Mr. President
and Senator so I if you read on,
Senatorsfante and the bios and
the bioscience Authority.
Thank you Senator Hickey just a
reminder to go through the
excuse me, Mr. President,
I don't have my calculator to
check and see if he's right. Um,
so we're assuming that he's
correct in his math and I'm not
sure that that's the case. But
anyway, he is handsome, so I'd
important because we, we started
this discussion a few days back
about whether we're really doing
economic development right in
the state. And of course when
we're spending 20 something like
I'm reading that section that
you just read, it said the
authorities investment in a
business shall be not more than
1.
of the combined investment of
the authority.
private investor would do 2/3,
but when I read this literally,
it says the authorities
investment shall be not more
than 1/3 of the combined
investment of the authority, so
I I really do think what this
more of that money, then it
should in any one business,
isn't that really?
what that language is, is
intended to do to assure the
authority doesn't put all of his
$25 million into one business,
into one, any one business.
Senator Cervantes is, I think
your assumptions are correct.
This is not to be done with one
investor. This is really small
companies, startups at the very
etc. um, and they, uh,
Are the value of the company is
substantially going up in its
companies.
Senator Cervantes, yes, Mr.
President, I'm still, I'm still
puzzled, Senator. I'm trying to
find the language in the bill
2, line 21, which I've read and
reread and, and, and it reads to
me that the purpose of that
language is to assure that the
state doesn't take all $25
million and put it into one
investment of the authority. So
the, the $25 million a third of
that is limited to go to one
investment, and, uh, it has to
be spread around various
different investments. Isn't
that really what that language
And, and that it's, it's on a, a
yearly basis, and, uh, let me
remind you in terms of the money
as as this works and grows,
which so many other, uh,
of very successful companies
when these companies are
successful and they exit through
any one of a number of
mechanisms being bought by
over time when those companies
succeed.
Yeah, Mr. President, Senator,
and I, and I can hear and
maximize our efforts at economic
development by our investment
of, of state resources with
partnerships with the private
sector and so I'm still senator,
business. That's what that
language, uh, provides for, and
I see you're agreeing with that
now. But so that if that's true,
then where in the bill would
there be any requirements that
1/3 of the combined investment
of the authority and a
co-investor that is investment
by the authority and a
co-investor organization in that
And thank you Mr. President.
Senator. Yeah, I think we're
just gonna read that
differently, Senator. I, I
probably we're not gonna get
some agreement on that. Let me
turn to a different subject.
liability company, a new exco
business would be a business
where the majority of the
businesses employees located in
the state of New Mexico, would
you agree that that's the way
the bill reads? Hickey.
state you need to have 80% of
the businesses employed in the
state. Why is there a difference
between what is a New Mexico
business that's a limited
liability company or corporation
or limited partnership in terms
Senator Cervantes and Mr.
President.
A limited partnership may also
have offices elsewhere in the
Has to take place in New Mexico
and that's why this is a job
growth and getting into the
business of investment as a
have and that's the other
benefit of the bill, uh, in
terms of some of the
technicalities that you're
pointing out between uh limited
liability and corporate
Comparisons, but again, I, I
don't know that those
comparisons are the, the essence
of what we're trying to do in
the bill. The essence of the
has only a 1/3 potential
investment as it grows to take
so that the company may grow,
demonstrate the
covered in a five-year period,
so that the company would be
much more likely to stay in the
state. We've had recent
companies that have been
developed here who didn't have
State with a stock value of uh I
think it's about 200 $195 per
share, um, other companies, uh,
again, the essence of the bill
is to get New Mexico into this
$3.2 trillion business in the
United States that is only
information, but my question was
very different. Uh, my question
relates to the definition of
what it would constitute in New
Mexico business. This is on page
2 of the bill. So if we're
business if you're a limited
partnership. My question is, why
would there be a difference
between a New Mexico business
that's a limited liability.
partnership versus a limited
Uh, Senator Cervantes, uh, I
can't tell you exactly what the
answer is to that question. I
believe that it is particularly
germane to what this bill is
trying to do.
Senator Cervantes, well, Mr.
President, Senator, due respect,
get a piece of $25 million
and, and if you only have to
have 5 employees, uh, then you
have to have 2.5 of the
employees to have a majority.
in New Mexico if you're uh
organizes a corporation or
limited liability company. So
maybe we don't have 5 employees
who are getting costing us a
million dollars a year to pay
dollars a year per employee to
pay them $60,000 a year.
I, I, I, I don't, again, I still
don't see the difference
between.
Having a certain number of
employees for corporations or
Cervantes, the general partners
manage the day to day
operations, uh, and have
unlimited, uh, personal
liability, limited partners
a limited partnership is and we
both know what a general partner
is in, in a limited partners in
a limited liability, but none of
that really addresses the
question. I think you see the
problem here, Senator, which is,
on. I, I don't think I'm going
to be satisfied with any answer
to a question that I don't think
has a satisfactory answer.
Um, the, um,
Senator, the bill would say that
if one of these companies goes
bankrupt.
The claims by the authority
essentially a clawback or
essentially reimbursement would
others who are going to stand in
line long before the state ever
gets its money back. Isn't that
fundamental bankruptcy law
center?
philosophy, which is the last
thing we want to do is have the
taxpayers holding a $25 million
bag, uh, with a company that
comes in.
Uh, gets, uh, a big investment
all $60,000 a year, but takes
that $25 million and does
something else with it, uh,
maybe pays the CEO's a pretty
good salary. Maybe takes a few
that, um, and then if the state
wants to do something about it
in the end, and the company just
declares bankruptcy.
The bill would purport that we
would get the money back first,
Senator Cervantes and Mr.
President, uh, that can be true,
flowers and I don't know.
Any other kind of
Neat entertainment. The uh
Uh, I would point you to, uh,
investment to release a
disbursement of funds.
Senator Cervantes, yeah, and Mr.
may do it monthly, we may do it
quarterly, we may do it every 6
months or we may do it annually
and we're just gonna decide that
on a case by case basis. I
really do wish we would say
you and I think would be, uh,
would be important, but, um, Mr.
President, I'll, I'll move on,
um, I, I do think the bankruptcy
proceeding language doesn't
belong in the bill. I think we
took that out in Senate
earlier. I'm not trying to be
difficult, but, um, when a bill
comes to judiciary and then goes
to finance and gets substituted
in finance, some of the
discussion, debate, and reasons
why I'm going back to this and
um I'm nearing the end center
with my questions, uh, my, my
position on the bill is probably
not going to change too much
from
it wasn't judiciary, but 11
misdemeanor when an officer is
dealing insider dealing, I think
it's really what it boils down
to, um, and it goes on to say,
uh, that a person who knowingly
instance, uh, senator, or does
your experts know of a single
instance when the state has ever
enforced any of our LEDA JTip,
uh, my name's clawbacks to
and Mr. President, uh, I've only
been here as my 5th year. I have
not watched that. Uh, it
potentially is true. I know
there are questions about the
amazingly well. There is risk
reward, there is risk, some,
some may not.
be able to, to make it, but
those entities who do
company out of this knocks out
of the park, which is what
happens in a lot of funds, um,
that knock out of the park.
happened in the past, I would
agree with you that we as a
legislature do a very poor job
That uh I'd be happy to work
with you on something that
looked at how we could have not
just executive oversight, but
thank you for your observations,
Mr. Savan. Excuse me, Senator
Cervantes. Thank you. You're
wooed again by my charm, sinner.
Mr. President, thank you,
Senator.
We put out a lot of money during
COVID. We supported a lot of
businesses. We've made a lot of
loans. We put a lot of money out
there on the street.
on the promises made, and I can
give you example after example.
I, I made some, uh, I made some
examples the other day. I got,
uh, lit up by one of the local
With promises of jobs and
promises of wages and promises
of all kinds of economic results
and then we really never follow
up.
And we never really claw back
Um, and Senator, that's why I've
put you through a lot on this
bill, um, not because I don't
again, share your enthusiasm for
biosciences. I'm gonna, I'm
We're relying a great deal on
promises. We're really, we love
the press conferences.
We love announcing, uh, jobs
coming here, solar manufacturers
don't materialize and we're left
wondering where the money went
and we're not serving the, the
taxpayers and doing so senator
so I'll listen to the rest of
the debate. I know, uh, maybe
some of your colleagues are
gonna get up and, and try and uh
by Senator Padilla.
Center Lopez. Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I'm
just gonna give some background
information and with a good
one with glasses, uh, and where
he got his biosciences degree.
Senator Hickey, if you'll yield
guys who don't have glasses on.
But um they're, they, uh, I
would like to ask, uh, Adrian
Novilla, uh, what's your degrees
are and where are they from?
From the University of Edinburgh
in Scotland. It was so long, but
basically it had to do with
overseeing investment economics
Senator Munoz, Mr. President, I
think they forgot one thing in
biosciences.
Correct?
My, my bad, uh, Mr. President
the match money to keep them in
here. Uh, one is sertorius. It
came from UNM.
Uh, it sold for $80 million in
the state.
Uh, and they did bioscience
infrastructure, um, circular gen
genomics had a valuation of 14
million uh but worth of 100
in the state and they moved out
of the state. Each one of those
had a job of of.
Some in the six-figure numbers,
Angel Investment Companies, 700
million annually a year, we're
trying to cap that with an LOC
bill that came through here, uh,
Senator Campos was the sponsor
investment and we fund those
angel investors or, or
Investors and then they come
back and they, they invest in
companies in New Mexico. We just
buildings for all these all over
New Mexico. There's a lot of
them in Albuquerque, the one
that just left left a whole
vacant building, uh, with even
just the writing on the wall and
The biosciences.
Department or the bio science
was done a couple of years ago
by the young gentleman who just
executive to come on board with
the amount of money and what
they did, and they always had an
issue about investing, but it's
all right for the SAIC to go out
and give 700 million away in
investments, and then track them
that says for those guys that
are getting their master's or
PhD that if you invent something
in New Mexico, we want to help
fund that.
And so as we fund that, then
With what's happening in the
world around us. But if we're
gonna sit here and still say,
oh, we don't want to invest
because there's risk. Well,
there's risk in everything in,
in the good senator Sleepy Joe
Texas. And, and you can have a
limited partnership in both
states and operate in both
states. This is something that
if you really want to think
had a semi truck tip over. It
was risk and reward.
Uh, and, and so those are some
of the things that I take with
risk and reward each and every
day.
We have to invest in this. This
right now.
He left New Mexico because the
capital was not here and the
employees were not here.
And so if we don't have the
capital and we don't have the
You look what ASU is doing in
their biosciences economic
development. They just built a
gigantic building right next to
the Mayo Clinic for biosciences
And so we're gonna go in slowly.
There's only 8 million in the
budget right now, 8 or 666 in
the budget right now and so
we'll take it slow. We're, we're
how these investments work, and
then so when the good send
Sleepy Joe is still there, will
have made money and he'll, uh,
he'll have uh
Lost the battle on the floor,
Mr. President.
Thank you. I would like to point
out a couple of other things too
that Senator Munoz was, was
speaking to, um, we currently
near where we need to be. We
have to develop an ecosystem.
Companies will come here if they
know there is talent here that
they can go raid. That's why
Silicon Valley, Boston, etc. are
to build that ecosystem here in
New Mexico and uh pursuant to
Senator Cervantes, this is not
Lita, this is not JTip. This is
This is not walking away. This
is monthly or it, it could go up
to a year because technology
takes a long time to develop,
all my milestones before I got
the next set of money, so, um,
with that, I, I yield to others
who would like to comment.
in on the bill. Thank you.
know there's some some concerns
and I know it was brought up
about private equity venture
capital, but I think it's
important to really talk about
those differences, you know,
we're really want to make sure
the negative aspects of uh
private equity and what it, what
can happen in our hospitals and
other places and I'm not as
comfortable with that, but I
believe with what we're talking
biochemistry major from UNM and
a pharmaceutical chemistry major
from University of.
Florida, so I know a little bit
about biosciences and this is an
important area, even here in UNM
we need to make those
investments so they could
actually stay here in New Mexico
and fill some of these jobs
we've had these conversations in
our interim communities in in
legislation is so important, um,
and when we talk about
biosciences, we're talking about
new pharmaceuticals and new
drugs. We're talking about
agricultural. We're, we're
talking about biofuels. I mean,
to, uh, really, um, emphasize to
the body how important this
investment is, especially.
When we talk about diversifying
the economy of New Mexico and
creating jobs for folks and
Thank you Senator Pope seeing no
further debate.
We do have further debate, I'm
sorry, center Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senator Jaramillo until
he returns to the chamber.
Hearing no objection.
I didn't see this um in any of
my committees, and I don't.
Also remember seeing it in uh
any of the interim committees,
um, but I'll, I'll start with
the state investment council,
1110, 11% of the state permanent
tax fund.
Isn't that a source of funding
for something like this, uh, Mr.
President.
for that, uh, clarifying
question. They, they don't
actually invest in the startups,
uh, and don't do a lot of
vetting, uh, they invest in
bioscience we're going to invest
in, uh, railroad car, uh, any
one of a number of things, but
it's
a fund that they invest in, not
the company directly.
already yielded, but I apologize
for failing to ask for not
catching that. Thank you,
Senator Celia Lopez. Um, thank
you. So, so, OK, so there isn't
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator Sio Lopez, uh, that was
in the initiating bill. I
believe there's one
university, um, there are
individuals appointed by the pro
tem by the speaker and the
governor.
So that is an existing law
somewhere else, not in this
bill. That's correct, Mr.
President and Madam Senator.
Thank you. That's helpful
because I went through the whole
tedious, but I'm kind of curious
how this gets around the
anti-donation clause.
Um, I, I'm sure there must be
bioscience authority is the only
entity that has uh been able to
be granted the, uh, exception to
develop this kind of pri private
NMFA.
Senator Lopez, Mr. President,
I'm not sure how that gets
around the anti-donation clause,
Center Hickey, yeah. Thank you,
Mr. President and Senator, it's
not the state that's doing it.
And see Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. That's good to know
when I'm trying to get around
the anti-donation clause in
the Open Meetings Act does the
open Meetings Act apply to the
authority?
Mr President, Senator, yes, it
does.
So a state entity for the
purpose of the Open Meetings Act
but not for the purpose of the
anti-donation clause Lopez just
a reminder to go to the chair,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. President, Senator Hickey.
because it's a quasi entity. It
is subject to the open meetings
Act and uh IPRA and so forth.
that is secret is able to be
kept secret. Um, but the, uh,
what I'm
Told us that because of the
quasi state entity and the way
around the or they're able to uh
be sanctioned under the
Um
contingent to the open Meetings
Act, the corporation allows the
investment.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, that's
the of the buy to assess the bio
science business prior to making
the investment decision is a
protected social benefits of the
business in accordance with
procurement preferences provided
uh, procurement, um,
preferences, so I'm a little bit
worried.
Mr. President, what does that
mean?
With the
make sure that the state
procurement preferences continue
to apply.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator
Saia Lopez, if you look on page
6,
Thank you Mr. President, that's
exactly what I was looking at
and because it says or, um,
My question is, does that mean
important that they do, and I
just wanna make sure that that
language does that. I'm not so
sure, Mr. President.
not investing in then state law
takes precedence.
Center Lopez, thank you, Mr.
President. That's not how I
understand, um.
The relationship between federal
it, um.
And I, I, I actually did circle
on page 7, the bankruptcy
proceeding. I think you
As you get over the house, you
It's the, it's the first part
because it's otherwise provided
is gonna trump uh paid first. So
It says any person who knowingly
or willingly violates this, are
they, is this an exclusive
remedy or are they also subject
wouldn't they also be subject to
other criminal provisions?
identified, um, I, I do want to
note in your previous questions
that this federal state was
worked out through the
legislative council, um.
occur in this. So, um, I, I,
again, do believe that without
the state component here and,
and you have the law degree, so
I can't necessarily dispute you
on that, um, but in terms of
Thank you, Mr. President, I
appreciate that, um, again,
that's not exactly how I
understand the relationship,
but, um, I'm sure that there's
A little bit troubled by this
bill. I, and I apologize. I had
not seen it before, and these
are the kinds of questions I ask
in committee, and that was very
helpful and I really appreciate
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Bill 119 do now pass, and
I ask unanimous consent of the
of hands. Thank you all senators
call.
Senators to your seats, we are
voting.
There hasn't been a request for
a roll call.
vote, Senator Hickey, will you
please, uh, you're gonna have to
place that uh once again you
gotta add the Senate Finance
Senate Finance Committee
called.
Thank you, senators, to your
seats, please. We are voting.
votes, yes. Senator Block
Center.
votes no.
Senator Cervantes votes no.
Senator Charlie.
Center Gallegos votes no. Centra
passes.
Santa Lopez. Yes. Sanator Lopez
O'Malley. Senator O'Malley votes
yes. Senator Paul.
Center Paul passes.
Votes no.
Santa Sanchez.
San Sanchez votes no, Scott.
Santoshendo.
Centerendo votes yes center
souls.
Senator Stefaniks.
Center Thornton.
votes yes.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Block.
Center block votes, yes.
Santeria Lopez.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 119
as amended.
Has passed the Senate, Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, colleagues.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
235 or Senate.
So if you'll please explain what
the bill does.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
For many years we have heard our
pro tem talk about the
importance.
Of reading
reading, uh, our schools are
making a difference. We're
starting to see the numbers turn
in that very important area.
However, math continues to lag
and hurting this potential for
the state of New Mexico.
I'm a retired math teacher.
I taught AP statistics, algebra
Like, well, I'm not good at math
and my mother wasn't either.
As if math is genetic.
It's not.
that, we are hindering the
ability of our students to do
well in the field of math.
And so we need to change how we
And I was an academic adviser
And I was an academic advisor
there and worked on students who
were finishing their degrees in
elementary education and in
secondary education.
In knowing how to do basic
levels of math, and yet they
were going to be teaching our
next level of students they were
going to be teachers and often
Doctor Souls, you're pretty good
at math. Tell me again how to do
a percent.
This is somebody with a PhD and
the head of a department in the
continue to be a leader in the
science areas at Lano as we look
at the future development of the
state and certainly make sure
that our students are qualified
and equipped.
elevate math and math education
to the same level that we've had
in reading. We all have seen, we
all know the abysmal scores in
math, and it may come up in part
necessary to improve the
teaching of math.
And how we treat math within the
state.
Some of the specifics that this
bill does.
Is
The mechanisms.
In order to set that up.
It requires screening of
early inter those screenings are
not tests.
They are assessments of what the
student is capable of doing now
so that the teacher knows where
those gaps might be.
procedures that are necessary
because that gives districts an
opportunity to get the qualified
math people in place. It
requires the teacher preparation
those teacher preparation
programs. I could talk more
about math for a long while.
Most of you, I know.
fine math on the dull side, uh,
Public education department to,
to sit and answer some of the
technical questions that may
come up a unanimous consent
request to allow the expert
Senators are debating Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 235 is amended
and we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
Lopez Lopez to move the
amendment.
Um, Mr. President, I move
Amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 235 is amended. So no
objections. Senatorio Lopez if
you'll explain what your
amendment attempts to. Thank
you, Mr. President. I was hoping
that this would be a friendly
you, I guess you'll ask, but I
was really trying to um
I agree with Senator Souls that
this is an important bill.
So what I specifically and of
course math and science
education is crucial. It's
crucial for everyone.
By race, ethnicity, tribal
affiliation, family income,
gender, English I mean not
gender, English profess
proficiency and disability
status.
Or on page 4, line 16, it adds
section 9.
It adds that they develop and
implement an annual assessment
to measure the effectiveness of
efforts to improve mathematics
and science outcomes for
what the findings we were in the
findings in the Yazi Martinez
case showed that we failed at
except for gender I added gender
because this bill is
I felt as I suggested in
committee, I felt that this bill
in providing the screening
process and creating this entity
where is it called? I'm in the
wrong bill, um, and creating
Right at the table from the
get-go, we should be looking at
whether this assessment tool
that is going to be provided to
I'm not assessment I'm sorry,
assessment of the students at
all. It's an assessment of what
of the effectiveness of the
efforts so this bill is all
about efforts and I.
data by race, ethnicity, all of
these factors, so we can see
whether it's effective for all
our students.
And the second part of this
To consult with experts in
culturally and linguistically
relevant education to identify
effective teaching practices for
improving mathematics and
disabilities.
I think there's a comma missing
somewhere and based on those
identified practices developed
targeted strategies and training
for teachers because this bill
A training program for teachers.
My understanding is that there
has been a pilot project, but
the effectiveness was just
measured by asking the teachers
whether they thought the
With that, Mr. President, I
stand for any questions on the
amendment.
We are debating Senate floor
amendment number one, and I'll
yield to the sponsor Center
Souls.
issues. The drafters indicated
that they were not necessary to
cover what the particular part
of this area of the changes
second reason is they're not
necessary. The first one in
section 9 on the amendment of
develop and implement an annual
assessment that is already done.
readily available. Each district
disaggregates all of that data.
It is not necessary.
it is duplicative of what's
already done and then on number
who are working on making these
changes and these upgrades.
These are not things that are
necessary and I think overly
complicate this bill and for
that reason, it is an unfriendly
we talk about Yasi Martinez and
the case stances still pending.
And experts within PED even
necessary to meet the criteria
within the Yazy Martinez.
And when we don't put on the.
this soft enough and on. We're
like, well, we got to put it in
the end, if we move this
forward, but yet we are going to
put this um particular
legislation into
To to mandate it, basically. So
um, I too don't wish and ask for
the amendment, the sponsor of
the amendment to yield.
But I do.
It may be the good intent of the
current administration to see
fit to move forward as has been
described.
But Mr. President, many a times
Yazi lawsuit. We're still
missing, I think, many different
aspects of what was being asked
what was decided, um, money is a
have data, information that we
need as we make and subsequent
legislatures to be able to make
the right decision. Thank you.
Senator Lopez. Any further
debate? We are on the amendment,
amendment, uh, we do have
further debate on the amendment,
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
just, I wanna, I don't need a
sponsor to yield, but I do stand
of the amendment, but our
communities need this
information and we need this
information to be redundant and
repetitive so that the system
Senator Maestas.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and thank you sponsor thank you
sponsor the of the amendment
just a quick comment I think um.
think that 9 is appropriate
subprograph 9, which is uh 3 on
the amendment page.
Cause we need stats, you know, I
think regardless of where we all
me more how are these stats
collected and how are they
disseminated, uh, today, um, Mr.
President uh Senator So Soles.
might take me a moment to pull
up on my computer, but I can
tell the stats for the
elementary level for math for
the secondary level for math for
all of the disaggregated
provided there are enough
students of each of the
different groups in order to be
statistically sound.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Soz, because I think
where the gaps are and to see
how we as a state, uh, teach,
you know, uh.
Disabled students, disadvantaged
students, English, English
the actual bill is fantastic. I
think this may convolute the
bill.
So I don't know if I'll support
the amendment, but definitely
the first portion of the
amendment must be emphasized
whether it's in federal law or
Thank you, Senator Ma us any
further debate on the amendment?
So you know for the debate on
the amendments, Senator C Lopez
law that and I want to emphasize
this is not the data about
student performance. This is new
data. This is data about the
teaching mechanisms, so it's not
about the students' performance
it's about the effectiveness of
the.
Teaching, which is different and
directs and and directly relates
to this bill and then the second
this teacher training will be to
effectively teach the students
where they are.
Mr. President, I have teaching
experience. I taught for 27
scores of our students every
single year I was there and the
reason we did is because we
found students where they were
and we worked on improving their
skills.
mean, the yeah, the
effectiveness of these efforts
to improve mathematics and you
need to develop strategies to
improve the effectiveness and
the amendment.
Oh thank you, um,
So, Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment number 1 to
Senate bill.
number one.
To your seat, senators.
If you wish to vote no on the
amendment, please raise your
Senor Ramos voting no.
Senator Scott, voting no.
Sandra Woods, voting no.
They share voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Brantley voting no.
Sit in there voting no.
Sennava voting no.
Senator Tobias and vote you
know.
Center block voting no.
Senator Paul, will you know.
Senator Thornton, voting no.
Thank you, Mr. President. We are
back on the bill, Senators,
anyone wishing to debate on the
bill?
Senator Giselle.
Um, I know that in our education
committee we had a prior bill up
that had to do with math also.
for 235 as amended. Will it work
in addition to or separate from
Senate Bill 116
President and Senator.
trying to get ahead in math.
They are not in any way in
conflict with each other. They
absolutely work hand in hand or
at least side by side.
And Mr. President, Senator,
planning on implementing both of
these Senate bills.
And our souls, Mr. President and
Senator, this particular bill
has two implementation dates,
setting up the framework, uh,
providing some of the structure
for colleges of education as
they move forward for the math
level of training that are
needed, uh, some of them have or
and do this immediately would be
very difficult. So it's got a
one year delay, uh, the
discussion was also, and I
believe it's the last paragraph
of the bill, but talks about
couple of years and one of the
key things they'll be looking at
are those early.
Manners where both the public ed
department and those districts
are learning about how this is
going, where there are concerns,
much. Those were my questions. I
do appreciate the answers,
Senator cells,
and I yield, Senator in there.
Thank you, Mr. President. Does
page 5 on line 12.
It, it's in section C.
A public school that has a
If
We've all said in a college
atmosphere with a PhD talking to
us, talking math, but that
doesn't necessarily make them
relates to kids, can relate math
to that student and make them
more effective.
So
My question to you is.
What, what is the level?
Senator Lanier, uh, that
actually is a very, very good
question, uh, and some of it
comes down to, in order to be a
good math coach, you have to be
public ed department, but also
we'll be working with the higher
education in the, the teacher
preparation programs towards
what those
requirements might be for the,
fully versed in the ability of
the math, um, being good at math
is not sufficient to being a
good teacher, being a good
teacher, but without math
content is not sufficient either
agree with you, um, I, I really
liked your opening when you
talked about um a student that
that can't relate to the
We don't, we don't require such
a overqualified person that they
can't come down to the level of,
want to make sure that we have
people that are both
pedagogically sound, but also
math competent to be those math
experts within our districts and
schools.
Thank you, Senator So, send it
in there.
the questions and I appreciate
it, Mr. President and Senator, I
always hear all of those things
when people, uh, when we earlier
debate, we were talking about
Thank you, Mr. President. This
may be a little bit of what was
uh raised in the committee, but
I will go ahead and do it. Um.
What, um, a screener does and
what tool has been reviewed for
purchase?
And that's on page 3, the
the screening tool really is
something that is more criteria
referenced. It's we expect
students to be able to do this
level at this time and what can
they actually do and one of the
That's the lowest level. The
next question might be count by
twos from 18 to 26.
All of those are escalating
levels of, of math ability and
number sense. Those are not
something that is, uh,
That might be a beginner level
being able to count to a 1 to 20
and it might be a fairly
advanced level to be able to
count by 5s from 365 to 390.
think it was from Iowa purchase,
you had a name for it, Mr.
President, that's what I was
trying to get to.
Thank you. Center souls Mr.
President, we did not indicate
in the thing that it was from
Education Association I think
it's NW or
NWEEA, uh, that I used to use in
my high school classes, they
quite interesting in that my
students would score very low on
something that they were going
to be getting next year in
geometry instead of in algebra.
Uh, I didn't worry about those
areas as much, but there are a
level, they tend to be much more
of a criteria referenced looking
for where those gaps so that the
teacher knows how to help that
particular student.
know what the student's able to
do, it's very difficult for the
teacher to fill in the gaps to
improve the student's ability,
the screening tool makes it very
clear for the teacher in each of
teachers, so then what is the
role of the mathematics and
science bureau.
Mr. President, Senator, it's a
Senator Lopez. Mr. President,
how are they connected, Mr.
President, the public education
department designs professional
development for teachers, and so
EA mechanism, but they would be
designing the professional
development for the teachers on
how to effectively use those
screening tools and those
page 3 of the bill, the
department shall establish a
mathematics mathematics
instructional leadership
framework for public school
administrators, the framework
How is what the department does
connected to what happens in the
classroom and to this framework.
And our souls, Mr. President and
districts are going to be
turning in their math.
Plans, if you will, uh, then
each school is turning those
into the district and each
be assured that these math plans
will address the needs of
English language learners,
girls, um, income, uh, what is
the
Um
income gender, English
proficiency and disability
status, how can we be assured
that those plans will include.
Instructural materials and
Senator, uh, it happens in a
couple of places, uh, one, those
are all part of, of the
research, the follow-up is all
done by the LESC who gets the
months after you implement a new
program, uh, you've heard me say
before on the floor that
investment.
in education and in these
particular areas are like
standardized tests that we rate
the state on, uh, occurs and so
before that, each individual
teacher and I've, as I've worked
they're doing, how they're
learning where they are with it.
And so the responsibility occurs
at all of those levels. It
occurs at the teacher individual
if the school is larger, and
then from there on, uh,
particularly in larger districts
at the district level where they
have a math specialist who is
overseeing part of that as the
uh, the LESC is looking at all
of those.
Thank you, Center Lopez. Thank
you, Mr. President, again, I
don't think that that's any
strategies for these for these
students, um, I'm afraid I have
problems with this bill and I
will not be able to support it.
Thank you, Mr. President. Lopez.
We do have further debate. We
Thank you, Mr. President. With
the sponsor please yield.
Center souls yield. Certainly.
endorsement, especially when it
comes to the elementary coaches
may limit the number of eligible
coaches in the school, but I do
hope that we get to a point in
know how important this is, you
know, mathematics can open up a
number of career opportunities
that reach far beyond just
science and technology careers.
livestock weights, uh, to meds,
to acreages, everything, and we,
we need to encourage more
mathematics in our classrooms. I
see that with my own daughters
in public schools if you
Uh, Mr. President, I'm not sure
whether this is the punch or
the, the setup line for a joke
or whether it's a serious
question, but, uh, it sounds
Mr. President, uh, senator, uh,
if people remember a year or two
ago I put out a daily joke of
the day, uh, dad joke type
thing. I don't have that one. I
will add it to my list.
Mr. President.
Thank you Mr. President, and if
the sponsor with you.
Finish those deals. Yes, I, I do
yield.
Um, um, Senator, I'm president
Mr. President, Senator, not sure
exactly my expert indicates
there are probably about 10.
And um senator and Mr.
President and Senator, the
answer from my expert was a very
technical term, many.
Senator Pinto.
bureau. We have the education
pathways Bureau. We have a
finance analysis bureau. We have
a school budget bureau.
I didn't see anything listed as
another
Create this or if it existed
already, um, the work that's
being done.
And with this bill, I did not
see any accompaniment of any
data as far as the all I hear is
that we're not doing good. We're
it says that we're gonna allow
them to monitor.
And I thought that all this
time, that's what.
Our Department of Education was
We have made some improvement.
But when
Things fall apart when students
I don't know how many members
are on these councils. I think
this one is, um, Mr. President
and Senator Solis, how many are
on this council that's being
created.
Sinner souls
members on the, the advisory
council for Math and Science.
Sinners Pinto.
So Mr. President, we have all
these council members and all
internalize this process it and
put forth, you know, something
planned whatever uh a report.
To help our students.
And
stuff in our schools and it's
and even trying to create an
overstep our local school
districts.
I, I don't, it seems like
legislation also are we creating
a mechanism of liability.
For our PED again.
Since Yazi Martinez has not
create liability for us,
especially if it's our own
departments.
I mean I understand we have to
do, do things to make
Trickling down all the way to
the advisory councils all the
way down to our student
representatives.
and do something.
That will help them.
We say there's too many
distractions. You say, well, we
don't have enough resources our
students don't want to get to
some sense, and we're still now
having to put even more stuff
into legislation.
But thank you thank you sponsor
for bringing the bell. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you.
appreciate the very healthy
debate about this and the
general concern we have to do
better by our students. Um, some
of that do better is stuff that
we can do through legislation.
hope in the time I'm still up
here that I don't hear more,
certainly legislators or others
talk about, well, I didn't want
to
Do math. That's why I went into
to hide behind the fact that
they don't like it. And so I
would appreciate if everybody
would be take more positive
attitudes about math so that our
And usually after PE or recess,
one of the most common ones I
get in elementary school is
math.
And I tell him, good.
You know math and money both
bring into New Mexico, rely on
math. And so we need to as a
state, start elevating that,
start moving ourselves up out of
the bottom. I do want to remind
going to take a while. Our
students only go a year at a
time, but we hopefully within a
year or two we'll start seeing
some real changes in math. It's
while. Do be patient, but you
have my commitment.
through the LESC and as I
continue in the legislature to
continue to work and elevate and
push math because our kids are
as amended, do now pass. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator Lopez voting now?
Senator Townsend, if you can
please report to your seat.
Senator Townsend.
you body. I appreciate it and
our kids are counting on us.
We will go to Senate Majority
floor leader.
Peterworth.
For the next
joint.
Uh, Memorial Senator Campos
thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the rules be
Thank you, Senators, we are in
3rd reading.
See no objection.
Senator Compos to explain. Thank
you very much, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, in
essence, Senate Joint Memorial 2
government service levels and
infrastructure and resources
available in the frontier areas
and study how state statute
might be modified to assist
frontier areas in the provision
Senator Campos. Senators, we're
debating San John Memorial 2 is
twice amended.
See no debate, Senator Compos to
close on the joint memorial.
Thank you very much, Mr.
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
the negative by a show of hands.
Thank you all senators to your
seats, please.
All senators to your seats.
raise your hand.
Senator Campos, I, I apologize,
we, we did have uh on the board
it says it's twice amended.
Senator John Memorial too has
board had indicated. So Mr.
President, I move that uh Senate
Joint Memorial to, uh, do not
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate, the records show
that there always has been
2.
Has passed the Senate. Senator
Campos, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you very much,
Memorial One as amended uh on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Hearing no objections, Senator
Padilla, to explain. thank you,
expedite forest restoration to
help avoid what we've seen
recently and uh these wildfires
that have overtaken the state.
Reason is, uh, that we're trying
to do this is economic
development, environmental
benefits, uh, resource
theater closed. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. Uh, I
move that uh Senate joint
Memorial One is amended do now
pass, and I ask you consent to
the Senate. The records show all
those that the roles been called
By a vote of 39, the afirmative
is 0 on the negative. Senator
John Memorial 1 as amended has
passed the Senate. Senator
Padilla, thank you, Mr.
President. Are you able to Maity
floor leader Peter to take us to
that next order of business,
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 2017 and
request the concurrence of the
has passed House Bill 251 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa Martiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk.
House Bill 93 as amended by the
House and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted this
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk
show the message from the house
has been received.
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
Journals show the message from
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
from the House has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 63 as
amended by the House. House Bill
171 as amended by the House.
submitted, Lisa and Martiz
McCutchen, chief clerk.
General show, the message from
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Respectfully submitted Ortiz
McCutcheon, chief clerk reflect
that the message from the house
has been received.
Mr. President, I am directed to
inform the Senate that the House
McCutchen, chief clerk. Journal
show the message from the House
has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 15 as
amended by the House and request
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 284 and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa and
our business committee.
reports no objection. We are in
that order of business committee
reports the reader will read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
Senator, Senator Shindo.
I, I, uh, in asking I send it
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
and that we vote with, uh, is it
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
That was a pro's name, the eyes
have it, the community port has
been adopted. The reader will
read.
As President your rules
committee, respectfully
submitted senator Katie Doig
chair Senator,
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
committee.
Senate Memorial 3 do pass as
amended and that referred to the
Certificate number 9.
Certificate number 10.
certificate number 66
certificate number 67.
Certificate number 68.
Uh, moved option the committee
reports we have a motion to
adopt the committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those are Po,
the guys have it, the community
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 127 has had it under
consideration in reports the
same with the recommendation
that it do pass and thence
consent to the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually
objection.
The reader will read.
Senate Bill 189. Do not pass,
but the Senate health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
a Senate Bill 189 do pass and
then referred to the finance
committee.
Finance Committee. Senate Bill
322 do pass and thence referred
to the judiciary Committee.
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair.
The eyes have it, the community
port has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your tax,
Senator Kerry Hamblin, chair.
Senator Hamblin.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
government elections and Indian
affairs, Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 47.
DuP
amended and the referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 353 do not pass, but
Senate Bill 370 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 445 do pass and
reports. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
Those oppose.
The eyes have it the committee
report has been adopted as a
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
The reader to read.
reports saying with a
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 492 do pass and thence
the journal reflect.
They were acted upon
individually the reader will
read.
Senate Bill 495 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
submitted Senator William P.
So's chair.
I move adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the final
committee report. All those in
favors signify by saying I.
Those are Boney.
President, unanimous consent. We
go to that order of business
introduction of legislation.
There no objection. We are in
that order business introduction
of legislation.
House Bill 63 introduced by
representative.
Andres Romero for the
legislative education Study
Committee, an act relating to
index rate.
Changing the at-risk program
unit.
Calculating the at-risk index
for charter schools on their
membership after the first year
Bill 6363 having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate Education Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
House Bill 16.
Providing for the inclusion of
advanced grid technology plans
by public utilities when filing
an application for approval of
grid modernization projects to
grid technologies in utility
integrated resource plans and
the annual reports of
distribution cooperative
utilities.
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
for House Bill 93 having been
read twice by titles referred to
the Senate Conservation
Committee, then Senate tax
Business Transportation
Committee, that's House
government elections and affairs
Requiring a lobbying activity
report on the legislation
lobbied and position taken by a
lobbyist or lobbyist employer.
Preserving lobbying activity
business, Transportation
Committee. That's House Bill
143.
the cost of high school
equivalency credential tests,
and associated test preparation
costs for New Mexico residents,
making an appropriation. House
Hospital 171 introduced by
representatives Jones and
Thompson for the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee.
And act relating to pharmacies,
Bill 171171 having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax business,
Transportation Committee. That's
House Bill 171.
Janelle Anananu and Dion Hochman
Vihi, an act relating to health.
Amending sections of the nursing
anesthesia, anesthetics, and
sedatives making changes to the
licensing process.
Expanding the powers and duties
of the board of nursing.
Modifying the administration of
House Bill 178178 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
House Bill 178.
licensure enacting the
counseling compact. House Bill
217 17 having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
Judiciary Committee, then Senate
Serato and Alan Martinez, an act
relating to property.
Enacting a new section of the
NMSA 1978 to limit county and
municipal restrictions of
NMSA 1978 regarding county and
municipal zoning, providing
definitions, House Bill 228228
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax,
Representatives William A. Hall,
Tanya Mirabal Moya, Brian Baca,
Luis Terrazas, and Catherine
Cullen, an act relating to
educational retirement.
beneficiary. House Bill 251251
having been read twice by title
is referred.
To the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
That's House Bill 251.
Exempting hair braiding from
provisions of the barbers and
cosmetologists Act prohibiting
disciplinary action for hair
braiding without being licensed
Committee.
Then send the Judiciary
Committee, House Bill 281.
substitute for House Bill 284,
an act relating to animals,
amending definitions of
livestock code.
Allowing fertility control,
relocation, and adoption of free
certain land through certain
methods.
Requiring the Mexico Livestock
Board to approve the
qualifications of a free roaming
horse expert.
slaughter of free roaming
horses, providing a penalty.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 284.
Thenenate Judiciary Committee,
that's House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill.
284.
How's commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
certificate for certification
requiring practitioners from
other states and jurisdictions
to have license requirements
that are comparable to or exceed
How's commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 296, having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Judiciary
An act relating to conservancy
district elections.
Removing conservancy districts
from the Local Election Act.
Providing timing and other
for absentee voting.
Election notices and polling
locations.
Amending and enacting enacting
sections of the NMSA 1978.
308 having been read twice by
titles referred to the Senate
Rules Committee, then Senate
Conservation Committee that's
House Judiciary Committee
announcements and miscellaneous.
He no objection, we are in that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Worth
now 11:59 a.m. I move we adjourn
until 12:01 p.m. The Senate will
afternoon's session. There is no
objection. It is so ordered.
Mr. President, I ask you to ask
consent.
Uh, that the rules be suspended.
The records show that all those
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
11:59 a.m. I move we adjourn
until 12:01 p.m. Senate will
come to order.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
ask consent that the rules be
suspended. The Journal show all
show that all that the Journal
has been read in full and
approved subject to revision and
approval of the judiciary
Committee. no objection. It is
chairs, and I think Senator
Gallegos also has an
announcement, uh, maybe Senator
Gallego should go first, I
think, and then committee
chairs. Thank you, Senator.
We're on that order of business,
hour meeting, uh, caucus meeting
in room 326 right after the
floor session. Thank you, Mr.
President.
present.
Thank you, Senator Gao, Senator
Pinto.
Uh, Mr. President, it is of
course Ash Wednesday, and I want
to take a moment to thank our
very own Senator Pete Campos as
a deacon who was there this
wanna thank Senator Campos for
that, Mr. President, and, uh,
and then Mr. President, uh, we
had a couple of bills that were
going to be heard today that the
sponsors have asked Bro.
today too. So please, uh, take
note because we've added some
bills to fill some space, so,
uh, we'll still have Center
Grantly, you've asked us to
bring back 214. We're gonna hear
that again, uh, Senator
Steinborn and Hickey on
psilocybin mushrooms, and um
gonna hear CYFD that we had
planned to do and we're not
gonna hear the healthcare
consolidation Act bill today, so
those of you who have those.
Thank you Mr. President. The
Senate Conservation Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
9:00 a.m. we have 5 house bills
on the agenda. Thank you Senator
Stephanic Senator Lopez.
See no further announcements,
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. You have one more
announcement.
Mr. President.
And then, uh, but you know, Mr.
President, I, I'm sorry I wasn't
here for the flowers yesterday.
I did have an issue and on the
job site and so I wasn't here,
but I, I think giving away the
flowers for me is against the
The clerk could not see Senator
Sindo voting from behind the
flowers.
And he was standing up.
Senator Brantley didn't get any,
I mean, they all came to this
side of the aisle and so, uh, I,
I'd ask him to ask consent that
we uh repeal the anti-Donation
clause on the flowers.
Thank you, Mr. President. We're
gonna go in, uh, Senate Finance
in, uh, amend the bill to
include that flower anti-omation
clause, uh, right after the
Senate Republicans caucus, we
start working on, uh, we're
weeding through the budget we're
gonna steer capital.
We know there's a lot of money
in flux and we're really
watching what's happening
federally.
federally. And so as we move
forward, we're gonna have to
start watching for some of that
stuff. We don't know what's
gonna happen yet. I'm not gonna
say it's gonna happen, but
we're, we're gathering that
information so if something does
Senator Pinto, thank you, Mr.
President. I think I said room
313, it's 303 for Senate in
Indian rural Cultural Affairs.
Thank you.
See no further announcements.
