business messages from the house
the reader will read
miss president I am directed to
informed the senate that the
duly enrolled in a growth copy
clerk journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
house taxation and revenue
committee subsequent house bill
two fifty two is amended see no
objection where in that order
business third real legislation
center should have explained the
bill.
package it was put together by
our or our senate tax business
transportation along with the
house center field if you'll
move the bill first
Oh okay all right my yes now
it's concerned that the cinema
that the record showed all
action for placing.
House tax revenue committee
thank you center schedule see no
objection it will explain the
bill
okay thank thank you mister
president the members of the
really want to first of all I
think our our committee our own
our senate text business and
transportation no my trustee
vice share kerry hambling so
millions of tall man and senator
worth
also want to think or or a
committee staff or analysts as
well as our
senate per or respect of uh a
committee members of bills and
then for the first time we
actually had a a joint session
of both the house
for the tax package so that was
very good
and so I want to want to think
the house
uh chairman in a rep vice chair
the the package uh with the
matrix as well as the uh
the analysis and these an
options of the each of these
bills.
There are containing these
specific questions uh of the
building we will entertainment
as a time so on the house side
we have the energy storage tax
deduction this bill will enable
energy stores facilities to be
amends in existing g r t
deduction for sale a win and
solar generation equipment to
include sell of energy storage
equipment to local government
provises sense and date of
progressivity and target cut
rates for working families these
proposed tax breakthese do not
impose a tax rate increase on
any income level the personal
income tax structure proposed in
investment credit extensive
sunset on the angel investment
tax credit from a
twenty twenty five to the end of
the two thirty the tax credit is
twenty percent of the investment
next one is the rule health care
practitioner credit that's over
five thousand healthcare
practitions to be also for the
rule health care how income tax
credit of three thousand
capital games deductions repeals
to forty percent capital gaze
deduction currently in state
instead in statute and provides
for a.
protect their investments
effective and applicable date is
january first twenty twenty five
uh the fire recovery tax credit
creates an income tax credit to
candy and hermes peaks fires cap
the total cost of five million
per year and at fifty thousand
per home the credit is non
refundable but maybe care for
for three years
and then the
uh
the house also had the single
sales a portion
but you know i'll get to that
later but that there was amended
medicaid there is no sunset for
that and in the child care
provider grt deduction creates a
rt deduction for
deduction for profit child care
thirty four so that was the
package that came over from the
house uh we added
fifteen center bills to the
to thirty thousand military
retirement pay and ensure that
spouses are military veterans
also received the income tax
exemption
special needs adoption credit.
deduction creates an income tax
deduction for school supplied
speeches by public school
teachers of up to five hundred
dollars in a taxi or twenty
twenty four in the thousand and
textures twenty five to twenty
electricity generate it and as a
cap of five million each or ten
million total credits are not
refundable but may be carried
forward for three years since
giotermo he he pumps credit uh
creates AP IT and c IT credits
for thirty percent of the cost
of installation there more
twenty three twenty thirty one
twelve thirty one twenty thirty
four
the bill strikes an existing ten
year care for provision and
with the sun said date of uh
july first twenty twenty nine
sole market tax credit increases
the agreed cap of available tax
credits for solar system
in twenty twenty three but did
not receive a certificate due to
the cap to apply or reapply for
certificate the cap on this
supplement up opportunity is.
the tax base and make the
technical changed to how some
taxpayers file the cafcanian
legal services grt deduction
provision groceries tax
tax credits may be allowed in
fiscal years five million eve
and
charging
unit credits creates a pity and
transferable to allow cash on
the hood transaction at core
dealerships since it's at the
end of twenty twenty nine
electric generations single
the events energy equipment
credit uh cre- uh creates a
credit of up to twenty five
million for equipment purchased
by manufacturers or of advance
energy products such as the
with an annual cap of twenty
five million a year
the fire recovery tax credit the
senate amendment adds
manufacturer homes
wells to recoup investments made
to wells for compliance purposes
and then the final is the health
services grt makes technical
the bills that are contained
one has the correct
period
were also in front of you the
correct one is handed out
online thirty one the far right
number should be sixty two uh no
four right numbers thirty one
and thirty three
that's the correct matrix.
Thank you ciner schendel.
Senator are we ready for debate
i'm ready all right things
interesting the senate is very
debating house tax revenue
committee house term station
mister president as a you
thank you and mister president
senator schedule section thirty
seven what does that deal with I
Thank you senator disability.
chamber record and identify them
senator yesterday mister
president I have is now tourists
in jennifer fobby on here from
the policy thank you thanks
sorry for when it's revealed
here seen no objection.
text foreign in the foreign
corporate income to the tax base
it makes it technical change
that house
basic item to the taxpayers good
Thank you center disappear only
for the debate senators.
an amendment coming down so
you would you want to talk
center video
yield to senator senator michael
for the thank you mister
president
session and so as a result I
fully support it but with that
mister president asking him to
consent to the senate that
we excuse centers do hig I
result though and
Mr president looks like some
other members have what we were
for that amendment that being
printed right now so I will
yield to other members looks
like center poll in center
studio lopez have questions
thanks thank you thank you
appreciate that it was a lot of
difficult work that that the the
tax committee did in doing this
and there is a lot to like about
this bill but the thing that is
I don't blame the senate
you know i'm not trying to say
that it was the senate tax tax
committees fault because I know
it is extremely disappointing
and I just don't feel that I can
vote for a bill that goes yet
another year without dealing
with the incredible costs that
we created a list over the
interim of programs and we
worked with the agencies and we
worked on a list that would show
treatment services and adequate
recovery services
I understand from the finance
committee that there are
increased behavioral set health
not going to move the needle in
our state until we get on so
many social issues until we get
a handle on this people talk
about
poverty depression other things
or maybe alcohol in addition and
addiction are not at the very
beginning of the reason of why
uhm we need to put resources a
sustainable amount of resources
into our programs and we need to
build them out so that they're
and I understand why um and it
is unfortunate it makes me it
makes it very difficult for me
to vote for this bill thank you
mister president thank you
for the others would like to
debate we have senator pope.
think like any bill does not
always the situation will be
like everything that we see but
I do want to commend a few
things here and highlight them
surviving spouses get that tax
benefit I think that's a huge
far state
I also want to come in the work
residence and missing out on
that tax credit uh this bill
expands what that amount is
going to be and twenty twenty
four to thirty million but it's
that credit so this is a huge
opportunity and this is great
work by the committee I also
want to commend what we're doing
lower middle income folks and at
the same time we didn't raise
any taxes at all on any of the
brackets so I I think this is
just huge and as the right
direction that we need to be
think so something that we need
to continue to work on in the
future if we're really going to
attack tackle this problem it's
a problem we're seeing here
while we're even in the chamber
in our state.
have to pay for it we have to be
serious about it and I
understand sometimes it's tough
to talk about tough to work on
you know sometimes this even
president at night appreciate
the debate and it's it's
interesting it kind of mirrors
the debate we had on the budget
because the reality is there are
things in here that all of us
we had a process that did not
work very well we had the house
and senate in different places
we were in a conference
committee late at night on the
one fifth the size and i'm
thankful quite frankly that in
the end once we ball taken a
step back that we didn't have
that package signed in full last
direct criticism over the
environmental tax credits that
got vetoed last year and I think
this package certainly respected
who's out there looking at this
you know we did go through a
very transparent process this
year as senator schendo
mentioned I think it's a first
uh the bills all got hit all got
hearings and chance for folks to
weigh in and at the end of the
day I think what everyone needs
to do is look at the total
Because again I just think doing
nothing is not an option so I
just want to point out point
and there might be a a couple
you don't like but but again for
all the different interest
groups that are working on
different parts of this at the
end of the day I certainly
really set this up on a path to
get this enacted and I think
that the benefits of this
overall will really be helpful
to our state thank you mister
president thank you center worth
we have further debate senator
brent.
As mr president senator thank
you mister president and thank
you senator for for bringing up
the alcohol tax issue do you
from our excise tax now is going
to prevention and treatment or
is half of it still going into
the general fund mister
president there was nothing in
options like the dwi funds very
limited treatment prevention and
recovery options
um
sprinkle throughout the budget I
just.
Thank you thank you mister
president and senator do you
happen to remember how much the
you mister president thank you
senator I appreciate you
yielding for those I just
couldn't remember the numbers in
my head and and I know you've
been working on it and so I I
was pretty sure you would
remember them
support an increase is that all
of it should be going to the
needs and honestly it's not
we're taking half of what we
and putting that in our general
fund instead of actually using
that money to
build in those needs because
like said there's millions hot
taking that money as a state and
spending it for other things
instead of actually putting into
those areas of need and you know
die from
alcoholism and and alcohol
related deaths than anywhere in
the country
resources that are raised
for that we just throw me to the
general fund and use them to pay
for everything else in quite
frankly we could be putting that
needs and to deal with those
issues and if we if we start
doing that and then we haven't
been meeting the needs and we
haven't seen the increase that I
need to be putting that money
where it's needed now
and instead we just keep
allowing our budget to grow and
our budget to grow we've got all
And one of those priorities were
supposed to be metal health.
Well
we didn't make much of an
the crime issues were dealing
with which are huge mister
president with a huge crime
problem in this state I know
that make one's a shock to sir
address that this year.
Yeah we've passed a couple a
little bills were you know hey
we're going to let some law
enforcement officers who have
retired come back to work that's
a good thing to maybe fill some
of those gaps for the next three
years.
Yeah we still get bills you're
setting in committees
that would have helped address
those issues that were
bipartisan bills that have been
worked on with the governor and
really telling the people of new
mexico that we really care about
the crime issues when we have
speed almost thirty days here we
spent twenty seven days.
but we as a body we as a chamber
have not addressed those issues.
And quite frankly I think when
it comes to you know what let's
An absolute eff we don't even
get a d.
Because we did nothing we failed
Hopefully at beefing up our
state police might help a little
bit but
most likely they're just gonna
take him from another department
and most likely the governor
will have to send them back down
to albuquerque to deal with the
out of control crime because the
mayor down there doesn't seem to
be able to do it.
But we had the day from down
there here
trying to work on some bills
that would have helped.
voters are paying attention I
think are chamber gets enough
when it comes to dealing with
the out of control crime in our
state.
bit in language.
That's language and the budget
that's not a bill that's
actually going to address it
permanently it's not a bill
that's going to deal with the
issues.
We've got
fact there's a peace and are
it's mine
all your teachers can think me
later.
The.
Now is trying to take care of my
teachers.
The.
really good income we have
billions of extra dollars
and the house actually put a
couple tax increases in here.
But.
We do we got a couple in here
that you will make it really
We're going to give our staff
you know they're there are
weight lifting exercise for
today.
Corporate income tax rate you
know e justified but it's a tax
increase we increased it to five
So these things in here I like
these things and here I don't
like.
The.
It's a it's a tough bill for me.
Anything for people trying to
deal with the crime issues in
there stay in the other thing I
But that's not in here.
Near those safes costs more and
again.
The.
But I tell you what we did do in
here and this is great if you if
you really love them
For rich people that want to buy
evs
we're gonna subsidize the heck
out of the eb for you.
Here's let's just be honest the
only people who buy.
There are two buys on
the only ones who can afford to
buy mister president
how about you what I can't.
Now it depends on the weather
right so one of the things we
saw on the really extreme cold
this winner so far was ev's
parked all on the side of the
When it gets to a certain
temperature.
And so especially up in the in
the colder regions of the
country and we had some really
cold earlier one and you guys
remember.
So those those you know for for
all the wealthy folks out there
that can hear me and are
listening in we're going to help
you buy one so thank you I mean
that's that's a huge portion of
this tax package.
The huge portion.
some middle class folks that are
getting in on the solar panels I
will tell you my neighbors put
someone and they appreciate your
subsidizing that for them.
So
Some of the companies will let
you lease them.
He also feel poor you can get
into a lease agreement.
Of course when you go to sell
your house
it's going to cost it's gonna
require someone with at least a
seven hundred and thirty credit
Although solar pounds
so those are some of the issues
in here thirty two million
dollars
then then it drops down to
eighteen.
For a shot solar wannabe
maybe we caught shot solar two
point l
into my district and rear
ancient and everyone so excited
and I was invited to the ribbon
cutting and all those kind of
stuff I am sure glad that I was
out of town that day
Twenty five million dollars for.
Shot two point oh.
and it works so well that after
over thirty years we still have
to have to subsidise it.
if you search hard enough you
can find it.
One of the good things in here
that that I did not bring up is
the the caf can
So we lowered it from ten so
it's five million dollars
for the folks who got burned out
it's it's not for the victims
directly
it's for the victims attorneys
kind of
I don't know if anyone knows
that like if you're in a state
that the sales tax you don't get
taxed on services but in our
state or on the few states that
thousand dollars settlement so
they bill you twenty percent as
I think what the caf can you
want to go on for so that's
twenty thousand dollars they're
percent so
sixteen hundred do mouth around
on that sort of
worth at eight percent about
businesses job to pay it but all
businesses for the most part
pass that on to the ultimate
customer but that's a good thing
that's in here
to come in and make all those
people hold.
And I stated in committee and
i'd like to stay stayed here on
the floor for the record that
that it's absolutely ridiculous
In federal government burns down
our forest burns down our homes.
The.
And we as a state after.
Pay for it.
That one really gets me that
that we have to pay.
For people's homes that the
federal government burned down
I try to remember if it was the
year I was an analyst or if it
was the first year I was up here
that someone in the house tried
to run a bill.
Was because the federal
government could do so much
better of a job managing it.
Well that's laughable.
But the federal government does
that what they call managing the
forest
instead of finding it instead of
letting us log in set up
actually keeping the force
healthy.
have way too many trees per acre
in the desert.
Let the trees get really nice
and sack
and then start a controlled bird
grandson could tell you that's
not a good idea.
But the federal government can't
seem to figure that out but
they're better managing our
force than we are.
Like that.
But I just have to ask whether
we can actually hold the federal
government accountable.
You talk about one of the
crappiest run organizations in
our government.
What else what are the gyms do
we have in here.
And this one had come from the
house so I guess i'm have to
give a little bit of credit
today is the pet brackets
so for you two million residents
of new mexico that are listening
which means everybody.
We did lower your personal
lowered the bracket made the
bracket even lower and lowered
the the percentage it's a good
thing
thing and if you're on a lowest
income tax next year we lowered
by seventy nine million
the following year we lowered it
by hundred and fifty nine
million is the hit to the
Our total hit here
on the budgets about
two hundred and.
Twenty million dollars.
Couple years ago we passed.
And we've been working on it for
years well we serve burger had
framework for our
tax package.
One thing got a sunset put on
it.
Now is the military retirement
day.
So i'm glad that we've taken
that off now that's a good part
of this.
The.
We have some some good things in
here.
That are we can support.
We put.
Which man I drink so little now
that wouldn't affect me at all.
I did dry january.
And I just don't even have the
It's good for your weight loss.
Today are going to have a race
we're both like that.
But the medicaid renovation
guarantee that's that's a good
thing
right now to not charge good tea
tax when you have an
So as present I think we finally
got the amendment ready to go.
About twenty minutes ago send it
a rent
see I I got so so busy I was
I thought you were enjoying my
my talking today center
center particular was enjoying
it we we've been kind of
conversing back and forth with
that way we know we know what we
need to do down here
us through a beautiful life and
the life of the tack package
thank you senator rant we do
have a floor amendment.
The rate of train.
house bill to fifty two as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator burden.
Senator cliff hurtle to move and
explain the amendment center
thank you mister president if
you turn to the last page
there's only one paragraph I
know it's a little little
frightening the
the size of the mind and
unfortunately we're gonna need
for sole security tax that this
body put in last year that was
vetoed
and so I think it's important
being the youngest member on the
Thank you product ready for
debate and the amendment.
We are debating send a floor
amendment number one and i'll to
the sponsor center schendel.
today of I know that this is
something that I think we could
discuss next year but at this
time this is unfriendly
amendment thanks in a shandon we
are debate in center floor
you send her neighbors mister
president
my question is what
we took it out last year or we
Center period and thinking as
present that you senator so if
you look forty years ago the
federal government started
taxing social security and they
was was quite significant a
chevrolet pick up with a cost
you about thirty five hundred
four thousand dollars for a
brand new one so ten times out
of a vehicle and and since it
hasn't changed now thirty four
with inflation so I don't think
the intent was to tax or
security and less you made an
exorbitant about amount of money
so the concern here is as I will
around thirty forty years from
now will be taxing people that
make over a hundred thousand
social security and and really
it won't be that much money
forty years from now thank you
relying on social security give
them a reasonable uh break on
their income taxes if you will
send her neighborhood center
period thank you mister
it was on the indexing portion
and so I think it's important
that we we put the in indexing
in it's it's going to have a
minimal impact on the on the
pretty center neighborhood.
And mister president uh coming
from a community that holds
itself out as a retirement
community this is particularly
whether it's our low cost of
living in or what have you and
so I think the senator is
correct that uh the indexing
portion is something that we
mexico and contribute to our
communities
mister president and and senator
without the indexing then.
social security what will have
to pay income tax on
income they receive from social
security that will no longer be
yeah in inflation's silent
killer that that a lot of us
don't notice on a year to year
basis but any time you look at
it over a ten year twenty year
and extended period of time and
back and then raise the cap
raise the cap every four or five
years just to keep up and what
this does is just puts in an
automatic indexing so that way
we don't have to doesn't mean
income not to be punished as
things become more expensive.
They sent a personal center
niver mister president one other
concern that I have is a message
we were trying to do something
good to attract these retirees
and we're just trying to
reinstall that effort that was
done last year.
everybody involved in this body
and so I I think it's it's
unfortunate that that that
happened but we have an
opportunity to to put it back
necessary to ensure that this
tax break moves forward and so
that people would not be
punished as things become more
expensive
and a pretty senate neighbor
mister president I think the the
continue to put the indexing in
with respect to social security
payments thank you mister
president thank you sitter for
bringing this thank you center
nine we do have further debate
on the amendment center more.
change we have a body finally
passed some exemption to social
security a few years ago up two
hundred and fifty for a married
couples and hundred thousand
of only ten states including us
their taxes social security
earnings only ten states.
And at the time we did that we
had the commitment to the
haven't done that that's not
sure as a state we haven't taken
that second step we as a
legislature last year took AAA
mini step by lease indexing it
least taking that hundred
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in diminishing the value
as a move forward that was good
pot tax policy the better tax
mexico road island vermont
utility voice virginia as the
only states the tax or security.
In our desert up in the
northeast heights uh we have a
but then get in the arizona.
Then get it in arizona and what
when you order zoni get a lot
more upper income residents that
to retac- a tracked retirees to
the state and enjoy what we have
we got to get rid of the source
security tax we're not going to
do that obviously in this tax
bill now we should I debated a
and unfortunately
we need to do it and I encourage
you guys coming back to do that
it needs to be done we do not be
need to be one of ten states
that actually tax and so
security.
And send in that message to
those retirees that last year we
we got veto this year we're not
going to consider it so why
would I go to new mexico when I
go to arizona elsewhere
But you know when you're not
going to come from somewhere
else you're going to choose
arizona over us because of the
tax structure and what they have
so these list that it keeps us
tried and the governor said no
let's do it again and let's see
if she says no again but she
doesn't have as she signs at
this time and at least we move
forward and then you can get the
next couple of years you can
and let us join the other forty
one states for you now let's be
the forty one state to move
forward and not tax or scary
mister president thank you thank
in the senate but we are
striking
one of the things they sent over
you know we're striking the
single sales factor that the
the agreement well we're we're
striking one of their memens
that they are voted on so I I
think we should just do our
I know my district will benefit
from this
we've all talked about the
ageing population we have a new
mexico I think we all probably
have there.
And let's listen for our
factor so let's we can always
work you know where there is
plenty of times plenty of time
with for districts and do its
best for new mexico thank you
mister president thank you
center speed is would have
it is one we need to have and it
should be more than just an
indexing the issue of social
security we did have the changes
on the floor and I think as we
put together their additional
bring bills from last session
bring up different issues and
put those into the mix and this
is the first time it's been flag
number the challenge we have is
in it and what we try to do is
is to have a framework a budget
framework and stick within that
friends and other side the isle
that this is something that next
year we should look at and
center more you're right i'm
willing to look at the whole
issue of social security
framework our chair finance gave
us a number this is the number
built into the budget this would
be an additional couple million
box if we made this change and
that's why i'm going to vote
for and it's a good flag and I
just again wish we had someone
had raised this before the last
minute when we're down on the
floor thank you mister president
you send the word say no further
so that's one one hundredth of
one percent of the entire
budget.
They spert they spelt that much
just bring the budget down to
it's a million dollars I know
that sounds like a lot but
when we're dealing with a budget
of ten billion dollars it's it's
pretty irrelevant in that aspect
going pay check to pay check
trying to pay for prescriptions
trying to pay for food trying to
keep the bank off their back on
house tax and revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty two as amended roll call.
Thank you centers tier seeds
please we're voting on senate
yes center birth center
birthboard cs centre composed
centre compos votes no center
servant
is center civantes words no
centre do hick.
Senator guy house.
Sent your handling votes no
center hamphile.
Sent your hickey.
Santa be sat though.
spots now centre make catching
sent to me catching boats yes
central mckenna.
Send a no.
Centre in availability s center
neighbor sender neighbor votes
yes central neil.
Centre product votes yes center
poe.
Center pop votes no sent a
No they interested love is both
no center share.
Send your share boat cs center
shandow centre send shandow
votes no center soles.
Center steinbern boat snow
sincere stewart.
Center stewart boat snow center
tom in.
I know explain my vote centre
I would have fifteen infirmative
twin the negative senate floor
categories for just a little
history that sponsored the
social security bill several
years ago and the only one can
get through the house was to
make the capital we did which
was to
me from twenty fifty is pretty
upset.
Bank is a little burden we are
back on the bail senators
senator gagles on the bill.
gaggles soon a shandow I
appreciate you adding my
bill into this on the
increase for the.
posh parent
that have disarmed some real
issues with some of the kids but
give me a number for that page
versus
on page
sixteen nine nineteen in the
same categories mister president
five hundred I was wondering if
we had in magical number of
hundred and fifty thousand
could you give me the difference
between the two categories
Mister president center guy goes
are you talking about the tax
difference
different in taxes.
Yes those are individuals in
that category
most likely rest.
Retax reduction around two sixty
loan circs the hundred and fifty
thousand way high in that
category for twelve thousand but
not over a hundred and fifty
category and I just wandered I I
guess I expected a lot more
a savings away it set their.
The.
understanding what exactly the
question is again
mister president center so if I
were talking in those both
categories the hundred and fifty
wandered no what the number
would be the tax poll out
and if you go to the next page
line nineteen for that one goes
over a hundred thousand but not
Senator schender.
because their marginal auto
lower rate because they rate
because although the marginal uh
tax race below it drop.
income with pulled
spouses working and leave county
I think that would be a fair
number and I was just wondering
president and thank you for that
I know the the here they're
got the computers out and and
hopefully they can give you them
here in the in about a minute
so.
Okay thank you mister.
two and under the new bracket
will be sixty five thirty nine
which is about to to a two sixty
three that I mentioned in the
number in the bracket.
Thank you mission though senator
gagos.
everyone's got a little bit hard
burning here appreciate my point
in this bill but mister center
have you had direct
conversations with the
governor's office so this won't
But mister president was that a
question
center center there was a single
guy because it can restate the
question thank you mister
president so center I was just
wondering in these brackets the
you've had direct conversations
as I go to my constituents I
want them to have an expectation
to this whole survivor veto
spread thank you mister
president I thought you had a
discussion with the governor
no I I appreciate the
restaurant.
Thank you center schedule
several gagas not thank you
mister president thank you
center I appreciate your expert
further debate we're on the bill
sender more followed by center
niverth and santa bell and
sender would sit a more.
Thank you miss president would
senator schedule yield in a
reduction and what is the camp
on my sheet how much are we
reducing it.
is after we raised it while was
at two years ago
when we raised the top rate up
to five point nine from four
point nine how much revenue did
Expert witnesses have their
trustee calculators out to
hopefully you give another
minute and they're very good at
this stuff.
The.
Senator more so forty one
million.
Pinner more thank you mister
reduction but it really is a now
reduction of only a hundred and
thirty million.
Correct mister president
chairman schedule mister
president that's the difference.
talking about other bills and I
appreciate what are you doing on
the public
person in contacts and did need
to be wrote of lower
but I don't want us to forget we
was forty one million dollars
for the last two to three years
so have actually increased it by
eighty million I think this
three years ago we did if I
remember correctly doesn't
increased revenue and that hunt
fat forty million is going to
continue on forward screen the
gate all the what we're doing
here so there's don't pattern
source too much on the back for
reducing the uh person point
corporations and I understand
that arguments on the other side
but anywhere in your senator
schendo when we did that big tax
increased couple years ago we
also increased the cost on
That's correct and we also raise
I believe I think we did a gas
tax I can't remember all but it
was a pretty big tax increase we
did a couple years ago do you
Mister president will pull it
out.
But mister president senator
morris about thirty million
center morris I missed well
thirty million is less than the
forty million nature already
tax on and I do remember it was
four years ago because
uh me as memory print you
blessing it was sent to
recommendations answers who are
pring brought that tax increase
to us and that included the tax
I was talking about the
increases and I remember it also
had increases on the excise tax
alone forty million dollars a
year over the last four years
since he's that hasn't been here
as a hundred and twenty million
dollars that we raised income
tax on new mexico families just
again I don't have the numbers
of front of me but also it was
significant and so we're now
doing two hundred million
dollars a tax increase or really
only hundred and sixty million
for years ago so I just don't
want to still
pat ourselves on the back too
hard on this because those tax
increases hit new mexico
families and it seems like this
in although I do congratulate
you on the income tax reduction
and and creating it does help
metal middle income you accent
And so what we did as we raise
taxes on your mescal family and
now we're going to try to get
tax decreases to those that were
going to support a political
agenda in corporate welfare that
very little over the last couple
years we're not doing anything
property tax we're not doing
anything to actually help new
mexico families were helping
that new mexico families really
don't care about
so we raise taxes and then we're
going to claim to lower taxes we
raised accidental mexican
families were then going to give
there devote against it also
because this really is not tax
decreases this is a tax increase
in disguise should shuffle the
round and giving money to
Thank you mister president world
and sponsor yield
certainly would advocate for a
tax policy that uh uh
essentially made the five uh
Try and do make the tax policy
basically simple make it
efficient make it equal
make it uh
But when I see our tax policy
generally and not just this bill
but our tax policy generally it
seems that every year we get
further and further away from
one issue
which we've discussed briefly
but i'd like to
to find out whether or not the
hard data such as the inflation
rates that we've experienced
last year with the last several
years and did these rates
comport with those inflation in
Oh mister president er central
neighborhood the answer is no
it came from last year's bill.
neighborhood mr president and
center cindo.
So the the reduction in the tax
rates are giving the the lower
keep up with them flation then
if I understand your answer
correctly will that be accurate.
Mister president senator but
that's correct
mister president and and center
inflation in disease when when
doing this because otherwise uh
as people
experience inflation.
spending power is should
necessarily be at one other
issue on the personal income tax
did we do anything to try to
in mrperiod president and
senator schember you know one
thing I I do think that we do
with tax policy maybe
unfortunately is that we do try
that we ought to be encouraging
marriage and having the children
in the mexico raised by a mother
and father in this tax penalty
seems to
families and tactic and so I
think in the long run we need to
really look at that and see if
if our tax policy should may be
scene though I know I said we've
changed a little bit on the
capital gains deduction and
I would like to know uh
gains there could you kind of
explain some of those
limitations and why
that's important for us to do at
this point in time.
Thank you send a neighborhood
center shindow.
reduction does is it repeals the
forty percent capital gains
deduction currently in statute
and provide for a twenty five
hundred deduction for for
mexico may protect our
investments
mr president center and I was at
million dollars and current tax
policy is at new the limitation.
The.
the maximum that you can shield
or get a lower rate on is the
one million dollars if it goes
over a million dollars you're
paying a higher tax rate on
deduction you still get
deduction on the million yes we
we've limited the amount once
you exceed the million dollars
you're going to pay a different
Mr president center shindow the
um
there's a lot of good arguments
that will mean that for
uh businesses that are smaller
they are going to see an
increase in their corporate tax
correct but most small
businesses five under the
personal income tax.
Hey mr president schender asked
because it's probably an lc and
not a
The.
Mr president
sun and sansa in that
specifically tied to wind and
solar
and.
Began to pick up
some of the
burden the tax burden in new
parcel pulls are making up forty
fifty percent of our budget
directly and much greater than
that indirectly
and so is there anything in this
bearing the tax burden by the
industries that are replacing
parcelfuls.
Mister president in a senator
not in in the current package.
credits to those industries and
we're sending a lot of renewable
energy to california virtually
tax free and and I would
begin to capture some of that
energy that's been transferred
to to other states and be able
I have a few specific questions
uh in the bill itself
i'll have you turned to.
section fourteen and this is the
provision that it will exempt I
guess gross receipts tax from
and my question is
do we want to give this tax
break because there's a lack of
lawyers willing to do the work
miss president this particular
is to pass to benefit more to
the victims not the attorneys.
um well i'm i'm glad to hear
that
I just hope it doesn't result in
maybe greater fees cause I I see
them advertising on television
and elsewhere and it doesn't
benefit to the people that have
experienced those losses yet
you're right mister president
and center nine the the fees for
the attorneys are capped at
twenty percent
out a sunset that occurred in
two thousand ten
or two thousand twenty and my
question is
That deals with geotherman
energy.
They can send a neighbor.
San francisco.
Mister president center can can
you restick their question again
yes
guess and twenty twenty we see
several days two thousand ten
and two thousand twenty
that policy ended and my
have sunset that it was not
meeting uh we're not receiving
the benefits that we were
otherwise trying to receive from
virtue of that tax policy and
therefore we're now reinstating
it.
internet tax company but I don't
really know the specifics
but certainly you know there was
advocacy to extend the uh the
policy mister president now
we're putting it back in over on
page fifty five section thirty
six
uh that was all about what is
advanced energy equipment mr
president and san schender thank
you center niver center schenel.
a components to go into that
okay so mister president if I
understand this correctly it's
really directed that it's solar
projects and when projects.
i'd consider advanced energy
projects such as
you know battery technology or I
technology with respect to
completely self contained
natural gas burning generation
that has no exposure to the
neighborhood this particular
bill we're trying to comport
with the federal uh
system it's only technology
schedule i'm not for me with
that particular provision of the
code uh would that be limited to
women solar would it be more
expensive.
Over on page sixty seven
the individuals and others and
my my question mister president
center schenders how do how is
that money allocated to the
people who apply for it is even
effort or or based by region or
geographic area what what would
be the criteria or seniority
is getting mister president it
year one then you have available
money do those uh applicants
carry over to year two.
certificates in the priors to be
able to get that thank you
center shindow center and
thank you mister president
mister president
getting to a more simplified tax
code each and every year becomes
more more complicated and I
really hope that at some point
this body the house.
state tax codes to try to make
them
you know obviously we have to
raise enough money to to support
government but but we also need
uh potential thing that we think
is is good policy and and so
I think we really need to study
that in future years and i've
meet the five goals that are
stated and and simplicity is one
of those and I would encourage
you to do that thank you mister
president thank you make you
urban president yes and can
senator sinternet thank you
mister president.
First off i'm on a vote for the
bill
dollars in tax benefits to the
citizens of the state and about
three four seven is pretty good
stuff the other fourth I don't
really like but that's just the
way it goes can like the budget
tax credit
in the federal tax credit
situation for plug in hybrids
for plug ins in general uh they
restriction going to be involved
on these plugins are these
car battery vehicles mister
president senator no
Mr president if it's under fifty
thousand dollars very good thank
you mister president center
not much money is that the same
is what the
legislature in the magistrates
not no it's not you have do you
happen to know what the name of
that fund is mister president
center.
That that's fine I don't need a
register and I was senator.
Ping senator ingler when he
passed the year retirement
And just curious senator greggs
is in the room here it has a
bill in there that's part of the
list that uh
great we deal with that would he
yield mister president thank you
send a while send her greeks
dealed.
The.
Wish president I will.
Is present and and sinner valley
it does it has a it has no
impact on the general fund but
against the shevershacks and
allows them to use that money to
come in to comply inch with the
rules mister president center
I'm i'm sure I said that would
help ease the pain of having to
shut these wealthy and as well
what we're doing is that mister
president.
Thank you I believe it'll help a
operators and and overall is a
very positive bill for the year
the environment because these
guys are going to be where they
Thank you mister center
appreciate it one final comment
more than anything on the DWI
grant fun senators sadilopes had
commented on that earlier I
the most advanced programs for
DWI
treatment and so forth in the
state I think it is probably the
the premier program and we would
would keep that in mind that the
DWI grant fund is very critical
as you go into future sessions
and we need to make sure that
fund we need to get that other
half switched over that was the
around the state and if the last
minute there were some budget
issues they sucked half of it
out and it's never gone back we
need to get the other half back
into the program I don't agree
unfortunate is the people who
are most
affected by alcohol they're
going to buy just as much as
well and unfortunately what's
going to happen is their kids
senator woods.
Thank you mister president
we have a sections fourteen
if the sponsor would you almost
president.
senator schedule
we are we have several mutual
friends up in the woods so
do with a lot of the wild life
things that have a while far
things that happen that that uh
some of those people decided to
we're trying to save money.
For the people that are very
much in need because of this
crisis
was that ever thought of mister
president and senator make you
send it towards center schender.
Mr president if you look at the
the speakers are bill house bill
ten
speaks to that okay so we did
think of that and that's a good
thing thank you very much for
clear net up
this
amendment here instead of going
through the the bill itself
so I have got it this second
to hear a little i've got all
note senator
just interesting on section
twenty five in this house to do
down here you have new language
that says in star but nationally
a credited ground short heat pop
installer can you mister
president and central can you
president and senator
ministry
may be better administration but
I don't mean the.
Because you trouble all i'm
saying is it would look like AAA
nationally a credited
most of the
plumbing contractors
if you your centre sanchez the
question I have is
why wouldn't someone with your
expertise be able to put in one
Surprise that I do see it center
cities.
Mr president center would could
you repeat the question
bottom of the senate it talks
about.
That the income tax credit shall
be only allowed
rules and natural resources
department so
would it be a great step for
just a regular plumber that does
Individual to do this work
instead of someone that has hold
one of our state license because
through what I understand our
to be an internationally
approved person micropresident
and senator center was center
sanchez.
eight for your mechanical I
don't see why that you wouldn't
be able to install these um and
you're right about that anyone
who is licensed here in your
mexico does have to go under the
mechanical or your gf nine which
is all your utilities so
mister president center I think
you're on the right track I
don't see why we shouldn't be
able to.
you had some playing and putting
that wording in their senator if
you would yield uh do you may
repeat the questions senator
basic plumbing skills but a
ground source heat pom balsa
requires that the person that is
installing it understand how
many tons of capacity is needed
and that's based on the density
system that's needed very
greatly and that's a very
specialized skill that most
plumbers do not have that is
part of being able to do install
is is why don't constructure
industry department.
Put that in code
to say in this area you use this
limited to just a certain group
that's what i'm getting at we're
talking about local employment
here so
mister president and senator why
would it's not something that's
easily to put into the code for
any particular area within local
areas the soil composition
varies greatly that he carrying
capacity varies greatly it's
actually test the soil going
down to several depths or
several meters of depth to
determine what the composition
and he carrying capacity would
be and so it's and very
Well then I would ask this
question mister president in
center and I don't mean to get
i'm sure those test the
gentleman that does those tests
he he has to sim that somewhere
to accomplish that goal
specifics of whether any plumber
could but similarly any plumber
that has the skills could easily
sit for those portions of the
test to become a certified
soils rocky soils loaming soils
they all have different
capacities and certainly a
plumber could go and sit for
those portion of the test and be
able to do basic plumbing and
grounds or seats pumps I guess
we're not I just wondered why
that particular language is in
there and certain presentation
thank you too for yielding at
the same like to me it was a
Connect same
second section twenty six where
it's talking about
of the purchase and installation
cost of the system
is there are so a federal income
tax credit for that mister
president and and uh
Center schedule
mr president the senator I
believe there is.
two uh how much of the system
could be paid for between the
two mister president and senator
case senator was finished mister
The maximum that can be done is
fifty percent of the system are
between the state and the
federal
that it serves that the the
department this is under
affinices department shall
present the report to the
revelation revenue and
idea and on g
it gets down here and it starts
talking about the fisher to
raise shows and this is a very
picky question and I apologize
numbers it uses either a maximum
coefficient a performance of
three
and four tenths.
Why not one fifth.
but why not miss president and
senator why not three.
N and two fierce if it's four
tenths where not too fair.
The.
Okay thank you center words
since when and I have elder but
to anymore i'm not sure if this
necessary we need to install
that back in eligible too so
that we can we've.
Is there anything in this bill
about motorboats
many time we see those model
votes at their smoke and now I
just wonder if there's anything
Uh mister president and senator
no not not not on boats unless
your car turns into a boat when
it's the water.
have that idea and on
on going on on the under the
section twenty seven and we're
talking about the amount of the
And now where we could have in
all this argument about how much
that we need to put in the road
phone if we instead of saying
we're going to give you for
thousand dollars for a new
electric vehicle why don't we
just cut that down a little bit
and put some in and the road
fund and say man you're doing a
discussion mister president and
senator schendel.
Mister president I think it's a
wonderful idea.
most president this is a simple
one
very simple.
Undersection cear that same
article there
under twenty seven
credit number no this is
evidently this may be existing
language.
But it says
it is the vehicle shell have a
least the vehicle and and why
were two questions I guess
mister president and charter.
More likely we're going to pay
two tax credits for that vehicle
the senator only one per
vehicle.
Permission presidential that if
the previous owner bought the
vehicle in state when he had got
Mister president and senator you
can get one on new and one and
use but you can't do over an
over on the used.
president senator thank you
center woods cyner schendel.
you can get it under a certain
circumstances.
There is going to be pretty good
book keeping problem back I
I understand this a whole lot
better appreciated thank you
mister president.
Thank you center words for a
second time we have center
gaggles.
senator sinder deal mister
president say you
singer gaggles miss president
schedule on section seven page
twenty four I was reading i'm
in I was wondering if that is
considered by size of the
community or is it just anywhere
outside the corner much
president center in your center
gaga center schender.
Mister president center then
there's a map on that in that
those part of my concern I know
miss president center is as you
go down and it's talking about
the people who could get the
three thousand dollars or would
be eligible it touched about
same type job as president make
you send her gagas.
that's all I want to do is just
clarify that because I want to
make sure that our uhm license
clinical social workers that are
in public schools get the
Mister president I moved that
the house tax and revenue
committee subsuper house bill
roll call vote please also
receipts please we are voting
also it is to your seats there's
better request for a role call.
Click to call the role.
pass center birth center birth
pass centre compus center can't
post both yes center survived
gonzalez yes center gregs.
Center greg's votes yes center
handling sent your handling
volts yes century hit bill.
Center hakey.
Centered open spots yes into my
estimate center my estimates yes
center mccatchen center mccatch
involves.
Center mars votes no centre
minors
center minors passes centre
never
Centre per dbs enterpinto.
Sent your pento passes center
period
Send your sanchez passes center
cities.
Sentence medicine snow center
city allow best pass center city
a lopus passes center share.
sos sent yourself cs interested
by next center stephanie experts
yes interest die more.
Sender steinbern boat cs center
Center words about ses.
Senator brand
send your brand boat snow center
brantley send you rately votes
no center birth.
Sent her many us.
Sentence for snow.
Center pinto.
Sent your pant about snow.
Yes
the deal opens yes.
By the of twenty six infirmative
thirteen in the negative
house tax revenue committee's
substitute for house bill two
fifty two as amended has passed
compensation for the hermit's
peak cafer is what made me vote
now the initial bill was to give
the victims the full grt credit
then just receive a state credit
for the g r t on these legal
services now the legal g r t is
passed on to these victims the
from state the only way the
credit would have worked is by
lumping it in one full g r t
credit and because of that since
that was given back to the
climate thank you mister
president how to meal senating.
Mister president though thank
you the body of thank you.
Thank you
Thank you senator worth
senders time on thank you miss
president colleagues I asked
unanimous consent of the senate
and there is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
thank you senator steinborn we
did we had we do have a floor
substitute the reader will read.
forty six and act relating to
hospitals enacting a new section
of the hospital funding act to
provide affordable payment plans
to patience under certain
circumstances
going to move and explain the
substitute thank you mister
president and I move senate
floor substitute
number one four.
Miss president ready for this
thank you mister president so
the other day and that we took a
position while I work with the
parties we basically removed
half the bill the other half
that remains today that you have
of life saving treatment and
they're dealing with somebody
who insurance they don't accept
someone who's uninsured and the
you senator steinborn centers
were debating the senate floor
substitute.
Senator smith.
Thank you mister president with
a sponsorer please I weren't
what what affordable is going to
me into the parties involved
thank you center standon yes
mister president senator
calibrated.
I just understand where i'm
center speed is the the
mispresident so the the hassle I
guess would within enquire about
them yes mister president
sanitor generally you know as we
know when you end up at a
hospital it's the first to ask
you as it is the financial
capability task and then they
come up previously about how to
define affordable if you don't
think that needs to be defined
i'm not
i'm not criticising that I just
wanted to can't explore that
affordable and then what what
happens you know when there's a
when there's a disagreement so
i'll i'll move on
Thank you center mr president
center eight dead and and i've
have done more research on that
and for for the you know our
kind of issue but what's
happening is is that hospital
will treat them stabilize him
and then release them very
quickly as compared to providing
real treatment to what is going
president center so it sounds
like and i'm just comparing this
to the president i've seen two
prior versions of this bill
it sounds like in this current
the hospital to except certain
insurance plans
whereas in prior versions I
think we were is is that
accurate mister president
senator yes that is exactly
internally over the next six
months to year to get hospitals
to start covering all the
insurance that in the market
place and so you know there was
cover everyone's except every
part of the different plans and
so that's the arrangement that
we made center smeaters thank
you
think the general jist of the
bill now makes a lot more stands
I think it is an improvement
from the prior a couple of
versions the only other thing
that I would want to add in here
that that is a federal rule that
was put in a few years ago
um there's been some
creative interpretation of what
federally in law but I think
that states you know we can take
leadership in in that federal
initiative and start putting
that into statute to put a
insurance company and the
hospital they are going to if if
some of these negotiated rates
are out
in the open I think it could
really help if you really help
a lot of parties if we have more
price transparency in health
care overall so they'll be made
on the other ask and maybe we
can just keep working on that
metal at a time thank you mister
office then centers surrounders
sir neighborhood thank you
mister president will response
are you
out will you
thank you mister president
parties and and so I appreciate
that and and my understanding
that correctly.
Thanks in a neighborhood center
mr president i'm not sure what
the senator is referring to that
senator could eliminate me what
he's referring to mr mister
president I believe that the
first rendition of their so
maybe the second rendition of it
Thank you center neighborhood mr
president I I think I know what
the and it was in yesia mister
president said you're referring
and that's what you're referring
to who their hospitals we can't
track with for an insurance
provision and yes all that's
been removed from the bill thank
you center stand born center
neighborhood
could you tell me who's in
plan um yes you know county
initiate programs mister
president that's number three
those are people who will
receive you know medicaid
coverage at local local
In the way this would work miss
president in his when and this
was also in the bell is when
someone went to a hospital for a
situation they would be
affordable payment coverage for
a life threatening issue
mr president incentive my
concern is three and four are
issues that are determined after
If the following occur and and
two of them are items that occur
to why we would have things that
are determined long in the
future with respect to an issue
that is immediate.
It's a great question mr
president and that's why be is
accepted in the medical pool
that that gap between showing up
with an emergency life
threatening issue and then
actually being covered that the
hospital is responsible for a
association this morning that we
agreed to and so this is just
making sure that before you know
they provide this affordable
takes a minute to get coverage
under the insurance pool for an
indigent fund and that's where
the hospitals agreed to provide
that affordable plan and provide
immediate assistance
covered and be that uh I would
have taken them out of paragraph
a but thank you mister president
and thank you senator for
revising it because I had a real
disappear thank you mister
president the sponsor doesn't
need deal they'll just share
with the body that
people associate with the
hospital association have
Thank you mister president I
don't need to sponsor to to
yield rise in support of this
bill and I think this is
actually a finer tuned bill for
what circumstances were very
illness and so i'm very grateful
for that one can we are living
in an age where um if people get
their health care when they need
it not having to wait for us for
insurance are going through
forward for working on it and
being very diligent about it
because I do think it's going to
in this new version really get
to to what senator steinborn and
I know our issues that are
but it doesn't close all the
gaps me will the sponsor yield
an ideal center in the city of
office thank you mr president
there are some rural counties
this help them mister president.
Mr president center it's a good
question in the answers probably
now because if you look at the
condition including cancer there
many hospitals throughout the
state that don't treat cancer
you have to go to other
hospitals so while it does
address some people it certainly
diseases or illness and um while
I support the bill I hope that
we can work in the future to
further close the the gap for
had single pair thank you mister
president center city of up as
we do have further debate where
center servant is.
My most president mister
figuring a center of our
colleague from doing any county
made reference to the hospitals
in donate a county so
i've not seen this bill before
near the committees i've served
for when it refers to on page
mountain view.
So mister president senator yes
those concepts are defined in
law they're definitely in the
hospital act county hospitals
are county own hospital in the
absolutely is the case of
memorial medical hospital which
is on the county and they have a
contract it is not included
probably the other two hospitals
end lice crisis.
Mr president mountain view and
three crosses were not fall
under that category and and
perhaps not memorial but they
certainly would be a contracting
hospital.
senator neighbor interpreted
this to not require a compeller
contract I think he was talking
about a very specific type of
provide an affordable payment
plan that gets to the point
center schmide's mean what is an
affordable payment plan
and I I didn't get an answer to
that um
they're income is what they're
and what what the treatment is
going to cost etc who will make
a determination what is an
would and again the these are um
these are words and concepts
which there's a lot of
precedents for in other you know
monthly income and sell that's
either that certainly one way
it's commonly done.
Mandavis is necessary I I think
there's some challenges to the
payment plan what the hospital
thanks is an affordable payment
plan if if the if senator you're
saying the hospital will decide
what is affordable and not
affordable my guess is there
maybe some disagreement
ultimately
imposed are on the provider
where the patient resides were
up on an individual resides as a
complicated issue sometimes in
new mex going in the law for
eligible run so the to me that's
a bit ambiguous to make this
applicable where a patient
resides can be resides for how
long do they have multiple
counties where they reside
how are we going to define
rough life through any condition
including cancer
if we if we say that in here
we're saying cancer is going to
be included but can answer can
be a life threatening condition
years but but what what what we
call a life threatening
condition and say cancer is a
life or any condition may or may
not be accurate and the corn i'm
looking at my colleague center
committees and others who are
I think will be problematic
I share senator neighborhoods
concerns that the.
Eligibility for this is when
you're in eligible for an
indigent program where a medical
my supporter opposition that
comes down to we're telling the
county hospital or contract your
hospital a lot of things they
must do i'm not seeing in this
bill what the consequence is if
well mister president senator as
the good senator probably knows
hospitals can be sued
there you can have attorney
general action
if if a hospital is not engaging
from a regulatory standpoint may
end up making some further
clarifying rolemaking
but but you know if if I
hospital is blatantly ignoring
these things certainly they can
that becomes that of a a matter
of opinion too in a matter of
some dispute whether they're
blatantly avoiding an articles I
should ask my question more
precisely does the bill itself
anything else afforded this in
this bill for a penalty.
And I think you center
appreciate your candor on that
this body knows me pretty well
lawmaking and and I employ all
of you who are here they're
working very hard to your bills
you're making law that lawyers
and judges and those of us in
the in the world of law have to
they have to do or not do it so
I can tell a judge what the law
says or doesn't say when when
there's a lack of clarity that
makes my job impossible it just
means things get tied up in the
absence of specific consequences
we're we're effectively adopting
a memorials rather than laws to
which those of us that are in
the lock actually ever apply or
center worth he was ready to
send excuse center padea on your
and courier hamper
until they returned to the
chamber except for purposes of a
call see no objection.
Senator steinborn i'd say cinema
memorial hospital down and lost
crucials I had an inclinate was
and there's been some
some recent news articles about
some issues down there so I
assume that's what this is going
and in your bill it says it's
only provider care in the county
where the patient resides um i'm
not sure mister president
senator this covers memorial
putting a burden on all the
other a small rural county
hospitals out there and damien
and while yes and everyone else
when that's not the target of
this legislation mister
director to ask the exact
question about memorial and and
the you know the definition of a
contracting hospital under the
law which is a which is a which
believe that it applies and
tell I think the answer is yes
it does do that but also many of
the hospitals around the state
fall under this president center
i'm trying to think of the count
is that more than one hospital
you got lee he got burned all
you got done and a sound affair
but most if they have a hospital
only have one so those ones were
provider of care in doing any
county you can go to bound you
and you go to three crisis so
as so the session cover what
you're you're you're talking
about I think in your first
mentioned site III I
think you need to
work on the some more I don't
think this is baked yet because
I don't think it actually the
only provider care in donate
county if you just add done anna
that they're not the only
provider care in that county so
this doesn't apply to them
mister president senator the
one of the only providers maybe
only provider of certain kinds
of cancer treatment like
radiation treatment in the
county and that's where as I
understand it and that's where
they are applicable that's where
of the life saving where you may
be a hospital and there may be
multiple hospitals but you may
be the only one with a certain
life saving
where two laboratories want to
women don't and the county I
believe in your district that
receives pathologies surgical
and etc and tumors removed so
there are other options besides
memorial those other two
hospitals mean them case our
pathologists on a daily basis
Thank you center moors
see no further debate.
Sinner's time warrant closed on
the bar thank you miss president
lot of people around the state
mister president it's not
perfect but it's a great start
and you know what we've seen a
very loud message especially as
we're handing over one point
three billion dollars the
I move that senate floor
substitutes politics I moved
that senate transportation
business track tax committee
substitute for senate bill one
forty six b now adopted and I
ask for a shell of hands.
present as me counted and buy a
show of hands.
You go see we're working on this
working on this legislation
substitute of florida substitute
to make it an easier process I
want to say thank you for that
singers we are voting on center
place up to two percent of the
one forty six.
Send it a brand building now.
Senator composed for now.
Senator servant is voting now so
there are more is voting now.
Senator share body now.
Center gages volume now center
birth money now and senator
ville volley now.
forty six has passed the senate
centers nightmare thank you
president thank you colleagues
said a major florida peter worth
to take a set next order
business thank you mister
president we go that are
four messages from the house of
representatives mister president
I am directed to in front of the
senate that the houses passed
house build one sixty five as
amended by the house and
requires the concurrence of the
the senate that the house has
passed house bill one eighty one
and request the concurrence of
the senate respectly submitted
the same or these mechanic and
chief clerk the general show the
messages from the house has been
received.
market he's macating chief clerk
the journal show the message
from the house has been received
mister president i'm directed to
infront of the senate that the
ninety as amended by the house
and request the concurrence of
the senate respectfully
submitted december teasement
cutting chief clerk thank you
the journal will show the
community substitute four house
bill two thirty nine and request
the concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted these
emergencies mccatchen chief
clerk.
there no objection where in that
order business introduction
legislation the real read.
community based pharmacy
providers for the full cost of
president prescription drugs
plus a professional dispensing
fee required the health care
to medicaid recipients making an
appropriation house bill one
sixty five hospital one sixty
five having been read twice by
title is referred to the senate
health public affairs committee
that's house bill one sixty
five.
amending the life and health
insurance guarantee association
act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance guarantee association
section fifteen husband one
eighty one one eighty one have
you been read twice by title
is referred to the senate tax
business transportation
to motor vehicles raising the
apparent damage content for a
vehicle accident there requires
a written report of the accident
to the department of
transportation from five hundred
committee that's house bill one
eighty six
hospital one ninety introduced
by representative guarantee and
activating to procurement and
department of finance in
administration to promotate
rules for review and approve
public private partnership
agreements husbill one ninety
introduced by representatives
some motor and reeb.
An act relating to corrections
including cabin canabas in the
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the senate
judiciary committee that's how
two thirty nine.
Yeah.
announces misleading senator
worth thank you mister president
so that is it for today just to
give the members of sense
tomorrow we're going to come in
on the floor at noon
a late afternoon early evening
floor session tomorrow night so
with that kind of framework
now's the time and I know I sena
pope's gonna announce a
caucus meeting in the senate
lounge tomorrow at eleven thirty
once again eleven thirty am
tomorrow and the senate lounge
eleven at nine thirty or half an
hour after conservation finishes
and I understand there are going
to be a long time i'm told so
figure out a different place to
meet thank you thank you center
source we have senator
thank you mister president a
senate conservation will be
We will be meeting a hearing
senate bill to ninety four which
is a committee sub we will be
hearing sentiment oil fourteen
which is a committee sub and we
a breakfast this time
nine am room three eleven thank
you satisfaction center when
yours mister president in other
public incident asked me to meet
between that and then maybe well
mean right around nine thirty am
so what senate financial going
tomorrow at nine thirty am or at
the caller chair so will that
members know
you mister president center when
you are senator or these have
been a
victim is determined it is
banged my need.
Senate health and public affairs
three twenty one it's available
tomorrow morning because we
can't meet this evening up and
we have actually
kind of heavy agenda so we'll
in three twenty one thank you
center disappearance in
restaurant this thing was
resident president given the
hour and some commitments of
committee members this evening
slight so right now with the
expected four session and the
caucus i'm expecting judiciary
to meet about two o'clock maybe
two thirty tomorrow when we get
advance so I can plan for our
time and community members again
please take note of that
mispresident on a different
subject
I heard somebody just talk about
going to church negotiate center
ashes and and ash when a
ceremony here wednesday morning
center my nose is back so that's
good so mister president will
we'll have an ash wednesday
members please plan to get up
early once the morning and it's
an ecumenical service so all are
invited to join us wednesday
morning at seven thirty thank
somebody it was full of clean ex
until I I don't know if he's
over his crying or not but I
mean has since I want to I know
I got the extra soft puffs with
not it's the second time we've
been to super wall and the you
know mister president last night
the chiefs had tailor swift with
them and if that was enough then
it out there at the very end I I
think that's
i'm beginning to wonder whether
that's really just a fair battle
anymore mister president but but
hey event yeah we we had a great
day wouldn't you say center when
you know sixty to one odds that
pays today those were at a
tribal gaming facility
clear by that but yeah that was
odd sixty to one.
house next I appreciate him
behind the clean next deliver to
my house and I won't speak to uh
what products will be delivered
to center minorities office in
house before the end of the
just a couple things senator
survantees I just want to make
sure you checking with our
senate chaplain let him know
about the ash wednesday services
I don't heal appreciate that and
then for the members tomorrow
available for senators in the
senate lounge starting at five
o'clock tomorrow night so just a
heads up on that we appreciate
that and with that you know must
consent the senate standard
recess until noon tomorrow.
