Sandra Gonzalez
Hamlin.
Center Hickey
Senor Nova
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Sanchez.
Santer Scott.
Santa Cedilia Lopezent share.
Senator Stewart San Thornton.
Santer Tobias
Santer Tobiasan
Center Townsend.
Please stand for the invitation
to be given this morning by
Reverend Joy Hare from Christ
the pledge in Spanish to be led
by Senator Figueroa and the
salute to the New Mexico flag by
Senator Pope.
Ebert for this opportunity to
offer a prayer, um, to your
chamber. I also want to take a
brief moment to introduce
myself, which I don't think I
Church in America. We are so a
member of the.
Lutheran advocacy ministries of
New Mexico which has been an
advocating agency for.
Harry.
We are proud to be the host of
the pilot safe outdoor space.
our congregation with the city
of Santa Fe and with the
Lifelink who provides services
and we were proud to be on the
front page again of the New
in New Mexico for 10 years and
almost 2 years total. I share
this because I have.
Behavioral health and the
homeless affordable housing
crises here in the state.
So take a breath and let us
pray.
of this legislative session. Let
us pray.
Creating and sovereign God.
We first give you thanks for all
of creation.
various natural environments we
call home.
We give thanks for this space
and for the many people who
serve here as elected officials,
federal administration announced
this week and the unknown impact
those changes may have upon us.
We ask for you to grant us
humility to see each other and
wisdom to listen to and hear
As we work to respect and
protect the rights of all who
live in or enter our state
acknowledging their God-given
dignity regardless.
If they are descendants of
As we work to care for the most
vulnerable in our midst,
including the homeless and
mentally ill as we work on
businesses, especially those
local in New Mexico so that they
earnest efforts benefit owners,
workers, and consumers.
Encouraged to act, trusting in
your guidance.
May we give each other the grace
and mercy we ask from you.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it
stands, one nation under God
Oh
Uh salute.
Why of the state of New Mexico.
Good morning, everyone. Senator
Peter Wirth.
Uh, good morning, Madam
President, unanimous consent we
President, I just asked for
unanimous consent that we go to
that of our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Thank you see no objection mo on
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth you, Madam
the state and it's just super
important that we understand
that we're here to help New
Mexicans. And so your words
really.
came through and sang out to us
this morning. I also just want
a huge success, and that's in
large part to your being willing
to do it, uh, again, I have as
folks know, uh, an in-house city
knowing lots of folks that lived
nearby and work nearby, all the
reports are positive, so it is,
it is an example and we're
having this discussion. It's a
Association, uh, legislative day
at the Capitol, uh, reminder
from the Secretary of State.
Financial disclosures are due
today at 5 o'clock. They will be
assistance, uh, preparing those
certificates. We do have a
certificate for New Mexico
family and consumer services day
that'll be read, that'll be
Senator Jamilo when we get to
Fonda Hotel at 7:30 a.m. by
invitation.
Uh, a reminder again for the new
members and anyone who wants to
attend, uh, legislative finance
committee is going to continue
earmark severance tax bonds for
schools, state facilities, local
projects, elements of successful
projects, so important
discussion on capital. there are
chamber again is having a brunch
on Sunday at 9 o'clock, uh, by
invitation and on Sunday there
also is a legislative reception,
uh, Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce at the governor's
Senator Padilla, good morning.
Thank you, Madam President.
Unanimous.
consent to allow cameras on the
Senate floor in the Senate
gallery.
Seeing no objection, it is
ordered.
Senator Woods.
And I loved what you said.
Take a deep breath.
Open your eyes.
Open your ears.
That uh we have a New Mexico
State bag owner desk today.
And I might say, uh,
Go Aggie's.
was a bounds. So I'm sorry I
didn't.
Ride the colors today, Madam
President, uh, all my members, I
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam President.
library Legislative Day.
So, um,
Today is library Legislative day
and it's sponsored by the New
Mexico Library Association.
libraries opened the doors to
information, literacy, and
opportunity in all of our
communities. I'd like to
introduce a group of librarians
who have come out today.
Behind me we have.
library, uh, she's the president
of the New Mexico Library
Association also uh.
We have folks seated in front
here, um, so I'm just gonna read
Library, uh, Francine, let's
see, I already Francine Benet
with the Cottonwood Classical
Prep.
Sarah Quimby with the Institute
Uh, Carlene Garcia with San
Felipe Pueblo Doctor David Cost
of the New Mexico Technical
Library in Socorro and.
Madam President, the chocolate
on our desk was provided by the
New Mexico Consortium of
academic libraries.
Libraries have stepped out of
their traditional roles to
provide New Mexicans with a
lifeline of 21st century
technology resources and digital
skills.
low and moderate income people
to utilize government, business,
educational and employment
services online in 2023 and
bond issues by substantial uh
margins.
Uh
I, uh, when we, uh, when I was
growing up we didn't have a
grows in Brooklyn and also the
um series uh the, uh, uh, Little
House on the Prairie series.
Those are two of my favorite
library.
So, um,
Madam President, I'd like to
yield to Senator Seddio Lopez.
tell a little library story when
I um was growing up we did have
a TV but it was a really small
little black and white one, and
it wasn't, it didn't open as
Actually read all of the books
that were that I was allowed to
read and my mom gave special
permission so that I could read
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley
thank you.
Madam President, I'd like to
yield now to Senator Jaramillo.
in our communities during the
pandemic it was a place where
those nortenos who don't have
internet access, went to to
apply for funds that they needed
And thank you so much Senator
O'Malley for allowing me to
speak. Thank you, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
O'Malley. Thank you, Madam
President. I think we have one
more and that's Senator
Stefaniks. Senator Stefaniks.
libraries, but they're all run
by volunteers and I think we
need to acknowledge the people
who have dedicated themselves,
for example, in Corona, New
computers, so every little bit
that we do for rural
libraries really helps and
Capitan, New Mexico, they are
using the computers for people
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator O'Malley. Thank
you, Senator Stefani. Senator
O'Malley, thank you, Madam
President, I yield to Senator
Gonzalez.
libraries were so special.
And uh there was a few of us in
Taos that um during the time
when we had a lunch break that
know, just to be able to, to do
that.
But on another hand is um my
wife retired from uh being a
teacher and administrator for
and it is certified by the state
and uh Talpa Community Center is
on 518 right out of uh 58.
quilting, there's
Everything you can think of but
uh the library is the big
special thing.
And as uh Senator Jaramillo
mentioned during the.
Carson Co op really stepped up
to the plate and put a quite a
few uh hotspots to where they
could even do it outside.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator O'Malley, thank you,
Madam President.
All right, uh, Senator Padilla,
thank you very much, Madam
senator, uh, Calleos.
Madam President, thank you. I
was trying to get Senator
O'Malley's attention so I could
be part of the uh library day
we built an elementary and we
focused the elementary around
the library. Now with the
audiobooks and computers, it's,
uh, easier for uh students to
I went in to read to the
kindergarten class, and I used
Big Red Dog book went through
the whole thing. The kids loved
it, but I did it with the book
those things, it may be a losing
art in the future. I think we
need to stand.
and make sure that our
librarians have the resources to
be able to do what they do to
I wish I was out there because
I've got all kinds of rural
library stories, but maybe on
Monday I'll start talking again
about it. Anyone else, uh,
Which was something that uh
Very much needed and also serves
not just the students in New
Mexico but the students in
restrictions.
But in that too that I have a
student that is working for Gal
McKinley County Schools that is
also a library assistant and to
and to go back and, uh, go back
into the schools and serve in
that capacity, so I very much
applaud her and thank you for
all what the libraries do for us
and the librarians. Thank you,
Thank you Madam Chair. I rise to
introduce, uh, my guests for the
day, uh, unanimous consent to
introduce my guest.
introduce everyone to, uh, this
really wonderful student from
NMSU today, even though I am a
lobo, I am fully in support of
has a very proud daughter of a
bracero, a granddaughter of a
bracero my abuelo efrenava who
used to go across the country
School in 2023. As a teenager
and Ido migrated with his father
to work in agricultural fields
across New Mexico, Colorado, and
Texas and recognition of his.
An honor he received at the 2023
National Association of State
Directors of migrant Education
Conference in Albuquerque.
A first generation college
student, Gennaro was recruited.
and ranches across New Mexico.
Now he's a sophomore majoring in
industrial engineering, and he
is part of the 22nd cohort of
camp at NMSU with a cumulative
community infrastructure both
locally and internationally.
Please help me in welcoming
Gennaro to the chamber.
Thank you, Madam President. No
longer a diamond, Madam
President, uh, Senator Nava, I
am also proud. I'm an Aggie
through and through. I bleed
program in New Mexico State
University is a federally funded
program that helps migrants and
seasonal farm workers attend
college and New Mexico State
School, a first generation
college student and farm worker.
Maria joins the 22nd camp
co-hearted New Mexico State
University through this college
impacts on.
fellow students for your work
and for your family's work in
agriculture. Thank you very
much. We are proud of your
academic success, and we know
Uh, Senator Souls.
Thank you, Madam President. Uh,
first, I wanna thank the various
members who were able to show up
in the education room this
discussions from those three
secretaries, but also with us
today and shadowing me is the
president of the Education
commission of the states, uh,
moved into Washington where he
was the national, uh, chairman,
director of the community
schools initiative. He is now
president of Education
legislator, whether you're on
education committee or uh
committees or not.
And lots of information about
what's happening in other
states, uh, most ideas are
probably been tried somewhere
about education. They've got
thousands of requests, uh,
they're one of his staffers
assigned to New Mexico is
Gabriela Rodriguez, uh, but
we're very fortunate today to
Thank you Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, we will not go to Senator
shall read.
The legislature of the state in
Mexico, fifty-seventh
legislature, first session 2025.
whereas the New Mexico
Association of Family and
Consumer Sciences operates 42
programs at middle schools and
high schools throughout New
child abuse, preventive
healthcare, financial literacy,
healthy families and parenting
skills, nutrition and healthy
food choices, creative decision
for jobs in banking, health
care, elder care.
Nutrition, tourism, fashion,
design, and retailing, child
care, early childhood education,
Mexico graduation reality and
dual role skills began in 1989
and has served nearly 20,000
young parents and whereas NM
enrolled in NM grads graduated
compared to 53% of teenage
mothers nationwide, a 90%
to 15% statewide and whereas NM
grads includes a fatherhood.
ing program for partners of
teenage mothers and whereas in
Mexico association.
student-led family career and
community leaders of America and
the regionally targeted career
and technical technical
education workforce readiness
State University helps fill the
gap by preparing students for
family and consumer science
careers in secondary education,
and Consumer Sciences for its
valuable contribution to
education in New Mexico signed
and sealed at the capital in the
city of Santa Fe.
Jaramio, thank you, Madam
President. As a former middle
school teacher, I'm thankful for
the work of the New Mexico
Association of Family and
Consumer Science and New Mexico
It was the shell that we got to
name. We got to take to class
with us and by the end of the
week we had to ensure that that
it that.
was safe and protected, and I'm
curriculum out to middle and
high schools and so joining us
is Janae Johnston from the New
Mexico who's the New Mexico
grads director. Michelle Cea,
Family and Consumer Science
Advocate, and Diane Kemp, the
New Mexico Association of Family
and Consumer Science president,
so Madam President, if you can
announcements and all right,
well, with that, uh, Madam
President, I'll take us to that
next order of business committee
reports, Madam President.
Center share
So I did have an announcement,
I wanted to start
There is certainly fear among
some of our Native American
populations about what's going
on on a federal level, and I
make sure, but we're looking at
the, the safety and welfare of
everybody in the state, and that
would include getting rid of the
gonna get swept up in this and I
don't think that that is the
intent. I know it's not the
intent, but I also want to make
sure that if that is happening,
Then we need to know about it so
If there is a situation like
this, please let us know. We
established a, a, a hotline uh
email website so that people can
So that we can get the federal
government to protect our
communities from the violent
cartels, so this is set up now
we're concerned about this on
violent cartels and so our
website is senate.minority.
At NMLedgers.gov senate.
we'll we'll look into it that
day, or if there's a violent.
Cartel that's happening out
there or hiding out there
somewhere. Email us that and
we end our announcement to
miscellaneous. Thank you, Madam
Chair. You know, we had some
questions about FIRs the other
day. We did put a format in
place and, and the chairs have
ranking members should probably
visit. You have a copy of it.
I'll make sure it goes to the
ranking members, uh, so we can
get that to you guys. But just
so you know, if state agencies
I mean, there is, we put a
format in place.
We're gonna test it. We're gonna
see how it works and, and we're
gonna keep, uh, moving forward,
so that way there will be no
questions on the floor. Thank
I'll take us to that next order
business committee reports.
So we have unanimous consent for
committee reports saying no
objection, will the reader to
read.
Madam President, your rules
the opening day ceremonies of
the 2025 New Mexico State
legislature directs the chief
clerk to prepare suitable
documents to express the
appreciation of the Senate,
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports and that we
act on the move with one motion.
So these are their certificates.
Certificates and we act on them
with one motion. Thank you. the
Congratulations certificate
number 2.
Recognition certificate number
4.
7.
Recognition certificate number
8.
Recognition certificate number
9.
Recognition certificate number
12.
Directs the chief clerk to
repair prepare suitable
documents to express the
recognition of the Senate
respectfully submitted. Katie
President.
OK, we're on a uh.
report for certificates,
adoption of the certificates,
all those in favors signed by by
saying I.
reports all right, that's it,
Senator Padilla. Thank you very
much, Madam President, unanimous
consent that we go to that next
order of business, introduction
of legislation.
Seeing no objection, we are on
Senator Campos, an act relating
to public finance.
Providing zero interest loans to
political subdivisions of the
state and electric cooperatives
that have been approved for
contracts, providing for
enforcement of the terms of the
loan contracts.
Creating the natural disaster
revolving fund.
Providing an annual transfer
from the appropriation
reimbursement revolving fund
making appropriations.
Declaring an emergency. Senate
Bill 31. Senate Bill 31, having
Senate Bill 220 introduced by
Senator Woods and Senator Ramos
for the legislative finance
Committee, an act relating to
requiring reports Senate Bill
220.
Senate Bill 220 having mid-read
price by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee,
relating to insurance, amending
the New Mexico Insurance Code to
define and prohibit an
additional unfair claims
practice. Senate Bill 221.
Senate Bill 222 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez, an act
relating to public safety,
Allowing the health care
authority to promulgate rules to
establish additional
disqualifying convictions for
caregivers, providing for
read twice by title, this sort
of printed and referred.
To the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee thanks to
development, amending the local
economic Development Act.
Requiring a qualifying entity to
conduct a housing study prior to
submitting an application for
Senate Bill 223 having been read
twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee, thence to Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Senate Bill 223.
mediation and court proceedings
that involve the medical
malpractice Act.
Senate Bill 224. 224 having been
read twice by title is order
Senator Munoz, an act relating
to penalties, increasing fines
for littering, increasing hours
of community service required
for committing graffiti,
Act, Senate Bill 225. 225 have
been read twice by title is sort
of printed and referred to the
Senate.
Tax business and transportation
Senate Bill 226 introduced by
Senator Munoz.
An act relating to motor
vehicles establishing a maximum
speed limit for truck tractors,
Transportation Committee the to
Senate Judiciary, Senate Bill
226.
Then a bill 227 introduced by
Senator Munoz for the
certain funds. Senate Bill 227.
Senate Bill 227 have been read
twice by title or a printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
Committee thanks to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 227.
Providing that it is a 4th
degree felony for a person to
enter a retail establishment
with the intent to commit any
felony or theft after receiving
referred to Senate Health and
Public Affairs, the Senate
Judiciary, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 228.
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
required by law. Senate Bill
229. Senate Bill 229 had been
Xena Bill 230 introduced by
Senator Scott.
An act relating to notary
officers.
Increasing the maximum fees and
notary officer may charge for
2021, chapter 21, Section 28 as
amended. Senate Bill 230.
Set Bill 230 have been read
twice by titles or printed and
Zen bill 231, introduced by
Senator Boone.
An act relating to agriculture
enacting the beneficial
Substances Act.
Providing powers and duties.
Allowing inspection, sampling,
analysis and testing of
beneficial substances.
Assessing fees.
Removing soil conditioners from
Bill 231231 have been read twice
by title as order printed and
referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee, thence
to Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 231.
to the local government division
of the Department of Finance
Administration to contract for
master planning for permanently
affordable housing in the city
of Albuquerque.
Committee thence to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 232.
Senate Bill 233 introduced by
deceptive trade practice, Senate
Bill 233 Senate Bill 233 had
been read twice by title
disorder printed and referred to
Senate Bill 234 introduced by
Senator Pinto, an act relating
making appropriations. Senate
Bill 234.
Senate Bill 234 he and read
twice by title is sort of
Senate Bill 235 introduced by
Senator Souls.
An act relating to public
schools.
Amending the mathematics and
Science Education Act.
programs requiring school
districts and charter schools to
develop mathematics professional
learning plans requiring the
public education department to
establish a mathematics
instructional leadership
grade.
Requiring immediate
interventions and parental
notification if a student is
identified as having
characteristics of this this
printed, referred to the Senate
Education Committee, thanks to
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee, Senate Bill 235.
It's about 236 introduced by
plates for motorcycles, amending
section 66-3-424.
Senate Bill 236 have I read
twice by Titus or printed and
referred to Senate tax, Business
and transportation thence to
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 236.
commission activitiesen bill
237.
Senate Bill 237 had been read
twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
An act making an appropriation
for a youth behavioral health
prevention project for public
school students. Sanibel 238.
Senate Bill 238 had been read
Senator Stewart, an act relating
to real property, amending the
Homeowner Association Act to
provide an additional remedy for
to Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 239.
Senate Bill 240 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez and act
relating to timber.
Senate Bill 240 and then read
twice by titles sort of printed
and referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee, thanks
to Senate tax, Business and
construction zone automated
speed enforcement Act
authorizing the department of
transportation to use automated
speed detection devices to
construction zones providing for
hearings.
Requiring rulemaking.
Imposing penalties.
Making an appropriation.
Committee, thence to Senate
Judiciary Committee, Senate Bill
241.
Senate Bill 242 introduced by
Senator Stewart.
demonstrate competency in
structured literacy and the
science of reading, requiring
the use of high quality and
structural materials for all
student teaching and supervised
monitoring and enforcement.
Senate Bill 242.
So that Bill 242 had been read
twice by title disorder printed
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 242. Senator Padilla, thank
you, Madam President. You
consent to go back to that order
referred? Senate bill 109 has
had it under consideration
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they acted
upon individually.
no objection, the reader shall
read all the committee reports.
Senate
Senate Bill 109 recommendation
do pass as amended and thence
Senate Joint Memorial One
recommendation do pass and that
referred to the conservation
committee.
Uh, Madam President, I moved off
of the committee reports. I just
want to know, I think two of
those were as amended, I think
only one was read out as
Senate Bill 124 do pass as
amended.
And then referred to judiciary.
misheard it, so I apologize for
that. But yes, I move, uh,
adoption of the committee
reports.
Uh, we're on adoption of
favorable committee reports from
the rules committee, those in
favor signify by saying I.
individually. Senator Padilla,
uh, thank you very much, Madam
President. I think that's all of
the business on the table there
and uh unanimous consent that we
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Thank you, Madam President, and
I would like to announce that
the health, uh, committee, uh,
will be reviewing Senate Bill 2
and 3, which we started our
discussions on last week and
also Senate Bill 6 and 7,
we're in the room is 311.
Monday afternoon, thank you
thank you. Other announcements,
Senator Souls. Thank you, Madam
President. Uh, the education
Garrola, Pope, and Figueroa's
bill, um, I've put 3 other ones.
I don't have them in front of
me, so do make sure this
afternoon that agenda is being
gonna be the first one, so it'd
probably be around 10, between
10 and 11, uh, on Monday,
there's a chance, so pay
attention as to the education
bills. Thank you, Madam
President.
the senators who are sponsoring
are Senator Campos, Senator
Munoz, uh, Senator Stefaniks and
Senator Harmio. We will be
hearing a region for the New
Thank you. Other announcement,
Senator Cervantes. Thank you,
Madam President. Oh man, my
voice does not sound, does not
sound good, does it? Yeah,
at 1:30 today and I won't talk
very much. We've got a short
agenda. We'll also, we will have
a short hearing from the
association of Counties on.
know you love our hearings, so
please see us at 1:30. It's a
relatively brief agenda we can
begin to enjoy a little bit of
one of our last weekends.
just, um, having concerns and
questions and I won't ask the
minority leader to yield, but
maybe he can comment on it. I
appreciate acknowledging the
fear that folks are fearing, um,
call line, but what I fear with
this is what's gonna be done
with this information?
What agencies or how are you
gonna act on this information
one and 2, what's to make sure
cause more harm to folks that
are in fear.
Thank you, Madam President.
Well,
so senators share, do you yield
Mexico and certainly none of
that, uh, is, is be used in any
kind of nefarious thing, but
what we wanna do is we want to,
what we will do is contact the
evidence that you didn't, that
you did the.
wrong thing.
And I think if we do that.
A couple of times, then they'll
get the message that they
shouldn't do that anymore and
hopefully that puts uh uh uh the
personal cell phone number, so
I'm probably not going to call
him.
But, but we do have the system
that we can move further up uh
to to the Homeland Security
anyway to.
the, the cartels have really
taken over, especially
Albuquerque, but throughout the
state of New Mexico, but some of
them we believe are are going to
hide in places where it's
Can you help us, then yes, we'll
do the same thing, but in that
case we will go through the
tribal authorities.
lands where state police don't.
So that's the two parts. One, we
want to make sure that we are
protecting Americans, especially
Native Americans.
Alright, thank you, Senator
share. Other announcements or
miscellaneous were not talking
about things, Senator Cedilia
Lopez.
had a good uh
A good reputation of uh
protecting people's or
respecting people's Fourth
Amendment rights or any rights
the most important thing I think
people can do. There are
trainings about what to, what to
do. But if you see an
interaction with ICE, I
recommend you take out your
Padilla, thank you very much,
Madam President, and thank you
to, uh, the members here and a
special thanks to the staff and
all of the folks across the
building up in front of you,
consent that the Senate stand in
recess until 11 a.m. Monday
morning.
Seeing no objection, we will
recess until 11 a.m. Monday
morning.
