Santa Brown.
Santa Campos.
Cervantes.
Senator Charlie
Senator Hamlin.
Center Hickey.
Senator Maesteva.
Senator O'Malley
Senator Paul.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scottia Lopez.
Senator Sheer.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Townsend.
I have a quorum, Mr. President.
From the Episcopal Diocese of
the Rio Grande in Albuquerque.
We ask that you remain standing
for the Pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator Paul.
The pledge of allegiance in
Espanol to be led today by
Almighty God, Creator of all
that is, you who are known by
many names.
I give you thanks for this
beautiful land.
And the sun that warms and
enlightens us all.
I thank you for all who have
dedicated their lives to public
service.
I give you thanks for our
And for their families who
generously give them leave to
serve our state.
I thank you for all those whose
work makes lawmaking possible.
languages and faiths of our
state.
I pray this morning for each of
these senators gathered here.
That the diversity of their
views and the strength of their
business here in this beautiful
land of enchantment.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States.
Judo
get us started on today's order
of business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, unanimous consent we
go without our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection, we are in that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous.
all of this and recognizing our
families is something that we
all need to really send out lots
of love to all of them because
end of each week, and this is,
again, we're out here doing our
part, but it is everyone in this
building very much.
appreciate your words. Thank
then the senators share and then
we'll let everyone know. Uh,
good morning. Thank you, Mr.
President. I also appreciate the
words this morning, and I love
the portion about the staff. I
think that was very, very
See no objection. Cameras are
allowed both on the floor and in
the gallery. Senor Padilla,
thank you very much, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senators Gonzalez Sendo.
until they return to the
chamber.
Hearing no objection.
So.
Senator Sher, thank you, Mr.
also excuse, uh, senators
Brandt, Sanchez, Gallegos.
And Scott and Zel and Townsend.
Except for the purpose of a
call.
share.
Any further announcements,
senators, Mr. President,
Senator, we just run through my
little script here. I know
is there are no plans now to
shut down power in the downtown
area still possible uh outside
of downtown, but it looks like
it's gonna be the East
couple of things we've got.
Two certificates, uh, one,
Senator Lopez has a certificate
in remembrance of the missing
uh, also CNN is sponsoring a
legislative luncheon, uh, today
from 11:30 to 1 o'clock, uh, in
the lobby by the bill room on
the first.
floor
Uh, tri-county Socorro, Sierra,
and Catherine Legislative
reception is tonight at La Fonda
Hotel in in the La Teraza room 6
location that may not happen,
given all the public schools are
also closed, so we will
certainly give everyone an
update on that as the day
progresses, Mr. President, I
would yield to other members to
Senator Hume.
Mr. President, I have a lot of
friends in the chamber today, as
you know I was in student
council and I work closely with
student councils throughout the
state of New Mexico and their
cheer in the chamber. So I
thought, Mr. President, Rio
Rancho High School activities
director Christopher Sala is not
only a good friend of mine, he's
a former state senate employee.
if you can stand up, Madison
Pitts, who's the student body
secretary who have plans to
attend the University of New
Mexico to study speech and
language pathology. I have Owen
study cybersecurity. Alex
Jaramillo, no relation
but just maybe somewhere down
the line we'll be joining the US
Navy. Zin by the treasure,
Olivia Tatari who plans to
president Anika Garduno who
plans to attend New Mexico State
University to study
microbiology. Senior class
president Jack Cardenas
Gutierrez, who plans to attend
engineering. Angel Dominguez,
who plans to attend UNM to study
education and is Aguilera who
Seeing no objection, send her
had a meal.
Rio
Yeah
continue to teach not only our
past but our present and where
they're going as a future. So,
and I have 2 more guests. So if
my students can stay standing so
that they can help me introduce
can help me.
welcome my guests to the Senate.
Thank you Senjaramio. Senator
Padilla would like to also make
President. I opened the door,
and this entire barrage of
student leaders are right in
front of my door and I was kind
of taken aback and shocked, Mr.
President, and, uh, you know,
we, we host, you know, folks all
ask me, and they were following,
they each are individually
following a piece of
legislation, and these aren't,
you know, sort of like the moon
is this and that. These are
really hard hitting pieces of
legislation. So I just wanted to
want to serve, and I think
that's a wonderful thing. Thank
you, Senator Jaramilo. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Padilla. Senator Wirth.
So, Mr. President, before we go
to the certificates, I just got
challenge when we're doing
basketball right at the end of
the session is that we're all
working hard down here and so
we've got to see if that's
doable. Uh, so we'll keep
Senator Werth, we do have other,
uh, legislators or senators who
do have guests. I can, yeah,
let's do all, let's do all the
guests and then we'll do Senator
Good morning, Mr. President. um,
Go Aggies, you know, it's hard
for me to cheer for the lobos,
but I'm, I'm all senate tonight,
and I hope we do have an
opportunity to play. I want to
point out in your Spaceport
County and all of the entities
that make that up, we invite you
to join us this evening if you
can, especially if that
basketball game is canceled at 6
p.m. at the La Tresa in La Fonda
tonight, uh, to
uh, unanimous consent to
introduce my guests on the
roster hearing no objection,
Senator Maestas, thank you, uh,
Mr. President, honorable
members, so, uh, you know, we
sitting on the rostrum to the
president's left, Mr. President,
uh, the, he's a hometown hero
grew up in Chama, went to
Escalante High School. He was
the former.
Athletic director at Highlands
athletic director at UNM Ed
Manzanares.
And the gentleman to his right,
playoff level, he, he, he, uh,
coached Idaho to top 10, uh,
seasons he can flat out coach
Mr. President. He had 3
consecutive winning seasons,
honorable mention players and
he's the perfect fit for the
University of New Mexico
football program, please, uh,
join me in welcoming, uh, head
football coach at the University
of New Mexico, coach Jason Eck,
have to wait till that plays
out, but welcome coach we love
you. Thank you for bringing your
family to New Mexico. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Maestas.
Any further announcements,
senators?
See no further announcements.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Wars to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. I'd
Members of the body, um.
As the certificate is read, just
ensuring that we keep the volume
to minimum.
certificate, um, that he is
currently holding.
For the um West Mesa women.
See no objection. The reader
will read.
missing West Mesa women, Jamie
Barrella, Monica Candelaria,
Victoria Chavez.
Virginia Clove.
Selena Edwards.
Does hereby extended to heart
heartfelt condolence and
sympathy to the bereaved family
and friends of the deceased and
Albuquerque, and whereas it is
believed that the remains belong
to women who were buried there
by the same individual or
individuals.
And whereas according to a
And whereas for forensic
investigators have now
identified all 11 victims as
Jamie Barrella, Monica
Candelaria, Victoria Chavez,
Evelyn Sarazar, and Michelle
Valdez.
And whereas the Albuquerque
Police Department has compiled a
list of women who have been
reported missing, whose
disappearances may be related to
that of the West Mesa women,
since 2002 and Selma Guerra
missing since 2004.
Anna Viil missing since 2005.
Chantelle waits missing since
And whereas families of missing
women from across New Mexico
file missing persons reports
with police to no avail, and
these families continue to
88,000 89 active missing person
cases reported in the United
States as of December 2017.
And whereas the women whose
remains were identified in the
whereas the la labeling of these
victims creates an atmosphere of
um ambivalence with regard to
the crimes that have been
perpetrated against them, while
also denying their humanity and
deserve diligence and respect
under the law and in the public
discourse while their families
deserve the right to carry their
memories with dignity.
Police departments and the
Federal Bureau of Investigations
Treatment of the crimes
committed against these women in
relation to the collection of
evidence at the mass grave and
highest rates of female homicide
victims, and one of the highest
rates of domestic violence in
the United States.
And whereas thousands of New
Mexico women are not safe in
Now therefore, be it resolved by
the Senate of the state in
Mexico that condolences be
extended in recognition of the
heinous crimes that have been
Doreen Marquez, Juli Nieto,
Veronica Romero, Evelyn Salazar,
and Michelle Valdez, whose
remains were found in the West
Mesa mass grave and in
recognition of the missing.
urged to proceed with due
diligence in resolving these
murders.
And be it further resolved that
the mayor of Albuquerque and the
members of the Bernalillo County
Albuquerque Police Department
and the Bernardino County
Sheriff's Department be employed
in the most expedition manner
possible.
And be it further resolved that
the media be encouraged to
And be it further resolved that
the state insurer.
That services be available for
addiction treatment and
rehabilitation for women in need
incarceration of those women and
be it further resolved that all
New Mexico res residents be
encouraged to show their support
for women who are victims of
President Pro Tem. Cherry de
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
Senator Lopez.
ago.
Um, about the discovery.
That took place on the just kind
of as the crow flies just about
1 mile and a half mile away from
And it's not just those of us,
who were here in this building
and in other positions of
leadership in our community, Mr.
President.
But especially the families.
Of these women.
And I continuously want to bring
along with my colleague Senator
Padilla and others.
To make sure that we don't
forget.
These women
And their families?
It's a beautiful park and both
senator Padilla and myself and
others have contributed to it,
along with our city councilor,
Clarissa Pena.
remember.
Is what currently happens to
women.
In the state of New Mexico and
in other places across our
country.
depicted in the media.
It was almost just blaming them
for what happened in their lives
for being murdered for being
many other descriptions that
were given to them.
And there's one who's a
physician.
There are others who have gone
on through education in our
contributing members of our
community.
In many different ways.
murdered indigenous women and
relatives task force looking at
our sisters, our indigenous
sisters as to what has not been
happening.
When one of their family members
goes missing.
And what continues.
Hopefully with uh even
listening.
To this memorial will remind us
that we still have to keep that
all of the other issues, Mr.
President, that contributes.
to
to say thank you for the
indulgence of the floor and if
there are others in our um
chamber who would like to add to
the conversation.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
memorialize and think about uh
this horrific tragedy that
happened in our community, Mr.
President, uh, Senator Lopez and
I live, uh, again, not very far
away from each other, and this
continues and that this
recognition continues of this
heinous event, we did work
together and
Senator Lopez again,
spearheaded, pulling together
day, Mr. President, these
individuals are New Mexicans and
they are kind, loving people,
and we should always remember
there have their memories in our
to reflect. It's designed in a
manner that recognizes
everything that happened there
and um and it sits atop a hill
in a lot of ways and it's seen
by our entire community, which
the positive in life, Mr.
President. I know that you've
taught us a lot of that, and I
know you've taught me personally
how to pivot in the positive
direction, Mr. President, and
you heard one of the stories of
Out of that tragedy, can you
imagine how many people she
cares for on an annual basis,
uh, carrying that loving message
that her mother had.
And that's a, that's that's just
beautiful that, that uh we
recognize this, but it's also
important to note that from this
tragedy came very positive
outcomes as well, and I just
wanted to recognize that and I
did want to thank Senator Lopez
Senator Woods, did you wish to
speak to the certificate?
Center woods
Thank you, Mr. President. And
yes, you know, we just.
recognition was horrific, and I
want to thank the good Senator
Lopez for
For bringing this forward and,
and
You know, just
details, only what I saw come
out on the news, and yeah, it,
it made them sound like, well,
they were just throwaways and
that's certainly not what it
was, Mr. President. I, I hope
that I have never
President, I just stand in
support of Senator Lopez in
this.
Memorial. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Woods.
opportunity for us to have this,
uh, discussion and to remember,
um, the women and their
families. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Are you able to Senate Majority
authority Peter Worth.
College to come over, so we
might do something similar to
what we did yesterday, uh, go to
3rd reading, do a couple bills,
and we'll
Get them factored in here
depending on when they come, if
we're on a bill, it's gonna take
unanimous consent on a committee
report that we need to fix
because before we read in the
committee report, so there's an
expungement on a committee
report just to clean something
up so I yield the center Hamlin.
I ask unanimous consent that we
expunge the tax business and
transportation, uh, report from
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee substitute for House
documents that we had our chief
clerk and the secretary of tax,
Business and Transportation
caught that it came out of
committee without the referral
to judiciary. So we are
expunging.
with the referral to judiciary.
So I do ask unanimous consent to
expunge the original report.
Senators have been unanimous
consent request to expunge the
original committee report.
the plan today on 3rd reading is
to do items 1 through 5 in that
order. Better get the fan out
there, Senator Tobiasson.
I am number one is Senate Bill
Senate Bill 83, that'll be
Senator Stewart's item number 4
is Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70,
that'll be Senator Brandt, and
we will wind it up with Senator
Senator Bison, right? I'm number
one. Senators, we are in that
order of business. They're
agreeing legislation.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
debate, amendment, or
substitution.
Senator Tobiasson to explain her
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President.
AMAFCA's debt limit is at $80
million and due to inflation,
Thank you, Senator Tobias, and
senators, we're debating Senate
Bill 100.
Anyone wishing to debate?
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that Senate Bill 100 do now
pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Buy a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Bill 100 has passed the
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill 9
as amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
any, uh, violations of the
pipeline Safety Act have a
maximum in the state of New
Mexico of $100,000 per day or $1
million total, uh, what this
$200 or 200,000 a day or $2
million. What it does is we
don't
don't have to keep going back to
refix this with inflation and
other things, it just
automatically puts the escalator
in at the federal level. That's
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the sponsor yield for a question
or two.
Senator souls, do you yield?
Yes.
Center Scott
are trying to do the right
thing.
Operating their equipment
according to the manufacturers
this piece of legislation for
that circumstance and would that
be considered
A mitigating circumstance. Thank
you, Senator Scott. Sinner
So, uh, Mr. President, are there
any mitigating circumstances
that would draw a company back
from that maximum level.
the penalties has flexibility up
to that level. This does nothing
to determine whether it's at the
maximum level if it's less than
that, this bill just sets with
the maximum level could be.
Mr. President, the PRC brought
this to me, uh, it just makes it
a whole lot easier when there's
only one place where the
recent history where the, where
that has been a problem where
the $100,000 a day has been
inadequate.
constantly re up it, uh, so that
it keeps up with what inflation
might be. It just automatically
changes when the federal numbers
change.
Senator Scott
Senator ourselves yell for a
couple of questions.
Yes, Mr. President,
thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, Senator, I've heard you say
Mr. President, this is the
maximum penalty cannot exceed,
uh, the, what the civil penalty
would be pursuant to 49 USC
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, Senator So,
there's two places in the
federal regs. Part 195, you, you
I'm trying to make sure I trying
to catch up on this piece of
legislation. If you're talking
about
The amount of fines that federal
The pipeline safety boys.
Of New Mexico, it can impose,
not the federal.
the maximum so that it matches
what the federal would be.
Thank you inner soul, Senator
Townsend.
Matching what the Fed can be,
Mr. President, Senator So, um,
Does the state have the same
level of
Fine.
Uh, oil and gas.
Mr. President, this particular
legislation is very narrowly
focused on the Pipeline Safety
time this bill has been forward.
Um, I don't know if we've seen
it in the Senate before, but
The New Mexico Pipeline
Authority has tried this
regulatory agency to impose, um,
Higher fines and, uh, and it
seems like to me, it's just a
Thank you, Mr. President. Just,
uh,
from one non-lawyer to another,
if the good senator would, uh,
yield up, I promise you it's not
gonna be, it probably be a
Senator Ses yield, Mr.
President, certainly.
Um, uh, I know very little about
that industry, but can both
Center souls
Mr. President, Senator Woods, I
don't know. Uh, this is
affecting the New Mexico
Pipeline Safety Act and again,
hoping maybe some of these smart
guys in the chamber would chime
in, but I don't have the answer,
but it, it, uh, I've always
wondered. I know that uh in a
like in a criminal law,
in a federal court or I know
there's more surety of a senate,
and that's why most, uh,
criminal attorneys don't want
deal. But
me you don't know and we may
never know. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods.
Senator Lopez.
um cite the USC and the CFR, uh,
would it be, oh, actually, Mr.
President, will the senator
yield
Thank you, um, thank you, Mr.
President. um, I think this is a
really great bill. Um, I, I
and um it, she had it resulted
in skin lesions. It resulted in
um, her, the loss of her goats,
more of an incentive for the
pipeline company to do the right
thing, Mr. President, my
question is, is why are we
citing to federal law and I
applies.
So if my understanding is that
if this is a state enforcement
action state law implies if it's
a federal enforcement law action
an amount, Mr. President.
Lopez, so
uh, Mr. President, if I
understand the question is, uh,
why is it site the federal law,
is that accurate?
Um, instead of just having the
dollar amount in the statute,
Mr. President.
Mr. President, thank you, and I
do understand now, and the
would just change when the
federal one changes.
Thank you, Mr. President. My
concern about that is that if
federal law were to actually go
a, a reason um that safety
might, if, if on a cost-benefit
analysis, the pipeline company
so, um, but if the goal is to
simply have it match, I assume
it, it, it does that, um.
I am concerned about the federal
government reducing the fine and
there's not an issue with regard
to which one enforces it, the,
the consequences would be
exactly the same, so I'm really
happy to support this bill and
thank the senator for bringing
it.
For a 2nd time I'll go to
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
I
was able to talk to the pipeline
Uh, has the right to their own
opinions and their own thoughts
to represent their districts,
but the facts are the facts, and
public digging in to those
facilities, not for the absence
or the
Ill acts of an operator. So,
fines to the general public for
not following the
Uh, digna Mexico statute.
That caused them to make
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
I believe you'll have to borrow
a cookie from Senator Giselle
for that, but we'll get to that
in a bit. See no further debate.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called in all
those present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Scott voting no.
Senator Sanchez Morino.
Senator Paul voting no.
Senator Tobiasin voting no.
affirmative, 14 in the negative.
Senate Bill 9 as amended has
duly passed the Senate. Sen our
souls. Thank you, Mr. President.
We're going to go on to item 3
on today's calendar. That's
item number 3, Senator O'Malley,
I think has her guest here. So
this is for Central New Mexico
Community College Day and it's a
certificate that's gonna get.
announcements and miscellaneous.
Are there any announcements?
Wishing to be made.
Mr. President, why don't we go
ahead and we'll get this, we'll
read the certificate in so we
can all pay attention, and then
we'll make sure that
Our guests get in here to get
introduced as part of that
certificate. I know the sergeant
requests for the certificate to
be read. See, no objection. The
reader to read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature for session 2025.
in the Senate, whereas Central
New Mexico Community College,
CNM has provided New Mexicans
with access to high quality and
affordable higher education and
workforce training that meets
the state's economic and
workforce needs as well as
academic courses and degrees
that transfer to state
resources and processes to
create efficiencies while
modernizing and improving the
student experience.
The employee experience and the
ingenuity fuse market marker
space and entrepreneurial
development programs which
promote local and state economic
development goals and whereas
then partners through leadership
and education, training and
innovation, and whereas the
Nemesco Senate desires to
recognize CNN for its many
valuable contribution
recognized to honor and showcase
the tremendous impacts the
college makes on the economic
well-being of the state and its
residents.
recognizing March 6, 2025 at
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry Duhan, chief clerk, New
Mexico State Senate.
Thank you to our reader. I'll
yield to Senator O'Malley.
the Senate. My understanding is
that um the CNN board president
are still in the house and um
the legislators are commenting.
I'd like to thank our guests for
joining us here. We're just on
the certificate, Mr. President,
um, I'm going to yield to any of
President. Thank you, Senator
O'Malley, for first year in the
Senate highlighting one of our
largest educational institutions
in the state of New Mexico, if
not the largest and I'm very
completely renovated and we're
always adding new services, new
programs, um, new ways to
achieve higher education in that
um.
In that location and then of
actually sitting up there next
to you, Mr. President. She's the
real pretty one right there. Uh,
she's, she's, and I go way, way
back. Yeah, everyone's
beautiful, yes. What am I
I got that out there. But, uh, I
do, I want to say that CNN does
such a phenomenal job for the
entire state of New Mexico, this
gigantic organization just has
so much innovation. I, I, I
And again, this is a nationally
recognized school in a number of
ways, but one thing.
that I will recognize CNN for is
uh the highest quality, most
wanted to rise and support
Senator O'Malley and her
recognition of CNN as we uh
spent a lot of time talking,
waiting for them to get here,
but they're here now, and we,
and we really do appreciate all
of them and I see my good friend
President. I too stand in
support of the certificate.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley, for
bringing this forward.
Go CNM.
upholstery class at TI. This is,
this is a few decades back,
right?
Um, but I still, I mean, that
that was my first introduction
who is also one of the board
members going through all that
process when we had Governor
Bill Richardson when the name
was changed, um, all of these
for different meetings.
And most importantly, Mr.
President, I think from when we
talk about community colleges.
No, not to denigrate our
universities but our community
pivots with the needs that we
have you guys address it in
many, many different ways, so
always appreciative.
And of course I have a special
Your your team that works there
at CNM from instructors, office
persons and such are wonderful.
With his learning disability,
uh, the student Resource Center
in how the help at CNM has been
giving, so again,
congratulations, uh, CNN for
what you do in our community.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. We do
have further discussion on the
certificate. Senator Dio Lopez.
campus is in my district and or
I maybe I should say the first
campus back when they were TBI,
um, and they, the TV uh CNN has
there at UNM, so many students
were able to.
finance their education by going
to CNN for the 1st 2 years and
transferring to to CNN and CNM
um, and so I'm very proud to
stand in support of this
certificate and thank the
sponsor for bringing it and just
keep going CNM it's just
everything you do, I think just
actually had friends who taught
in the paralegal program and
there's so many connections that
I have, um, with CNN, but I'm,
I'm very happy to stand and
support and just say go get them
keep going thank you.
Mr. President, um, as Senator
Lopez mentioned, of course CNM,
uh, was known as TBI, and I just
wanted to say a few words
an office job was my goal. I'd
been working as a waitress. And
after a year of study, I
received certifications for
clerical bookkeeping and
shorthand, and it got my
careers. Mine is director of a
community development
organization and my husband's as
a computer programmer.
As a result, we were able to
work and stay in Albuquerque by
President, I ask, uh, UNAS for
consent to introduce my guests
today and to thank them for the
wonderful gifts they placed on
our desk today, which I am happy
to get credit for him. Uh,
it's owned and operated by the
Remby family, friends and
supporters, so so many of us.
So enjoy.
They
undergraduate student body in
New Mexico under her leadership,
the college remains committed to
developing and strengthening
partnerships with government
help empower students to to be
successful economic success and
a better quality of life for all
New Mexico joining her board
members and friends, um, we
And Virginia Trujillo.
to that order business 3rd
reading, uh, you know, I'm to go
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation, and I
yield to Senator Stewart for
item number 3, Senate Bill 83 as
that the records show that all
action for placing 83 as amended
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
Senate Bill 83.
Creates the innovation in state
government fund.
Mexico's air, land, water, and
cherished way of life.
The bill creates a dedicated
community statewide.
Syn 83 invests $10 million over
two fiscal years to bring state
capacity, promote a resilient
economy, strength and pollution
monitoring and ensure
accountability. It has
Senator Steward deal.
Yes, a question or two sounds
good. Senator.
Um
My reading of the legislation
that there are 4.
primary goals and objectives.
And I'll go, I'd like to go
through these kind of one at a
And Senator, what's
Assume for a moment that that
goal is accomplished.
The lives of our constituents in
that cir
uh, Mr. President, all our state
agencies are under the
governor's.
Certainly in 2030 and 2040,
there's also goals, uh,
implementing economic policies.
These are all part of the
believe if, if uh miracles
happen and by 2050 we're at net
zero, then the worst impacts of
climate change will be
mitigated.
Senator Scott.
is a quantitative measure of how
we have improved the lives of
our constituents.
With this $10 million
Net zero emissions.
How have we improved the lives
of our constituents.
northern part of the state. Our
state is under attack.
It's under attack today. We have
a warning that we might have to
mile an hour winds actually show
up this evening, the chances of
wildfire, it's so high that PNM
is threatening to shut it all
down.
do, and they've come to us
asking for help and for money.
The mitigation of what's
happening in in Roswell is very
significant.
work that's being done.
Our state agencies and all of
their FIRs. Everyone has said
this would help, and this is
our state agencies to reduce the
impact of climate on their
communities. This is all hands
on deck time for all of us to
move forward and this bill.
Well, Mr. President and Senator,
I, I keep asking the same
question over and over again,
improving their lives in a
measurable way if these policies
that we're going to spend $10
Well, Mr. President, uh,
Senator, uh, no disrespect, but
you must not have read all the
FIRs because the FIRs are filled
them to expand and diversify low
carbon leasing opportunities,
and that might even increase
revenues to the state land
office. The workforce solutions
is trying to look at workforce
issues.
they've needed money to
implement it and they will uh
attempt to do more with that. So
The state agencies want to offer
technical amendments. We have
funding from the federal
government.
What
I think it's still there.
You just got Mr. President and
Senator, I certainly appreciate
that we're going to spend a lot
of money on these various
efforts.
is what we would do to improve
the everyday lives of our
constituents. We've got 2
million people to answer here
material difference in whether
or not the wind's gonna blow or
whether or not the snow's gonna
fall or anything else that might
be a consequence of climate
this piece of legislation.
Uh, Mr. President, our
constituents are asking for this
piece of legislation. They're
all upstairs in the rotunda
to do this, and I believe their
lives will be better if we can
move forward with this. I don't
think $10 million is very much
money, frankly, when you're
Thank you, Senator Stewart,
Senator Scott.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
I, I appreciate that there are
if they are completely
successful.
Make our constituents' lives
better and Mr. President and
available to us that our efforts
just trying to clarify what the
question was.
OK.
Let me try this one more time,
Mr. President. Is there any
expenditure on the course of
climate change.
Around the highways that go
through Deming.
If they redid some of the exits
and entrances that Department of
question is about, it's all over
the state about issues that this
money will help. So there's no
scientific evidence, empirical
evidence, or any evidence that
these policies will impact the
course of climate change. We
I believe a portion of this.
Was directed Mr. President,
President and Senator, could you
tell me what that looks like?
Uh, Mr. President, we've had a,
and programs and projects all
over the state.
And Mr. President and Senator,
can you tell me how many jobs
up from these efforts, but
there's certainly their FIR to
this bill, uh, said that's
exactly what they would work on
the economic development
department to put more emphasis
years, Senator, how many jobs
have been created as a
consequence of all of our
efforts so far really in this
administration.
agencies, one from the
Interstate stream Commission on
what's gonna happen in 50 years
to the water in New Mexico. Uh,
certainly the environment
in New Mexico. You can read all
these online. I don't have them
at my fingertips.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
to. And that question would be
how much more water will we have
in the state in the event that
these policies are completely
successful.
Mr. President and Senator, do
you have any scientific
evidence, projections, or any
Peer reviewed information that
might support that statement.
uh, that you can get all that
information from.
Um, I will tell you that on one
of these FIRs, it does talk
about what is happening to New
degrees to 7 °F over the next 50
years, primary impacts are
decreased water supply, partly
moisture levels increased
frequency and intensity of
wildfires.
Increased competition and demand
Mexico Bureau of Geology and
Mineral Resources New Mexico
Tech 2022.
Thank you, Senator Stewart,
Senator Scott.
Mr.
Has is the operative question.
Remains what the policies of
Let me ask it, uh, perhaps as
plainly as I can.
Will this piece of legislation
Eliminate
The temperature change.
President, we certainly those of
us who are working on this issue
are working on those.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senator Scott.
there will be no temperature
change and no change in the
availability of water with this
piece of legislation if all of
those efforts are successful.
Well, Mr. President, I, I, I
don't know why you even are in
this job, Senator Scott, when
you're so pessimistic.
You know, I can't do this job
unless I'm optimistic. And I
there and say this isn't gonna
do anything, and I'm gonna say
this is an attempt to do
something and I've got FIRs from
all these agencies telling us
the Senate.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
don't believe there is any
scientist on the planet.
have any impact on what the
temperature will be, with the
snowfall will be with the
rainfall will be, how much
water's running in the river or
All of our efforts in the last 6
years starting with the
governors.
Uh, executive order with respect
resulted in, I believe,
No additional jobs or prosperity
to the state. Can you represent
3 states for the uh increase in
jobs in the solar industry,
clean energy is growing rapidly
carry who is producing
technicians to work in our wind
industry.
And we now have a manufacturing
plant in Los Lunas that is
Uh, Mr. President, I, I mean,
the only concrete evidence that
I have is the loss of somewhere
between 1000 and 1500 jobs in
I have seen a UNM study.
That represented that as many as
aware of that number?
Thank you Senator Scott, Senator
Stewart. Mr. President, well,
thank you for telling me.
Senator Scott.
But,
Mr, Mr. President.
about 1,030,000 high paying.
Taxpaying unsubsidized jobs in
the extractive industries.
and those are replaced with
8,000,500 jobs in the renewable
industry.
We are going to be in a terrific
world of hurt.
Providing these revenues, but
the rest of the state.
And I just do not see.
Andy
Nothing on the horizon.
That would
That would come even close.
That would be a fraction.
I'm sorry, I just cannot
support.
Piece of legislation that looks
to me like it will make our
state poorer. Thank you, sir,
and thank you, Senator, for your
First, if uh the sponsor would
yield, I do have questions.
Stewart.
Certainly. Center. So Mr.
President, it starts out that
this is a non-reverting fund.
Uh, Mr. President, it's a fund
that's going to be for 2 years,
2 fiscal years, and that that
language is just that LFC, you
No, there's plenty of reverting
funds if we didn't have a
result, then the money goes back
to the general funds so we can
use it for something else, but
this one is not. But
So I guess, Mr. President,
How do we achieve net zero
emissions, especially since this
our agencies, we empower our
communities we empower our folks
that care about this to work
towards lowering greenhouse gas
emissions.
Thank you, Senator Stewart
To get to net zero, Mr.
President.
It seems to me that you would
have to cease breathing.
Is that what we're talking
about, Mr. President?
Stewart. Yes, please, Mr.
President. Senator.
You know, Mr. President, it's
just such a silly question. It's
very hard to answer.
about this.
So certainly there have been
lots of things that have
happened to reduce
CO2 emissions and methane
net zero. A, I don't, I don't
see how that's even a possible
goal. It's not even a possible
goal.
But certainly reduction is
A significant issue here.
I also know that technology has
advanced enormously, Mr.
President.
And we decided that the best
thing New Mexico could do was
close down the cleanest
coal-fired power plant in the
world.
Instead of capturing the CO2
CO2, but no, we had to, we just
had to, had to close down the
cleanest coal-fired power plant
in the world.
Because we were going to reduce
carbon.
San Juan College, they're ready
to teach people how to, how to
build these things and how to
run them. We could have become
the carbon capture of the world
because Mitsubishi, who was
going to build this thing,
They wanted to sell hundreds of
these things.
And it turns out that the very,
very best place.
In America
And maybe the entire world.
cleanest coal. Now we didn't
even address all of the
thousands and thousands and
thousands of coal-fired power
plants that are outside the
United States.
damage.
So, Mr. President,
I, I have another question for
her before I get all worked up
Uh, I don't know the answer to
that.
I think it's point, and then I
think it's 40s, 1.
%
If you completely shut down the
economy of New Mexico. If you
drive all of the people up. In
fact, you have to drive all the
animals out too because animals
also emit both, uh, CO2 and
industry, maybe, maybe we could
then be net zero.
But we are irrelevant in the, in
the global picture.
Of CO2.
So is it sustainable to
completely destroy?
The state of New Mexico.
uh, the senator may be surprised
to know that I have a list of 10
major oil companies here, all of
whom
and their goals are to develop
real world project, real world
projects, solutions for lower
that is net zero by 2050.
So certainly what we want to do
with sustainability in New
Mexico is just increase our
from oil and gas. I personally
very appreciative for what we've
been able to do for education.
Currently there are about 30% of
our state budget when you look
the governor is trying to do,
uh, so, uh, resilience is
important, uh, because
eventually, not anytime soon,
our economy, uh, I prefer, I
prefer cleaning
energy, but there's certainly
plenty of other industries that
are here. I'm glad we now are
So, um, thank you, uh, Mr.
President. So yes, the oil, the
oil companies that she mentioned
certainly can deal with their
To reduce
The CO2 by 95%. That's where
they were on track for. And
then, of course, technology
probably would have driven them
even further.
state.
Well, that's, that, that's such
a very different thing. So
certainly I could do some things
to reduce my carbon footprint.
To get to net zero, I still
don't think that's possible at
all, but you can certainly
reduce it a lot, someone
generating station was going to
But I do have a question for
Oh
Excuse me, Mr. President, our
chairman of
Senate Judiciary is not here,
previous bills, it's in statute,
it's in the sustainable
economies task force.
So, Mr. President, can you?
Can you read that to me, even if
it's not in this bill, can we
find it?
President. Interesting.
So again,
The real climate issues.
For the world.
why they're building all those
power plants over there?
So
Energy
Abundant and affordable energy.
Lifts people out of poverty.
food and it's a miserable short
ugly life.
And for centuries.
That has been the standard in
China and India.
and an unbelievable pace.
But they have no emissions
controls.
None.
anymore.
They've discovered that they can
live indoors with air
conditioning and heat and
Billions of people.
Decide they don't want to be
poor anymore.
They want to have the internet.
several billion people.
It's a lot of energy and coal
can produce a lot of energy
really quick.
To put up enough wind turbines.
You probably have to have 10s of
thousands of acres to put up
enough wind turbines to replace
So
It's, it's relatively quick to
build a coal-fired power plant
in China, not here, of course,
And here we're talking about
destroying the economy of New
Mexico.
And not even getting close, not
even getting in the same world.
We almost never get to the root
cause.
And so
It just, it just befuddles me.
policy. Mr. President, what if
the, if the sponsor would yield,
what does we, what do we mean by
reducing the barriers?
Senator Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President,
impacts, and they've asked for
grants, they've asked for
technical assistance, and
they've asked for money.
Uh, this bill and the Senate
also provide grants to
communities, so, uh,
I think we're putting in place
here a way for the people of New
anybody stopping other.
Other than its body, is anybody
stopping San Juan generating
station, which we've now
destroyed, uh, from reducing
There, I mean, the barrier
became us.
So was there another barrier
that I was missing there, Mr.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
Senator, Mr. President, it does
say implement, enable or reduce
barriers. So that's, that's part
of the bill.
it, Mr. uh, it's gonna take a
lot more than that for me to get
over it because that's a
significant emotional event in
my life.
That wasn't, that one just
almost went too far for me, Mr.
President. You know what I think
the, the, the, the reduce the
barriers part is.
This is just my theory here.
oh, climate change isn't real.
How we reduce that barrier is we
cancel.
That person, that company, that
whatever.
Mr. President
Uh, I, I, I don't have them all
here, but, but there are dozens
and dozens.
And you're gonna say, how can
you remember this? Because
you're not that old.
But I do remember it.
1968, the population bomb.
There will be massive climate
change problems. There will be
massive migration, all of the
world ending events if we got to
3.5 billion people in 1968.
Everything will come to an end.
1968.
We're approaching 9 billion
people.
Now.
running water in their house.
Many more people have
transportation so they can have
actually travel and go see the
world as opposed to walking or
maybe riding a donkey.
When I was in high school,
We talked about the coming ice
age.
It's gonna be here soon.
We better prepare for it.
magazine. It wasn't some weird
theories thought up by some guy
in the corner.
Time Magazine.
And yet,
changes. Climate changes all the
time.
Gets warmer, gets colder.
Whatever.
That happens all the time. It
And all that was before anybody
was driving a car.
And nobody was burning fossil
fuels then.
And then in ice age that came in
through the Middle Ages?
They just
Didn't come true.
Now, do I want clean air and
clean water? Absolutely, Mr.
President. Absolutely. We need
clean air and clean water.
The air in our house is 100
years ago or a little bit more
for, for most of, of humanity.
was filled with smoke.
If you live down in the country,
you had a fire in your house.
And often filled your house with
smoke.
Depending on what was going on.
the trees to burn them.
They're now burning dung.
And what would the Africans
like?
A coal-fired power plant.
Like any kind of power plant.
And that just troubles me that
this whole bill is designed.
To destroy
Industry in New Mexico.
If we get to net zero, what does
that mean for the people of New
Mexico? If we really achieve
that, what does that mean?
technology, mostly, we have
reduced an enormous amount of
the emissions.
They come out of our vehicles or
come out of our wells or come
out of our air conditioners.
compare cars from the 90s to
cars from today.
Enormous reductions in
emissions.
Compare the technology that kept
So much better, so much more
energy efficient than they used
to be.
Enormously or progress has been
made.
Yet here we're saying no if we
I think if we actually get to 0,
we go back to the Middle Ages.
where we live.
Miserable lives.
And how does that help anybody?
How does that help any
constituent in here at all.
At all.
in the oil and gas industry.
What we need to be looking at is
the 1500 jobs in San Juan
generating station in mine.
All union jobs, all well, high
Absolutely. We need 10 new oil
and gas has been very good to
New Mexico, but I agree we need
other industries.
And it just
It's just bugging me.
Because this is another one of
those examples it's one that I.
naturally.
That we have seen for the past
50 years or more.
Has really improved our lives.
You know, in this very room, Mr.
President.
When this building was built.
The average life expectancy of a
senator was about 68.
will live to be older than 68,
probably because we do have
cleaner air and cleaner water
and better medicine.
Because this bill will even stop
lots of other people who want to
come here. So it was mentioned
that we're building wind
turbines now in New Mexico.
The blades
And you know where that carbon
fiber comes from?
Gosh, let's see the root
substance there is natural gas,
It takes an enormous amount of
steel and concrete to build a
wind turbine.
And to make that much steel.
takes a lot of electricity.
it with wind turbines.
You need some kind of fossil
fuel to make the, to make the
iron and, and turn it into
It's an enormous, it's
unbelievable amount of energy.
For some of those mines.
So we can talk about net zero,
but is it really net zero? I
And yet in New Mexico, we
produce the cleanest.
barrel of oil in the world.
Cleanest not only because of the
product itself, the mineral
Wow, because they're not
perfect.
Maybe we should shut them down
and replace them with something
else because San Juan generating
station was not perfect.
It needed to be shut down.
to be shut down.
To get to net zero.
And I, I just
drinking water, Mr. President.
I'm not planning on going for 4.
But what I am concerned about
was with this bill and many
others.
things down, instead of letting
the technology go.
The technology will help.
We're doing it today.
And yet we've got people outside
marching around no nukes, no
nukes because they don't
understand the difference
between a bomb and a power
plant.
er permission emissions on a, on
a grand scale.
If we could build those and we
could in New Mexico.
We have almost all of the
Ah, but the tech technophobes,
they're all freaked out by it.
Totally freaked out by it.
is to make life
More difficult for industry.
Any industry
So.
What do we get if it's
successful?
We freeze to death in the dark.
Thank you, Mr. President.
There's no need for the sponsor
to, uh, yield. I'm in support of
this legislation, uh, enjoying
the debate, but it is a repeat
Of the people that are impacted.
By climate change.
By what's in our ear.
Young kids who.
POS that is in their water
system. So when we talk about
costs, it's not just the jobs.
And I think we need to remember
that.
As far as New Mexico being
irrelevant, I would respectfully
disagree.
Traps so much more heat than
even CO2.
It's a huge cause of our climate
crisis.
And we can't ignore that.
There's nothing wrong with us
leading on this issue.
Now, I'm not gonna argue what
that percentage is or what the
leader. What's wrong with that?
And that's a rhetorical
question.
You know, Mr. President, I had a
chance to go upstairs, right
when the certificates were going
on and.
We should all be concerned.
Because when we were young,
this world in a better place. If
we're gonna argue anything and
we argue that there needs to be
more money in this bill.
There needs to be more
opportunities for agent
agencies.
To do something here.
cause a catastrophe, but once
again, I disagree.
This is my 5th year.
Every time we have a bill like
this.
We're gonna destroy industry.
this bill. I'm not gonna go back
and forth on what was said here.
Many much of it, I do not agree
with.
But the reality is,
Let's step up and lead as New
Some of these young folks I saw
on the rotundo are now up in the
gallery.
We always hear all the time.
New Mexicans need to watch our
votes. Well, guess what?
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President, the
gentle lady yield.
morning and
Have
Many comments and have opinions
that differ from some.
I too have.
talked to me and
Guys attacking the job.
That
My
To a pointed question.
Your bill speaks to net zero
emissions.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President, net zero is
part of the Paris climate
accords. It's what we're trying
So, um, I mentioned earlier the
uh 10 companies, oil companies
that are in New Mexico as part
So all of these are aiming for 0
methane emissions or net zero,
net zero sometimes implies that
you can do things like carbon
capture.
Which would be incredible.
there's some small in uh parts
of uh some of the oil and gas
industry, certainly Europe, have
this state. It's part of the
Paris climate. It's a goal.
That we're aiming for.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend. Thank you, Mr.
you correct me if I'm wrong.
It either means that we capture
And um
A sequester enough CO2 to offset
Produce, and that can also get
us to net zero. Is that correct?
Stewart.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, probably not.
uh, cap and trade, so there's,
there's ways to reach a net
greenhouse gas emissions by
2050. That's what we're aiming
Because they
I
I know the answer to Senator
Sher's 1968 population bomb,
Their air quality control
commission unanimously adopted a
rule to fully phase in zero
emitting pneumatic controllers
our EPA methane rule and this is
the quote from Colorado Oil and
Gas Association. Our industry
remains committed to working
alongside regulations.
in Colorado, so we have a lot of
innovation and creativity in
business in the oil and gas
industry in government, um, we
Documents that that's their
goal.
Thank you, Senator Stewart,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Um
Senator
outlaw pneumatic controls.
On
A location.
Senator Stewart.
Um, Mr. President, I don't know
what you're talking about. This
companies are talking about when
you read their documents, they
mention all kinds of ways,
research that they're doing and
innovation that they're trying
I think, I think people don't
realize how much effort these
companies are putting towards
innovation to reduce their
greenhouse gas emissions.
The offset of
Outlying pneumatic controls and
saying that we're going to go to
For instrument controls.
Now, if you're out in the middle
of nowhere, and you have no
power like many locations across
an air compressor to create air
pressure to run.
The pneumatic controls.
And the end result is the
emissions that you're creating
Quite frankly, is without
science because it has no
science behind it. And that is
the problem with many of these
it's detrimental to the end
result.
Madam Senator,
mentioned headquartered in New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. President, I, I don't
know. I, I know that their major
producers here, EOG says they do
to keep global warming to 1.5%
Celsius.
I think, yeah, I think probably
the headquarters are mostly in
implemented the methane rules in
2022 in the four years since we
started working on it,
production has doubled, so I
It's incredible. We're all
celebrating it. It's not enough.
We have to keep going on that.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, gentle lady.
regulations that we, uh, try to
impose upon them. It's because
the technology and the financial
uh um.
drivers are there to create
that.
That
Promote in horizontal drilling,
hydraulic fracturing. That's why
the
Permian has been so prolific is
Economic policies and the
sustainable economic policies.
Uh, that are talked about in
your bill.
one.
But not one of those.
Would be where they are today if
it wasn't for subsidies.
And those subsidies.
It's, it's always amazing to me,
Mr. President.
That we say all these things
about oil and gas and how bad it
is.
we're created by oil and gas
revenue.
At least 50%.
That
Seems to tell me that.
the industry, not necessarily
reduce emissions.
And what makes me say that is
because if you go back in
history and you look,
Um
Was that because of climate
change?
Senator Townsend, was that a
question directed at
Was that because of climate
Uh, you know, in, in my office,
I have a long treaty on why the
Dust Bowl happened. I haven't
read it yet, so I can't answer
your question.
Senator Townsend.
Mr. President, I don't know the
answer to your question.
Well, that brings me to another
point, Mr. President. The other
day on the Senate floor, we were
The reason we have to do this.
It's because we were sold a bill
of goods.
We were sold a bill of goods and
And I think history will show us
in the future.
That all of these things that
we're promoting and saying that
we're gonna do that we have
absolutely no science to back it
We can't say that it's going to
raise lower or sustain our
temper. What we can say and what
has been proven.
Um, native.
People in the Northwest were
without jobs today.
Didn't do one thing for the
districts with different
Desires.
Cultural beliefs.
The district that I represent. I
hope you appreciate that because
that's exactly what it does.
Money
On the climate change.
Issues. Some are building.
But I think that's what we ought
to do in here is we ought to
incentivize people to do bigger
and better things, not.
try to
A lot of catastrophe. If you go
back in history and you look at
Civilizations across.
The world
perfect example.
And
As Senator Scott said a while
ago.
And we have tried to
Show me
That it's going to lower.
Tell me that it's going to cause
more rain to fall.
the heck we're doing, Mr.
President, thank you.
misunderstandings and
disagreements about philosophy.
Moving forward. Uh, I believe in
innovation.
In government
example of what a state agency
can do working with the oil and
gas industry.
So I don't think it's true that
do anything.
Um
So this is the innovation in
state government fund. It does
forward, including the workforce
solutions which I think is
really important. Uh, they are
focusing on recruiting and
training firefighters.
almost no snow and no rain.
So I think it's important that
we empower our state agencies to
help our communities. That's
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that the
role has been called and those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
There has been a request for a
Senator Boone.
Santer Boone votes no.
Senator Brandt
Senator Cervantes votes yes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie Hick.
Santer Du Hick votes yes.
Santa Gallegos.
Centricalecos votes no. Senator
Gonzalez. Yes. Sandra Gonzalez
Senator Lanier near votes no.
Senator Lopez votes yes. Senator
Yes votes yes. Senator O'Malley.
Santa O'Malley votes yes. Saint
Padilla votes yes. Senator Paul.
Yes.
Santa Ramos votes no. Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Scott
Lopez votes into share votes no
Sanatorendo votes yes.
Senators votes. Senator
Sandra Stewart boats, yes,
Sandra Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
By a vote of 26 in the
affirmative, 14 in the negative.
Senate Bill 83 as amended has
duly passed the Senate.
government burns down our
forests, and they will maintain
our forests. And once you burn
down the forest, then you have
all these other kind of
problems.
And when they're overgrown, the
moisture that does fall doesn't
not oil and gas industry. Thank
you Senator, Senator Stewart,
uh, thank you, Mr. President,
members of the Senate. Thank
you, Senators. We're gonna go on
to the next item on the calendar
that's gonna be item number 4.
Senate Judiciary Committee
for placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended on final
passage has been taken is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution.
this, uh, cleaned up a little
bit and down to the floor, uh,
this adds several crimes to our
RICO statute, um, to go after
fighting, bringing contraband to
places of imprisonment and human
trafficking.
All heinous crimes in themselves
and they need to be added to
this, uh, this allows RDAs to
Senator Brant. Senators, we're
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended, we do have a
floor amendment.
The reader will read Senate
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
move, uh, Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate Judiciary
Committee, uh, substitute for
Senate Bill 70 as no objection
if you'll explain what your
amendment does. Thank you, uh,
Confused facts, I'll say about
whether or not cockfighting
should be added to these lists
of crimes that could be grounds
absolutely, law enforcement will
tell you often involved in
criminal activity, uh, organized
crime, in fact, and so this is
uh this belongs on the list as
well, Mr. Mr.
Well, I like the amendment, I
have concerns, and so I told the
sponsor that I just want to let
everyone know there is some
confusion and some disagreement,
cockfighting in New Mexico is
not a felony. It's a misdemeanor
until it's 3rd time, then it
becomes a felony, so there's
some question and some, some
Well, I personally feel that
cockfighting is repulsive.
Um, I will really leave that to
the body, so I'm gonna be
neutral, but I will be voting
for the amendment.
Senator Block.
And Senator Thornton from the
chamber until they return except
for a call.
Thank you, Senator would see no
it's a misdemeanor the first two
times, if they're gonna go after
the chicken cartel that's
organizes these in, in the
cartel runs a lot of these dog
fights and all these things in
the organizer is, cause he's
probably not gonna be there.
Everybody's gonna be charged
with a felony because they're,
if the chicken fights, they,
they do still happen. I will
tell you, they do still happen
you could be trapped in a felony
charge, uh, they may charge you
and, and, and it'll, it'll take
a while for you to get out of
that felony charge when they
Realize you're not the
these fights, uh, will again go
ahead and, and just run them
and, and they'll point to
someone as an organizer and, and
they'll get off Skype scot-free
and, and
Mr. Perez, and I rise in support
of the amendments. Uh, I don't
think cockfighting is a minor
thing.
Uh, associated with cockfighting
are all kinds of other organized
crime issues and so.
these animals, and I just think
that I appreciate the, the
little confusion here, but
prosecutors will certainly weigh
that if it's a first offense.
Senator Stein were to close.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, colleagues. I, I
wanna add colleagues that we
have offenses on the books right
cockfighting is, is absolutely
the same kind of statutory
framework and again as we've
heard absolutely important to
have in this statute. So with
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
So senators, there's been a
request to adopt Senate floor
Amendment 1, Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill 70 as amended.
Senator share voting now.
Senator Ramos voting no.
Senator Greg
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 6 in the negative.
Senate floor amendment number 1
has been added to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 70, now twice
amended. Senator Steinborn,
thank you, Mr. President.
Thanks.
with us. It's, he's been at this
for 2 years, um, and, and during
the special session as well too,
and I know he was disappointed
each time that we went back to
the drawing board on this, but
about, uh, addressing crime,
spend a little bit of time
really recognizing what
The senator is doing with this
bill. So Senator, uh, your bill,
additional crimes be?
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and we have sexually sexual
exploitation of children, a
heinous crime in itself.
organized an organization
they'll be, we'll be able to go
after the entire organization,
not we, but the, the DA's and
the federal prosecutors, uh,
criminal sexual contact.
Uh, bringing contraband into
places of imprisonment and human
trafficking, and they'll be able
to be charged, um.
I think it's with a 2nd degree
felony, or is it 3rd? I'm, I'm
to be charged, uh, under the
RICO statute.
And thank you Mr. President. So
again, I, I think it's important
because, uh, a number of you all
Some of you all are concerned
about exploitation of children
and and sexual exploitation of
children.
We're doing something about that
crime in this bill.
a legislature this session to
attack these crimes, and I think
it's important we take the time
to acknowledge that and
recognize that when, when it
comes down to messaging in the
public.
And, and Mr. President, um,
a number of these crimes that
are already in the statute that
are subject to RICO.
That we frankly do not go after.
And, and as a good example of
that in the list of already.
crimes that would be subject to
RICO.
would be trafficking in cannabis
is subjecting you to a RICO
violation, and yet we know very
well.
That since we enacted legalized
marijuana, we have turned a
ignored trafficking of cannabis
in our state since the
inception.
And I think it's because we did
it.
And turn a blind eye to all of
the illegal trafficking of
cannabis that's going on, and we
have a law that has been in
place since the beginning and we
hear people saying, well, we
stancia.
That has gone on for years.
Illegal cash, hotels.
sheriffs would all say we don't
have any law.
That allows us to go after these
people.
Here's the law.
And it's been around.
support it. I want to fight for
it just like the rest of you,
but don't be buying into the
notion that more laws is going
to make the big difference,
because we have the laws now, we
way. Does anybody here in this
chamber not believe that we were
safe for 20 years ago than we
are today.
Does anybody not believe we were
We've only increased the number
of laws. We've only increased
the number of sentences in years
and years to penalties. And yet
we were safer when we had fewer
laws.
so Senator, your bill is
important because we're adding
some additional crimes to a RICO
prosecution, and I applaud that
and I appreciate you working
with me on that, but this bill
allows us to illustrate the
point.
laws here all day long. We can
come into special session after
special session, and we're
really not going to make people
safer.
And we're not going to be safer,
and that matters to me.
And Senator, if I can.
Our our crimes.
Involving stolen vehicles,
fraudulently taken of a motor
vehicle embezzlement of a motor
vehicle. We have all those bills
And see the consequences
swiftly. That really is
ultimately.
The most important part of our
criminal efforts to make our
The most probably noteworthy
example I've seen lately of the
use of this law this is existing
law is with Albuquerque Police
Department.
Rico makes illegal bribery.
And
The federal prosecutors have
used RICO.
officers want to be proud of
their department and their
service and it's time that we
begin to get a handle on that
too.
we have to acknowledge that we
have to take this to the next
step because the chamber should
be aware that of the law
enforcement officers implicated
in the APD scandal.
By the state Department of
Transportation as a consultant.
What's going on, folks?
contract.
By the State Department of
Transportation as a consultant
and guess what the consultant is
on?
DWI
Thank you, Senator Samantas. We
are debating.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you. um, Mr. President,
will the
Sponsor yield.
Cervantes said.
Um, has
Truth to it
that's what's been the problem
in New Mexico. We have
constantly stripped the
penalties off of issues, making
um, and yes, uh, I, I would
agree that Senator Cervantes
made some good points. I don't
agree with everything that, that
Senator Cervantes said, that's
And they learn how to get around
the current laws, and so we have
to go back and refresh our laws.
We have to go back and go
through and say, OK, they've
gotten really smart about this,
by the DAs that it hasn't been
used in our state.
is because it doesn't cover the
most heinous crimes that are
being done today like human
cases have been charged by the
feds because our RICO statute
didn't cover it.
Our attorney general wanted to
charge.
But couldn't because our RICO
statute didn't cover human
you're bill has pointed out.
Um
Crimes.
That require statutes to
address.
Criminals are going to somehow
decide to be nicer tomorrow
because we didn't, uh, we didn't
have a stiff penalties, and
And so criminals don't have the
same level of respect for law
enforcement that they once had.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Townsend.
See no further debate.
Senate Judiciary Substitute for
Senate Bill 70 as twice amended,
do now pass. I ask you to
consent of the Senate, the
record show that the role has
We're voting senators, all
senators to your seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Bill 70 as twice amended.
Has duly passed the Senate,
Senator Munoz having voted in
the majority to explain his
vote.
President, you know what the
price of eggs, I thought we need
more chickens.
We're gonna go on to the next
item on the calendar.
That's gonna be item number 5
Senate Bill 126, and I'll yield
been taken and is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. There are no
objections, Senator Pa you'll
explain your bill. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. The
bill essentially is all the work
we've all been doing over the
years to ensure that broadband
looking to raise the rural,
rural universal service fund
from $30 million to $40 million
and that's essentially what it
does and that it assures that
President, thank you very much
and uh all users of broadband in
New Mexico well thank you. uh, I
move that uh Senate Bill 126,
uh, do now pass, and I ask
consent of the Senate that the
record.
show that all those present have
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 126 has passed the
go out our business. Messages
from the house. We're in that
order of business scene, no
objection.
Message from the house to reader
will read.
Mr. President
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa
Martis McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
The reader will read, Mr.
President, your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 41 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
amended do pass and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
amended do pass and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefani's chair.
Minister Stephanics, Mr.
President, I move adoption of
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually, the reader to
read.
do pass
respectfully submitted Linda M.
Lopez, chair Lopez.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
Senate Bill 2005 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 200 do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
referred to the finance
committee.
Senator Bill 288 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 305 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 338 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
referred to the Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 366 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
finance committee, Senate Bill
436 do pass and then referred to
the finance committee submitted
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair.
Senator Lopez
it. The committee report has
been adopted and the journal
will reflect they were acted
upon individually.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your tax,
business, and transportation
had it under consideration,
reports saying in the
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Kerry Hamlin, chair Senator
Hamblin.
The eyes have it. The report has
been adopted.
Reader to read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred, Senate Bill 53 has had
Senator Cervantes.
Mr. President, I ask you know as
consent of the Senate, the
Senate Bill 219 as amended, do
not pass, but the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 219 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
Those oppose
Those pone, yeah I have it the
community report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
The Reader to read.
submitted Senator George Munoz
chair.
Mr. President, I asked my's
consent to the Senate that the
records show that, uh, the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports and then
pass.
Senate Bill 252 as amended do
pass.
Senate Bill 290 do pass as
do pass respectfully submitted.
Senator George Munoz,
chair adoption committee report,
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
President, unanimous consent. We
go that our business
introduction of legislation.
Hearing no objection, we're on
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Read or read.
A joint memorial requesting that
the governor instruct state
agencies and authorities to
advance and coordinate the
conversion purification, and
transmission of remote remote
And the joint memorial for
having been read twice by title
is ordered, printed and referred
to the Senate Rules Committee.
Then Senate conservation, the
Senate Joint Memorial for.
strategic recruitment program in
the workforce solutions
department, providing services
for qualified healthcare
providers in healthcare shortage
fields, making an appropriation.
Transportation Committee. That's
House Bill 15.
House energy, environment, and
natural resources can be
substitute for House Bill 1040.
Amending and adding the
identification and listing of
hazardous waste constituents to
the duties and powers of the
environmental improvement Board.
House energy environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill 140
haven't been read twice by
titles referred.
To the Senate Rules Committee,
then Senate Conservation
business announcements and
miscellaneous. There no
objection. We are in that order
of business. Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. I do
have a unanimous consent request
to move a bill from the floor
Finance that, uh, again, the
sponsor Senator Stephanic wants
to look at back in the Senate
Finance.
Committee, so did visit with
Senator Munoz and Senator Sheer
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. So the
plan tomorrow is to be in at 11
o'clock again. Uh, we do have a
certificate that Senator
Richardson family, and I really
appreciate him doing that, so
that'll be a big, big thing for
us and for the family, uh, and
then we'll try and uh again have
make announcements. Thank you,
senators. We are on that order
of business.
Center Woods
Um,
thank you, Mr. President.
substitute for emergency Senate
bill 533 sponsored by myself,
Pat Woods remain in Senate
taxation, business,
proposed substitute is related
to the
Public peace, health, safety and
welfare amending the New Mexico
bingo and Raffle.
Devices
The proposed committee
substitute 202 number is 23
The proposed committee
substitute 202 number is 2312,
So. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Center souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Education will meet at 8:30
Lopez and Naba, uh, and Mr.
President, with the consent,
I'd, I'd like to put forward a
theory as to what I think
happened this evening.
from uh PNM to make up some, uh,
story about that the winds were
gonna be too high to play a
basketball game indoors just
doesn't make any sense to me in
Thank you, Mr. President, just
would like to remind you that
your Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee will be
meeting at 3.
Ramos, Senator Nava, Senator
Townsend, and Senator Sheer's
Senate Bill 481 will be rolled
to Saturday, which we will meet
on Saturday morning at 9
o'clock. We have a full 4 hours
you Senator Hamlin. Senator
Munoz, thank you, Mr. President.
I mean, when the House doesn't
show up because of high winds,
I, I clearly see that as a
forfeit.
I, I think the house
four-footed, I think we ought to
facility, uh, I mean, we could
have got a glow in the dark,
dark ball if we really had to
and still beat him.
But I, I, I see that as a clear
4 ft. I mean, I may have to add
that to the budget. They forfeit
that.
9 a.m. uh, we're working hard on
the budget capital working
groups working hard to get that
wrapped up and uh we'll keep
rolling the clock and going
Mr. President, your Senate Rules
Committee will be going in at 9
o'clock tomorrow morning in room
321, and we'll have
confirmations and bills from uh
Senator Worth, Mr. President,
sounds like you need to, I don't
ask unanimous consent. You
appoint a committee of 3 to
advise the House of the forfeit
due to the high winds in the
Senator Tobiasson.
Senor, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. With that unanimous
consent, the Senate sent a
recess until 11 o'clock tomorrow
morning. See no objection to the
