Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Just before we jump into the sub
for uh Senate Bill 21 and 22,
which is the one bill we're
get done, uh, means we're not
here quite as late into the
evening. So, Mr. President,
youanimous said we go to our
business committee reports.
Hearing no objection one that
order of business committee
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but the Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 137
read.
Senate Bill 186 as amended, do
pass respectfully submitted.
Senator George Munoz, chair. I
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent. We
go to that order of business.
3rd reading of legislation and
objection, we are in that order
business. Third, we new
legislation, Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President, asking
him send the record show all
action for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
bill. Thank you, Mr. President,
before I do that, unanimous
consent to bring in two experts,
uh, Shelly Lemon, who's the
surface water quality bureau
chief at the Environment
Department and Jonas Armstrong,
the chamber.
And provide seating for them.
Senator Werth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
First, it creates a new state
law to lay the groundwork for
the environment department to
implement the Federal Clean
Water Act in New Mexico.
Uh, second, the bill amends the
Superfund law, were one of very
few states in the United States
and the only state in the West
that still relies on the federal
government to decide who should
be allowed to discharge into our
surface waters.
Dallas, Texas. Uh, the only
other states that have the EPA
default or New Hampshire and
Massachusetts, uh.
This involves the federal Clean
uh, to do this, the EPA
establishes and enforces
standards through permits under
what are known as national
pollution discharge eliminations
and elimination system or
big things that this bill does.
Uh, the second thing that it
does uh is requires the water
quality control commission to
Uh, for 50 years in, in New
Mexico, uh, the Clean Water Act
was interpreted to protect most
of our surface waters.
applied to free-flowing rivers
in New Mexico. Uh, so about 95%
of our water in New Mexico, our
surface water, were deregulated.
general permits to cover
discharges such as stormwater
runoff from industrial or oil
and gas sites, uh, pesticide
applications, fish hatcheries,
So, uh, also the bill, as I
mentioned, amends the water
Quality Act to protect
downstream straight and tribal
Now, shifting to groundwater, as
I mentioned, this bill provides
authority to hold polluters
responsible for pollution that
threatens groundwater but does
contamination. Uh, there are
hundreds of sites with
contaminated or threatened
groundwater in New Mexico, dry
cleaning chemicals, uranium
mining, forever chemicals for
many of these sites, the
contaminated sites do not
qualify for this.
Federal funding, so that's
certainly impacts, particularly
rural New Mexico, uh, which is
House Bill 2 there's $50 million
for this cleanup, uh, and so
that's essentially what this
bill does. It's been on a
journey, uh, it's gone through 3
That has been removed in the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
Another big issue was how this
is going to be funded and the
issue of funding just through
fees, while there are amendments
whether it's fees, fees and
general fund.
or all general funds, states
have done it differently on that
front, and again, that
flexibility needs to happen and
we need to figure out how to do
happy to go to that process.
Thank you, senators. We're
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 21 and 22. It does have an
emergency clause, uh, before I
go to the amendment that you
We do have a floor amendments,
the reader to read.
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills 21
amendment number one to Senate
Judiciary Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills 21
and 22. No objections, Senator,
if you'll explain what your
amendment attempts to do. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. This
collected, uh, by the
Environment department, go into
the general fund.
So originally we had moved them
into the new funds that were
being the new funds that are
Thank you. Senators, we're
debating Senate floorend number
one. anyone wishing to debate.
See no debate. Senator were to
close on the amendment. Thank
number one. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposed?
The eyes have it. Senate floor
amendment number 1 has been
added to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
If you just give us a moment,
uh, the, the amendment is
working its way to us.
substitute for Senate bills 21
and 22 amendment sponsored by
Senator William E. Scherer.
to move and explain the
amendment.
no objection. Senator Sheriff
move and explain your amendment.
So Mr. President, this one, this
one is about definitions. It
just adds definitions that have
been agreed upon between the
that were otherwise unclear, so
this is, this is a cleanup.
with
Thank you, Senator Sanders.
We're debating the Senate floor.
Amendment #2, and I yield to the
sponsor centeror. Uh, thank you,
encourage members to support it.
Thank you, Senator Sanders.
We're debating Senate Floor
Amendment #2. Anyone else
wishing to debate. Senator
Sheer, I believe this is the 2nd
friendly amendment that has been
accepted.
and 22 as amended with the
emergency clause and ask for a
voice vote. Senators we're,
there's been a motion to adopt.
Senate for #2. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader will read.
And they share to move and
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr. President. I move
Senate Flo Amendment 3 to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill, Senate, Senate
it adds additional uh agreements
between the environment
department, industry and the
environmental organizations, it
clarifies guidance to the water
quality control commission
otherwise require a permit and
finally ensures the right for
the public to a public hearing
for permit applications with
that, I'll stand for questions.
Thank you, Senators. Senators,
we're debating Senate floor
Senators, we're debating Senate
amendment number 3. Anyone else
wishing a debate?
Seeing that send and share your
clothes. Thank you, Mr.
for a voice for voice vote to
adopt Senate for Amendment 3.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those opposed, ne?
The eyes have it. Senate
Senate floor Amendment number 4,
the Senate Judiciary Committee
amendment, Mr. President, I move
Senate floor amendment number.
Should be 4 now.
To Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 21
just to make sure that it was
read in properly.
It was right in the Senate floor
amendment number.
It was written in a Senate
amendment number 3. We're gonna
go ahead and have that written
in and then we'll go back to
Amendment sponsored by Senator
William E. Scher. to move and
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr. President. I move
Senate floor Amendment number 4
to Senate Judiciary Committee,
substitute for Senate Bill 21
agency industry and
environmental organizations. It
clarifies the process for
addressing contamination in
soil.
It adds additional defenses from
This is what Senator mentioned,
was also negotiated and is a
friendly amendment.
Thank you, Senators, we're
debating Senate floor amendment
and 22 as three times many moves
the emergency clause and ask for
a voice vote. Senators, there's
been a request for a voice vote
to adopt Senate Flo Amendment
number 4. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
That was a pose.
amended and it does have the
emergency clause. We are on the
shield for some questions,
please. Thank you Senator
Senator to yield, uh, Mr.
President, I be happy to yield.
Mr. President, thank you very
I read prior to the amendments,
Mr. President and Senator Wirth.
I saw that it was going to harm
our agricultural industry.
thunder has been been taken
away. On page 4 of your bill,
I'm afraid you probably lift one
of the, uh,
there just gaming fish need to
be in there just well it is in
there. I'm just being kind of
silly at that point, but you
have a lot of people that are
gonna be involved in this.
Mr.
So that has been changed, but
whenever we're talking about a
will, a pit, a pond, a lagoon,
an impoundment, a ditch.
You did have an amendment that
went in there regarding the
field material. I'm glad to hear
that, Mr. President.
On page.
Line one
And like I said this is from a
farm and ranch point of view,
the agricultural aspect of this
Relative to a farm, could it not
a farm or a ranch?
OK, and Mr. President, Senator
Wirth, thank you very much for
that. That's why I've got some
concerns on this bill, Mr.
President.
Um
I'm not sure if one of the
amendments did take this
language out under section V on
page 10.
This is the only place I've seen
it in the bill. Am I missing
something here, Mr. President
and Senator Worth, would you
in the bill it actually applied
that definition that kicks in,
Senator, yes sir, that is what
I'm asking. Uh, this is the only
place I'm seeing it unless I
have missed it somewhere and it
thank you for pointing that out.
Mr. President and Senator Worth
also on page 10.
Line 23.
You give a definition of water
where the surface or subsurface
public or private except private
waters that do not combine with
the other surface or surface
water.
with other surface or subsurface
water. That's why I have a
problem with the way this bill
is being drafted.
If uh
The substantial adverse
environmental impact if there is
a flood or a fire.
Or
If a flood is an act that
and Hermit's peak fires were
caused by acts or omission of
the United States Forest Service
aided and abetted by the New
Mexico Forestry Department. Why
under substantial adverse
environmental impacts.
Senator Worth.
before. So this is a criminal
standard and by putting in uh on
page 59, line 10, a person who
was out of your control, you do
not.
rise to that threshold.
Well, Mister Speaker, I'm, I'm
And one of the thing I would
like for you to do if you don't
mind, Mr. President.
for you to explain all of that
to me right there.
Even though I read it out, I do
need your explanation on it,
Mr. President, Senator, first,
page 3, what we did is that it
was struck because they're
reordering and renumbering. So
on the bottom of page 3 line 22,
you'll see that same definition
you're looking at. So it's the
existing language. I want to
clear that, clarify that first,
and then, uh, Mr. President,
could you, do you have a
specific question about how that
existing law is interpreted.
I, I guess the problem I have
with this with the what this,
and you say it's existing right
And uh
Obviously it's 2 atoms of
hydrogen, 1 atom of oxygen.
But I'm curious as to about what
All water and you'll know it on
line 25 that I'm gonna go to Y,
cause that's gonna be what's
redone. So it's surface water,
subsurface water.
Again, what it's, it's intended
to do is capture.
You know, those waters with the
exception that's pointed out
there for those private waters
Because it does commingle with
the surface or subsurface
waters.
Mr.
President, uh.
and somebody was reading some
fast. I couldn't keep up with
what was being taken out or
added in. So,
Don't snarl at me.
Let's see, Mr. President and
Senator Wirth.
Let's see.
On page 17, Mr. President and
Senator Wirth.
Online 7.
Whenever you're talking about a
specific practice.
So Mr. President and Senator,
first of all, this again is
existing law, so let me get my
this basically is an exemption,
you'll note that on line 5,
these are things that shall not
require a permit respecting the
uh, that documentation or actual
case history is shown to be
hazardous to public health or
the environment or for the use
of produced water.
So I can
Worth.
Whenever you're talking about
specific practice in that uh in
connection with the irrigation.
And that brings to mind on how a
most diss are watered.
The water enters at a head gate
and flows through the farm and
then it goes back into the
ditch.
be contaminants in there, Mr.
President and Senator Wirth.
I, I was kind of curious why
and, and you just said that this
is.
Prior language that was in
there, Mr. President and
Senator Wirth, on page 19 of
your bill.
On October 20th of 2024.
The city of Roswell and the
100 year flood that we had that
particular morning it started
well around midnight, I guess.
And that raging flood water, Mr.
President and Senator Wirth.
Carried this mere material into
the Spring River, the Hondo
River, Rocky Arroyo, South
We would really like to get as
much of that field back as we
could.
So we could rebuild what what
conducts flood control dredging
in the Pecos River. You have
gone back and then I can't
remember which amendment it is
there, but you do have the
definition of dredging in there.
effect.
It could be considered an act
that caused substantial adverse
and if I have
Like I said, the amendments that
were.
Presented in such a hurry, I'm
not sure I was able to keep up
On page 25.
Line 22.
amendments that we were
presented with.
Um.
is an additional definition.
On the 2nd page, uh, item number
5, a new definition of surface
water discharge, I think
What I'm seeing here is new
material.
In its states for surface water
permits, the commission shall by
Uh, permit.
If this is the if this bill is
to pass, Mr. President and
Senator Worth.
River free flowing river that's
covered by the the federal Water
Act, then their permit is just
gonna carry over. So it's gonna
basically be status quo. It's
Then basically they're gonna be
Under regulation by the
Department of Environment. And
so an example of that I think is
Plant here in Santa Fe is is
having trouble, it's all that
needs to be rebuilt, and it's
actually, there's a $2 million
that. I gotta figure out somehow
to get hundreds of millions of
dollars to build a new sewage
plant, uh, but I think this is
an important point you're making
because without this bill, what
Something that that ended up
calming, for example, all the
agriculture down below it. So we
need to make sure we, we find
that line and someone is, is on
top of it as they are here in
Because of some certain things
that have happened, but right
now what you're telling me is
those existing municipal
domestic wastewater systems are
OK
Then there might be a problem,
Mr. President, later on, I'm
Mr. President, I know that, uh,
other people are wanting to
speak.
I do have, I need to.
I don't know what you mean by
that very last word on that
particular line, Mister
President, Senator Wirth.
you're referring to the term
groins.
Mr. President, Senator Worth,
yes sir, that is what I'm
referring to. What is meant by
dikes, dams, levees, groins.
I don't know what that what that
is referencing
It's what it what it what it is,
but again, it's, it is, and we
had a, we had a fun time in
Senate Judiciary, I will tell
you, because there's, there's
especially with with the farm
and ranch community is make darn
sure that those that those same
definitions in the federal law
that everyone's lived with for
50 years, got carried over and
so a lot of the, the temperature
Sinners out.
Mr. President, thank you for
that little moment of levity we
I need your clarification here.
Or if a new activity brings the
surface water of the state into
So, uh, Mr. President, Senators,
this comes again directly from
the federal law and it's
designed to deal with a
Well, Mr. President and Senator
Wirth.
This is the way I took that, OK?
I don't think there's an area in
from the exemption there.
I was also curious, Mr.
President and Senator Wirth.
If this was, I was specifically
at dairy.
I've seen that you've gone on to
page 35 and you put fees in up
in that in one of the amendments
that you have over here.
through your amendment that I
had the questions I had were on
page 43 that has been taken care
of.
And uh
Mr. President.
states neglected and
contaminated sites fun to create
it.
Can you tell me what the current
exist, but once the, here's,
here's what we're trying to do,
as I mentioned in the opening,
uh, in-house Bill 2, there's $50
million for this purpose and the
hope is if we get this fund in
Mr. Mr. President, Senator, I
knew that's what you were going
to tell me, so my follow up
question to what you responded
to me was going to be this.
Senator Mr. President, Senatori,
yes.
Mr. President, thank you very
On page 48.
We are talking about going back
to the agricultural aspect of it
A concentrated animal feeding
operation, uh,
Pollutants that may are or may
And Mr. President, whenever
we're.
Taking up that particular.
entity right there.
As I stated before.
Get on further down in the weeds
with that.
Mr. President, I do want to
And I'm going to line 12.
And you have used the word
If it's discretionary, why have
mandatory upper and lower limits
on the penalties.
If it is to be mandatory, the
just read off, Mr. President,
Senator Worth, do you agree with
what I just said
regarding the word on line 12 of
Who's that whatever entity this
is in front of, if it's a judge,
an administrative law.
Uh, officer making this
decision, I think accessible
with you because I would be on
his side, not your side, in the
use of the word accessible in
this, Mr. President and Senator
Wirth also on page 56.
penalty. Has that been addressed
in any of the four amendments
that we got rapidly.
Uh, Mr. President, Sanders,
they, no, that one has not.
I, I have a hard time believing
a bill coming out of our
judiciary committee dealing with
civil penalties in district
court does not have a venue
provision.
district court to consider the
seriousness of the violation as
well as the economic benefit
resulting from the violation.
district court in the county
where the violation occurred.
Mr. President.
I really, really struggled with
this bill.
We greatly appreciated in
changing up some wording there
in the bill.
But Mister President and Senator
the fact it's yet unwritten
rules on the remediation of
Moura San Miguiel, Lincoln
Chavis, and other counties after
our devastating fires and
floods.
thefornication of New Mexico
continues, Mr. President,
Senator Wirth, thank you for
your answers.
Mr. President, I stand in strong
support of this legislation.
In fact, only 1% of streams in
my district are protected. What
that means is 9,571 miles of
streams are unprotected.
A resounding 8210 acres of
wetlands remain unprotected.
How and why is the story of all
of our districts our waterways
are seasonal. They're ephemeral.
and when the monsoons bring the
hard rain.
This cycle has sustained the
ways of life for many of our
ancestors, and it's time for New
embodying and enduring a
relationship of respect,
responsibility, and reciprocity
with our ancestral homelands,
which includes sacred mountains,
This care and nurturance has
been adopted by our land grant,
our rural communities, our
farmers and our ranchers.
This bill goes further into the
district are downstreamers.
Is Fleda is downstream from
Albuquerque. Los Lunas is
downstream from Isleta, Belen is
And so it is important for us to
establish accountability and
some semblance of
standardization.
Right now throughout New Mexico,
Just a couple of weeks ago I met
with tribal leaders from the
Islado pueblo. They shared with
me.
That there when there's a sewage
Water that was once a life
source for their crops, their
animals, their building
materials and their drinking.
By way of permitting.
To the critical protections it
provides to our ephemeral
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Well, the sponsor yield,
please,
Mr. President, I'm happy to.
quality permitting and
And pollution control in the
state. Is that, is that correct?
Clean Water Act, and again, our
Federal Clean Water Act after
the Sackett decision applies to
those free flowing streams here
in New Mexico, and yes, we
default to Texas and the EPA
circumstances even with the
Supreme Court decision.
Has there been any cessation of
Uh, so, Mr. President, I'm being
relatively recent. So this was a
2023 Supreme Court decision, and
I think your question
Highlights why I believe it's so
the other 90 to 95% of ephemeral
streams. And so,
Folks are used to that.
want it.
Again, so I, I just think if we
don't do this.
What's been the norm is no
longer gonna be the norm, and
That everything comes with a
cost.
And if I'm not mistaken, the
Um, Mr. President, Senator
Scott, I, I think you are
correct, and one of the issues
that we're gonna need to decide
is would we like the cost here
in New Mexico to be 0.
some general fund.
Some states do it all with the
fee. The way this was initially
drafted was all with a fee we
made sure to make an amendment
appropriations we've made. Uh
last year there was a $7 million
appropriation, which has helped
kind of with this transition,
and I think you are absolutely
a good argument for that, and,
and I think in this environment,
that's something we should
consider, but that's gonna be up
to us.
Yeah, Mr. President.
Somewhere on the order of uh of
300.
Employees at
now. I know that the uh FIRs did
not have numbers in there that
approached that, but
nonetheless,
I would, I would.
Uh, discharge permit fees, and
that is a significant concern of
mine that, that we may be taking
a service that's being provided
Uh, Mr. President and Senator
Scott, I can. So the estimated
cost, uh, for administering the
And so I think again going back
to where I, where I, where you
and I were having this
discussion, we do need to make a
policy decision.
Of
program won't go into effect
until
2028. So we've got a little bit
of time here and I look forward
That all of those expenditures
are gonna be paid for.
With uh with uh out of the fee
structure, how many permits
Senator Scott, uh, 5000 permits.
OK. Thank you, Mr. President,
and thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
Thank you, Senator Scott. We do
Uh, perhaps, Mr. President, I
will.
Thank you, Mr. President. I say
perhaps because I'm gonna mostly
make a statement, but I will
have a question or two.
issue, um, Mr. President, and I
said about another bill in
committee.
The other day, and I'll say it
for this one too. This is not
really colleagues a bill about
Is it true that we're only
having to do this bill because
these protections and these
permits that existed with the
federal government for so many
years, has now gone away,
leaving New Mexico vulnerable.
90 to 95% of the ephemeral
streams, those that aren't free
flowing in New Mexico that
previously had protection, no
issue, and we need to again go
back to the way we did it for 50
years is what.
So, Mr. President, Senator, I'm
put in a program to protect
these water resources. Is that
fair statement?
Uh, Mr. President, I think it is
a fair statement, and I think
one of the things we're having
lots of discussions this
kinds of different initiatives
that I know you've worked on
Senator, uh, that will really
again help us make sure that
with our climate that we make do
everything we can to protect the
water that we have.
Thank you, Mr. President,
colleagues, I don't think it's
an understatement to say that
water.
Every land grant, every
community, every industry, and
if you don't have clean water,
bringing in this presenter who
talked to us about economic
trends and talk to us about
research on the decisions that
people make when they choose to
They want communities with clean
environments.
With amenities.
With healthcare doctors.
But it's about quality of life,
radioactive and hazardous
materials interim committee. We
have an interim committee, Mr.
President, colleagues, it
actually has oversight over our
new our national labs.
Deals with hazardous materials
That is devastating economically
and threatens the very economies
where they exist, and I want to
go through them, Mr. President,
in my experience, Mr. President,
or a liberal Democrat, points at
the government and says, why
didn't you protect us?
This is
Vitally important that we
protect this on the front end,
Hexavalent chromium that now,
Mr. President, is going to cost
hundreds of millions of dollars,
threatens tribal water supplies,
threatens community water
supplies.
have a dairy that was devastated
in Clovis, New Mexico because of
PAS contamination.
Devastated and you have a whole
industry and I won't go into it
because frankly, it's a problem
chemical, that if you don't
catch the contamination on the
front and you were dealing with
it forever, potentially
devastating a community.
I'm sure some of you, uh, my
a mine busted loose, an old mine
turned a river orange.
Sorry to remind you of that,
senator.
Turn the Animas River orange
Under a demo Democratic
administration, no less, and we
won.
But
But literally heavy minerals,
heavy metals deposited in that
And yeah, unfortunately,
recently it was reported that we
have record levels of PFAS
contamination in our wildlife
around another military base.
That hunters
This is what happens and again
devastating to these economies
and have permanent long time
impacts to New Mexico.
Colleagues, I know you've heard
that we're trying to grow our
outdoor economy in New Mexico.
critical.
It absolutely is critical, Mr.
President, because whether
you're going to world-class
fishing waters and rafting
waters in the San Juan River,
If we do not protect our water.
They're up a creek. How's that
for a pun, Mr. President, for
Late on a Wednesday night.
Not a good one, I admit it.
in this bill is essential, not
because we wanted to deal with
this problem because we have to,
and if we don't, it'll be shame
on us for not taking these just
you so much for carrying it.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Sen Steinber. We do
have further debate, Senator
Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. President. Good
evening.
of by thanking everybody cause
I, I know how much work goes
into these bills and the
amendments, all of that kind of
stuff. So I, I wanna thank
everybody that worked on it in
our committee, um.
put this on and, uh, and I do
appreciate all the work that's
went behind that.
And
But I do, I kind of want to
start out with uh
Whiskeys for drinking.
taught.
As I didn't realize what it
meant until I grew up.
I serve as a trustee on the
Colorado River Water Users
that goes on over water.
And so this bill I want to make
sure that we get things right,
um, because for every effect,
every pebble you throw in the,
Uh, Scott and Ezel, you guys did
a great job. I'm just trying to
kind of took all my thunder
because everything you talked
about is what I would talk
about.
So as a small business owner.
You have dry cleaners, um, Taco
Bell, of course, I have to say
that your fast food, your
should protect our neighbors.
That's what we're here to do.
But
I don't want to hurt the economy
and everybody else around it.
We've all debated, we all know
what's going on in here. Those
people out there, that's the
ones.
That we're gonna have to answer
to at some point.
blowing up about the time we
finish here tonight. So
economically, I want to make
sure that we are not
Where are we making more rules
than we can enforce.
What, when are we making more
laws.
Then
We can
time because it is late and, and
I just, I want, I do want to
thank everybody.
And those folks at home that are
watching, the folks up in the
gallery.
So with that, I will get back on
the Colorado River.
And I will row row my boat.
Right back down.
Thank you, Mr. President.
um, and I really wanna just echo
what Senator Lanier just said
about the work that was done
really for the 3 committees this
went through for the members on
both sides of the aisle because
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that all action, uh, excuse me,
uh, Mr. President, I ask you, I
move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
seats, please. We are voting as
a reminder there is an emergency
clause.
So 2/3
We'll need to vote in the
Senator Bergman. Senator
Bergman's votes yes. Senator
Block.
Center block votes no. Senator
Boone.
Camposs.
Santo Cervantes.
Senator Cervantes votes yes.
Center Charlie.
Centra Figueroa votes, yes.
Center echos.
Centralecos votes no. Senator
Hamlin votes yes
votes yes. Lanier votes no.
Senator Lopez.
Centervava votes yes Centra
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes, yes,
Popes Santo Ramos.
Santa Ramos votes no. Senator
Sanchez Center Sanchez votes no.
Center Scott.
Centerendovo center souls.
Center sos votes,
centersteonics
Center sos votes,
centersteanicent Stephonics
votes, yes, enter Steinborn.
Center Tobias and votes noent
Townsend.
Center Townsend votes no Center
By a vote of 25 in the
affirmative, 16 in the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 21
and 22 as 4 times a minute has
passed without the emergency
clause.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Wurtz take us that next
order of business. Thank you,
Mr. President. Unanimous as we
go on our business introduction
Senators souls share andendo.
A joint resolution proposing an
public education department and
sets policy for public schools
as provided by law and to retain
the elected public education
commission to serve as the
Resolution 15 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Education, Senate Joint
resolution 15.
adjunct and contingent faculty
at post-secondary educational
institutions, providing for the
certification of full-time
employment status.
House Bill 6969 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Education
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, that's House Bill 69.
And many of the physical the
physical therapy Act to provide
for state and federal criminal
history background checks,
declaring an emergency. House
House Bill 129 introduced by
representativeshispanski and
Royal Caballero.
An act relating to public
if an employee elects to
transfer or move to a different
state service assignment.
House Bill 129129 having been
Representatives Doo, small
Gallegos Jones and Brown.
An act relating to public
holidays.
Senate Indian Rule and Cultural
Affairs Committee House Bill
172.
House Bill 297 introduced by
House Bill 2977 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, House
Bill 297.
come in tomorrow at 11:30. I had
earliest at 11, but 11:30
tomorrow, uh, on the floor, so
just yield to any other chairs
or announcements before we wrap
it up.
at 10:30. Uh, we have a whopping
one bill on the agenda for
tomorrow. Also, uh, everybody
get a good night's sleep, uh, 6
o'clock tomorrow morning is
basketball practice, maybe the
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. President,
uh, Senate Finance has a Senate
Bill 258. I've talked to the
So I lasting man's consent to
make that transfer.
Sanders has been a unanimous
consent request, seeing no
objection,
so to sends. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Any further announcements,
senators.
consent to Senate and a recess
until 11:30 tomorrow morning.
See, no objection.
Center still opens.
Then it comes conservation will
3131, OK, see no further
announcement, Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
We'll do that another
announcement, Senator Wirth.
One last announcement.
was being called to the
principal's office and because I
was missing yesterday, he
noticed and he wanted to see how
I was doing, so I really
appreciate the sentiment and
just wanted to thank, uh, Mr.
Seeing that Senator Worth. Thank
you, Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We stand in recess
until tomorrow at 11:30. There
no objection. The Senate in
