Senator Bergmans. Senator Block,
Senator Boone.
Santa Brown.
Senator Do Hick
Sariel.
Center Figueroa.
San Gallegos.
Centra Gonzalez.
Senator Lopez.
Center Maestes.
Here
Santer Mignos
Senator Pinto. Senator Pope.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Steinborn.
Sandra Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Santa Worth.
Senator Woods, you do have a
car, Mr. President.
Thank you. I'd ask that everyone
Please remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance to be led
today by Senator Pope.
Pledge allegiance and espanol to
be led today by Senator Ramos
and the salute to the Mexico
flag to be led today by Cen
Good morning.
The best decision making that
they can do to uplift our
community.
Mm
be peaceful. They are servants,
we are servants of you.
And we want to become more
united. We ask that you bless
the signs of the times of the
end, but in the political times
we need your guidance, Lord, we
You may be seated.
We'd like to welcome you once
unanimous consent, we go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous no objection. We
are on that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President, and thank you,
Uh, and we take what we're doing
seriously and certainly it's
super important that we're
working together and keeping it
peaceful and train on the tracks
and lots of good things to do.
come back to me and we'll let
everyone know what we're doing
today. Thank you, Senator. We
Senator Padilla, uh, good
morning, Mr. President. You look
absolutely terrific today and
thank you for the words from the
Mr. President. uh, Unanous
consent to excuse senators
Munoz, Shindo.
Campos Gonzalez Steinborn, and
Trujillo until they returned to
pastor, uh, I saw her.
Fooling with the microphone and
I just assumed he was having to
prepare, pre-prayer. So make
you for that. And Mr. President,
actually, I've got several
people gone, but they're in
committee, and unless we have a
And I'll have Senator Worth,
take us through today's
calendar.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
today is African American Day at
Day at the legislature, uh, as a
reminder, uh, Monday is the last
day to submit bills and capital
outlay requests to the
Legislative council service for
drafting.
today for our good friend and
former colleague, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez, uh, which I will
present and we'll have that
read. There's also a certificate
Our schedule Monday we're gonna
have a joint session to hear
Senators Heinrich and Lujan and
Congresswoman Ledger Fernandez
on Monday. So just as a preview
We come back from uh the joint
session and we'll do items 12,
and 3 in that order. These are
the behavioral health bills, so
Senate bill, uh.
Bill 2, Senator Shendo and
Munoz. So with that, Mr.
President, I yield to other
members to introduce guests.
Thank you. Senators wearing
that.
Order business announcements and
gallery we have dental
hygienists from all over the
state and dental hygiene
students from the University of
New Mexico from PIA and Donana
is more appropriate, Mr.
President, on a day filled with
sugar and
chocolate.
Dental hygienists are licensed
professionals who provide
access to quality oral health
care for all of our citizens and
they volunteer many hours to
serve the underserved and
special needs populations in
Mr. President and colleagues,
would you join me in welcoming
and celebrating our dental
hygienist.
dental hygienist bag. We also
have gifts in the lounge.
Mr. President, from, uh, it's a
and they've also delivered to
officers a button wear your
button with pride.
These health care professionals
include nurses, respiratory
care in New Mexico.
That's um 1199 NM AFT and the
United Health Professionals of
New Mexico.
staffing, better patient care
and a stronger future for New
Mexico's health care system.
Let's make sure our health care
workers know that today and
every day we have their backs.
Senator Pope, I'm sorry, Senator
Hickey, you're up, Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, as
many of you know, I think it was
at UNM and giving a talk on
civics and politics and how it
works to the medical students
there and they said, well, why
contacted folks at Burrell, and
they have coordinated over 30
students coming here today. They
will
be visiting your offices.
to make New Mexico a place we
really want to experience the
joy of the practice of medicine
then.
And um I think we're, we're all
in the state, um, and I know UNM
is going to be increasing maybe
morell as well, and that's
really part of the key to our
years, please remember them and
their future and for those of us
who are older are being able to
get through our future, uh,
stand up? Uh, Henry, and you can
tell who they are because
they've got stethoscopes. The
schools wouldn't allow them to
wear their white coats with the
insignia. That was
political. So they, uh, identify
migrated here, so great, you
know, immigrants and look at
what we can do. He's interested
in emergency medicine, critical
surgical suite by bringing
attention to prevention and
common causes of
hospitalization. That, that
coming from a surgeon is pretty
to, uh, Egyptian parents in
Washington DC and he went to
Las Cruces and NSU and
Mexico. We certainly have them
and thank you for that
forward-looking dedication.
Siduja.
Is from Albuquerque and she is a
breed. We just got to keep her
focused on that. We definitely
need primary care. And uh uh
it's excited to be a physician
practicing in New Mexico and
Burrell, and she has loved her
time getting to talk with
patients and families in New
Mexico, and she hopes to pursue
residency. So, uh, but I also
should note that we've got all
the other medical students up in
the bleachers here if you could.
stand up and I would uh like for
recognize the 25th and uh annual
African American Day here at the
legislature, um, we'll be going
over there to the house soon,
and this is a great day, getting
to see people I haven't seen in
what color it is.
With that, Mr. President, I'd
also like to recognize some of
my guests.
Uh, I have folks here from the
They are driven by shared
commitment to excellence and
these young trailblazers compete
at the highest levels in
prestigious programs such as VE
Robotics, Math Counts,
have Maria Bradford and Chandra
Dunn, if you could both stand.
And then we have Marlon
Lovelace. He's a 6th grader. We
is in 3rd grade and then finally
we have Curtis Nichols.
Curtis here.
Curtis isn't here. My apologies,
Thank you, Senator Pope. Senator
Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. President, on our
and happy Valentine's Day from
her, and she hopes that we're
working hard and go lobos.
Thank you, Senator Bergman. So
we do have others. I just want
to give information to the body
so that way you'll know in which
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
have the honor of having one of
the favorite, my favorite people
in the world, be my shadow
organizer for almost anything
she's been the president and the
vice president of the South Los
Altos Neighborhood Association,
council, uh, she helps for with
we have these big food drives.
She's just in charge of almost
everything, so we rely
around her a lot. She's an
Senator Fenix.
Thank you, Mr. President. First
of all, I'd like to share the
like to introduce some uh guests
up in the, um.
Gallery and these are uh
students graduate students, the
leadership education in
are housed at UNM Center for
Development and Disability.
They provide interdisciplinary
leadership training for graduate
students, family members of
neurodevelopmental and related
disabilities and their families
lend fellows spend 9 months
attending seminars, engaging
the United States, Doctor Tony
Cahill is the director. Could we
please all welcome them and
thank them for their work.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, um,
have two very special guests
with me today. I have 11th
graders from the New Mexico
Olivia Thomas. Um, they're here
today with their school
advocating um and being
recognized on the House floor,
Mr. President, for youth mental
health crisis documentary that
their school produced.
recognize these two and so if
we're folks would join me in
recognizing these two amazing
young advocates, outspoken, um,
Senator Dagos.
Thank you, Mr. President. Body,
I, I stand here privileged today
on African American Day here at
Luther King's niece, Elvita
King, and it's a extreme honor
to understand that family and
everything they've done for our
nation, but I'd like to start
uh, Joseph attends Grand Canyon
University. He's working on a
master's program for information
technology. His wife Adobe is a
nurse here and they have 4 boys
Senate to welcome.
families, Senator Sanchez, and I
think since I've been here at
the Senate when Valentine Leo
Carmio for the flowers on my
I hope Leo doesn't get all Jello
because I have a new sweet mate
and it's Senator Pope and he's
been great to be a turning out
to be of a great, great neighbor
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senator Cervantes until
he returns to the chamber no
objection.
So ordered.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
texted me to ask my very
distinguished chair, uh, Senator
Lopez, if we could maybe, uh,
get home early tonight from
public health, so we could have
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Senator Block. Um,
I'll take it under
consideration.
Thank you Senator Lopez. Senator
uh center block, you still have
the floor. Did you?
Senator Black. Senator Ramos,
Mr. President, I just wanna wish
everyone a happy Valentine's Day
and back home I wanna uh wish a
happy birthday to both my dad,
David Ramos, and my brother
of my life and uh.
Um, happy Valentine's Day to all
of you. Thank you, Senator
Ramos. Any further
announcements, senators?
Seeing no further announcements,
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Uh, our colleague Senator Nancy
Rodriguez.
And what I'd like to do before
we jump in is ask the reader to
legislature first session 2025,
the New Mexico state Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to Senator
professionalism, pleasant
personality, commitment to her
family and for being one of the
most well liked and respected
people.
in the old county courthouse and
of Regents and whereas within 10
years of starting her career
with Santa Fe County. Senator
Rodriguez became the first woman
ever appointed county manager
and whereas Senator Rodriguez
championed initiatives in her
first full term that brought
results, including bills that
exempted dis disabled veterans
against animal cruelty made it
easier for private and
homeschooled students to get
into college and made it
possible for some.
Santa Fe teachers to receive
Junior Wrestling and hosting the
2005 Grand National Amateur
Athletic Union wrestling
tournament and whereas Senator
economic development.
Whereas Senator Rodriguez is a
woman of achievement, a great
listener, and a dedicated
senator who has been elected
state of New Mexico that it
recognized Senator Nancy
Rodriguez's outstanding
contributions to the city and
county of Santa Fe to the state
accomplishments over decades of
public service, be it further
resolved that the Senate wish
her a happy and fulfilling
retirement signed and sealed at
Thank you, Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President, and
I'm incredibly honored to
present this certificate to our
friend.
know when I first came 20 years
ago, Senator Rodrigos was the
only woman in the Santa Fe
delegation today.
I'm the only man in the Santa Fe
6 new members on our side and
the members on the other side
who haven't served before, this
was a very different place back
in the day, and so, you know,
and the thing that always
impressed me is never.
the number of different things
that she was able to do and the
number of different groups that
she cared about, she fought for
Top shelf and what you did was
amazing and we are thrilled to
have you back to just say a few
words and share with you what
what better thing on Valentine's
Day, all of our love to you. So
in a bit and we'll stop, uh, to
acknowledge Sergeant at Arms, so
I just wanna make sure that
everyone has an opportunity to
share their words with uh with
Senator Rodriguez and her
accomplishments, so I begin.
Senator Fadilla.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
President. This is gonna be a
hard one, OK? This is gonna be a
really hard one, Mr. President.
I have to say that I heard a
little while ago of the word
All right, come off it. We all
know that Senator Rodriguez is
not gonna be retiring. We all
know that she's got about 93
things that she's working on at
this very moment. We know that
that word retirement is nowhere
And I want to just let the
chamber know that, uh, and you,
Mr. President, that the first
time I came up here as an adult,
I was lobbying, uh, not as a
lobbyist but just working on
And I thought, oh, she's gonna,
you know, come out and she's
gonna spend maybe 30 seconds, 45
seconds with me and we went
right out that door that I'm
looking at right over there into
know if she remembers the first
time we met, she took me into
the Senate lounge and we sat
there for about 1 hour and 45
minutes and she made me feel
like I was the only person in
the entire building, and she was
this and I can talk to a senator
and she took the time to listen
to me and it was very special to
me and the other people that
were with me, and I just want to
say thank you to her for that
and I know there's a lot of
uh, Hamblin is, and I sat where
Senator Souls is and we sat
there and we joked and we.
did this and we did that and and
she would always make sure I had
eaten something and in the first
couple of sessions, I'm running
periodically and we just got to
know each other really, really
well, and of the many multitudes
of accomplishments that she had
in her, her, um, public service
career, one of them that I think
to make sure she understood the
housing issue and we're still
working on it, senator, I
promise you.
And made sure that we had a
housing trust fund that with
real teeth and it had meaning
and it was going to make a real
difference. And then, of course,
love you like a, like a sister
and you know, like a family
member, and we're gonna miss
you, but I know you're not
retiring, so come off that. All
right, thank you, Mr. President.
we'll have Senator Duic followed
by Senator Scher, then Senator
Munoz, Senator Stephanics,
Senator Stewart, Senator Woods,
Senator Brantley, Senator
Cedillo, uh, Senator O'Malley,
a lot of the same themes over
and over today. Uh, like, uh,
Senator Rodriguez's, uh,
incredible kindness, um, as a,
when I was a freshman coming in
here, having no idea what I was
acceptance and kindness and
help, um, with, with nothing
expected in return and
I, I can't thank her enough for
that, uh, I, she is a, a
she.
I, I hope someday that I can
have a, a history of public
service that is a fraction of
what she has done for the state.
I too wanna just talk about
Senator Rodriguez for a minute
even though I was kind of a
hotheaded uh Republican when I
came in here. She was welcoming
uh, with Senator Rodriguez, and
on behalf of the.
A prayer caucus, which is, um.
Opened all of us here.
I'm gonna present her a Bible
with her name on it and so.
Thank you Senator Scher. Senator
Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
didn't know Senator Rodriguez is
gonna be here today, so it's
kind of a surprise. I was
so I could see.
But that was my first.
Uh, experience with Senator
Rodriguez and I, I sat down
there next to her and, and so,
You know
passion and probably one of the
smartest ones on the budget and
looks and reads every little
detail.
You'd be surprised how many
times we're sitting next to each
been here 16, uh, a lot more
than me, 30 some years. And, and
so,
Uh, I don't know, but, you know,
she texts me and I don't always
She decided she didn't want to
do that. She wanted to spend
some time in
I, I, I'm looking for the words
to search, but other than
decisions and listening to her
in, in responses in her passion
for housing and the way she
treated people.
I don't think I've ever seen her
them short out just a little
bit.
is more than anything she
probably in person has more
personality traits in that Bible
that shows so much love for what
anybody or anything was doing.
That it's just hard, it's hard
to say a lot of things about
that because
Really?
did that love with compassion.
And sharing and teaching and
knowledge.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
am happy to say that Senator Rod
Rodriguez and I are friends, and
we will always stay in touch,
interim committees and she
brought a special perspective
because of her own disabled
child.
In her life and the
for all disabled persons and all
persons who need health care in
our state she was our conscience
and I'd like to thank her very
much for all of her service to
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think it was Senator Dohek who
said we're all gonna say the
same thing. Well, that's because
those things we're saying are so
because not everybody comes over
and gives me a big hug every
morning when I get here, uh, but
she did and she did today, and
she does every day. I will say
that there is.
Santa Fe, um, the superintendent
has already talked to me about
it. She almost started crying.
So, we're all going to have to
So, uh, she looks so good now,
you know, maybe when we all
quit, we stopped looking so
stressed and pinched. Just think
about that.
Stewart. Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
President, I'm sorry.
been a, a, a true, uh, uh, real
friend to the, to the group, uh,
uh, she, I used to set up here
in the back and she'd come over
and she'd give me a hug and say,
always an encourager, so I, I
did appreciate that and, and she
was a true fighter for housing
in New Mexico and, and we damn
sure walked in that office
for us, so I thank you for your
hard tries and your, your
success that you had.
and you were a very successful
senator in my eyes.
Brantley. Thank you, Mr.
President. It is so good to see
you here, Senator Rodriguez. I
did not even realize you were
gonna be here. I was so
disappointed over the interim to
thank you. You're one of the
first Wonder Woman that I met
when I came into the Senate, uh,
senator, uhy Hempel and I were,
were in finance together.
with Nancy, and although I've
one of us, for better or worse,
makes an impression on the
other, and I want you to know
that you made a large one on
mine and I appreciate uh all
the, all the love that you've
shown me and I wish you only the
best.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
know I'm gonna repeat what other
people have said. I think of,
um, when I think of um Senator
Rodriguez, I think of um someone
elected official. Her many
accomplishments are nothing less
than impressive. She has been a
Yeah, I look at all of the red
in the room and I, I think in a
way it's a symbol of the women's
support for Senator Rodriguez
forget how warm and welcoming
Senator Rodriguez was to me. Um,
I had been hoping to tell her
this in person, um, and I guess
I am telling her in person on
the floor, um, she taught me how
deaf, blind, and hard of hearing
of facility in my district and
um it was an incredible and
And he talked to me about what
an ally, uh, Senator Rodriguez
was for their community for so
long and I just want you to
know, Senator Rodriguez, that
sponsoring a bill that will
increase the surcharge on
telephone, um.
Charges so that they can have a
stable source of funding, um,
and we're also working on
Fill a tiny little piece of your
big shoes, um, because it, it,
it's so important and we love
you so much and we, and like I
And we're here for you, love
you, please keep in touch.
Thank you, Senator Silvio Lopez.
Uh, we have Senator Lopez
followed by Senator Gonzalez,
Thank you very much, Mr.
President.
And uh
Mm-hmm
Nancy.
Um, fellow sister.
Uh, your advocacy over all the
years when we talk about for
those who are deaf and hard of
hearing.
But also your understanding.
Um, of those who have a learning
disability.
Um, about similarities that our
children have.
Have had
guidance of where to find where
to put money, I mean there there
was never a no from you.
And I learned a lot from you.
The, um, Mr. President.
Sometimes dysfunctional, but
that's what we are.
And one thing I know is Senator.
Rodriguez, um.
something with any one of our
members here on the Senate floor
or in the other chamber.
Her commitment to housing,
Working to find resolution for
Your demeanor and sitting here
where Senator Bergman sits now.
Always an opportunity.
For us to chit chat, to talk.
You'll see over another couple
years, for those of you who are
new.
It, it does happen.
And yes, when you, when I first
came.
We had a few more months over me
Because you actually set forward
footsteps for me to follow.
Um, for anybody who wants to ask
Senator Rodriguez has many
Because that's what we do in
this chamber. It's an evolution.
And senators, my colleagues have
said.
Our colleagues here, you're not
Taking the time for you.
And your family.
Love you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez, uh,
just for informational purposes
that the house is not finance to
Do you know that everything in
Santa Fe is named after Nancy
Rodriguez.
I am really surprised that Saint
And that just shows, you know,
the appreciation from the
community for your hard work
that you have done.
Uh, we spent many hours, you
uh with uh Senator Rodriguez is
um she would come to me with her
spreadsheet, and she would say,
let's help them poriito poresito
me to help all of them. And I
said, well, OK, we will, you
know, we will, but she always
had that extra vision and extra
eye, you know, for the
underprivileged.
part that that always amazes me
is that when we would adjourn,
3 seconds on the parking lot and
she was out of here, you know,
she was just like, but she just
liked to go home and visit with
issues, many types of different
scenarios of uh, you know, what
we can do with the state budget
and how we can work.
coffee with your family and
enjoy your family, so please do,
you know, it's well earned and
thank you, Mr. President.
Wow, yeah, when I first came
here, it's kind of bewildering
and intimidating, and many were
very warm and welcoming. Uh, I
you doing? How is that pain and,
and even when I finally got
better about a year later, I
mean, she was just always
questioning. But the other thing
she did, and as you know, I
asked about my kids and how they
were doing, and they're doing
great incidentally, Nancy, yeah,
and, uh, but just what a, what a
doing oversight when the answers
were evasive. It was incredible
how she was able to call out
what some people didn't really
want necessarily exposed and
wonderful life. You certainly
deserve it and your
contributions here state that.
So thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Hickey. Senator.
This gracious lady, the first
com uh interim committee I went
to, I was very unsure about
going in and this lady said.
And your smile has brightened
our world. Thank you for doing
that.
Thank you, Senator.
So another
because I recall watching you
very closely and watching how
you treated people and seeing
how you as a woman as a Latina
as a Hispana how you.
daughter of Mexican immigrants
you were one of the most
welcoming senators on the floor
and furthermore, you were here
senators and to
House members say that
undocumented students should be
deported along with their
parents and as a 17 year old
Is is beyond words and I can't
tell you.
How much your support meant and
how much it means.
To me
After spending all of these
Muchas gracias. Thank you for
your work in housing and thank
you for being an inspiration for
young women and mujeres Latinas
yespanas and no Mexico gracias
thank you Nova sergeant at arms.
we have representative Rubio
representative Aan Nornu and
Representative Zamora.
Welcome our House of
Representatives guest, please
deliver your message.
A freaking African American they
I'm sorry I didn't want to
misquote that one. Thank you,
Mr. Mr. President. Thank you so
much, we, the message has been
house waiting for us too long so
with that, we'll you to Senator
Pinto.
Yeah, Mr. President.
Incredible stories. Incredible
things for you as you are here
today, but you are a hero to us.
Thank you, Senator, and thank
you for all those years being in
the, a neighbor to my
grandfather. I think you guys
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
am so honored to be able to rise
in support of this, um, Senator
Rodriguez and it's hard for me
I'm just gonna share a couple of
things about
Nancy
We would show up to community
events together and I came with
all kinds of papers. This is
with a little sticky note patch.
She always had some in her
pocket or in her purse and she
would pull out those sticky pads
and I would be sitting next to
her and I'd see her writing with
this little pen or pencil and
sticky note, somehow or another
she got that information on
there and she would get up to
speak and I'd always think like,
I just need to follow after her
Agua Fria, whether it was the
school district, whether it was
the city, the county, wherever
we would be at a community.
meeting, Senator Rodriguez would
have those numbers in her head,
and they must just still be
known.
But do not be fooled.
Senator Rodriguez is fierce.
She is a fierce advocate for the
the work for all of the people
that she's served throughout
this, the, the 30 + 40 + 50+
years that she's been in our
In 2019, the last day of the
session on this floor, I was
still waiting for a CYFD bill
that was gonna have CYFD and the
Espanola and this bill was set
to help address that and Nancy
kept texting me, it's OK, we're
getting, it's OK.
the gavel went down. Thank you,
Senator. I love you to pieces.
Thank you. So we do have Senator
Cervantes followed by Senator
Ramos Steinborne Jami Shindo and
Campos. I'd like to get through
the list.
Senator Cervantes.
important thing about uh that
I'd like to add the conversation
is Nancy has showed us there are
many ways to be effective in
this chamber and, and some of us
are affected by knowledge or
uh, and sharing my personal
pain.
And the one word that I'd want
to add to all of that is she's a
reassuring person and, and
that's what Nancy's always been
to Senator Trujillo's point is
what made her effective and so
Nancy, it's wonderful to have
you back with us again.
Thank you, Senator Cervanta.
Senator Jarami.
Thank you, Mr. President. I want
to stand up and just thank
district with pride, but it's OK
to lead with heart. There's
nothing wrong with that. So I'm
sure to stay true to myself, to
stay true to lead with heart.
She is a woman who's committed
for all of New Mexico. Senator,
I will tell you this. I will
always lead with heart, and I
will always remember the words
that you shared with me and your
friendship means so much. Thank
so true, but I, I do feel that I
actually have one thing that
Senator Rodriguez has not said
to anybody else, um, because 2
years ago I was moved up here,
I know what you chopped liver.
Um, I, I, I still think about
Nancy every day, even though
I've got a great neighbor, uh,
who's who's taking, taking her
place, uh, physically. However,
basis, Nancy would thank me for
smelling so good and for
showering.
And always gave the best hugs,
if I can get a consensus on
hug and so it's so lovely to see
you and so thank you, and thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you Senator Senator
Shindo.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
to rise, uh, Senator, uh,
hummingbird.
And she was always, I mean, you
look at a hummingbird, she's
here, she's there, she's there,
up and down.
And, uh, and, and I think
everybody has shared uh the
all of us, uh, uh, have learned
from her and, and I think, uh,
uh, Senator Cervantes hit it on
the spot that there's various
ways that leaders, you know,
in the state, uh, has shown us,
and I just hope.
That, uh, she was a longtime
member of the Senate Finance
Committee as vice chair, and I
just hope that I can carry on,
of uh of uh Penasco Chuches area
and, and uh we shared a lot as,
as, uh, uh, as we chatted over
the years and so forth, so thank
you.
Thank you to close us out on
this special certificate.
go ahead and do this and, uh,
and just a couple of minutes,
but first of all, uh, one thing
that Senator Rodriguez and I
really share and we've shared
this throughout uh both of our
ones at the same time, some of
the heart aches and pains that
we go through.
But through all of it because we
spend a lot more time here often
than we do with our families.
We are all family and we'll
never lose a family member from
our hearts.
And I bring that up because in
everything that we do,
regardless of what people say,
your heart.
And as we move forward within
our families.
Oh
The special people, all the
people that had something to do
butterfly continues to roam from
flower to flower and has the
beauty and if you will,
continues to share so much of
the elegance.
I ask each and every one of us
to think about and always
remember what Nancy has taught
us.
There's a whole lot of things
that, yes, she's going to be
known for. That's gonna be her
who she has helped us to become.
So with that, Mister President,
and to you, Senator Rodriguez,
there's so much more to share,
but I just say from the bottom
of my heart.
have happened and those things
are going to continue to be a
part of the legacy.
That Senator Nancy Rodriguez
Because we're closing it up.
Ladies and gentlemen.
It is great to recognize.
La ennadora.
Nancy
senators for your words. I you
have to send repeated words to
take us to the next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. I ask unanimous
consent. The Senate resolve
itself into a committee of the
Mexico Senate.
Seeing no objection, Senators,
we will dissolve ourselves.
In community the hall, all
senators, please join at the
usual spot as we head over to
the house.
