Hickey.
Sanarmio.
Center Nova
Senator O'Malley.
Santra Padia.
Santa Sanchez.
Senator Scott.
Center Cia Lopez.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Centra Tobiasson.
Center Townsend.
Thank you each of you please
rise for the invitation to be
given today by our very own
Reverend Doctor Harry W. Ebert's
first Presbyterian Church here
Lanier.
And it is a real honor to be
here as your Senate chaplain for
these next 59 days, including
was sitting right here to give
the opening prayer, and I
received word a few minutes
before the prayer was supposed
to happen, that my mom had
passed away.
I still gave the prayer.
but I was with all of you in
this important time in a
person's life when you lose your
mom, and I have always
appreciated each and every one
of you in the Senate for the way
children every week in church.
We are located right across from
the convention center.
And we have 5 year olds and
3-year-olds and 7-year-olds
there and they give us a
It may be strong for the work of
healing in the world.
And so they know it by heart,
and we respond.
And then we include the whole
state with a blessing.
In body, mind, and spirit may
New Mexico be well this day.
I pledge allegiance.
Promenta let that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. Uh
unanimous consent to go to
announcements of miscellaneous
hearing no objection. We're in
that order of business announced
its miscellaneous. Senator
Worth.
for agreeing to step up and be
our Senate chaplain. Uh, this is
a time for the new members we
have 16 new members, more than a
third of the chamber, as I
mentioned yesterday, are brand
we're here and what we're doing.
I thought you're, your prayer
this morning to
was particularly appropriate
because it's not just about our
own little district. It's about
the whole state and lots of
Eberts, will, will bring in,
again, as I mentioned, a number
of different voices and we'll
always start off with that. Uh,
so a couple of announcements and
then uh we're gonna do something
representative Elio Lealcon
are as follows on Thursday,
January 23rd at 6 p.m. a rosary
will be held at Saint Teresa of
a.m. at Saint Teresa of Avila
Catholic Church, followed by
tournament at Grant's Memorial
Park Cemetery situated at 500
West Roosevelt Avenue and
Grants.
invitation.
Uh, as I mentioned yesterday,
for new members or any other
senators that want to attend,
uh, the legislative Finance
Committee will be holding a
from 7 to 8 a.m., uh, to, to
deal with issues on Medicaid,
uh, turquoise care eligibility
and coverage, managed care fee
for service, cost drivers, and.
morning in room 307. Uh, anyone
is welcome, but it's
particularly for new members who
want to get a sense of all these
issues that are there and it's
legislative reception and dance,
uh, at the El Dorado Hotel 5:30
to 10:30 by invitation only and
then tomorrow we'll have a joint
once I find out what time, uh,
they're planning that in the
house, but we'll be on the
floor, we'll recess to go over
and hear from.
the Chief Justice and then come
back.
Uh, also tomorrow, the New
the feed bill, House Bill 1. So
what we're gonna do is after
announcements, we'll read in the
message, we'll read in House
Bill 1, then we are going to
recess subject to the call of
this morning and I yield to
other members, yield first to
Senator Padilla.
Senate majority whip Michael
Padilla, uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President and Mr.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent to excuse Senator Hickey
until he returns to the chamber?
Hearing no objection.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
President.
We have further announcements in
semantics.
Thank you, Mr. President, and,
uh, members of the body
yesterday one of the bills that
districts and I would invite you
uh to sign on to Senate Bill 15.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Mr. President, thank you,
Senator Stephanics. Any further
Thank you, Mr. President. Um, I
would like all the women in the
chamber to stand up.
Senator Pinto, come back here
notice that some of us are
wearing white, and that's to
honor a very, very special
anniversary, and that is the
anniversary of women getting the
right to vote.
in 1910. So women had a little
bit of a right, but they had a
hard time getting the
Constitution in New Mexico
changed, so the women in New
in federal elections and that's
what they did and I know some of
you have heard this before, but
one of those early suffragans
was um Avelina Otero who was the
President asked me to, to stand
up and talk about how important
and how significant it is that
we have.
This many women in the chamber
and, and thank you for um for
running, Sisters.
See no announcements, I yelled
to Senator Gia floor leader
Peter Warz to take us to the
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 1 with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa M
next order of business. Thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We go down our
business. Introduction of
legislation.
Hearing no objection, we are in
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
The reader to read.
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 1 has had it
under consideration in the
House.
For a do pass and it's
respectfully submitted by Nathan
making
Making appropriations for the
expense of the fifty-seventh
Committee, the House Chief
Clerk's office, the Senate chief
clerk's office, and other
expenses of the legislature
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 1.
Senate Majoritylo leader Peter
Worth take us to that next order
of business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go without our business
announcement miscellaneous. See,
no objection. We are in that
order of business announcements
you today? Doing well, thank
you. That's good. You look good
today. Um, we Senate Finance is
going to go in and, uh, let's
just say 11:40ish. Give us 5 or
tell us the room number, please?
That's a good question. I think
it's 325.
2 322 my office at 325. 22, 1140
just a moment to tell you about
a great thing that you have on
your desk.
And this is uh from twocucurry,
Totencurry. And this is better
than money, Mr. President, I
guarantee you, you want to buy a
vote. There's a way to do it,
guys.
Uh, protalis is one of the
world-famous place, uh, have a
peanut facility there. There's
lots of peanuts grown in New
many different kinds of peanuts.
This is Valencia.
And it's one of the only places
in the world that's grown. So,
Much up and have a good time.
Don't throw the holes on the
floor.
have nut allergies. I have no
allergies to food. So if you
don't want yours, please bring
them this way.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senators.
Any further announcements,
senators?
recess subject to the call of
the chair, it sounds like.
Noon or slightly thereafter, so
just stay close by and Senate
Finance will go up and hear
See no objection. The Senate to
stand in recess subject to the
