Senator Campos.
Center Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Do Hick.
Senator Hamlin
Senator Hickharmio
Senator Lanier.
Senator O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator
Senator Shao.
Sandra Stewart, Senator
Thornton, Senator Tobiasin,
Senator Townsend.
Senator Wirth.
For the invocation to be given
this morning.
by our own Senator Pete Campos.
Please remain standing.
by Senator Soles and the salute
to the flag to be led by
Senator.
Lopez.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Madam
Whether a legislator, staff
member, advocate or visitor to
this grand place.
There are many parts to and
during this legislative journey.
It's the strong affection we
have for serving others.
Because we have a devotion to
this process.
Diplomacy.
He genuine commitment to family,
community, our beloved land.
And each other solidifies our
It's our individual and untold
stories that have formed our
talents in independence and
collaboration.
strength.
Dignity and integrity within our
roles in state government.
Separately, we cannot always
United and meet the purpose of
what we hope and strive to
accomplish.
This reflection.
I thought of and written,
We're here for the common good
and have each.
been given very special gifts to
compliment.
The final outcomes of this
Hoo Felicila ala bandera de los
estados Unidos de America Yala
republica que representa
unenacion Bajo Dios indivisible
called the retaria paratodos.
Good morning, everyone.
Uh, unanimous consent, we go
that our business announcements
miscellaneous. Seeing no
objection, were on announcements
to miscellaneous Senator Wirth.
we put those all together for
the common good and the common
purpose is why we're here, and I
just really appreciate you.
Spending the time to put those
cameras, unanimous consent, and
then some excusals, and then to
Senator Woods, if he's got it on
his side, and then I'll let
everyone know what we're gonna
do.
Uh, just a reminder that it's
Madam President, Senator
cameras in the gallery and on
the floor. Senator Padilla.
Madam President, unanimous
consent to excuse senators
Cervantes and Nava until they
return to the chamber.
like to, uh,
I think, uh, Senator, um,
Go for
The prayer he offered, it's
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Wirth. Thank you, Madam
President.
Uh, today is Aerospace and
Aviation Day at the legislature.
is a certificate that Senator
Jaramillo, uh, will read and
he's got a bunch of guests, uh,
in terms of events this evening,
Spaceport America is having
once we get done upfront, we'll
do, we'll do the one
confirmation and then just
the members is a heads up, uh,
the plan today is to work down
the list, uh, items 1 through 8.
Senator Munoz, uh, Senator
Stewart, and will work. I
understand the lieutenant
Governor may be down at some
point is what I've heard. Uh, so
we'll make sure that works for
you, Senator Cil Lopez and
business in the introduction of
guests, we'll wait for Senator
Adammilo.
I
Highlands University. Her, her
name is Kristen McDaniel, and I
just found out we were gonna do
a bio biography real quick, but
the one thing I found out from
her is she's from Valencia
Thank you Madam President.
Thank you. Any other
announcements or guests to
introduce.
Senator Pinto.
currently at UNM studying.
Biochemistry and business. He
will be with me all week and um
if you see him in the building
Senator Nava.
Thank you Madam President, I am
really excited to introduce my
intern for the week, uh, Ms
in sociology and she is hoping
to go to law school upon
graduation if we can please
welcome her to the chamber.
OK, uh, Senator, Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
So I would yield at this time to
Senator Jamilo for City of
because you can't hide my son
devil pride before we get to the
certificate, I just want to give
one quick fun fact. I'm the
first sun Devil senator but
won't be the last Sun Devil
President, unanimous consent for
the reader to read the
certificate.
The reader to read.
The legislature of the state of
Espanola Day in the Senate on
March 3rd, 2025 whereas the
Espanola Valley lies along the
Rio Grande and has been settled
for nearly 1000 years, beginning
pueblo of Santa Clara and 00
Winge, whose people nurtured the
land long before the arrival of
European settlers and whereas
under the name of La Espanola
and whereas the city of Espanola
was incorporated in 1925.
And they're celebrating its
centennial in 2025.
societies contribute to the rich
cultural tapestry found
throughout New Mexico today and
whereas the city of Espanola and
the counties of Rio Riva and
The city of Espanola became
known as the lowrider capital of
the world. Now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
the Senate signed and sealed at
the Capitol in the city of Santa
Fe, Senator Leo Jaramillo, Mimi
Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry de Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
President, you've heard me say
it time and time again where
we're brown, we're down, and
we're low to the ground in the
1980s MTV coined the Espanola
motorcycles, and bikes, who they
All are in awe of the beauty and
the scientific work behind them.
So much so, Madam President,
that 60 minutes came and did a
acknowledge that the Espanola
Valley lies on the ancestral
lands of the Tawa people of
Okeawinge and Santa Clara
Pueblos strong and resilient New
Mexicans who have been here
New Mexico. They then created
Nestroerencia, my culture, which
is mestizo, which mixes Native
American, Spanish and Mexican.
It also then became the
people.
But in our language, in 1925,
the city of Espanola was
incorporated as a city in the
state of New Mexico and we will
sure to send a personal
invitation, you know, Madam
Chairwoman, I don't have
children, and I think of the
Espanilla Valley as my child,
and I'm raising it the best way
I can with as much love and
from very humble beginnings but
rich with love and so much
support. We were raised to
believe that you do anything you
can for family, and we were
raised to believe that community
is family.
City councilor Denise Benavides.
City clerk Carla Anne Martinez,
the executive administrator to
Martinez and behind me, Madam
President, is my mother, Clara
Jaramillo.
My sister Loretta Martinez, my
sister Denise Jaramilo and my
Partial, uh, uh, an honorary
member of the Espanola and of
the Jaramillo family and so
today I have with me uh Madison
Romero, who is Senator
year. Madison will be attending
the University of New Mexico and
studying a STEM related field.
And then also I have Cadence
Chavez, who is the daughter of
Dustin.
we'll be attending the
University of New Mexico in the
fall, and I now yield back to
Senator Jaramillo.
Madam Chairwoman, and those
students that were giving out
Medina who are huge members of
our Lowrider community. Thank
you, Madam President, if all of
you can help me in welcoming my
guests to the chamber and for
Espanola Day.
Thank you so much, Senator
Jaramilo for making it espanola
day in the Senate.
Uh, Senator Wirth.
gonna go ahead and do the
confirmation if there's no other
announcements, or I'll yield
back to you.
Yeah, sooner worth, I, I
probably missed out on having
people stand up, so Senators.
senate to pay attention to what
this month is.
It is women's History Month.
And hell yeah.
Bertha M. Paxton was the first
representative to be elected.
She was a woman from Dona Anna
And in the Senate it was Louise
Holland Co.
She was elected. She was served
She was president prote from
1921 to 19.
41.
in the Senate and being elected
president prote, one of her
comments was, and I quote,
I made it my business to speak
out.
chair and offer my thoughts on
Bills I believed were important
to them.
And Madam Chair.
Madam President, I don't think
women we have working up here on
behalf of all the citizens of
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you very much.
And thank you, Senator. I have a
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam President. I do
want to wish everybody a happy
women's Month.
of female leaders. In fact, one
among us was ranked one of the
most effective legislators in
America.
the nation. Legislators in the
nation.
Recognition was given in 2017.
Proving that you are not
effective because you are pro
tem, you are a pro tem because
you are effective.
chair Stephanics is making
history today with her patience
and discipline and
professionalism, and we know
that the Democrats for a long
time have championed women, and
Artaro Warren, a New Mexican
native here who championed the
women's suffrage movements
resulting in the passage of the
19th Amendment.
K kudos to Governor Susanna
this most recent election. It
was the first, not just the
first Republican, but the first
woman to ever hold this seat in
New Mexico history.
And
Thank you.
And we
And Senator Azel, who happens to
be the longest serving
Republican woman in the
legislature. She is 20 years of
wasn't until Candy arrived that
someone had a set of
candy bowls the size of hers,
and so I, she's, she's a
She's a real firecracker over
any roles of leadership, but we
have never had a leader.
And my good friend
Representative Gaille Armstrong
has made Republican history. It
was not even mentioned at many
representative Zell for her
service here and also sent a
Representative Gaille Armstrong
for her remarkable role in
making history, uh, championing
I I have a little book on Louise
Coe, by the way, in my office
that she wrote, Louise Cohen the
law books. It's really fun.
She tells all
Oh
And uh Senator Harmu, I wondered
how low, low, low you guys could
go, um.
the state.
And just last week Thursday,
Martha Garcia was added to that
list, so she's over in the
um welcome to to the roundhouse.
It has not been, uh,
It's about time I guess in some
sense and thank you Madam
President.
women, and some people have
asked me, I've been interviewed
and, and they've said, well,
what difference does it make?
The, you know, the Republicans
or Democrats, what, what, what
bills where there's the work on
the bill goes all through the
interim and, and then comes to
the, comes to the
Chamber all thought out, um, and
out and it's something that I
noticed when I arrived I was the
8th woman, uh, to arrive and I
think at that time that might
have been a high point of women
Month, and I'm really proud to
stand in support of what has
been said and to add my little
bit. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
members that um just recently um
24 employees from the uh Carson
National Forest have uh been uh
dismissed from their employment.
Has made it a point that uh this
this families and this members.
Uh, will continue receiving
electricity and propane and also
Madam Chair, uh, Madam President
and members, um this morning and
through the efforts of our
chairman of uh finance, we had
budget-wise, and then also how
it's uh relating to our state in
in our state and what are the
Uh, Senate Finance Committee.
So, um, Madam Chair, I uh, I
just, Madam President, I just
thought I needed to share this
with the members. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
we'll do is just read in the
committee report for the
confirmation, and then I'll
yield back to Senator Armilo for
that confirmation and then we'll
go to 3rd reading. So unanimous
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
letter number 30 dated September
16, 2024, in which the governor
makes the following appointment
at the pleasure of the governor.
Your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment, respectfully.
admitted Senator Katie Doig,
Opposed nay, the eyes have it
committee report is adopted.
Senator Hatame.
Madam President, I ask that the
credentials of Manny Barreras,
I ask that the credentials of
Manny Barreras be presented to
the full Senate for
consideration as secretary of
the Department of Information
Technology. I now yield to
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Manny
Barreras as secretary of the
Department of Information.
technology.
Senor Paa to discuss the con.
Barreras, 26 years of
experience, direct experience in
this area, 22 of those years in
highly technical and public
sector solutions that he's
that he's been wonderful work
that he's been doing, um, you
know, he's, he's bringing
seamless, uh, uh, focus to our
state's technology
infrastructure, overseeing
and maximizing the dollars that
are coming to that area, uh, his
leadership has been key in
modernizing and expanding
statewide technology services,
all while maintaining a budget
multi-million dollar contract
negotiations delivering over
$400 million in mission critical
public safety solutions in areas
like police, fire, emergency
and dedicated public.
and you may know this, Madam
President, because you were in
the hearing earlier, but maybe
some of the members don't. His
father, who is with us today,
and his mother and his partner,
his father and his grandfather
we need him to do. He's got
vision when he was talking
earlier, I thought it was, I
almost wanted to tell him to
stop talking, Madam President,
because he has a whole laid out
vision in a number of key areas
on the confirmation of Manny
Barreras, uh, seeing non sinner
Paa to close.
thank you very much, Madam
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative.
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Senators, we are voting on the
governor to your seats if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
to secretary of the Department
of Information and Technology
commencing on September 9th,
2024, and to be served the
pleasure of the governor has
duly passed the Senate.
word there. I do want to
introduce his guest today, his
father, Luis Barreras, if he'll
stand, his mother Mary Rose
Barreras and his partner Teresa
Tapia, if we can also recognize
Senator Wirth, thank you, Madam
President. Unanimous consent we
go back to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
We're on that order of business
seeing no objection,
that Senator Brantly, but
they're not here. So what we're
gonna do is start the 3rd
reading and we'll go to Senator
Tobiasson for her bill, and then
Seeing no objection, we're on
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
Senator Tobiasson.
Maestas and Duig, um, I would
like to withdraw my last
amendment.
The Senate floor amendment 2.
To Senate Bill 299 as thrice
amended.
explain the amendment.
Madam President, this amendment
requires the Secretary of State
to um
notification from the Secretary
of State to the appropriate
county commissions down to 5
days to notify.
left.
President, I see it up there, 2,
have the reader read the
amendments. We're a little off
today, everybody. Monday
morning, uh, the reader will
read.
Senate for Amendment number 2 to
And seeing a senator Du he is
not in the, this must be
friendly or you would not be
offering it, I'm assuming. So if
you could just explain once
again uh what the amendment does
respective legislative chamber,
um, is notified.
Number 2 on page 2 line 1, it
strikes the word 15 and inserts
amendment.
Uh, seeing none, uh er uhen City
Lopez.
Thank you. Just a very quick
can answer the question.
Um, thank you, Madam President.
Why, why the reduction from 15
days to 5.
Thank you Madam President,
less days were appropriate for
many reasons, so we all agreed
upon 5 days to notify, which is
should be plenty of time for the
Secretary of State's team to do.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Madam President, and
again I would really like to
thank um the cooperation of the
senators that I've mentioned,
they really helped, uh, fine
To send a bill 299 is twice
amended. We'll take this on a
voice vote. Those in favor of
the amendment signified by
saying I.
Thank you Madam President, and
um for those who didn't hear the
introduction on Saturday, I
would like to do that again on
this bill. So imagine a New
crossing Arroyo's and dodging
tumbleweeds. By the time it
reaches the right office, the
next election cycle has already
come and gone. Senate Bill 299
ensures that we don't rely on
old West logistics to handle.
isn't lost in the transit
the bill.
the body who really helped work
on this, um, and fine tune it
for the people, which is
senators worth Duig and Maestus
and I move that the Senate floor
OK, I moved that Senate bill
299.
Thrice amended?
of the Senate I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the roll has
been called and all those
To your seats if you wish to
By a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Bill 299 is thrice
legislation to our body. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Um, Senator Wirth, thank you,
Madam President, I believe that
was Senator Tobiasson's first
bill on the floor.
A torturous journey, but it got
there.
order business announcements and
miscellaneous.
We're back to that order of
business announced by
miscellaneous.
And I will yield to Senator
Brantley. Thank you, Madam
Scott McLaughlin, the director
of Spaceport America, Cecilia
Acosta, also a Spaceport
America, Ross Bell, the
executive director of Aerospace
Space Nexus.
Dan Morin of New Mexico Aviation
Division and Jane Lucero of the
New Mexico Aviation Division.
know Senator Woods and I took a
little journey yesterday and we
went to gallop and then we flew
back around Mount Taylor and so
we got to explore some of that
airspace that we talked about
Thunderbirds come in and
training at the spaceport.
There's a lot of economic
development, business side that
can happen at the spaceport, but
Uh, it might have been the best
deal we ever could have got
because we would still not be in
the agency that's still
underfunded, the, the, they just
signed their lease after a
spaceport can be made viable,
and it should have some vision
of where it wants to head if it
really wants to lead aerospace
in New Mexico. I mean this
technology is, is just amazing.
People don't know this, but.
uh, and so if you really want to
change the way the spaceport
operates and what it is, let's,
let's open it up for business.
Let's restrict that, get rid of
that, get rid of the restrictive
that we better prepare for, uh,
this summer, uh, hopefully not
wild for fires, but a lot of
wind and a lot of dryness in New
Mexico, but it was a great
what happened. So, thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Senator Munoz
announcements, I guess since I
just have a second right now. We
will be handing out another
sheet since we're not doing
grow, uh, another she will come
down from our Senate Finance
down there shortly to you. We'll
talk, we talked about the
government issue and what's
happening to the feds, but I
just went across the street to,
uh,
talk to the good representative
me that all the federal
healthcare in Zuni, New Mexico
may be shut down now. And so I
asked her to send me that text,
uh, Zuni represents Senator
Charlie has half azuni, I have
half a Zuni.
to Zuni next hospital would be
Gallup and IHS. I don't think
there's a clinic at Raymond Pine
Hill, uh, and then you have to
go to grants in Sabola County or
to Gallup for health care and so
of. So we're gonna be real
cautious as we move forward with
the budget and what our future
looks like in New Mexico. Uh, we
did talk about today that if we
did get hit, and I don't think
$3 billion in just a matter of
minutes and so just a cautionary
tale, we're not saying anything,
we're just gonna be
Cautious and, and watch what's
happening. Thank you, Madam
President.
go out of business 3rd reading
of legislation. I yield to
Senator Gonzalez for item 2,
Senate Bill 201
as amended on that order of
business. Third reading of
that all action for placing
Senate bill 201 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendments or substitution.
uh, what, uh, Senate bill to 201
is amended to is um.
Uh, this bill amends would
require public education
department to develop
initiatives funded through the
public education reform Fund,
the bill also moves the
submission deadline for public
What this does is uh currently
funding for 6 major initiatives
at public education department
82.5 million for the next 3
years. And with that, I would
stand for any questions.
Any debate on Senate Bill 201.
Senate Bill 201 as amended, do
not pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the role has
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative
Senate Bill 201 as amended has
duly passed the Senate. Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam President, I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that all action for placing
Senate Bill 319 on final passage
Madam President, this bill is a
crucial step toward improving
road safety and protecting New
Mexico residents with New Mexico
facing one of the highest rates
accidents.
The state can be the state may
bear the costs of emergency
services, medical treatment, and
even legal proceedings. This
legislation will help reduce the
financial burden on accident
victims and the state and
Madam President, thank you and
uh will the sponsor please we
yield for a couple of questions.
Yes, she yields. Madam
President, you know, being an
If this bill were to go through,
we're looking at about a 16%
increase.
In people's policy.
Madam President,
I, I, I saw that, that statistic
to offer it. They are then
competing.
They are competing for uh
consumers, and I think that will
actually lower the cost of this
coverage.
to run a policy of a general
policy for one of my
constituents and uh.
The, the basic policy.
President, um, we're looking at
that to figure doubling,
tripling, quadrupling depending
on how many cars they have.
You know, I, I'm an insurance
raise if this does go through
and, and, uh, you know.
This is truly a bill that, uh, I
fear for because being from a
but mostly in our rural areas as
uh people know our.
Our income levels are pretty,
pretty low and president. This
think this is just compound on
our problem that we currently
have, Madam President.
Thank you very much and I think
that's all I've got, Madam
President.
So do
do you.
Thank you, Madam President, uh,
senator, how many
How many people drive uninsured
now, do we know? Or what
percentage?
uninsured motorist coverage, uh.
See no objection, the sergeant
Madam President, approximately
uninsured or choose not to get
insurance.
also is if it's going to cost
substantially more for insurance
that we may be increasing the
number of people who are driving
uninsured by requiring all to
doesn't serve anybody very well.
And so that's my concern.
is that we are actually going to
be increasing the number of
people driving uninsured because
of the increasing cost, uh, and
increases the number of people
driving uninsured, that's going
to escalate those other costs as
well and the cost of insurance
will go up. That's my concern,
Madam Chair.
rules yield
to yield Senator Townsend, Madam
Of those people that have full
coverage today.
What percentage of them.
A refuse.
have that statistic, but most
people misunderstand full
coverage to include UM and often
UM coverage is priced to try to
get people to reject it.
Based on your expert witness.
What does he expect the increase
cost to level out at if you
believe there is some
Madam President, uh, my expert
believes that uh Rachel will
actually remain flat because
there are already paying on
every car and now it would not
dollars is because right now, so
that is based on how it's being
priced right now.
Right now it is being priced in
a way to try to try to get
see those same prices. Uh, if
there's not an incentive to try
to get them to not get the
coverage, um, or reject
stacking, uh, we're gonna see,
Sarah Townsend
Thank you, uh, Madam President,
uh,
Senator, I have, I, I have, um,
Take on an additional risk.
Where they know 24% of the
drivers out there have.
No insurance to begin with.
strictly off the actuarial
computations it's going to look
at this and say, OK.
1 in 4 don't have insurance, but
President, that I believe that
the body has to realize is that
what we're doing.
And, and I understand exactly
where Senator Duig is coming
Choose to pay for insurance.
That's required by law, knowing
full well that 1 in 4 don't.
Penalizing those people that are
Following the law and doing
what's right is not a good way
to, uh,
and that's just gonna be a big
problem across New Mexico. We
have enough problems already, so
I appreciate it, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Next we'll
hear from Senator Steinborn.
Madam President. So to, to start
off with Madam President, can
the gentle lady please just
share kind of what the genesis
lady? I don't think I've ever
been called that in here,
but um in the house.
Madam President, I have been an
attorney for, I think going on
that was said that we're
penalizing people.
Who are, who are doing what
we're asking of them now. This
protects them. I've repeatedly
seen people who are hit by
They can never be made whole.
And so I've seen that throughout
my career, um, and that, and
that's one of the reasons I
brought this bill.
Thank you, madam, Madam
Nonu who's joining us here on
the floor on this bill.
Madam President, was there
anybody else who asked you to
kill the bill. It it sounds like
the answer is no. I'm just just
Madam President, this is uh Jeff
Romero, I believe he is
self-employed.
A person, I understand
subsection D that an owner is
required to
Um
Carry this coverage because
that's what you're posing, but
then it says a person shall not
is loaned a car, say it's a, you
know, high school student, I'm a
parent. Is that high school
student then violating the law
because of subsection E here, if
the parent hasn't gotten the
coverage on that card.
the decision that we want people
on our roads to be insured. So
we mandate that they have
liability insurance, and I think
this might actually even be the
criminalize it.
Madam President, there are no
criminal penalties. This is not
a criminal bill.
high school student and your
parent has loaned you their car.
And for that matter, the section
above it.
If you are the owner of the car
and you don't have it, there's
Madam President, at the same
question. Is there no penalty if
you don't have liability
insurance?
OK, so I, I guess I'm just
pointing this out that
Uh, on subsection E.
You know, uh, penalizing a
minor could be liable for that,
and I guess get a ticket. I
mean, I'm still not sure. I
drive uh with a car without
insurance now, and they get a
ticket for it. It would be no
no different, and it's nothing
about them being a minor or not.
It's, it's just about whether
uninsured coverage is what is
probably the most valuable
coverage a person can have. When
you have liability coverage that
everyone thinks about liability
coverage because you think if I
takes care of you if when
something happens.
Yeah, I'm, I'm well aware, Madam
President, of, of, of the
different coverages and what
they get you and I uh had a
careened off the road, smashed
into his vehicles.
Um, and it was actually a car
that was taken that was um
calling it.
Um, uninsured because she was
not the one driving. She didn't
authorize him. I just want to
make a little bit of a point,
issues with insurance and car
insurance right now, Madam
Chair, uh, Madam President, that
I hear from my constituents,
including how people see
people's car insurance rates
seem to be rather arbitrary and
vehicles individually, and I, I
To them, it feels like it's a
little bit of a racket, and I
don't know what our
superintendent of insurance is
New Mexico. I will say that this
bill doesn't deal with that, but
in a way, in a way it does
because it's a product that's
got to be affordable to people
and we're adding on another
mandate.
Onto that system that
Madam President, Senator?
Madam President, uh, I met with
them about this bill before the
session and they were
So if it is mandatory, uh, I
think we will see less of that
arbitrary pricing, at least for,
for this coverage.
Well, thank you, Madam
President. Respectfully, I would
don't think it fixes the problem
at all. But, you know, like in
the case of my constituent who
uh who got hit and then he was
out thousands of dollars and
he's left, and he, his food
coverage required of people for
all types of circumstances,
having said that,
It's always about the fine print
and uh.
You know, you can have coverage
President. Thank you, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Madam President. Will
the senator yield for a question
or two
Ss.
Automobiles with only the first
And liability being state
required. Is that accurate?
But Madam President, there are
other coverages available, a
particularly to folks that, that
are driving automobiles that
those other coverages be, uh,
comprehensive, that is coverage
against uh hail damage or a tree
limb falling on the vehicle.
be one of these required
coverages, uh, collision which
would pay for the repair of the
So, uh, Madam President, most of
these, uh, most of these
coverages would also include
some
have to kick in. Is that also
your understanding?
Madam President, no, the finance
companies don't require medical
protect them or pay for their
expenses in the event that they
are injured. So,
You've got the car covered.
You've got your medical
deductibles in the event of an
accident.
Is that
Also
Your understanding?
for that, uh, and I suspect that
some of and, and we also have a
number of uninsured folks
without medical insurance here
in New Mexico. Uh, and my guess
is if you're
of this piece of legislation in,
in most circumstances would be
to protect.
The state against uninsured
certainly part of it. Uh, yes,
it will, it will.
Ensure that the state is not
bearing the, the costs of those
unin the damages caused by those
happened. Madam President, when
you get, get, uh, hit by a car.
It's not just medical problems
you have. It's not just the
damage to your car, you also
damages to, to our bodies and
our vehicles, uh, that this
coverage would protect New
Mexicans against.
Uh, Madam President, uh, not
being able to work for a couple
That what we are doing here is
penalizing the the folks that
are obeying the law, buying the
To buy the coverage. How would
you address that concern?
Madam President, I don't think
we're penalizing them. I think
we're protecting them.
We're making sure that if they
are are hit by one by an
If we only had one insurance
company in all of New Mexico,
and there's mandated coverage,
then yeah, they could probably
arbitrarily make that price
To get those customers and my
understanding from
Many conversations, uh, in this,
that is good for the consumer
and tends to lower prices. Madam
President.
What I can't see.
For the folks that are breaking
the law, not willing to buy
liability coverage.
How is this different from what
Madam President and Senator, but
only for me.
Not for the other guy. How is
this not forcing me to buy
Madam President, I think we
might have a, a misunderstanding
of what liability coverage means
in this debate. So liability
To have liability coverage to
cover their damages.
Uninsured motorist coverage is
But I'm already paying for
insurance for all of the issues
that might occur in the event
buy liability coverage for the
person that is that hit me, that
is liable for my damages but
unwilling to pay for their own
at it in the wrong way, because
you are not already required to
have coverage that will I think
you said there was a statement.
Someone's already required to
now. Right now you are only
required to have insurance that
would cover the person you
damaged.
that I may cause. And now,
I'm going to be required to buy
a liability coverage for the
other guy that's unwilling to
any other way. Thank you, Madam
President, and thank you,
Senator, for your answers.
Senator Manos.
Thank you, Madam President. Do
were made in New Mexico or the
shortage of insurance dollars,
uh, to pay those claims.
Madam President, no, we don't.
at here if we don't know that
it's actually a cost to
somebody's because they don't
have the coverage and we don't
know what the number is for the
uninsured motorists that didn't
paying 2.
A million dollars in medical
expenses.
Madam President, I'll, I'll not,
them what they're paying for
with this, uh, but, but me, me
not knowing the exact number
doesn't mean we don't know that
there's a cost. We absolutely
know that there's a cost. That
someone, someone gets hit and
they are injured, uh, and there
is
And they're on Medicaid and
that.
You are, you don't.
You don't cease to be damaged
simply because there is not
coverage there to pay your
damages. The damage is there
And Madam President, uh, the
sponsor said they were, there
were lawsuits over there. Do we
know the the amount of lawsuits
or how many lawsuits were filed
under uninsured motorists
claims.
Madam President, so my expert
has been involved in about a
dozen class action suits, um,
but I know there are also lots
and lots of individual suits as
well.
were taken and, and where they
settled yet and what was the
dollar for the class action,
because that means multiple
people. I'm not a lawyer but to
help me with this a little bit.
I'm not a lawyer born in class
Madam President, there's been,
different issue that's insured,
but didn't get the claims on the
premium, so that's a different
clock I can shoot rather than
uninsured motorists, which has
no insurance or something. I,
full coverage policy. So, Madam
President, I carry full coverage
because it depends what the
value of your vehicle is, and I
live in the area where the
people really can't afford a lot
of insurance.
They may not have the policy
increase. That, that's a large
increase in most insurance
companies, a lot of insurances
are driven by hedge funds.
And hedge funds are there to
make money and, and they're
gonna increase the rates, so
Madam President, I don't know
that. I, I do want to make the
point though that, uh, about
the, the class action suit about
them taking premiums and not
Well, basically what this bill
would do, Madam President, is
make sure
That you know what you're paying
for when you buy your insurance
and that you get what you paid
streets on our streets, have the
protection that they need.
So Madam President, Senator, so
my full coverage policy and I if
I pay on insured motors, I, I'm
actually, you could get hit and
they will use offsets to say
nope, you don't actually get
anything under that coverage,
get the benefit of that and this
bill would fix that.
Madam President, but then I keep
reading in the FRR and said in a
43% increase would be for if
someone just has general
liability or GL policy, right?
And doesn't have an uninsured
motors, and we have to add this
And Madam President, that's
because that is, that is looking
at the current pricing, which is
manipulated in an attempt to get
pricing and we'll have the
benefit of competition to help
keep to, to help uh keep those
prices down.
But I don't think the numbers
you would not be able to
manipulate if this passes.
And Madam President, I, I, I, I
totally agree with you that
insurance companies and lawyers
make a choice to, are they gonna
buy insurance or they're gonna
buy gas to go to work.
Ah, are they gonna buy
Uh, food, or are they gonna pay
for their insurance, but when
And, and so you have to think
about people as a factor in
this. I mean, this is a very
important factor if everybody in
this room, which I think
me right here, and he knows that
he probably can't go get
insurance. I don't know what his
age is, but he probably can't go
get insurance.
At his age and I'm just gonna
his driver's license. I mean,
insurance companies have told
us, oh, you can keep your kids
on your policies.
And reduce the rates and we can
get them coverage in the good
they go in and get a policy, uh,
and then buy a car and get a
policy or, or, or is that a
restricted in the insurance pool
the good senator from, uh,
Madam President, yes, they can
get insured and that 21 year old
is the same person who will be
destroyed if hit by an uninsured
motorist and is out of, out of
Just, there's no, there's not an
age limit, uh, to insure your
vehicle.
Madam President, Senator, but,
but the insurance companies, I
driving. They're young, they're
youthful, they know they're
gonna speed, they know they're
gonna run stop signs. And so
it's just the cost is what's
people, that's the big issue
here is 16% to everybody in the
state in 43% to people that
barely can afford liability
insurance. That is a big issue
policies $1000 they're going to
see $1400 policy for the
uninsured motors part, um.
I, I completely agree with the
uninsured motors, but the cost
to to a person that that can't
have the record of doing that,
driving record. So I think
you'll see a lot of denials and
then I think you're going to see
a lot of insurance lapse and,
the sponsor yield, will you
yields.
Thank you, Madam President, um.
I'm curious how the sponsor.
Madam President, um.
I, I
I, so we as a state have already
decided that.
anyone. Therefore, I don't need
to be insured.
Madam President.
But in reading this bill, I know
requiring me to carry the burden
of even more insurance.
Madam President, no.
Madam President, I disagree with
a consumer to pile on levels of
insurance, and I think that's
also why there are 30 other
states in in America that do not
require this additional
insurance. So,
driver, the individual driver
right now bears the
responsibility and if that
uninsured driver does not carry
insurance, then if they cause
requiring everyone in the state
to pay more in insurance
premiums, isn't that?
Correct?
So, Madam President, so, so
first of all, that, again, the
that makes, especially no sense
because if you already have full
coverage, you already have UM
coverage, so it makes no sense
that you, it's gonna go up cause
you would already have it, um.
looking around the other day and
saw for um.
The, uh, a quote that adding UM
coverage now under the pricing
just liability and you added on,
uh, the minimum limits uninsured
motorists on top of that. But
again, this is the, the our
current pricing is is
Madam President, as the business
coach, I teach my clients
something called market
competition.
And
Because it's not mandated.
If this additional insurance is
mandated, then you have less
Does the FIR, um,
Senator Du, does it talk about
market competition and does it
talk about the price overall.
markets work, um, that there is,
is less competent is that
there's less competition when
everyone is competing to provide
disagree with that because I
think you have a forced mandate
that then puts the consumer at a
disadvantage because they have
to buy, therefore insurance
freedoms and in a state where we
have
A very low wage, um,
disproportionate amount of
workers in our state that now
increased inflation, um, we're
facing potential federal cuts
that over half of our citizens
rely upon in some way or
another. So there's lots of
just um disadvantaged
individuals. For this reason, I
cannot support this bill. Thank
you, Mrs. Madam President.
Any other debate?
Thank you, Senator. I just want
to make sure I understand, uh,
your position when it comes to
the analysis that's uh performed
on this bill.
Um,
Makes note of likely sizable
increases in the insurance
premium. You, you think that is
inaccurate?
Madam President, yes.
Thank you, Madam President.
to reject this.
Coverage this bill helps those
injured by uninsured or by
uninsured or underinsured
carry that insurance, so the
increased costs from the
Tax and rev department, you
believe they're, uh, in error as
well.
Madam President, as I said a
that the OSI is predicted, and
that's because they are looking
at the current pricing, that is
used to get you to reject the
Is the industry analysis wrong
that it will increase auto
insurance. It's going to raise
your premiums.
coverage, as you might, you
might spend an extra
10 $15 a month.
And the and what you get in
massive medical bills, you are
covered, you are made whole. So
it is the, it is the one of the
best investments one could
possibly make.
It's more than that, and I think
the senator from, from McKinley
County, uh, was exactly right as
well as the senator from, uh,
Right now we know that New
Mexicans don't buy insurance
now.
This is going to raise the rates
for New Mexicans, and if you're
not buying now.
those who don't buy it now.
For those who currently have it,
it's going to increase our rates
and those, there might be people
who dropped their coverage.
Madam President, so under the
Um, there might be some people
and so, and that's what the, the
current scheme that is used to
to get you to reject it when
they would no longer have that
about 25% of the people in New
Mexico do not have insurance,
uh.
That doesn't, that doesn't, if
anything, that suggests to me
that it is more, it is
absolutely critical.
really high, and there was a
statement earlier, Madam
President, that, that well the
uninsured motorists bears,
that's on them. They, they bear
the liability for that.
compensation from them because
they don't have insurance. So,
Madam President, thank you,
Senator for that. How, how do
you know if this bill is
how do we know that this bill is
working for New Mexicans when it
comes to.
Increasing the amount of um.
New Mexicans insured.
How do we know how can you
guarantee that New Mexicans are
here, but I think that what we
see right now is that where we
have mandatory coverage, about
75% of New Mexicans comply with
it.
to, for whatever, speeding or
whatever, uh, is, is this bill
going to require that police
officer to ensure
want to talk about compliance.
When a police officer pulls.
A operator or an owner of a
motor vehicle over is that
police officer.
It's Madam President, it's
automatically there if any
insurance policy was sold.
I'm sorry, Madam President,
Senator, could you repeat that?
look at your car insurance, for
instance, mine, USAA.
All that shows is proof of
insurance.
You don't know what type of
this bill, it's mandated, then
it would be mandated and it
would have to be sold as part of
the.
Madam President, Senator, again.
When you show that coverage,
that insurance coverage, it
doesn't show you that you have
this, all the police officer
cares about is your license,
they look at your proof of
liability insurance because
that's what we mandate.
So
They would look at that, so if
we mandated this as a state.
That would show that you met the
state mandate.
So Madam President and Senator,
so when you show your proof of
insurance.
Madam President, in the 22
states and District of Columbia
that have adopted this law. I'm,
I'm pretty sure that's how it
works.
you have, but you would not,
Madam President, have the option
to reject it if we pass this
law. So if you had insurance, if
you had auto insurance, it would
Thank you, Madam President. So
it's mandated we're forced to
take it and uh we're also forced
to pay higher premiums and
you've admitted that yourself
it's going to cost the New
floor. Thank you.
Senator Steinborn.
For the 2nd time.
Uh, will the senator yield?
I'm hearing, uh, I'm hearing the
concerns and I'll go ahead and
pull the bill.
Uh, so are we rolling this over
the correct term. All right,
final pass has been taken. It's
now subject to debate. Amendment
or substitution.
Sinner words to explain the bill
amends the inspection of public
the practice of a medical
provider working in a public
institution who performs medical
services related to abortion.
um,
And basically what IPRA is being
used for is to target providers
and puts those providers in
UNMH in this area have had their
work emails, uh, targeted, and
all kinds of sensitive
information that puts them, uh,
uh, this EPA exception, uh, I
believe is needed and I would
yield to Senator Nava, who is my
co-sponsor on this bill.
Senator Nava.
co-sponsor, um, and I'll start
us off by the quote by RBG which
says women belong in all places
where decisions are being made.
I believe that's important on
anonymous out of state PO box
request for a large volumes of
documents. These have been
targeted OBGYNs who are subject
to the EPRA Act who provide full
dedicate their careers to
serving our communities and we
need to ensure that every OBGYN
we can recruit and retain in New
Mexico is here to serve and
support us, Madam President, I
Senor share.
Thank you, Madam President.
I thought there was an amendment
here somewhere, but.
Apparently not, but
in general said yes, uh, the,
the certain data, names,
addresses, phone numbers,
emails, uh, those should be of
the providers.
is finding its way here. Uh, it
did say that aggregated
information, however, was not
protected.
And so,
The question is,
Why
Center were to yield, Madam
President, I just ask the
unanimous consent to bring in an
expert witness, uh, Doctor Lisa
Hofler, who is the interim chair
of OBGYN at UNM Health Sciences.
Uh, Madam President, and in
response to the question, uh,
again, I think we need to
remember kind of the two tracks
of exceptions that are already
in the law, and every once in a
while, we add to those we did in
2019, I believe, we had an
exception for police.
aggregate data, because
certainly, uh, UNMH is part of
Has a huge budget, as we all
know, and they go through their
to that budget process.
Certainly that is something that
will come out as part of that
process. This though is designed
to stop the targeting, uh,
that's happening in the
inbound here should be here
soon. Uh, so then we can
actually.
Talk about what's the amendment
instead of uh hypothetical
things here.
Um, and, and Madam President, I,
That's where I think it it's
changed because that, that rises
to the level of attorney-client
privilege.
Um, right now we, uh, we had.
Because prior to that, it could
be.
So we did away with that because
that was important, but that was
an individual human.
It wasn't
Madam President, just a moment
here.
We have technical problems.
OK, so, Madam President.
And I agree.
Let's not do that.
But it's the aggregate
information that's being paid
for by the New Mexico taxpayer.
asking for here. This is simply
a transparency for, for
New Mexico taxpayers looking,
you know, for what did they pay
for?
So, is there a question in that
last statement? I'm looking for
a question if you can come up
Madam President, uh, the
question I have is well
understood this, this had to do
a lot with you and them. So is
it just you and him we're
So center words do you yield to
cinder woods, I'd be happy to
yield to Senator Woods, uh, yes,
as I said up front, this only
this specific procedure, there's
no issue with IPRA. Uh,
currently, the only place public
provider that does abortion
Voluminous amounts of time
trying to respond to IPRA
requests asking for all of their
emails, their travel plans, uh,
that are in states where this
procedure is restricted, and if
you might, I think you can
imagine that that's certainly
challenging, to say the least,
the only public institution I'm
being told by my expert where
this procedure is done, and
that's why they're subject to
IPRA with the exceptions that
exists in HIPRA, but those
here.
Every agency we have, Madam
President.
Every agency will come in here
and tell them they're innovative
with infrare requests.
of that one.
And
I don't see where
We need to draw this line, tell
you the truth.
Uh, but
Thank you, Senator Woods. We do
have an amendment, the reader to
read.
Amendment 1 to Senate Bill 57
amendment sponsored by Senator
Scherer.
Senator shared to move the
So, uh, Madam President, the
amendment's pretty simple. Uh,
it does absolutely clarify that
personal home address, personal,
What it does add though is
provided that this exception
does not extend to information
and aggregate data.
We can ask, now they won't tell
us who, but they'll, but they'll
have a number.
And so that's what we're trying
to get to is just the aggregate
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
So, uh, for two reasons, this is
not a friendly amendment first,
uh, already in the IPRA
already some exemption there. I
think what we're saying though,
and I think that this goes back
to Senator Woods as well, um,
this is an area where these
asking UNMH again, wearing your
Legislator hat being part of the
budget process to talk about
what services are being
not, most of these are out of
state, uh, with respect to the
specific practice. So not a
friendly amendment.
Other debate on the.
Um, Madam President, if I'm
reading the amendment correctly,
you're saying that the exception
would not apply to um it says
information and aggregated data.
so how can there be an
exception.
Really, you're, you're making an
exception to an exception. Would
you agree with that first of
all, Senator? You're making an
exception to the exception.
Could be things like how many
out of state came here? That's,
that's general information.
Well, ma'am, Senator, first of
all, you don't use the word
general information. You just
it's a double negative, so
you're saying the exception does
not extend to, so you're making
permissive, uh, the request for
information, and then it just
information and I'm, I'm trying
to understand how would a lawyer
or judge know what the
limitations on information would
be acceptable to you and
acceptable to anybody else, we
That clearly is protected here
is the personal information of
any of the providers, and that's
in the opening here, we said,
oh, there's threats to the
I don't want anybody going after
the nurse or the.
Whoever's running the front desk
or anything like that.
they also can't have any
information at all about
anything.
And yet it's still paid for by
the taxpayer.
And if a requests can come from
Oh,
Department of Health, uh,
healthcare authority, sorry I
lost the name there.
Those are, those are happen all
potentially threatened or
protected.
The aggregate information is
not.
Aggregate information is, hey,
this is what happened. This is
But I will ask you, Madam
President, if he would answer
back. If we redid this and we
took out the word information
and.
ambiguities. One is again the
word information is entirely
subject to interpretation. You
don't have a definition. You
don't limit it, so without any
they did not exempt information.
We're gonna debate what we meant
by the word information.
Since we didn't describe it or
define it, put any parameters
around it. So you proposed
amendment to your amendment
So Madam President, what then is
the other problem?
Madam President said, you got
it. You were already ahead of
me, and you saw it because you
are pretty experienced and know
gonna allow aggregated data, um,
you gave an example of what
aggregate data data means to
you, um, but what aggregated
data means to you may not be
what aggregated data means to
So Madam President and Senator,
Certainly our, our
Healthcare Authority
Who I keep wanting to call
Department of Health, but I know
How many cases of diabetes are
there in New Mexico that's
aggregated data.
Uh, we can get from the
Department of Public Safety. How
aggregated data, and I don't
think that that's a.
I don't think that's
troublesome. In fact, now that I
have my encyclopedia, I mean my
dictionary here.
Because Webster can figure that
out. I'm sure judges can figure
that out too, Madam President.
our statutes. You and I see them
all the time. We're putting in
definitions we debate and argue
over definitions. We could just
say see Webster's for a
definition of, let's say an
assault weapon, um, instead of
Uh, or, or we'll ask the NRA to
give us a definition. We'll use
their definition. Senator, you
and I both know, uh, we spend a
lot more time, a lot more effort
to define terms and so I
would simply leave that to
somebody else to do, do, uh,
describe and fight about and
those parties might fight about
it by relying on Webster's, but
they may not. The very fact that
you're turning
I, I would have to speak against
the amendment because of these
undefined terms and the
ambiguity your bill would
create. Thank you.
Other debate on the amendment.
for a question or two.
Uh, Madam President and Senator
The original language in the
bill that this
Amendment
information will.
Madam President, as I look
through this bill right now.
There does not appear to be a.
Colly, Madam President, I think
we need to hold this whole thing
over until we get a definition
section so we can identify what
uh.
debating the amendment.
Uh, yeah, yes, Madam President,
but the question was, we don't
know what aggregate is, so.
And Senator, I have no idea of
what might be.
Considered sensitive
information, and I would ask
The relevance of this amendment.
Yeah, so that that would be back
on the bill. We're on the
would like to know from anyone
with the information, what
sensitive is.
sensitive information related to
the practice.
And replaces it with the
personal home address, personal
phone number, or personal email
address. So in in this
Uh, Madam President, can anyone
when we're on the bill, you can
ask that question. I'm sure you
ambiguities, and I appreciate
the uh answers to my questions.
Thank you, Madam President. And
thank you. Other debate on the
amendment.
the definition of is is.
And uh
Yet most of us understand what
is is.
So
The bill itself.
that I agree should not happen.
That's the intent of the bill.
The bill, however, currently
does.
Protect other things like
sensitive information.
That I agree should be a
protected, OK. The name, the
address, the phone number.
Uh, the, the email address?
Those are things that we should
can be
Uh, there can be no information,
uh, request for any information.
Under the way the bill is
were troublesome. People being
threatened, protect that.
But the aggregate information.
How many abortions were there?
How many of these were, uh,
That's information that we ought
to know.
As citizens, not just a senator.
But the citizens, I don't know.
job as a state to provide
information through
transparency. We have
transparency on so many things.
And we provide that information.
the governor's office provides
information. Why would this
special interest group. A single
special interest group, not have
to provide information.
And I promise you, uh, Madam
President, that there are people
out there that are trying to
figure out.
What business?
of it he does and how many
barrels of oil he produces or
doesn't produce.
And our state will provide that
information.
But everything else he does to
pay for the
Expenses of the state of New
Mexico because that's what he
does.
All of that.
be requested from somebody in
Pennsylvania or California.
And we will respond to that. The
state of New Mexico will respond
to that.
And it doesn't matter if they
this. The people of New Mexico,
the people of America.
By all kinds of standards that
we've had.
Addressed the concern that was
stated.
And still have transparency that
we are obligated to have, and I
think that obligation to
Then the word aggregated will.
So with that, Madam President, I
now move Senate floor amendment
number 1 to Senate Bill 57.
on Senate floor Amendment number
1, to your seats if you wish to
vote no, please raise your hand.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Senator Campos.
voting no.
Senator Figueroa.
Voting no. Senator Nava.
Senator O'Malley.
Voting no.
Senator Charlie.
Voting no.
Senator Gonzalez.
voting no.
Senator Trujillo.
Voting no.
Senator Hamlet.
Voting now, Senator Munoz.
Voting no
In your souls.
Voting no.
Senator Stefani voting no.
Senator Padilla.
5 out of 16 in the affirmative,
26 in the negative Senate floor
amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 57 has failed to pass the
Senate.
Senator Sha.
Thank you, Madam President. I'm
to Senate Bill 57. Amendment
sponsored by Senator Gallegos
Gallegos to move the.
And present body of this just uh
real brief, it's on line 13, and
what we're doing here is to um
that this subsection shall not
apply to the procedure results
in number one, death or serious
bodily injury to the mother.
out of uterus death of the fetus
due to non-natural causes.
And present, that's the gist of
the bill of the amendment,
sorry.
this amendment is already banned
by the Health Information
Portability and Accountability
Act, known as HIPAA. This is all
personal information about
Sinner share. So, Madam
President, so it starts off on
line 14 here, which is the very
end of
Of the bill itself.
And so
Public body is very important
here, in case we missed that the
first time. It's not a private
enterprise, uh, who performs
medical services related to
abortion and then it adds.
Probably we should know, again,
not who the mom is, but did it
happen? bodily injury but not
death to the fetus that is
subject to an induced abortion.
So it just adds to this list of
things, um, and, and really.
In these cases here.
We're talking about
So why, why, why should that be,
you know, protected information.
And then, uh, the live birth of
the fetus and subsequent out of
uterus death.
Living human being.
Outside the womb.
We kill.
have a baby because we can see
it.
We know that she has arms and
legs in a heartbeat.
We can see it.
these are the
The things that that we're
concerned about.
And I'm just, I'm, I'm
frightfully concerned that
we're, we're evolving into.
And when we get to this, leaving
a baby on the table to die.
That's child sacrifice. That's
not an.
Nobody wants to hear it from an
old white man, but it's an old
white man who has children.
Born premature.
has grandchildren.
Born premature
Kathleen. You've met her.
And yet the advice was to abort.
This is personal to me because I
do believe dads still care about
their children.
This is important.
Child sacrifice is not and
should not be acceptable.
When somebody is dying.
Singing no sinner close. Madam
President, I thank you for the
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended and
the records show that the role
has been called in all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
If you wish to vote no, raise
your hand.
Senator Lopez, voting no.
Senator Souls voting no. Senator
Senator Bergman's voting no.
Senator Shindo.
voting no.
Senator Hamlet.
Voting, no.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Doheck.
voting now.
Senator Pinto.
Voting, no.
Senator O'Malley.
Voting no.
Senator Charlie.
Voting, no.
Senator Siddi Lopez voting no.
Senator Pope.
By a vote of 17 in the
affirmative, 25 in the negative,
Senate floor Amendment number 2
to Senate Bill 57 has failed to
pass the Senate.
did the math wrong before the
vote, uh, I do hope, Madam
President, that we look that uh
what our constituents and their
Senator Scott
Who are you pointing to, Senator
Tobias, and I apologize. Thank
you, Madam President. um, with
happened in the state of New
Mexico in 2024.
Center word, Madam President, I
don't have that information.
information and sends it.
Out for anyone who asks.
I present my expert says yes.
Senors,
Madam President, Senator.
Isn't women's health a statewide
data is reported, the numbers.
Madam President,
If we're talking about women's
disadvantage and, and I'll
continue by asking, as a woman,
We say that I understand that a
So a woman faces many other
situations, many other
considerations that men actually
do not face.
And I believe that it's very
rally around supporting and
continuing the initiative of
women's health, both physical,
mental, emotional.
without continued information,
how do we know how to rally
around women in, in a health
initiative. How, how do we
question.
Thank you Madam President. I'm
going to yield to Senator Wirth
first, and then I will take it
were discussing, uh, again, what
this bill is really designed to
do is stop the targeting of
these providers, uh, getting
into levels that's putting them
really at risk. And so, again,
together UNM's budget, and
UNMH's budget to understand
exactly where funding's going,
that's not going to change with
this bill, uh, so again, I think
an OBGYN working at UNM. It's
not gonna be the letters from
students in other states.
s trying to come to New Mexico
to get, do it, to do a
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you Senator Tobiasson for
your question. As a woman of
color.
One who has been marginalized by
systems. I just want to
Be positioned um as a bill that
is prohibiting health care
being targeted by ideological
position.
Thank you, Madam President.
Sinner Tobiasin
Thank you, Madam President. um,
myself and many other people,
we're not asking for doctor's
names, but we would like to know
the aggregate information so
how we can continue to support
women, not to deny their access
or not to deny the doctors.
access to helping women. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
the sponsor uh yield for a
question.
So in other words,
do you, Madam President, I'm
happy toy for a question.
make sure I understand what
you're saying, uh, starting on
just line.
Uh, tan an act relating to
public records.
to the practice of a medical
provider who performs medical
services related to abortion.
Um, Madam President and Senator,
From disclosure of any record
containing
Personal identifying information
or sensitive information.
our
Law in 2019.
UNM law enforcement, state
police, all of those police
records that have data that
we should do an exemption. And
so,
Again
I think this is a policy choice
and I respect, you know, the
difference of opinion here, but
all those state agencies.
others, because there are a
number of different exemptions.
From IPRA in in the act, and
again, that's the one I'm
thinking of off the top of my
head.
reports on what we can release
and cannot release.
But let's just say,
Let's just go to um state state
employees or, or county
government employees, if you
Makes a decision.
Where someone is extremely upset
and goes unhinged and makes a
threat against that person.
Centerworth,
I, I don't have the IPRA law
right in front of me. That's,
again, I think you would need to
practice is to disclose and
interestingly,
This bill was not opposed by the
normal groups that fight very
Thank you Madam President. So
Senator, again,
Are we treating these particular
people differently who are
Government employee in the state
of New Mexico.
Senator.
Again, I don't, I'm not an
this specific narrow area and
we're recognizing the fact that
we want to encourage OBGYN,
which is one of the most
challenging.
It made me willing to carry a
bill like this that normally,
again, for all the reasons that
we talked about, you know, this
is a
Asking for an exception is a big
hope you would agree, if you
take a look at our first
responders, our police officers
and our deputies are.
State police
The personal identifying
information or sensitive
information related to the
practice of law enforcement of
case by case basis. We also in
this body have received threats,
um, been in some very
challenging situations, but
nothing like what these folks
country and not doing the job
that they're there to do, that
quite frankly, and talk, talk
about taxpayer dollars not being
used where they're supposed to
be used. I just, again, I think
because, um,
Senator Cervantes has had death
threats. I've had two death
threats this, this session,
Madam President, that's the
We've had police officers
stalked.
As well we've had government
and treat everybody equally. And
I'm not, and I'm not disagreeing
with you, Senator, about the
threat to these particular
people.
But how does it make, how do you
think a family member feels.
have been threatened where they
know who are wives or husbands
are our children are, they know
where we live.
Law enforcement officials,
elected officials, public
officials.
But we're going to set them
aside.
But I would argue that's not
equal, Madam President, Senator.
And I think this would have a
hard time defending.
dialogue, respectful dialogue.
Thank you, my friend.
Senor Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam President. I'm
fortunate to follow up on that
individuals.
And this also follows Senator
Sheer's question earlier about
the lack of a definition for
personally identifying
information. Uh, we do actually
In a case just decided this last
September of 2024, the New
Mexico Court of Appeals ruled
that it was proper to exclude
personal identifying information
case wanted information
concerning foster parents.
And the court said that that was
properly excluded from IPRA.
And I think we can probably
debate and discussion about
personally identifying
information. I looked up your
personally identifying
information on your candidate
disclosures for your home
address.
It's not available if you go to
address earlier in this session
when they thought that my
personal home address should be
a matter of public discussion.
Uh, and, and maintaining the
Senate Republican caucus web
page.
Republican caucus web page and I
appreciate the fact that I think
it was taken down promptly. I
appreciate that very much.
But our, as a matter of
policies,
is creating some special class
of individuals here for
physicians.
And I hope you all appreciate a
little bit of passion in my
voice because I'd like to
explain something.
Now you all had a lot to do with
her success as far as I'm
concerned. She went to public
schools in Las Cruces.
All the way through
And then she was offered what's
You all got her through medical
school and undergraduate, and
then she was offered a residency
in Texas at Baylor and at UNM
Medical School she met my new
But I don't want her to have to
decide when deciding to come
back to New Mexico that her
address, her phone number, her
email address.
elect to
Accept the risks of public
service.
But my daughter
As an OBGYN physician shouldn't
have to accept that risk.
Why would you make her at risk.
Why would you make it a threat
for her to do so?
I accept that risk. She
will go to people who haven't
debated first, Senator Scott.
Thank you, we'll sponsor yield
for a question or two.
To withhold names, addresses,
phone numbers, and email
bill of sensitive information.
Sender
So Madam President, we did not
specifically.
things we didn't want to do is
open up other sections of IPRA
because that would bring
everything else into play, but
sensitive information's data
that causes harm.
individuals travel plans if
Senator Cervante's daughter
wants to come and work at UNMH
and submits a letter, uh, that's
being IPRA, that puts her at
drafted, uh, after we went
through the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Senator Scott
So, Madam President, it's being
represented.
So, Mr. President, I think we
went into that, we've been
through that before. Uh, I think
that was the discussion that we
had prior to that, uh, again.
what we're focused here on are
the individual issues involved
in these doctors' practices, um,
that's being.
That information such as the
number of procedures performed
in the 3rd trimester.
the case, sensitive information
in the eye of the beholder.
could be just about anything
us might have concerns in this
regard.
So Madam President, I've, I've
certainly heard the arguments
again, we've made the decision
position. OK.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Woods.
When
We offer a
Amendment
And you're able to pick it apart
by saying there's not a
We decided that wasn't
important.
So we're just gonna let, I'm
assuming a judge somewhere
determined that.
I have counted the votes, so I
know the turnout. So, thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sheriff.
Aggregate consumer information.
Relates to a group or category
of consumers.
So it is in law.
room.
Wants to go after Senator
Cervant's daughter or anybody
else involved in any medical
practice or anything else like
And yet we made a conscious
decision not to.
Relates to a group or category
of consumers.
And that was the whole problem
when this was talked about being
By rejecting the word aggregate.
Because we couldn't figure it
out.
Singan Senator Worth and Senator
Nova close. Senator Nava.
Clothes.
important reproductive health
protections into IPRA.
I have to tell you, Madam
President, as one of the two
youngest members of this body as
and every day, especially at a
time where reproductive justice
is under attack.
And on behalf of the many
today provider provided that's
one of her favorite quotes.
Each time a woman stands up for
herself she stands up for all
women, and we hope that that is
Senate Senate Bill 57 do now
pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the
The
clerk will call the roll on
Senate Bill 57.
San Bergman's San Bergman's
Senator Brandt votes no.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantly votes no.
Yes, and to explain.
Hamlin votes yes. Senator
my estes.
Yes, ma'am
O'Malley.
Cedilia votes yes. Senator Paul.
Yes. San Pope votes Santa Ramos.
Senator Steinburn boatsaran.
No. Senator Thornton votes no.
Center Tobiasin
No. Senator Thornton votes no.
Center Tobiasins Townsend.
Center
Senator Charlie to explain her
vote.
abortion providers, a 231%
increase in burglaries and a
100% increase in arson against
abortion providers in states
country and it is my honor to
continue protecting them today,
Madam President, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Charlie by a
Madam President, members,
colleagues,
I believe that it's important to
agree to disagree with all due
before you along with Senator
Wirth, muchas gracias.
Alright, we're marching along in
our agenda item number 5.
amended, uh,
On final passage and is now
subject to debate amendment and
substitution.
Senorinos to explain the bill.
make the electrical grid more
affordable by making an
investment in modernizing our
grid and the state's electrical
grid infrastructure.
The Bills ensures that ER, uh,
grid mod to ensure actual
distribution and transmission
infrastructure can be purchased
with, with the funding.
It also ensures the speed of
transmission lines going through
New Mexico.
Then we talk about the power
shortages in New Mexico. Who
doesn't have access to power.
How do we make power more
there. Electricity is more
efficient, uh, in heating and
cooling than it was in prior.
And if you don't have
electricity, you don't have
power for your natural gas. And
Madam President, I will stand
for questions. Thank you,
Senator Munoz says their debate
on the bill. Before I call on
you, Senator Woods, um, I
misspoke earlier.
I just want to announce that.
I believe this bill essentially
addresses
Distributive generation is that
right, Madam Chair?
have my expert witness uh from
the PRC, uh, Miss Corey on the
floor.
Uh, see no objection that
sergeant of arms can expert.
the good senator repeat it just
so we make sure we're getting
the correct answer.
Senator Woods, if you'll repeat
your question, Madam Chair, the
uh, Madam President, the
Madam President, Senator, it
doesn't do anything for
distribution.
is a co op that I use at my
house. Last night my wife called
in our lights were flickering
and power was going in and out.
Well, you know what's happening.
They tripped a fuse somewhere.
or tie better fuses into the
system. They'd be able to come
to the PRC and uh Ener, uh,
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources and get a grant and
say, OK, tie these up and
and so they allow them to come
in and modernize some of their
equipment. Madam President, I'm
not going to get into
Too much more on this. I will
was planning on was expecting to
have to cut down some 2.
De-energize some electrical
lines because of high winds.
In my part of the world.
The PRC.
The request made from utilities
to the PRC on infrastructure
If I wanna, if I'm a utility and
wanting to do.
Improvements on transmission or
any other segment of my
distribution.
When it's when it's, when you're
not bringing load onto the
system.
Wear's laws are written today.
The, the system is adequate to
serve.
And it's called a certificate of
necessity.
To increase
Now I think this bill actually
has some money.
To tie into it so the state
would pay for some of those
improvements.
Is that these improvements cost
so much money.
And nearly the only way we can
do this is
that, that substation or
something to make, uh,
electricity flow better. But in
the end of the day,
well-intentioned bill and I hope
it, it does help.
But
This is a bigger picture deal.
Then
What maybe this bill actually
soft landings this weekend, and,
uh, I went on a little uh ride
with the good senator and, you
know, he's a heck of a hand on
my expectation has come home
unharmed and lucky here, here I
am.
So I appreciate that, Senator,
and
Good luck with your bill. I
think I'm going to vote for it.
Madam President, yes, I will. He
does president, Senator, could
you describe for the body
exactly what goes in, what are
the components of grid
modernization Act and never
really completed it. I'm looking
for my talking points, but that
was passed in 2021, uh, to the
the grid modernization road map
2030.
The Insight also provided the
research for modernization and
plans through 2030, and it said
a baseline under the state's
electric electricity sector for
electrical grid modernization
and that is a benchmark for
companies from now until the
future and how they do that.
Now what comes back is we made
this road map. Now we got the,
Now we know you, we don't want
it all based upon the ratepayers
like it currently happens. And
so how do we help you
incentivize and harden that grid
and fix that grid with dollars
to tie into that.
and spark and cause a fire break
and cause a fire. There's a
modernization that they needed,
they could come to this funding
and get the, the funds to do
that. As we move forward, I'm
And I hope that answered a lot
of your question.
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
it did not. I mean, all of those
activities generating
components of modernization. How
does, how does this legislation
know of, uh, community solar,
uh, and Lee County wanted to
build the community solar plant
and wanted to tie into the grid.
They currently can't because the
PRC has not had the authority
Other examples of modernization
could be in Southeast New
Mexico.
I mean, if in part of the
legislation it says it allows
oil and gas companies to use AI
whaleheads and and air operated
actuators so we can hit that
benchmark and so that would
modernize the way they're
working. Those are two examples
that I know of, uh, to the best
of my ability center.
understanding that is the
percentage of renewable energy.
Uh, on the grid.
could be the, the increasing
impact of renewables could
actually be going the wrong
we're on this trajectory of
we're headed to solar, we're
headed to wind, we're doing
that, a possibility could be we
want battery backup for when
that unreliable power, the sun
grid.
And so that will take some of
the scarcity or the, not the
scarcity, but the um accuracy of
how much is gonna be on the grid
is currently hideously not just
expensive. It is hideously
expensive, so it's cost benefits
be doing to our ratepayers with
this modernization.
Madam President and Senator, you
know,
We can do smart transformers.
company is eligible for, for,
uh, AI monitoring of a
transformer or substation. They
can help pay that, so that the,
Modern technology, uh, to help
save the ratepayer, uh, from all
these costs.
with the PRC in this bill. What
does energy minerals and natural
resources know about
electricity. What, what is, what
Madam President, Senator,
Emner made this bill the grid
modification in 2021 when the
PRC was not functional at all.
now we're following this method
or this mode into modernization.
With the, with Amner leading the
charge, I mean, Ebner's charge
could be, you know, we need to
And, and so they also have the
state Energy office and they
received federal grants to do
this grid modification. So
that's probably Emner's role,
but
no appreciable electrical
engineering, uh, power
generation, transmission or
distribution expertise that they
can bring to bear on the
problem.
this question was coming, but
they have the energy office and
they receive those federal
grants.
So as they do that, then
coordinating with the PRC if
there's a rule change or, or
Thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
Any other debate on Senate Bill
142.
Center Paia.
do you yields. Uh, thank you,
Madam President, and Senator,
uh, can you tell us a little bit
more? So what in this
modernization, what are some
examples of modernization that
would make it uh pliable and,
and, and, you know, usable in
the future.
Men president and senator,
everything you just mentioned
exists today. If, if you need a
new technology to make
electricity more flow more
evenly over the line or make
switches, I mean, some of us
call switchers and breakers that
New Mexico and I'll give you the
examples that I've been told,
but now I've been told they
already do some of this stuff.
We know that when PNM took a bit
of investment in Valencia County
economic activity that are
happening, but the
infrastructure is not there.
And so they could come and say
it's 200 million for that. I'm,
that's a guess. We don't want
the ratepayers to come back and
say we're going to pay 100% of
that, even though they're not
used to it. We're going to come
to the state and say, this is
I'll just ask one more question
then, uh, you know, along the
lines of these virtual power
plants, mobile power plants,
whatever you want to call it. We
have so many electric vehicles
storage, uh, buy low in the
middle of the night, you know,
utilize it during the day. Is
that, is that an option as well
with what you're proposing here?
where you could plug your
electric car in, and it would
reverse charge power back down
the line. Sure, that's the way
we could generate electricity
when you came home if you went
there, you could plug it in and
reverse energize your house, but
also in technology, if 100 cars
all of a sudden pull up to to
charging station and they have
not forecasted that energy.
works both ways, Madam
President, Senator.
Uh thank you, Madam President.
I'm really happy to hear all
this. I'm very supportive of, of
this initiative and I think, I
think everything that the
lot faster, Madam President, a
lot faster for our state because
we have the difficult topography
that we have in New Mexico and,
and I just think this is a very
positive thing for our state.
couple of questions? You mean
the sponsor? The sponsors, do
you?
Thank you, Madam President.
Yes, I will.
Madam President, uh, senator.
the integration this is on page
5 facilitate the integration of
renewable electric generation
resources or net zero carbon
resources. Could you explain
62-16-1 of the renewable Energy
Act. It was the last amitted in
2019.
And it's the most appropriate
definition when it comes to
definition under the renewable
Energy Act. So, so, Madam
President, Senator, so does that
include then with a small module
That's a good thing if, if in
fact this would allow.
The development of small module
reactors, uh, which would give
us a good base load.
be limited to how long you can
store power.
So if in fact this design and
the plan allows for the uh
So I wanna make sure that that's
clear.
Madam President, Senator, I, I'm
looking for this section, but
it's on page 7 and it's number
3.
it reduces methane emitted into
the atmosphere or in the amount
equal to no less than 1/10 tons
of carbon dioxide emitted into
the atmosphere as a result of
SMRs would cover that.
And that would allow New Mexico
to pursue that as a potential
energy source in the future.
Thank you for that.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse Senator Gonzalez until he
returns to the chamber.
no objection. It is so ordered.
Seeing no further debate,
Senator Munoz to close on Cine
future. And, and it really
piqued my interest over the last
year when the former president
really talks about how
vulnerable our grid is, how we
don't have the technology to
Mexico. So with that, Madam
President, I do now move that
Senate bill.
142 as Amanda do now pass and
ask that the Senate that the
record show that all those
president voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
the time being, item number 6,
go to item number 7, Senator
Sidia Lopez.
Thank you Madam President.
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Senator Si Lopez to explain the
bill.
Thank you Madam President.
were riding a bike and you come
to a stop sign.
Under this bill, you will yield,
and if there are no cars, no
bikes, no pedestrians, you can
keep going without a full stop.
an incentive to stay out of the
way of any vehicles.
In addition to this bill, if you
come to a red light, you stop.
You come to a full stop, and of
11 states and the District of
Columbia have passed this bill
and they've seen their their
bicycle fatalities uh
dramatically decrease. 12 other
states have this legislation
Sing no debate. The senator to
close.
Madam President, I move that
Sinners, we are voting on Senate
Bill 73.
Madam President, Senator Woods.
I would, uh, rise to excuse,
Seeing no objection is so
ordered.
Uh, please continue, Senator
Sidia Lopez.
Um
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands. So Senator Stee
Lopez, I apologize, probably my
fault. You, you really need to
start over and say the number of
the bill. So just start it all
78? Yeah. Madam President, I
think I need a stronger, uh,
glasses prescription. I see 78
up there, um, Madam President, I
hands to your seats, we are
voting on the Senate Bill 73, if
you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 36 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative,
Senate Bill 73 has duly passed
the Senate. Senator C Lopez,
thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, members of the
that the records show that all
action for placing, uh, Senate
Bill 113 is one amended on final
passage has been taken, and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
And so the sunset omnibus bill,
Senate Bill 113 is once amended,
proposes extending the life of 5
boards pursuant to the
provisions of the Sunset Act,
barbers and cosmetologists, the
board of nursing Home
Administrators, the Board of
landscape architects, the water
quality control commission and
the cole surface.
bill, uh, resulting in in a man
in a unanimous recommendation
that the sunset dates be
extended for all 5 of the boards
and commissions mentioned.
Um, yeah, uh, Madam President,
I'm just wondering.
Um
Why, why are we doing this
again? Why are we extending the
Senator Woods. So in terms of
the process that we have for
about 370 of the boards and
commissions throughout New
Mexico, what the legislative
we're.
Recommending that this continue
or that they be allowed to
continue is because they have
been doing the work that they
The barbers alone.
That board clicks a million
dollars a year.
Why, why would that
administration and to uh
continue, if you will, with the
rules and the governance of that
particular organization. Thank
you very much, Madam President,
Senator Woods.
But
the present?
Sunset date right now.
For the barber's board.
Madam President.
year. So what this does is it
allows them to go ahead and
continue and to go back to the
original question, Madam
President, in terms of these
particular boards in order for
Senator wards.
Madam President, I'm, I'm
digesting that just a minute.
Let me think, just a second.
Thank you better president.
What, what I see in my analysis,
most of these boards are a
Every 5 years to determine
whether they're still relevant.
And
I'm sure some of these boards,
yeah, we can extend them for.
is that the only reason we even
put a sunset on them is because
we want to make sure that
they're relevant and with that,
director to each one of them
have an administration factor in
them, and is that the reason for
the board, Madam President.
Sinners. Thank you very much,
Madam President. Thank you very
the specific time frame in order
for them to continue to operate
and to be recognized, if you
will, officially, uh, by the
state. The resources that they
question.
When we start to go ahead and
deal with what these boards deal
with, uh, specifically as an
talking about and in there, what
it does is it gives the
statutory reference, the
organizational status, um,
whether it's a policy or
confirmation, the sunset date,
the funding, the membership, the
powers in.
and then whether or not this is
a duplication of some of the
about 370 of the boards and
commissions, uh, all that
information happens to go ahead
and be in a book compiled by the
Senate Rules Committee.
Thank you, Madam President.
For 10 years instead of 5 years
for.
These 5.
Boards are commissions. So thank
long-standing uh record of doing
what they have, uh, indicated
they're going to be doing. They
are in compliance. This gives
them then an opportunity to go
they move forward, uh, to go
ahead and participate in some of
the national uh work that some
of these would be doing, some of
these uh particular uh boards
you will, as you indicate
possibly the five-year
extension. Thank you very much,
Madam President.
Senator Woods.
Were not extending the terms of
these people.
We just extending the length of
the.
Sunset.
are, are doing their job is, is
that right, Madam President?
Thank you very much, Madam
President, Senator Woods, a
point well taken, two things
first of all.
As this moves along, this can go
to go ahead and operate with the
compliance and the function.
of what their administered to
do. So, uh, your point is well
taken, and yes, you're correct.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
A term so long.
Or
At the will of the governor.
So
President, Senator Woods,
another point well taken in
terms of that as we have the
specifics regarding boards and
commissions as we deal with
with uh specific parties, how
that is to go ahead and be
divided.
Uh, even as an example with
boards of regions as we deal
with that, uh, we would have
would be dealing directly with
uh how they're broken up by
maybe 5 districts or those type
of things. So the bottom line
with it, each one of the boards
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods.
And, and Madam President, so
When we change uh
administrations to how many of
that actually work in practice,
Madam President.
Thank you very much, Madam
President, Senator Woods, in
terms of the practices we deal
boards are made up, and then, of
course, how the terms are to go
ahead and be served.
So that's the first part.
The second part as we go
forward, oftentimes, uh, we hear
And within that, there may be a
request by the chief executive,
uh, calling for a resignation,
but those individuals do not
Along with that, there may be uh
unfortunately, the a death,
there may be a resignation, uh,
and then of course, depending on
who is to go ahead and offer, if
of them, uh, it all depends on
Senate confirmation
with that as well. So it all
depends their integral, uh,
there's a lot of different ways
and change, um, maybe the
persons who are serving, and
that goes back, if you will, to
the myriad of exam.
examples that I've already used.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
commission.
And so if we find one of these
board members that are doing
some kind of malfeasance or
something like that.
I are commission seat. Is that
true, Madam President and
Senator. Thank you very much,
Madam President. Thank you,
Senator Woods again for another
of course we all know that uh
we're innocent until proven
guilty, but as we go forward, if
there has been one of those
claims that has been submitted,
if you will, to the ethics
commission.
been, if you will, proof, uh,
that has been brought forward,
and then from there, there's a
completely uh ongoing process
with that.
So within the whole process
itself.
indicate is we follow a a court
system, a court process and as
we had a discussion over the
weekend, one of those issues
that surfaced was, uh, how do
is going to be that, uh,
situation of malfeasance.
if you will, uh, lack of, of,
you know, the full cooperation,
it could be anything from
terms of that particular border
commission position, so that's
basically uh some of the
additional information. And
again, the information that
we're talking about.
better understand legislation in
this case as we deal
specifically with 5 of the
boards and commissions. We know
that they're doing a good job
and we want to ensure, uh, that
organizations that there's full
compliance and uh lastly and
most importantly as we deal with
it, that it's providing or these
are providing the functions that
Senator Copo, it goes back to
the question.
That the legislature should look
at these boards and commissions
and an overall view of the
So, I don't understand.
Why not keep the legislature
more involved with these
Try that one more time and
explain that to me, and madam
chair, Madam President, I will
not ask another question. I'm
So again, uh, you bring up a
very good question.
And so as we go forward and of
course this is uh this
legislation is for the
legislative finance committee.
If there is any uh semblance, if
you will, of misfeasance or
there is a problem, let's say
for example, with a boarding
board or commission.
Of what that particular board
and commission or commission uh
performs the legislature at that
time, uh, can go ahead and call
or commission is authorized to
operate doesn't mean that at any
time we can't stop that. But in
uh uh good performance in terms
of the work that they do.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Thank you very much,
Senator Woods.
Senator Trujillo.
you, Senator Trujillo. I yield.
Thank you, Senator. I, I just
want to point out to the body
that these boards and
commissions are really very
individuals who need to have 24
hour care are located. They're
responsible for making sure that
the safety of
the facility is in good shape,
of that facility. The barbers
and cosmetology make sure that
when we go and get our hair
done, or we go and get our nails
conditions that they're trained
on how to not hurt someone with
the chemicals that they use with
the sharp scissors that they
couple, every couple of years,
but the goal is to try to do
every year. And then the last
one I'll talk about, I know
there was some conversation.
in Senate Finance about the
descriptive, and so I just want
to point out that these
landscape architects aren't the
individuals who come and do the
weeding in my yard or your, your
not going to interfere with any
other issues, so they really do
very large projects, so I, I
review documents together, get
their information together, they
report to us and I just want to
thank the senator for carrying
this and.
stand in strong support. Thank
you, Madam President.
Center compost to you Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. I do heal.
Thank you, Madam President.
Senator, as I look at this, I'm
trying to.
Figure out
Cosmetology or pick a board, I
don't care, nursing.
At what point will their term
So as an example there with the
uh uh the nursing home
administrators board that you
were talking about their powers
and duties. Alexature annually
and such.
board members, a majority of the
board constitutes a quorum and a
board member is automatically
removed for failing to attend 3
consecutive meetings, two of
mission is, and so each one of
them is very specific.
And in terms of uh removal. They
have their own rules in terms of
staggered three-year terms. I
could go on with that, but just
to give you an idea that each
one of these boards or
commissions is very structured.
Thank you very much, Madam
reading this wrong, but the next
government will have a weakened
position of influencing boards
you have boards that have
experienced members and they're
able to carry forth with their
task, the duties, and the
compliance of what it is that
member or maybe the chair or the
director of a border commission
come forward.
indicate, here's what we're
doing, this is how we're doing
productivity with each one of
the specific boards and
commissions, so I believe what
we're doing is we're
strengthening uh the incoming,
Um, Senator Campos, you're
You're right.
Yes
That might not share that
viewpoint seems like they are at
a deficit of letting a member
term out and then get to a point
They would have to remove them
and it would make it a little
more difficult. Is that true?
So, um, Madam President, of
course, Senator Townsend, what
Anything really to do with us as
a legislature.
As we take a look at this to
move forward and re, if you
Um, as an example with the
barbers, again, here's another
17 members appointed by the
governor for 3-year terms, 5 of
So again what we're getting to
is something that is very exact
and that again would be between
the boards and commissions and
Thank you, Senator Campos for
your answer on Senate Bill 113.
Sing, Senator Campost to close.
Thank you very much, Madam
President, members of the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Senators, we're voting on the
113 as amended to your seats if
you wish to vote no, please
voting no, Senator Block.
Voting no.
Senator Paul.
Voting no, Senator Thornton.
Voting no senator Ramos voting
now. Senator Sheer.
Voting now, Senator Woods.
voting no.
Senator Scott.
I a vote of 28 in the
Thank you, Senator. If the body
will just stand in place for a
couple of minutes, we're
switching, presiding officers.
going back to you for the, uh,
continued or the next order of
business. Senator Wirth, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, we're still on that order of
business. 3rd reading of
Madam President pro tempore
Stewart.
Mr. President asked unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action
objection, please proceed to
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and I am gonna take a little bit
of time to explain this bill
because it's a little confusing
to some people.
rights of same-sex couples to
have children.
And we're fortunate to have laws
that clearly define parentage
even in the same-sex
relationships.
Declaring their parental status.
So we have birth certificates,
um, those represent a
presumption of parentage, but a
adoption process, we can assure
that parents who have a child in
New Mexico through assisted
reproduction can protect the
integrity of their family even
with less time, fewer hurdles
and lower legal cost, um,
because we believe all children
deserve that secure parentage.
It, it would work like this when
daughter who tried multiple
times through eye the eye to
have a baby.
Um
Assisted elsewise for same-sex
validate their parentage, they
can apply for confirmatory
adoption. The simplified process
does not require what we usually
do for adoptions, a home visit,
parents, they simply would have
to go to court, provide
documentation and a judge
decides whether to order the
adoption.
those folks that want to go
through this process to have an
adoption process. I do have 2
co-sponsors.
Hamlin and then going back to
the uh pro tempore and ask her
to go ahead and also identify
the other co-sponsor that she
wishes to go ahead and make a
statement, so Senator Hamlin,
please.
With this bill, I think of my
neighbor kid that many of you
got to meet a couple of weeks
ago she stood right here on the
floor with me.
And she happens to have two
moms.
individual and they visit
amazing sites and attractions
throughout the country.
However, if they weren't in an
accident or ended up in the
And they could even be prevented
from leaving the hospital with
their own daughter. The thought
of this happening to her or any
Of protecting the families that
we as New Mexicans recognize
come in all forms in this state.
And we know that New Mexico we
value family.
And so I think my co-sponsor,
Madam Protem Stewart, and I
thank the body for listening to
this bill.
Thank you very much, Senator
essentially and we're open for
questions. Thank you very much,
Senator senators, we're on a
debate of the bill.
President. I move that Senate
Bill 417 do now pass, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Senator Pinto votes no.
By a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Senate Bill 417 has duly passed
about how this will affect, um,
any of what we have in place as
partEPA. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Senator Pinto,
Senator Stewart, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
go without our business messages
from the house. So no objection
to disordered, we're on that
order of business, messages from
the house, the reader will read,
Mr. President, I'm directed to
Respectfully submitted Lisa
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk,
thank you very much, reader. The
record will, uh, reflect that
the message has been received
Bill 181. House Bill 199 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respect the submitted
Lisa Martiz McCutchen, chief
clerk. Thank you very much,
Senate that the House has passed
House Commerce and economic.
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20 as amended by
the House and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House taxation and
Revenue Committee substitute for
reader to read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 145 as
amended by the House and request
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 41 and
request the occurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted
this, the reader to read, Mr.
President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 89, House
Bill 154 and request the
concurrence of the Senate
uh, Senator Majority Peter Worth
for the next order of business.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent, we go to that
or business committee reports.
Thank you very much, Majority
Leader see no objection. We're
referred House Bill 69 has had
it under consideration, requests
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
were acted upon
individually or disorder, the
reader to read.
Senate Bill 437 do pass as
amended and the referred to the
judiciary Committee.
bill for AD do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted, Senator William P.
Soul's chair. Senator Souls,
please. I move adoption of the
I'm, I'm sorry, so we have one
more, uh, Senator So, so we're
gonna go ahead and do this one
individually, so going back to
Senator Souls, uh, so, uh,
as amended and the referred to
the finance committee,
respectfully submitted senator
William P. Soul's chair, Senator
Souls for one report I move
adoption of the committee
report. There's a
Mr. President, your health and
public affairs Committee, to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 105 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
the recommendation that it do
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent to the Senate.
reader be allowed to read the
committee reports that we vote
when motion that the they were
acted upon individually.
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 120 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 144 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 177 do pass and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 216 do pass and
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 235.
As amended, do pass.
committee reports all those in
favor signified by say I.
posed, the eyes have it, reports
have been adopted going back to
the reader. The reader will
read.
substitute for Senate Bill 20
has had it under consideration,
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Senator
adoption request for one
committee report.
All those in favor signified by
say I, let's move forward.
OK, we're gonna start to wake
whom has been referred Cent Bill
100 has had it under
consideration, reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Carrie Hamblin, chair,
the reader to read. Senate Bill
327 do pass and
referred to the finance
committee.
pass as amended and thence
referred to the judiciary.
Senate Bill 355 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
I.
Pod the eyes have it.
Community reports are adopted.
The reader will read
Mr. President, your rules
respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig, chair.
Senator,
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
Senate Memorial 9 do pass and
thence referred to the Indian
rural and Cultural Affairs
Committee, House Joint
pass and thence referred to the
education committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig chair.
Senator Doig of the committee
reports. There's a motion to
business. Senator Worth, please,
Mr. President, unanimous consent
we go that our business
introduction of legislation.
So no objection, it is ordered.
We're on that order of business,
recommending that New Mexico
consider adoption of the chile
verde rock.
Song as the official New Mexico
Chile song.
Indian room and Cultural Affairs
Committee.
Senate Memorial 21. The reader
to read.
How taxation and revenue
Trade port districts established
criteria for approval of trade
port projects.
Creating the trade ports
advisory Committee and
facilitate the development of
trade ports, creating the trade
ports Development fund.
Authorizing grants and loans.
Adding an exemption to the
procurement code.
Making an appropriation.
House taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 19, having been read twice
by title is or referred to the
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 20.
An act relating to economic
development.
Creating the technology and
innovation network advisory
board enacting the research,
development and deployment Fund
Act.
Creating the research,
development and deployment fund.
Providing for match funding.
requiring reporting.
Creating the technology
innovation prize and providing
requirements for eligibility and
receiving prize money.
Repealing sections 9-15-16 and
9-15-17 NMSA 1978, being Laws
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 20.
the Senate Finance Committee,
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20. The reader to
read.
the public project revolving
fund to the drinking water state
revolving loan fund local
government planning fund and
cultural affairs facilities
Thence to the Senate Finance
Committee, House Bill 41, the
reader to read.
House Bill 89 introduced by
Representative Hochman the Hill,
and actually they need to higher
House Bill 89, haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
referred to the Senate Education
Committee, thence to the Senate
Finance Committee, House Bill
89, the reader to read.
An act relating to the financing
of highway projects, providing
additional bonding authority of
the state transportation
commission for state highway
projects.
House Bill 145.
Finance Committee, House Bill
145, the reader to read.
House Bill 154 introduced by
Representative Zamora, an act
extracurricular organizations
that primarily serve youth and
our who are 18 years of age and
younger.
House Bill 174 introduced by
Representative Armstrong.
An act relating to insurance.
professional dispensing fee.
Has 174 14 had been read twice
by title is order to referred to
the Senate Tax and Business
Committee, thence to the Senate
For the legislative Finance
Committee, an act relating to
the government results and
opportunity expendable trust
requiring state agencies to
submit an accountability and
legislative Finance Committee.
House Bill 181. House Bill 181
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered referred to the
Senate Rules Committee.
Representative Lente for the
legislative Finance Committee,
an act relating to taxation.
Authorizing the reveal of
taxpayer.
state or a political subdivision
of the state. House Bill 199.
House Bill 199 twice by title is
ordered referred to the Senate
Tax and Business Committee,
How's government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
Requiring the environmental
improvement board to adopt
requirements and procedures for
a person to submit rules to the
board for adoption requiring
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
Committee, House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 291, the reader to read.
House Bill 339.
providing that housing
discrimination based on the
housing applicant's source of
income, including the use of an
invalid screening process is an
unlawful discriminator
to housing. House Bill 339.
House Bill 339 read twice by
title is order referred to the
Senate, uh, tax and Business
Peter Worth for the next order
of business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
objection to disorder. We're on
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
does have the referrals here.
It's a Senate bill, so I'd ask
for unanimous consent to remove
Senate Bill 53.
For from the Senate Finance
Uh, and that the proposed
committee subs to be posted for
public viewing when the change
when these changes have been
made, the title of the
substitute is related to the
Indian casino near a
municipality to that
municipality making an
appropriation, uh, the proposed
committee substitutes 202 number
is 231-543.
consent.
See no objection, it is so
ordered.
Thank you very much, Senator
Wort, Senator Worth for the
continued order of business. Uh
Senator Harmillo and Senator
Gallegos both have an
announcement.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Peter Worth. We're going, uh,
we're continuing with that order
of business announcements and
caucus meeting in the lounge
immediately following the floor
session. Thank you and I'll be
working with Senator Galos to
let him know when we're done.
Thank you very much, Senator
Jaramillo. Next we go to Senator
326, immediately after the floor
session. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you very much,
Senator Gallego. I still haven't
gotten my haircut, but I'm gonna
go ahead and get that and I'm
dedicating that to Senator
centersteanics, please. Thank
you, Mr. President. The Senate
Conservation Committee will meet
at 9 a.m. tomorrow morning in
room 311. Thank you. Take note,
senators. Thank you very much,
Thank you. Point well taken.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Lopez. We're moving along. We're
going to Senator Hamlin, please.
Thank you, Mr. President. Just a
reminder to our Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
countdown of how many other tax
business and transportation
meetings we have for the
remainder of the session. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you
very much, Senator Hamblin.
We're moving along. We're going
now to uh.
one committee report.
And one bill today.
Senator Samanta was in that
Meeting we had this morning in
in Senate Finance about federal
cuts and what's we think is
gonna happen. That is in your
email.
Kind of take a look at it and,
and the real truth of it is if
year. But if we get out of that
range, it shortens the time life
that we can increase our
budgets. If the Fed's cuts come
into play, it really starts to
closed at 180 to 200 points
below because the, the president
said that the trade, uh, issue
is going to come into effect
today. And so the markets are
but, but that review from LFC is
in your emails, uh, so it's very
interesting to, to plan for
that. So as we talk about the
budget going forward and how
we're gonna have to make some
need to plan ahead. I mean, this
budget was built all throughout
the year. It's come to a
conclusion. We're wrapping it
up.
Now we need to prepare for
what's next on our agenda as we
and if you will, the budget as
we continue to prepare for that.
See no other announcements, so
I'm going, here we go, Senator
Cervantes, please.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
meet tonight. We've got a pretty
ambitious agenda and we will be
discussing, uh, the current
status of federal law starting
with the US Supreme Court down
to join us in the judiciary
Committee with a a brief hearing
on that and then we'll follow
that with consideration of, uh,
a proposed a piece of
legislation that that would
make announcements throughout
the evening. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Senator
Cervantes. Any other
announcements or miscellaneous
business see and then I'm going
back.
To uh the majority leader,
