call the roll.
Senator Brantley
San Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin
Senator Hemiel
Senator Hemio, Senator Lanier.
Senator Senator Nava.
Senator O'Malley, Senator
Padilla.
Senator Scott Lopez.
Senator share.
Santoshino
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Wirth, Senator Woods.
Junior from Santa Maria de la
Paz here in Santa Fe.
I'd ask that you remain standing
for the Pledge of Allegiance to
be led today by Senator Boone,
pledge allegiance and espanol to
be led today by Senator.
Theo Lopez and the salute to New
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator.
Most holy God, let your goodness
pass before us.
To guard them with your guiding
presence and lead them in your
way.
We ask that you would proclaim
around us, and we'll focus our
minds on the importance of the
work you set before us.
In you then God, will we trust
And we will not question when
you show mercy to those on whom
you have chosen to show mercy.
But may we be obedient when you
send us forth.
And may we be thankful when that
grace and mercy fall upon us.
Loving God, I come before you
For the commitments they have
made to serve their state as
members, as staffers, as all
those in this whole place and
without significant cost to
their family and their friends
and themselves.
I lift up to you their burdens.
The burdens that they carry
The anxiety and discouragement
felt when efforts are
disregarded and or unappreciated
tragedy and loss.
A pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
And to the republic for which it
Rometo Lear a la bandera de los
estados Unidos the America.
the symbol of perfect friendship
among united cultures.
You may be seated.
Once again, I'd like to welcome
you to today's session of the
no objection. We are in that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Peter
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you, uh,
Reverend Segura, for being here,
things we deal with as we go
through this process, and I just
really appreciate you being here
and sharing.
those blessings to us this
morning. So thank you. Uh, I
yield first to Senator Padilla
we're gonna do. Thank you,
Senator. We're Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I to allow cameras on
the Senate floor and in the
Senate gallery.
There's been unanimous consent
and requests, see no objection.
Cameras are allowed both on the
floor and in the gallery today,
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
too want to thank the pastor for
his kind words, uh, his, his
grace and forgiveness that we
received from up above from
Jesus Christ. Thank you so much,
until he returns, except in
case.
So Senator Woods.
volunteerism Day and bilingual
Day at the legislature. Uh, we
have 2 certificates to be read.
One is a certificate of
condolence for former Governor
Bill Richardson and Senator.
Asstancia Valley Ranch Rodeo,
which also will be read in
Senator Woods has has guests.
We'll do that one second, uh,
and I just if I would hold off
up.
up. Let me do that upfront on
3rd reading, we're gonna do
items 1 through 5 in that order.
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Thank you, Senator Worth. We are
in that order of business
announcements miscellaneous.
I'll begin a center Stephanics,
followed by Senator Isel.
Senator of Panics, thank you,
Mr. President. I request
is the executive director of the
Mexico Health Councils
Association, all 33 counties and
currently 10 tribal health.
know what they do, they do
public health education they
coordinate access to critical
services such as referring
veterans and community members
to behavioral health services
and they coordinate access to
mobile units. Could we please
welcome Val Alarcon to the state
senate.
It's my great honor today to
introduce some very important
people from my particular
district and all of these are
students from.
in a long, long time.
These young students are
representing the Latinos in
Action progressive leadership.
Mr.
principal at Mason Middle School
sitting next to him is Julie,
students to stand up so I can
introduce them individually.
First I'd like to start out with
Madeleine Villalobos. She is
teaching. She enjoys helping and
teaching others she wants to
travel and also to help her
parents.
Next I have Candido and Dezola
bachelor degree in order to
teach others his love of
history.
Adriana Moraz Ortiz is a 7th
plans to join the Navy after
graduation. She wants to study
cosmetology at CNM Main Campus
and opened her own cosmetology
business in Los Angeles.
She is in the 8th grade and she
does very well on her testing
for science and math, and she
will get better grade for math
by studying harder, won't you?
Isn't that right?
army or school at Texas
Christian University or Oregon.
She said there's lots of options
out there for this year.
student council and all members
of her class.
Mr. President also joining me
today.
Mera, uh, Adriana Marraz Ortiz,
Madeleine Villalobos, Tanya
Molina Gutierrez, Isabella
Munoz, Sergio Leyva Jacques.
body, every one of these
students goal is to help.
Mentor those that are younger
than they are to be good role
Mr. President and members,
please help me welcome the
Senator Steinborn followed by
Senator Nava. Senator Steinborn,
thank you, Mr. President. OK, I
have the very highest of honors
of introducing Alex Farrell, who
is your honorary lieutenant
this capital, uh, Jim Farrell
and Anna Ferrell and of course
Jim worked for the Senate worked
for, works with the go and
worked for us for a while, but
anyway, Alex swims for Las
Cruces aquatic team and
playing music at the next level
up. So that means you're a great
musician.
All right. And next year he will
join Centennialin Jazz Band.
Alex is an altar server also at
games, and he, uh, plans in the
future to attend New Mexico
State University and join the
Aggie Pride band and hopes to
become a composer of music for
All right, thanks, thanks again,
Alex, and thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Nava followed
by Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Vien Benidos este casa, Mr.
President, I am very excited to
to be joined today um on
bilingual Day in New Mexico by
uh, a while back and he did
labor intensive jobs in Mexico
and came over to New Mexico
specifically to Santa Fe where
he was shocked that the state's
place recognizing the deep
Mexican and New Mexican cultural
ties and the constant travel.
between Mexico and New Mexico
for essential products Mr.
store began in Santa Fe but
quickly expanded into espanola
towels and Rio Rancho. It is a
well known store, as many of you
Carlos and I've got to tell you.
I am quite a fan, Mr. President,
and I hope that all of the
members try this out. I will
have to say that I am not sure
or green. So, um, that was a
gift from Mr. Don Carlos, but
right here beside me is Adriana
Andre if you can stand Andre
Adrian Adrian has dedicated
himself to both community
initiatives advocating for
equity and opportunity while
playing a key role in supporting
and expanding the family
business El Paisano Food Market
and ensuring its lasting impact
Mr. President, um, thank you for
that and also I wanna give a
They are not. They might be on
the house side, Mr. President,
but we just wanted to make sure
that we acknowledge them. Thank
you very much. Thank you,
Senator Nava. Senator Charlie.
go ahead and stand pop is my
dad, Edmund Charlie, um, the son
of Laguna Pueblo. He's really a
the years where my
that has opened our home um for
people who need a place to stay
and has just taught me
throughout the years to be
say she's not such a chill gal.
Um, she's an advocate and an
activist and has worked for
years, um, in the political
works, um, so Mr. President, if
the body would please join me in
welcoming these two people who I
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
First, I would ask unanimous
consent that we allow the
Honorable Michelle Lujan
Grisham, governor of the state
It Sergeant I can please escort
the governor into the chamber.
Governor. Good to have you here.
Uh, with that, I would yield to
Senator Cervantes for the
certificate of condolence for
former Governor Bill Richardson.
Senatorvante, Senator Cervantes,
thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
indication of the importance of
honoring a gentleman and really
his wife today who, uh, is to
her
left, Mr. President, so I, I
that, uh, that we begin by
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico 57th.
Legislature first session 2025.
The New Mexico state Senate,
In the United States, Secretary
of Energy Bill Richardson.
Does hereby extend its sincere
heartfelt condolence and
sympathy to the bereaved family
and friends of the deceased.
And Maria Luisa Lopez Coada and
was raised in Mexico City.
And whereas at age 13 Bill
Richardson came to the United
from Tufts University and a
master's degree in international
affairs from Tufts University's
Fletcher School of Law and
Diplomacy.
And whereas in 1972, Bill
intern for Republican United
States representative F.
Bradford Morse of Massachusetts
later working on international
relations for the United States
Department of State under Henry
was appointed the executive
director of the Democratic Party
of New Mexico by then Governor
Jerry Apodaca.
And whereas Bill Richardson was
elected as United States
positions, including chair of
the Congressional Hispanic
Caucus, chair of the House
Natural Resources Subcommittee
on Native American Affairs and
Deputy whip for the House
Democratic Caucus.
Unfortunately, with the downing
of an American plane by North
Korea at that time. Congressman
Richardson instead negotiated
the immediate release of the
negotiated the release of two
American hostages.
And whereas United States
President Bill Clinton named
Bill Richardson United States
ambassador to the United Nations
in 1997.
elected as the 30th governor of
New Mexico in 2002, serving as
the nation's only Hispanic
governor during his two terms
from 2003 to 2010.
pieces of legislation, including
laws protecting New Mexico's air
and water quality and advancing
renewable energy initiatives.
He also signed one of the first
Spaceport America and led the
effort making New Mexico the
12th state to legalize medical
cannabis and whereas in 2009,
Governor Richardson signed into
key areas including more than $1
billion in public schools to
increase access to early
childhood education and to help
recruit and retain quality
teachers and provided millions
And whereas Governor Richardson
led significant efforts to
improve the state's
infrastructure.
Including establishing the
Mexico Rail runner Express, the
state's first commuter rail
partnership.
And whereas as a private
citizen, Bill Richardson
authored 3 books and founded the
Richardson Center for Global
Engagement, where he
Iraq, Myanmar.
Mexico and Sudan.
And whereas Bill Richardson also
Public Policy at Rice
University.
And whereas for his working
foreign diplomacy and as a
global crisis negotiator, Bill
2023 at the age of 75 in Cape
Cod, Massachusetts, and whereas
Bill Richardson is survived by
his wife of 51 years, Barbara
Richardson and his sister,
governor United States
congressman, United Nations
ambassador and United States
Secretary of Energy Bill
Richardson.
Signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Joseph Cervantes.
Mimi Stewart, President Pro Tem.
Um, Mr. President, a few months
ago I was at Mass at the
basilica here at the cathedral
and happened to run into Barbara
Richardson and her and I hadn't
had a chance to talk since
chance to visit a little bit
and, uh, as we caught up, I
couldn't help but feel a void,
uh, because something was
missing and one of the things
that that occurred to me was
taken that opportunity, yet with
Barbara and the people that are
close to her and her family.
The last time I had seen Barbara
and with some time was at the
that's the way I think that he
felt about a lot of us. Uh, he
was not a person who put on airs
and I don't think that we would
mind that we're honoring him
today by not always referring to
him as governor, Ridgeen
Barbara was there also at the
basilic Cathedral for the
funeral mass, where the
cathedral was filled to capacity
with a lot of friends and
dignitaries and Barbara was
of Energy and it was an
incredible moment.
To see here in Santa Fe and see
here in New Mexico to have the
president really emotionally
moved.
thank Barbara and to Diane
Denish, his, uh, then lieutenant
governor and some of the
colleagues that are joined there
with you on the rostrum who I
know are gonna be recognized by
in 2001.
I first really got to know uh
Bill well when he called me in
Las Cruces in 2001, I was in the
And he said, can you get 5 or 10
people to come over to your
house and join me for an
exploratory discussion and I
called 5 or 10 people that I
thought he would want to know.
200 people showed up.
gonna be in the kitchen and we
were in the backyard and we were
trying to stand on things that
were tall enough so that Bill
could speak to an enormous
crowd, and I, I, I know then I
presence and and gift to all of
us and so that was the beginning
of a friendship and a bond we
fought like all of us do in this
chamber at times aggressively,
uh, welcome those at this time.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. We
do.
you have other members who would
like to speak, and I'll begin
with Senator Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes for
for 6 years with Governor
Richardson, when I first came to
the legislature, and I will say
there is no question he was a
Uh, I got word that he was doing
a press conference with Sir
Richard Branson.
About the spaceport.
kind of explosive announcements,
and here was Governor Richardson
with rocket ships and Sir
Richard Branson, we had movie
stars, and my little 11 year old
Richardson had that Bill had,
and I just remember so
distinctly that smile and
twinkle in his eyes as he
watched this announcement roll
legislative battles, and I can
remember when I first came to
the Senate being up in the
conference room as he was
vetoing all the senators
outlay and cutting a deal with
just want to say he's someone
who made his mark on New Mexico
on this country, and quite
frankly, on the world with the
diplomacy that he was engaged
chance to recognize this
incredible public service
career.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Senator Cher.
relationship.
Because we exchanged some very
harsh words sometimes, but then
I'm high on his list. He goes,
oh, no, senator, you're like the
cherry on top of.
But then I said, hey, I need to
get some people to come and see.
Oh, sure, 3 o'clock. Wow, OK, so
gracious to me most of the time.
Shortly after we exchanged harsh
words.
my mind. But then several uh
maybe, I don't know how long,
long time after he left the
governor's office.
you recognize me?
So it was, it was a great.
Uh, I think, I think politically
perfect relationship where we
Thank you, Senator. We have
Senator Padilla followed by
Senator Trujillo, then Senator
Cio Lopez. Senator Padilla, uh,
thank you very much, Mr.
President, and thank you, uh,
on. Uh, I met him actually when
I was in high school but didn't
really know him until later in
my life and, and his life and
always found the time. I don't
know how he found out about it,
but he would call me
periodically just to tell me.
In the halls of Congress to see
my member of Congress, and we
went to his office, we thought,
oh, they're gonna give us a nice
pan or they're gonna say, hey,
this is his office. Would you
I'll never forget this, he says,
I've always told my staff that
if it's a constituent from my
district, they are number one.
You find me even if I'm with the
president, I will come and say
was just completely enamored. I
like I was just looking at God
right here, and he looks at me
and he says, yeah, you know, did
you know that you bought this
building, this literally belongs
the tiniest little paper clips.
you bought this building and I
got that from Bill Richardson,
and they always look at me like
amazed and I and they look a
little more comfortable when
they leave my office, and that
was a great lesson I learned
I don't know, it's been so long
since I've seen you, but of
course, I, uh, was the front
desk guy in, in the
congressman's office back then.
And um I learned so much right
That experience was just so
amazing, and I think unless you
were kind of served at the time
with Governor Richardson,
Congressman Richardson,
everything else Richardson, it,
you know, it's hard to
Um, I would suddenly get a call
saying, is it true that the
congressman is in Nigeria?
I was like, uh, is it true? I
don't know. Uh, but apparently
there. It's just amazing
stamina, amazing talent, um,
just a real dynamo and like has
been said, I mean, amongst all
his other traits was a public
servant who was bold.
stopped dreaming for New Mexico.
He tried to get an NFL team
here. I don't know if anyone
knows that, but, you know, he,
he always took the shot and
that's so cool because that's
what we're here to do and of
of course the governor's chief
of staff.
I was a tough dude. You had to
sit across from the table. If he
needed your support on
something, but then, uh, and so
be kind to him, uh, but, uh, but
house, and that was just very
surreal. And then, of course, I
got elected and then now he's
twisting my arm for votes and
stuff like that, but
You know,
on the national news telling us
what we should be doing with
Ukraine and all these big issues
and, um, just such an amazing
talent and just so lucky to have
served with them. And anyway,
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you senator for carrying
this, um, memorial. First Lady
Barbara, I haven't seen you for
a long time, but I, I too I'm
the regulation and licensing
department and I remember
attending a lot of different
events events with him.
In fact, when I decided to run
for school board, he was the
personality was a real jokester,
and some of you may, uh, recall
that he had a tendency to fire
people, um, and so.
we had my father-in-law there
with us, and the governor came
over and looked at Fabian and
said, I thought I fired you last
week. Of course, he hadn't, but
OK. He still has a job, but he
was quite, he was quite an
enormous personality and um I
will say.
for a time period and with Brian
and um.
I don't think I've ever cried
when I got news that a
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, and,
and thank you uh Mrs. Richardson
that that not only supported um
Bill Richardson's agenda, but it
also just showed what you
believed in and I think that was
'96. I asked him what the secret
was to his success, and he said,
um, you know I looked, it is,
his words, OK? I look like an
And um but what was real was
that he really cared about
everybody in New Mexico and my
personal Bill Richardson story
is, uh, it actually involves,
um, Senator Cervantes, but I
Would you accept it?
And I was freaked out. I talked
to my husband and my husband
said, well, my God, it's
President of the United States,
of course, you're gonna say yes.
Richardson negotiation. He turns
out was negotiating with Senator
Cervantes and Senator Cervantes
wanted the state headquarters to
hey kid, you're it. You're gonna
be on a plane to Chicago, um,
and I think that wherever the
convention, it was in Chicago
you're gonna get plane tickets
in the mail and you're gonna be
on a plane to Chicago and I'm
back to the law school. I had
taken a year leave of abs.
to do that and I went back to
the law school and he always
made a point of calling me
Michelle Lujan Grisham and
Lieutenant Governor Dennis and
of course Bryant Condit up there
and helping us remember all
President, members of the
Senate, of course, to, uh, my
colleague, Senator Cervantes,
thank you very much for bringing
the uh certificate forward as we
And so Barbara, as we have gone
through life.
Uh, so many incidents and so
many occasions and so many
other words, the underserved and
uh Governor Richardson was
always there for the
underserved.
As we continued to recall, if
you will, the giant of the
person.
my friends and uh they, we, we
sat there at the restaurant and
we started talking, he talked
about what he was going to be
doing. He was getting ready to
run for Congress.
there.
And then, and, and one of the
things that really stood out was
if he was willing to get and go
to the people.
reach out to people in small
communities.
And within that, within his
language, within his body
language, he felt very
comfortable with everyone.
but it'll go amigo.
If they didn't know him when he
walked in whenever he left.
They were there not only shaking
and uh we always talk about
capital outlay and uh if you
will, dealing with the budget.
So he was a visionary.
And there are many projects
throughout the state that all of
Why a project there in Fort
Sumner because they didn't make
any difference where you came
from.
It didn't make any difference
what the history was.
Governor Richardson was going to
to maybe joke around a little
bit and have a little fun.
He was always on a constant diet
as well.
And in the diet always consisted
I understand what Chiron is.
So,
Brian, you remember that and of
course, uh, as, as we go
he hit him really well until you
go ahead and see if you will,
some of the crumbs on his suit.
So, so with all of these things,
you can tell that he was a man
He indicated um.
Campitos
Why don't we meet in my office
in Santa Fe, so I drove from Las
Vegas.
Just let out our soul.
What we did, what we didn't do.
He was, he was meticulous in
every thought he could remember
And he said, continue to deal
with people and to help them the
way that you always have.
So those were instructions.
the people in the district that
I serve.
And he said, well, let me just
tell you.
I love the people of the world.
And so within that that struck
was to be able to go ahead and
serve the mass alongside the
archbishop.
And Barbara, I want to thank you
because
You were in charge of.
All of these things.
Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Campos. We
have Senator followed by Senator
Hamblin and Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. President, Miss
Actually, I had never heard of
him until my husband's family in
Kentucky said, Who is this Bill
Richardson from New Mexico?
I did serve whenever Mr.
whenever Governor Richardson was
in office, at then time
representative Worth and I came
If there was something that was
said in committee that the
governor may not like, he sit
down Mister Conduct, his chief
of staff, yeah, turn your head
away now, Brian.
So that was the way he handled
things there.
But
His uncanny ability to remember
We took my daughter and son out
to eat and.
He walked over to our table and
he said, Calder, how are you
doing? Candy, good to see you.
And it made every person that he
met feels special.
And so he did a
He, he won't be forgotten by me
nor my family nor everybody in
this chamber right here.
President, and thank you all for
being here today. You know, I
think we often don't understand
the impact we have on people,
um, and it's sometimes where uh
Um, I wanna share with you how
he was such a champion for the
LGBTQ community.
In the 90s, New Mexico had one
I grew up in El Paso and I've
lived in New Mexico most of my
adult life.
But because of what he was able
to create with having
conversations and listening to
Supported and protected and so I
just wanna share that with you
because we often don't know how
we impact people.
And so I just want to thank you
Thank you, Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you for joining us, Miss
Barbara.
Um
Mr. President, I, uh,
He had just implemented the
licenses for undocumented
immigrants.
On behalf of my family, Miss
Barbara, I thank you and I thank
students.
And that's when I actually met
him.
And he had all the things that
all my colleagues said, um, and
at the time I was undocumented.
Well, it just happened to be
that I was recruited, Mr.
President, for this organization
to take this leadership role,
but then
option because I moved my entire
life to Chicago.
And I got on the phone with him
and he told me a lot of things
that I can't really say here,
but he said
He said, look, Cindy.
full fledged because one day
you're gonna run for office and
I told them, Governor, I'm a
legal permanent resident now, so
maybe one day I will, and he
grateful and then he calls me.
And he says, hey, Cindy, you
said you're a legal permanent
resident now, right? I said,
yes, sir, and I'm in the midst
of moving back to New Mexico and
And I said, Sir, do you
understand that I've never
traveled in my life, and he
says, I don't give a damn and he
sent me, Miss Barbara, to Cuba,
uh, to the, with the diplomacy
who I believe is in the gallery
and I could, and I am just
eternally grateful because what
he did for me, I know he did for
so many others.
that we did it. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Ms.
Barbara.
Thank you, Senator Nava. We have
Senator Shindo followed by
Senator Munoz, then Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Shindo, thank
I, I, I, I wish I knew this was
happening because I think there
was one important uh uh thing
that happened here in Mexico
there should have been also
captured.
And it was huge. And I think
we're, I think we're still the
only one others are still
trying.
But to be
Um, the first.
So next to Diane Denish because
usually the governor sat there
and it was dying and then it was
usually me.
And
I'm thinking to myself, is it?
And not a native voice in
indigenous person from this
state.
have ever sat in this room.
I became emotional.
When he made it happen. Thank
you, Barbara.
You know, there's a lot of funny
stories in 2005, he also signed
And we made it happen and he
signed it into law and today.
That is making a huge difference
in our tribal communities.
time we were having a big, uh, a
gathering up at the, uh, of
tribal leaders uh at the uh.
At the governor's mansion.
And uh I don't know where he was
and uh.
But it was just one of those
things that he just
Did everything.
And and I, I could say honestly
that he's probably the first
boss I ever had.
understood tribal sovereignty.
He knew exactly, you know, what
was needed and what needs to
happen in this state.
And I had to keep up with him.
thing.
But he just knew
You know, what it was to do the
right thing.
I have, and then I think
Garcia had his duffel bag with
all the water and all the
whatever and so we had this
trip. We flew to Phoenix for a
luncheon meeting.
And so we were like, we were
here and then we got on the
plane, we flew to Phoenix.
And I thought it was gonna be a
luncheon, but, you know, there
was a luncheon but we didn't
have enough time, so we just
couple of us are like, I am
starving. So we're finally back,
flew into Santa Fe and I got in
my car and drove back to Bernal
Leo in about 12:15 in the
about stamina and his commitment
to be where he wants to be.
It was incredible and so I, I
just, you know, was honored.
You know, to serve, you know,
husband, Barbara, thank you for.
Allow him to serve our state.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Senator Munoz, followed by
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Jaramilo.
a mark.
And leaves a mark on the world.
He left a mark on the world. He
didn't leave it just for New
Mexico.
My dad took me to the Democratic
convention, and I was sitting
there next to my dad and he
comes up and introduces himself.
My dad said, you're gonna vote
for me? He says, yes. And, and
then he hires my sister.
stories with the governor, um,
one of the best fun stories I
have is, you know, he's a big
baseball fan, has his own
baseball card and, and books and
Oh bullshit, you don't know
those guys. I said, no,
governor, we're gonna go to
dinner. You want to go to dinner
with us? Yup, yup, I'll be
there. And so we go to the
baseball game, the governor's
sitting there, and I said, all
about baseball, who their
favorite player was, what
position they played, who was
the greatest player they ever
met, who's the greatest player
they, they sought to see, but
baseball was one of his loves,
but politics was his love stew.
some pictures of a dinner that
appeared in the blog and, and
we'd always listen to him and
he'd always give us advice.
Uh, but what he did and, and I'm
people, and he loved the Navajo
people.
He made sure that he could help
him any way he could.
The someone has to speak for
them. He always told me that and
and that's one of the things
people you're from.
It's such a great thing to, to
stand up here and talk about
him. When I first got elected,
everybody knows those of us
around know my kids were kind of
that has a New Mexico on.
It wasn't his surfboard we gave
was Chris Garcia's and, and I
still have it, and Chris has
never got it, but he gave my
kids that surfboard and I'm
like, I, I don't know where you
all went to the races together,
uh, and we had a good time. It
was, it was a good time and, and
I thought about something and I,
and I asked him, I said, who's
And a long pause and he says,
well, I'm gonna go on a trip in
about a month. I'm, I'm
negotiating that now. He said,
do you want to go? and I said,
yeah, he said, well, there's a
That's what we need to think
about. Who's gonna take Governor
Richardson's place.
Who's gonna lead us in that
direction. Who's gonna have that
And who's gonna take his place?
That, that's the key thing.
Who's gonna take Governor
Richardson's place.
together. Migo's trips and a lot
of other things together and,
and I appreciate that and you,
you gave him to us.
Our families are giving
he had to stay home for the day
and, and so, but you gave him
and, and we appreciate that the
United States appreciates that.
The world appreciates that.
And, and what a story.
Of what he did to get them
released and how that I
appreciate him, I miss him.
and the other day and he says,
how's your governor? And I said,
well, I'm sorry to hear, you
know, he passed away, he said,
I'm sorry to hear that, but even
other people remember Governor
Richardson. Other people that
was a baseball when I was around
him because he knew I connected
with baseball, but that hear
those conversations, uh, I miss
him.
I don't think it'll ever stop
left a mark on.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
and also to our honorable guest
in the rostrum to all of you.
Trujillo. Every time he greeted
me was Bobby, you're fired.
The Governor, you can't fire me.
I can fire you, but you can't
fire me. But uh we, we always
You know, and that really stayed
with one of uh one of my sons,
sent in forever, you know, and
that had a lot of
interpretation.
You know, how he, he knew how to
really flow in.
And uh just work things out and
whether if he was in a 1 to 1 or
Uh, here I never knew him, and
uh this is the first time that I
ran for office in 1994.
And we're having a political
rally in Taos.
And he walks out at the same
time, and he says, uh, Bobby,
what are you doing? And I said,
well, I'm gonna go home and work
on some lists. No, he said we're
going campaigning.
And this was a 2 in the
door and just who he was and
just uh 1 to 1 campaigning and I
said, oh my, you know, wow.
And uh, so I get home and my
wife tells me, where have you
um, he asked me, I really need
you. I want you to go to a
gallop with me and we're gonna
go campaigning for 3 days. It
was 3 straight days, I mean, he
just how uh.
That power of his charisma of
how he believed in people.
And there's one story at that
cabinet meeting at the mansion
early in the morning, and I had
called to see if it was OK if I
could bring my son.
And he said, yes, yes, of
bit early, and I said, yeah, we
just wanted it to be early.
And uh
And he said, uh, Marcos.
I want you to sit right next to
2 seconds, the room is full.
He gets the agenda.
And passes it over to Marcos and
say, you're in charge, run the
meeting. And boy, Marcos took
that agenda like if he had done
rather work for the governor
than your son. He's tough. So,
you know, but just that
believing on, on people and you
know, the impression that he
left.
This little girl.
You know, I'm gonna say like uh.
Maybe 2nd, 3rd grade, raised her
hand.
And Governor.
You know, and that's the kind of
just listening to someone very
young listening to our seniors,
that, Mr. President and members
and to the family and to our
guests, you know, what a special
day to have this here today and
to thank uh Senator Cervantes
condolences.
Governor Richardson spoke
Norteno fluently that when he
would come to northern New
Mexico, he understood the
dynamics of Aseass and land
there were yelling and shouting
at him, and he sat there like a
true statesman, soaking in those
words as well, and within
minutes they were joking and
of the world, and one that I'll
never forget his actions and
policies, Mr. President, left a
lasting legacy in northern New
Mexico, which demonstrated his
and
Grant, thank you for sharing Kim
with us. Thank you, Mr. Pres.
Thank you, Senator had a meal.
during that time I had several
different jobs. He bounced me
around.
But I would like to talk about
the mid-nineties and when he
worked at the federal level.
and I'm not sure if this has
already been talked about, uh,
you will know the ease of
traffic from one spot to another
to get up to Los Alamos or to
get down to the highway.
could be hurt, and so I arranged
a meeting for some of the
community members from Los Cenga
and um.
Uh, Bill Richardson, uh,
congressman at the time.
Because of the cigar, but he
listened to them and he made
sure that they got a stoplight.
To their road coming in and out
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Cervantes, uh, Madam
Governor and Ms. Richardson,
welcome. It's wonderful to see
with him again in '06 and had
the honor of serving um my 1st 4
years in the house where his
second term and.
We're, we're, uh, panicking out
because we got about 500 bills
it was, it was a lot of work he
expected a lot out of uh out of
everybody to work incredibly
hard. We, uh, me and another
young Turk, uh, killed, uh, you
us and says you know what, I
think that builds a kind of
important, and we said, well,
go, we can, you know, we can.
bring it back off the table,
maybe a minute and he goes,
yeah, I think, uh, that'd be
great if you could do that.
after that conversation, but it
was just, but he was the
diplomat. He knew how to connect
with people. He knew how to read
people and, and he knew how to
love people from all various
was, he was just so full of
life. I wanna thank uh.
You, Miss Richardson, I wanna
thank the governor. My wife was
a student at Columbia
University, had worked with him
Democratic Party. My wife
Vanessa Hallorre and so my life
would be completely different if
she had not, uh, been brought
home, but he brought talent back
to New Mexico. He gave younger
about Diego Maridona, the
Argentinian soccer star who.
Passed away and he called me out
of the blue. I freaked out. He
goes, hey Mo, uh.
It's good to, good to see your
tweet. I'm glad you're, you're,
I'm like, you, what are you
talking about go? Because when
you're in the house, you're just
in the two year grind and you're
happier and you're doing the
best you can but it planted the
seed, honestly, it planted the
seed, Mr. Richardson and me
affected New Mexico. He invented
YOLO. You only live once, and he
lived every single second of the
day to the fullest.
Love and compassion and
leadership and a tremendously
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, I would like to
have unanimous consent of the
Senate rules suspended, we
accept remarks from the
governor.
There's been unanimous consent
request, saying no objection.
Cervantes, Mr. Chairman, um, I'm
so grateful and I know everyone,
uh, watching and attending today
is, uh, thankful that you
And an entire family, um, I'm
gonna talk a little bit about
Barbara.
And and close with uh the
impacts uh he continues to have
Richardson I got fired by
Governor Richardson before he
was firing everybody else
because I was working for
Governor Johnson and uh had him
elevated the department on aging
and it's a testament to he was
clear that all of the voices.
And the equality in the work
that you do for every population
secretary of health and I really
got to work with Barbara
Richardson and in today's
environment,
You know,
The issues that we think are
epidemic with two deaths.
In, in the country when we
hadn't seen deaths in decades.
And advocates for good public
Notice they are at 4 or 5 states
that are in the right color
scheme because New Mexico's at
about a 97% vaccination rate.
poorly we were tracking,
particularly for childhood
vaccination rates. Well, I can
tell you because I got tasked
with fixing that, and so did
Secretary Pat Montoya, uh, a
we were 48. Does that sound
right to you? 48, 49th. It was
not good.
Yeah, below, and now we're in
the top 4 states in the country.
He would lean in.
fund childhood vaccines and
vaccine purchases in a number of
ways and I'm gonna tell you
today New Mexico still leads in
a number of those public health
worked in DC inspired by.
The works at Governor Richardson
did. Me too, and there isn't a
place on the globe that I have
traveled on behalf of the state,
impacts that both of them have
even today on the policies that
we're still debating, hoping not
jobs that we're in right now. If
Governor Richardson didn't push
us to be everything we could be.
I wouldn't be governor if I
country in those investments,
and I hope.
I'm gonna take a book out of
Governor Richardson's page, when
we fund.
universal access to all of it
and no state will get close for
decades to come and that's
because there are leaders before
A week before he died, I asked
him to help me with issues at
the border.
Public safety.
Economic development and in my
first year as governor, we got
he did find a way to get you to
do this and then to think about
a way to work together and
that's something I could do
better.
Simon had work to do better with
that.
delicious for the spaceport and
any number of these economic
achievements.
They started
With the work that you do in
this chamber.
Barbara, by the governor, and by
so many other people that are
here today.
And is he reminded me about
that.
our ability to retract new
businesses. They're upstairs on
the 4th floor talking to me
about early conversations he
had.
A decade or two before this
gonna have everything they need
in this state.
Because he inspired you to do
the right work in this chamber
today. So on behalf of the New
Mexico State Senate.
for him.
And also lucky enough to having.
been fortunate enough to be in
the room where some of the most
important and powerful decisions
yield to Senator Cervantes to
close us out on the certificate.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Governor, for the
remarks and it was an
extraordinary team back in the
remember the pre-K legislation
where her and I couldn't get
along on, uh, what the language
would look like and Bill sat us
down and, and put us together to
make sure.
Janice who's back there quietly,
but all of us are successful
people like Janice in our lives
who make sure things work and
run smoothly and she was with
Bill for how many years. The
to join, but they'd be here. I
think it's important to
recognize Lee Wit who
We all know, uh, outside of
Peter Werth's office and uh and
our and our majority office, uh,
Uh, who should be on the rostrum
with you today too as well and
we had a brief period of time
with him, with you, Governor,
uh, sharing him again with us,
but just an extraordinary team
And the, the, the last uh dinner
that I had with Bill was at his
request. We met, uh, at the
bullring, and he asked and I
said, who's coming? He says it's
just gonna be you and me. And I
We sat down. Mo was there I see
Mo was back here a little bit
ago. I don't see him now, but,
but of course Senator Munoz
heard and crashed, uh, the
dinner and decided that he was
going to get in on it too.
Uh, there's a photograph of it,
actually do remember what it
was, but, but, but for, for the,
but for decorum today, uh, Bill
said, uh, let's go and we spent
get over some stuff and, uh,
everybody around us has got to
get over stuff and and the the
beauty of Bill was.
He listened.
Uh, he, he was very unique about
that. You've gathered that from
lot and that's why he remembered
the names, Senator Ezel, that's
why he met with the low and the
high in our society, and I'll
tell you.
invited her to speak today in,
in classic form, she said no,
she'd rather not, uh, and that's
again who she is, but one of the
most magical moments for me and
it may not have occurred to you
to Bill about it, but it struck
me that night and it strikes me
now here was a young man who
grew up in the city of Mexico
with a Mexican mother.
rush for him to have seen where
life had taken him.
And you've heard in the
presentation the remarks emotion
from I've got to tell you,
Barbara, emotions from people
that you don't hear emotion
from.
Uh, at times in a in a process
in a place where it's sometimes
that love is lacking and, and
those of us particularly men
like Senator Campos or Senator
Sendo or Senator Munoz Senator
Uh, but we try really, really
hard not to show it.
And, and, and maybe we shouldn't
be quite so hard.
In our ways.
imagine what it must have been
like to have given that kind of
support, uh, we honor you today
and thank you for being here and
all of your team and all of
those who were part of just an
could negotiate and mediate and
who really saw uh perhaps not
himself quite so seriously.
Uh, and, and he took the job
seriously, but he didn't take
At this time, I'd like to do 2
things.
First, I'd like to wish a very
happy birthday to former
lieutenant governor Diane
Danish.
Happy birthday.
those in the gallery.
Please join me in this
presentation.
Of a governor
Bill Richardson.
And the life and legacy.
And our guest today.
Once again, thank you very much
and I'll now yield to Senate
Majority floor leader Peter
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Uh, next up, Senator Woods has a
certificate today for East
Mountain Rodeo Association and
Asstancia Valley Ranch Rodeo,
a beautiful testimony to
Governor Richardson's and I
really did enjoy it. But, um,
Mr. President, I'd make a
There's been unanimous consent
requests to allow the reader to
read see no objection.
The reader to read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, 5-seventh
the stancia Valley Ranch Rodeo,
whereas the East Mountain Rody
Association was founded in 2020
by Chris Morgan and James
Welchel after they returned to
serves the community by
supporting youth in agriculture,
veterans organizations and
community-based groups and
whereas the East Mountain Roadie
Association is dedicated to
the New Mexico territory and
whereas the East Mountain Roadie
Association joins with the
working ranch Cow
Boys Association to produce
families. And whereas the East
Mountain Roadie Association will
present the Estancia Valley
Ranch Rodeo at Rodeo de Santa Fe
rodeos in New Mexico, the other
being the Fort Sumner Ranch
Rodeo. Now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to the
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Pat Woods Mimi Stewart,
president pro tem Sherry de
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
Thank you to the reader to
And uh I wanna take just a
moment to talk about.
Uh, ranch Rodeo, Mr. President,
uh,
Many times.
land out there that's just off
the interstate and they think,
well, that's what New Mexico
looks like, but if you get a few
further miles in on some of
are portrayed.
In these ranch rodeos, uh,
there's, they're, they're not
individual skills, their team
enjoyable to watch and, and
route, you pick your favorite
team and your favorite ranch,
and there's, it's.
Quite a challenge to see just
Any things to say about this,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Woods. Senators, we are
in the announcements
miscellaneous. We have sinners
that wishing to speak to the
certificate. Senators out.
Many, many years ago, not all
that many because I'm.
Well, yeah, I am old. But
anyway, about 30 years ago, my
roped.
Anyway, there was a ranch rodeo
that was going to be taking
place in Rosville, New Mexico at
And everybody was very, very
enthusiastic about it. Somebody
was saying, we can do this and
we can do that, and well, you
can be involved in this and
everything.
to please excuse himself from
the dinner table at that point.
Go to the national.
there is a sight to be seen, and
they understand that more often
than not it is teamwork that
does get the job done.
Thank y'all for being here this
Thank you, Senator Woods, for
bringing this memorial forward
or certificate and welcome you
guys to the New Mexico State
Senate. You know, ranch Rodeo is
an opportunity to showcase the
you're doing to preserve that
Western heritage, the customs
and the cultures that are so
important to the land of
enchantment. We appreciate you
guys highlighting this and if
the
Woods, although this year the
basketball uh uh competition was
canceled, you know, we don't
have a whole lot of complete
participation and I propose that
Mr. President, I think that
might be a thing we need to
start thinking about, uh, I was
just wondering if the Senate
President would, would think
about joining us on that.
something in there that you
would just really, really see
that. But you guys, thank you
guys for being here so much, for
really promoting the customs and
cultures in New Mexico and thank
you, Senator Woods for bringing
this forward.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
introduce the guest up here, uh,
I'm so happy that they came
today, but I wanted to cut him
in a little on this because most
of this happens in his district,
And it goes all the way back to
1600s when the Spanish settlers
brought cattle ranching to New
Mexico.
And the vaqueros, the little
we have some folks who represent
that culture who bring it
forward today.
And uh I wanted to do some of
those great people who are
maintaining the culture of the
Cowboys.
was 18 year old he's 18 year
veteran, uh, Air Force veteran,
and reservist to deployed to
Iraq and Afghanistan in combat
roles.
Remained standing. We have Nolan
Mexico. Randy Norris.
Cowboy and and rancher in
northern New Mexico. He's part
of the working ranch Cowboy
Our famous cowboy artist and
retired ranch uh manager. He's
also the working ranch Cowboy
Association board member from
New Mexico and the WRCA
First we have uh Destiny Tapia
who's the princess of the Esania
Valley Ranch Rodeo.
She's a senior at Moriarty High
School, so she's right down the
Central New Mexico College.
Please, everyone, I want you all
to welcome them to the Senate
remind everyone that in July
18th and 19th, we're going to
have the rodeo here, right here
at the fairgrounds and in Santa
Seeing these young ladies up
here, you probably don't know
this, uh, Senator share, but,
uh, my wife was a uh rodeo queen
at one time and, and, uh,
She, she led her at New Mexico
State, uh, breakaway roping. So
Oh now you able to Senate
majority floor leader Peter
Worth to take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. If there are
up to 2, so let me just go down
the right. Senator Trujillo,
we'll do item one, Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 180, uh, Senator
Brandt will do item and Senator
Senate Bill 20. Uh, I'm gonna go
ahead and do I, what will be
item number 3 on the calendar.
We'll do it number 4, send 274,
and we'll round it out with
Senator Cervantes on Senate
some confirmations. So let's go
ahead, unanimous consent, we go
that.
Or business committee reports
just for the confirmation
committee reports. Thank you.
Senators we're in that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read.
January 16, 2025, in which the
governor makes the following
appointment, Gary John Trip as a
member of the Mexico Highlands
University Board of Regents for
a term commencing upon
Katie Doigg chair. Senator, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
which the governor makes the
following appointment. Elaine
Luna as a member of the New
Mexico Highlands University
Board of Regents for a term
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Senator Mr.
President, move adoption of the
committee.
We have a motion to adopt the
committee reports. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
consent. We got our business
confirmations. I yield to send
her meal. See, no objections.
We're in that order of business
confirmations before Senator me
you make your motion, you're
instructed to put on your
jacket.
Send her had a meal, Mr.
President, Senator Hamlin said
the credentials of Gary John
Trip be presented to the full
Senate for consideration as
member of the New Mexico
Highlands University Board of
number 55, dated January 16th,
2025. I moved to the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Gary John.
trip to the New Mexico Highlands
University Board of Regents.
morning, uh, definitely we're
able to go ahead and capture, if
you will, the true commitment
that, uh, Mr. Gary Trip
continues to exude when it comes
forward. His extensive
background, uh, continues to
Uh, be there for each and every
one of us as we uh move forward
Gary has served, uh, at various
schools. Moriarty, Rio Rancho,
he's from, uh, Las Vegas, uh, a
graduate, if you will of West
capacities, uh, throughout his
career, in particularly with the
CES or if you will, uh, dealing
with all aspects of education. A
couple of things that really
the second thing is that as we
heard just a few minutes ago
when we were uh talking.
about uh former governor, uh
Bill Richardson, within that, he
has a vision. He has a
going to be a great asset to the
New Mexico Highlands Board of
Regents, uh, if he is confirmed
today. And so with that, uh, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, if there's anyone else
the confirmation of Gary John
Trip as a regent in Mexico
Highlands University, and I'll
begin with Senator Jaramil.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
Tripp has been instrumental for
gonna take into New Mexico
Highlands University as a
regent. He's a proud Norteno who
understands that you got to meet
students where they are in order
to help them succeed when he
understands the needs of our
pueblos and indigenous culture
here in New Mexico, and I
proudly stand up and support
this nomination. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you Senator
Jaramillo. We have further
little bit later, but he is also
on the school board of Rio
Rancho, uh, School District and
it's doing a, uh, incredible job
there for and I would argue that
Highlands University, you might
be interested in this little,
uh, fact, Mr. President. They
the national champions for
Chipp for his service in Rio
Rancho in the public school
system, especially at uh Rio
Rancho High School, the Rams go
Rams. We love the Rams.
So, uh, I asked, I hope he has a
unanimous vote here in the
Senate, Mr. President, and, um,
Mr. Trip, uh, Highlands is is
before, um, my um uncle Charles
Cowan went to Highlands. That's
where he met my aunt, um, and my
aunt Irene Cowan, and he went
family and other members of our
family had gone to Highlands,
including my brother, um, so I
am very, and I had the
opportunity this morning, um,
Mr. President, to be in roles
it was really inspiring, um, so
I stand in full support.
of Mr. Tripp, I was very
impressed and I think Highlands
is really lucky to have that a
Cowan, um, who I miss very much,
but I, I, again, stand in full
support of this nomination and
and thank the governor for, for
the nomination. Thank you.
just, um, just really the
respect that he gets from the
community and the students that
he served. I, I really believe
this is a great appointment,
someone who worked in higher
education. So just want to stand
in full support. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Seeing no further debate as soon
as possible.
Uh, I'm sorry, San Diegos,
Trip, uh, he and I are both on
school board, so I've known him
for a while, but, uh, I wanted
to say that I'm very proud that
he's taken the um issues that
schools, physics in a box, and
it's a, uh, practical use of
physics that is literally in a
box, but I'd asked him this
goes into uh this new job, uh,
but I just, I really like the,
uh, I, the idea and the aptitude
that he has of what he's gonna
do.
thank him and congratulate him
as we go forward. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. Senators.
Seeing no further debate,
Gary John Trip can bring to the
table. He definitely is a
strategic planner, and that's
what we're looking forward to at
New Mexico Highlands University.
With that, I ask unanimous
consent that the record show
We are voting all senators to
your seats.
By a vote of 32 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The appointment of Gary John
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico Senate, Senator Campos,
thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the Senate
at this time, of course, present
his wife Jeanette, but ladies
and gentlemen, please welcome
credentials of Elaine Luna be
presented to the full Senate for
consideration as member of the
New Mexico Highlands University
Board of Regents. I now yield to
Senator Campos Capos.
hereby confirm the appointment
of Elaine Luna.
to the New Mexico Highlands
University Board of Regents
objections. Senator Campos to
explain. Thank you very much,
and she was there on the Las
Vegas City Schools Board of
Education for 10 years, but
along with that, with education,
both her master's and her
bachelor's degree come from New
beginnings and within that, the
one point that she shared was
there her mother was, she wanted
to uh ensure that as she moved
forward that she would be given
individual in our community and
within the state.
of New Mexico to ensure that
when it came to social work,
healthcare, all of these other
aspects of it that Elaine Luna
you will, of a person who
provides quality, tenacity, and
of course the completion of
whatever it is that she
undertakes, so along with that
and all the clubs, organizations
health education center and so
much more. Elaine Luna continues
to go ahead and show that there
is not only the devotion coming
from our heart, but there is
also the work that she continues
his career. Here's another
shining example of
what people can do within their
careers to help so many people
and to be positive role models.
So with that, uh, Mr. President,
the confirmation of Elaine Luna
and I yel to Senator Jarameo.
Thank you, Mr. President. Elaine
was born and raised just a few
miles north of Espanola and
mama dropped her off at New
Mexico Highlands University and
handed her a $50 bill, which is
a major sacrifice for Nortenos,
especially at that time, and
university she holds so near to
her heart was amazing to hear.
And to know that she wants to
help students succeed and want
what's best for the university
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate again, Elaine Luna, a
lifetime person who continues
mind yielding to, I will yield
to, uh, Senator Sadillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
also, again, I want to say I was
the, to the students that she's
going to serve as regent and her
incredible experience. I was, I
was just really lucky to be
there, um, to listen, and I just
wanted to stand in full support
and thank you for yielding to
commitment that Miss Luna
continues to go ahead and show
is.
Just something for each and
every one of us to admire.
We're going to find that in her
role, she is going to continue
outreach to the community and to
the entire state and globally,
we're going to find that Miss
Luna will definitely be a
shining star in all that we do
there at New Mexico Highlands
University.
hands. Senator Campos. All
senators to your seats, please.
We are voting.
Send it to your seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The appointment of Elaine Luna
as a member of the New Mexico
Highland University.
Border regions for a term
commencing upon confirmation and
I present to you the newest
member of the New Mexico
Highlands University Board of
Regents.
Thank you very much Mr.
President, members of the
Senate. Thank you, Senator
Campos.
Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So we're gonna go to
3rd reading again. We'll do item
number one, then number 5 and
234 in that order, uh, unanimous
And I'll ye to Senator Trujillo.
I ask you, Nanos unanimous
consent to the Senate that the
records show that all action for
And Mr. President, I actually
think that Senate Judiciary
substitute for Senate Bill 180.
Thank you Senator. We can start
that over. Go ahead and go
Senate Judiciary substitute for
Senate Bill 180 on final passage
has been taken, and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
It's, um, requires that the
rental agreement for a storage
unit also include the phone
number and electronic address of
require the owner to send the
mandated default notice to the
alternative contact.
It provides one more avenue for
making contact of an occupant
contact for current, um,
individuals who have an
agreement. It also reduces the
time frame for an occupant who's
to charge a late fee of $20 a
month. The one thing I will
point out is that New Mexico is
at the far end of that notice.
states that have 40 to 50 days,
and that's the group that we
would be in. There are 10 states
that have 60 or 61 days, there
90 days and with that, Mr.
President, I stand for
questions. We do have a floor
amendments.
The reader will read.
substitute for Senate Bill 180.
no objections, Senator, if
you'll explain what your
amendment does. Thank you, Mr.
President. I, I forgot about
not amended and so this just
simply amends the title to be
consistent with the actual
substitute.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Senators were debating Senate
floor member number one. Anyone
wishing to debate?
number 1 to Senate Judiciary
substitute for Senate Bill 180
do not pass and I asked for a
voice vote. Senator, there's a
request to adopt Senate for
one has been added Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 180.
We do have another floor
amendment.
Uh, if it's necessary, so will
the sponsor of the bill yield,
Mr.
President?
I do. Lopez.
Mr. President, that's just the
language that's in there, um,
from the drafter. I don't have
a, I, I, I don't, I'm not really
yeah, it just, it struck me that
we're we're moving tenant to
occupant, which, I mean, it,
it's a word, um, but it's just
more precise would have been to
increase the likelihood that
someone renting one of these
spaces will identify the unit
owner because I understand what
happens is um somebody renting
is excellent, but now I'm gonna
go um to the, the, a comment was
made or
Or the sponsor made the comment,
um, about changing 90 days to 45
Yes, Mr. President, so the 45
days um would start 5 days
after, so you've got 5 days and
once you hit the 5 day, um, no,
um, until which time as you've
either paid the, the monthly
fee, the late fee, and in at at
45 days.
it would actually be 2 months'
What the additional the the
reduction in the time does is
most people who have gone past 2
storage unit owners and
understand that it's very, very
rare that that ever happens. So
by going to 90 days now they've
reduced from any money that
results from the sale of their
items.
Mr. President, I think when
people are struggling to pay
items you have and it also takes
more than 45 days to often get a
job to, to figure out what
you're where you're going to um
To put the material and.
On page 2.
It allows a rental, the, the
company who owns the rental unit
to add an alternative contact
and so my question to the
sponsor is, is the 45 days also
gonna apply to people who
to be allowed to change the 90
days that people expected when
they signed their contract to 45
days.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
that's a very good question. So
contract was entered into. This
is contract, um, and so this
just.
gives them the option of having
the 45 days. It's not required
a delinquent um tenant or
occupant in this case they don't
have to sell it at 45 days. And
again, my understanding is that
people's property. In fact, in
most cases, they don't remove
your property from a storage
unit. They actually let it stay
least amount of time that they
can give to an individual.
Thank you, Senator, Senator C
Lopez, thank you, Mr. President.
I think that's a, that's a big
Center Cia Lopez, we're not
prepared for that amendment at
this point prepared for the
amendment once you complete your
questions on the bill that we
can go to the amendment process.
All right, thank you. Well then,
Um, about.
Inconsistent provisions, so it
amends section 48-11-7A stating
can be sent to the occupant or
the alternative contact.
And is there a reason, Mr.
President, for the
inconsistency?
Mr. President, um, could I ask
unanimous consent of the body to
bring in my expert witness.
Senator, if you, uh,
He represents the uh uh storage
unit association. Thank you,
Senator Trujillos. There's been
nanimous consent requests for an
expert witness sent to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection, if we can
Center Celia Lopez, if you can
please uh restate the questions
so our expert witness is able
to.
To hear that.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
section 1170, it's amended to
read that the notice can be sent
to the occupant or the
alternative contact um.
I just wondered if there was a
reason for the inconsistency.
Senators, uh, Trujillo Ander
Lopez, do you have that
available let me, let me find
it. I don't have it in my notes,
um.
Senator Hill
Yes, um, uh.
Or I'm wondering if this might
have been in the earlier bill.
Was this a correction that was
correction made. I don't have it
listed.
Senator, here, you still on the
floor, I believe, Mr. President,
it's on.
Or by electric electronic mail
to the last known electronic
address of the occupant or
alternative contact and my
question is, Mr. President, is
there a reason for the
inconsistency?
Send it through here, you have
inconsistency. I will just point
out that
The first notice is that they've
been in default for a continuous
period of 30 days, so they have
next part, they would have
already been notified.
And if the owner sends a notice
by that and does not receive a
response, then they could
notified in the first place, but
there's not a reason for that
being an or in that second, uh,
section. Thank you Senator Til.
Senator Celia Lopez.
contact or the renter and that
is problematic because while the
first one, adding the
Notified, I think the 2nd 1, the
2nd 1 putting or reduces the
possibility that the occupant
will be contacted, um, so Mr.
there's a limit, although, oh, I
guess that's my last question.
On page 9, an owner may charge
and collect a late fee of no
more than $20.
For each month
Um
Til.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
yes, they are allowed to charge
a late fee now and there's no
limit on what that fee could be
charged.
I would assume it's not so that
was a question I had in my notes
and, and I apologize. I had not
seen this bill. It didn't come
to any committee that I've seen
and it wasn't in um in any of
hear that amendment, I will rise
to present it. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senator Lopez, we do
have a floor amendment.
The reader will read Senate
floor amendment number 2 to
Cedillo Lopez. Senator Lopez to
move the amendment. I move
Amendment number 2 to Senate
Um,
Mr. President,
When this, when the sponsor of
the bill says that 90 days is
one of the longest days that we
to get their things out of
storage and the second thing it
says to me is this industry has
very good national lobbyists to
get this changed in other
I've been making it a point to
talk to people who are on the
streets.
In Albuquerque, if they're
willing to talk to me and what
I mean it is a very difficult
thing when they have their
entire.
Accumulation of things in a
than what is owed and so it is,
it's just a very quick way for
somebody who is struggling to
lose everything they have, so
that is why I move this
friendly amendment, um, the,
the, the time frame really just
adds to the late fees that this
individual would have to pay.
Thank you, Senators we're
debating Senate floor amendment
#2, and I yield to Senator Paul.
I yield, Mr.
President. uh,
Senator, can you, can you tell
me, or I don't know if you
recall, how many states
No, no, Mr. President, I do not
recall how many, how many have
a, a less uh less time but as I
suggested what I believe that
means is other states have very
think that, that it's a show of
where the industry as a whole is
going. This is, um, in essence,
my bread and butter and part of
what I do for, for work to not
only put food on the table for
whole
Cross, you know, 8 different
facilities that I own here in
the state in 1300 customers, the
people that are delinquent up in
and how my managers handle this
is a customer's due on the first
of the month and so their rent's
due on the first and they either
have till the 5th or the 10th to
$5.10 dollars, depending on
which site. Once the customer
passes that 10 day mark, my
managers are instructed to then
call the, the occupants of those
provide an additional contact
and I'd like.
That this, uh, what, uh, Senator
Trujillo had brought forward is
to just put that in into to the
law for this is that it does
skip trace and find them,
contact them on Facebook and
whatever other means we could to
identify these people because
it, it's my thought and belief
that for storage owners, our
we have lost money on every
single one of them. We have
never sold a unit to where there
was a profit above and beyond
what was owed on the outstanding
another customer.
who needs that space across our
portfolio of what we own our
occupancy levels have been up in
the 90 to 95% and sometimes
those units, so in addition to
that, when you go to auction
these things and the people have
been 90 days delinquent. The
reason that they're 90 days
delinquent is because there's
nothing of value in their units.
hangers, and that's it. And so
now we as owners of these
facilities have had to go for 90
days, sometimes more because we
don't want their, their contents
in this in the day to day.
it's tough to, to think that
we're harming anybody by
shortening that to the industry
standard of 45 days, um, you
auction was gonna go to unit our
staff, cut the lock, opened it
up, took the pictures that are
required to be able to post and
to to make notice and it was
So we went beyond the, you know,
what we needed to do and we
tracked down the person whose
unit that was. At the end of the
day, we said, hey, we don't care
what you owe us, just remove
We don't want the contents.
There's no value there to us.
And so we're willing to work
with, with people to
Move those items, even if it
goes off, we're spending
anywhere from 100 to $350 twice
to be able to post those notices
in the newspaper, so we're not
current law to, to be posted so
that people have the opportunity
to come back and get their
things, um, so, you know, aside
from that, I, I don't know that
consider that as well. Storage
owners are small business
owners.
Um, Mr. President, uh, sponsor
of the amendment, do you know
how many storage facilities are
in New Mexico currently
Paul, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, uh, Senator. So
currently just a rough estimate,
there's 500 storage facilities
across the state of New Mexico
and what that means is there's
statement to the body if we look
at the national level, I think
currently there's 60,000 or
close to 60,000 storage
facilities across the United
States.
impact anybody except for the
business owners and requires us
to continue to carry, uh, our,
you know, our accounts
receivable at a balance that's
never going to be paid back and
storing, um, gold in here if
there are valuable family family
items. We want to return those
to the customer and we'll do
everything we can to do that and
industry practices that you have
oppose and ask the, the body to
consider opposing this
amendment. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Paul. We have further
debate on the amendment.
Senator Padilla
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Trujillo.
Yes, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. So,
uh, to the sponsor of the actual
bill, were there any other date
or or number of days that we're
looked at and what were those?
substitute was being debated,
and at that time, the
information that I had, um, I
said that it was not a friendly
amendment. We have since talked
with the industry and there have
uh.
Less of a burden than the 90
days, so we did, um, I did share
that with the good senator, um,
from Albuquerque.
Senator Woods
Thank you, Mr. President.
Um
So, tell me one more time.
Why 9 is better than 45.
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Woods. Senator Lopez.
The, the accumulations of a
lifetime, many times that's
where they're storing their
pictures, uh, sometimes they're
storing their passports
the couch and the and the
dresser and in grandma's table
are all that they own and 45
days at least as I've spoken to
people.
To accumulate what's necessary
with all the services we have
one of the things that is their
priority when they're on the
streets is to try to become
don't have the services you need
to get out of the situation, so
I just think 45 days, um, a
month and a half, and I
understand that the sponsor of
the bill said it's really 50,
The the the lifetime of
accumulations when they have
them in.
They've, they've got what they
could out of the storage unit
Nobody, nobody, no advocates or
anything raised this with me. I
just read this and I was very
disturbed.
Thank you, Mr.
President Lopez.
Senator Woods.
Lesser of the stewardship.
On a case like that.
Because that's the key to the
turn, and it, Mr. President,
that
Explain to me if someone is
that.
For
Will they have a way to reach
out to them because I would
assume if they couldn't pay the
Lopez, could you further explain
that to me,
Mr. President, that's why I'm
um.
Trying to amend the bill to save
may not have very much access to
it, very sporadic in libraries,
is very difficult, um, but the
alternate contact that is in the
there's an alter the requirement
that there be an alternative
contact that could be contacted,
um, and hopefully would have
some ability to reach that
for questionsenator Til do?
Yes, I do, Mr. President.
Mr. President.
What was, what's the original
Thank you, Mr. President. So
what the contract, what, what
this law does is set minimums
and, and not maximums. And so,
This sets a minimum and so once
you're 5 days late on paying
your storage unit, then you'll
get notification that you're in
to notify you and what this bill
does is it requires them to
notify the occupant as well as
the alternative contact, and
They can't do that until 90
days, so really it's 95 days,
um, before the contents inside
ask Senator Paul to yield to a
question.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Paul, remember we are on
the amendment. Senator Woods.
So Senator Paul, what is the
common term?
Of the contract today.
In regard to this 30, 60, 90 day
Senator, in in terms of the, if
we're looking at the overall
rental agreement that's had with
the, you know, the renter of the
space. It's, it's a month to
month agreement with that
agreement.
So
If I was written a hotel room,
and I rented it for a month. Is
there an obligation?
I would expect at the end of
that month, they would expect me
to move out.
So
I'm having a hard time saying,
reasonable to say 45 days, but I
understand this is a little
different subject.
But Mr. President,
I, uh, I'm having a hard time.
That are in this business and
then have someone say, well, I
know better.
Because in my heart I feel like
it should be there.
We just heard discussions.
About how we need to attract
business into New Mexico. How we
need to wean ourselves, how we
every time we set a rule.
All of a sudden we're
encouraging businesses not to
come to our state.
Constantly against solid
business practice because they
feel good. They make us feel
good, Mr. President.
I would, I would strongly
encourage the body to vote
against this amendment, Mr.
President.
I don't wanna
Mr. President, I understand that
Senator O'Malley has an
amendment that would
Uh, change the day to 60 days
amendment, so with that I
withdraw my amendment been
withdrawn, but we do have
another floor amendment, and
I'll yield to the reader to
read.
Debbie O'Malley. Senator
O'Malley to move the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
move, um.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 180.
As a man did
See no objection. Nice job,
Senator O'Malley.
Go ahead and explain what your
sort of thing, OK.
OK, we'll have a lot of mentors.
Thank you so much.
Um, just quickly, as was stated,
to be uh closer to the average
in other states.
Thank you, Mr. President,
Senator O'Malley Sanders we're
debating Senate floor #3, and
I'll yell to the Senate sponsor,
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, senators. We are
debating Senate floor and #3.
There is further debate on the
amendment. Senator Paul, did you
wish to debate, Senator Paul.
Thank you a sponsor of the
for the sponsor of the
amendment. Um, I know that
Senator Trujillo, the sponsor of
the bill, said that this is a,
uh, friendly amendment coming
from from uh the folks that
she's talking with, but speaking
before you can make that unit
available for rental to somebody
who is willing to pay, and I'd
also ask the body just to, to
remember and consider that that
storage is not a necessity for
not.
a necessity. People don't have
to rent the unit, and when they
do rent the unit, they
understand that their obligation
by signing and accepting that
get assessed late fees or or
then they catch up and make
their payments or at some point
they their unit's gonna go to
auction, but I don't feel that
it is the business owner's
responsibility to have to carry
of time, it leads to thousands
and tens of thousands of dollars
of lost income, which not only
helps to put food on the table
for my family, but more
team currently that
you're not able to to be
employed by us and they'd have
to go find work elsewhere, which
would, you know, potentially be
at a lower wage than what we
90 days to, to move somebody out
and to incur the other costs
that we have with doing that. So
I just asked the body to, to
consider. I know that the, the
sponsor said that this is a
friendly amendment, but from
fair, more than enough time for
a customer to, uh,
Pay their, their past due
balance and also to make contact
with the owner of that facility,
out how they can get their
belongings back. So with that,
I'll yie. Thank you, Mr.
President debate on the
amendment, Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
assessed all the risks that are
included with it, even with no
payment.
And as we move forward, I
appreciate the First Amendment.
Whoever is assuming the
responsibility of the deceased
might be in another state.
And when you talk about
Because when we talk about
rental units and housing the
homeless. If you don't pay your
rent.
I believe there is the option of
person comes back to, um, I
guess assume the their property.
So I'm trying to take it down to
45 days, I think it's pushing
we talk about displaced workers,
people losing um some of all
their property in that sense
that when they do, it's an
option to put in self storage,
that's all I have. Thank you.
Thank you. We do have further
debate on the amendment, Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
uh, the sponsor of the amendment
um, I think in the past and I
think sometimes people think
that people rent self storage
units just have all these items
and it's a luxury and not a
necessity, but the reality is
We have some folks in
Albuquerque that have their
property in rentals and they're
literally living living out of
their cars.
So I just think when we talk
about this and when we're
We do have further debate on the
amendment.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, no
you have a 60 day or 90-day
waiting period. What is going to
happen is one of two things in
business.
Number one, you're going to
That cost of doing business.
Or
The delinquent thief's going to
go up, so you can do that.
So
have responsibilities for these
mortgages and on these
businesses, so all of those
things are things that have to
be considered, but
a cost without passing it on,
it's just not reasonable. That's
twice. I apologize, Mr.
Um, Mr. President, I don't need
the sponsor to yield, but this
is a business that seems to be
thriving in this state, it does
bill because um they
Um
Got this a 30 day extra 30 extra
Uh, withdrew my amendment was in
the spirit of compromise and uh
I really urge the body to
support this amendment. Uh, I
cannot vote for the bill if it
apologize, uh, let me yield to
Senator Wirth, and then I'll go
right back to Senator Worth.
Thank you, Mr. President. Just
unanimous consent that the
sponsor of the amendment,
Senator O'Malley, be allowed to
sit down while the amendments
been unanimous consent request.
See no objection. Thank you,
Senator. We senator Ramos, you
have the floor, Mr. President,
thank you again and uh I don't
need the sponsor to yield. I
with everything that he just
stated earlier, it's hard enough
to do business as it is. Not
only that, but there was a
comment made about thriving in
the state of New Mexico. Well,
they provide the service of
giving you a checking account or
a savings account and if you
don't have money in that
account.
mountain, you write a bad check,
they're gonna pay you. You, you
of Mr. President, and it's
really hard to do business as
is. It's tough when you have to
pay someone, uh, 30 days later,
45 days later, or 90 days later
just leave him and leave him
stagnant for such a long time,
Mr. President. Mr. President,
it's so easy for people nowadays
to make contact with the owner
that's just uh uh under
unresponsible of, of the so
called tenants at this on, on as
it states on this bill, but
thank you very much, Mr.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the sponsor of the bill, please
yield
Mr. President, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. President.
in the state those are located,
the mass majority or is that, is
that information just spread
throughout?
Senator Til, Mr. President, I
in Albuquerque is what I'm
hearing.
Senator Bradley, Mr. President,
that makes a little bit of
sense. It follows the
population. I will tell you I am
from Elephant Butte, New Mexico.
a large, large presence of
storage units. So per capita, I
would almost argue that man
Elephant Butte has got to be
right up there at the top when
it comes to storage units. And
We are a summertime town.
And I mean when school starts
and sun goes down, starts to
cool off. Elephant Butte shuts
down.
It is a poor
Off of tourism.
Wealthier people who come down
to Elephant Butte and they rent
storage units. They eat in our
restaurants, they fill up with
the majority of the business
that's taking place is just
summertime business. And so I
could see.
A 90 day in this case a 60 day
water toys that they need a
place to stay because they're
coming down every weekend from
Albuquerque, could really set
some of our struggling business
owners behind and for that and
already has a standard, New
Mexico, stick with what is
working.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Brentley.
Seeing no further debate on the
amendment.
vote.
Senator O'Malley, if we can just
restate that motion to include
the bill that it's gonna be
potentially amending that would
Substitute Senate Bill 180 as
amended.
Oh, yes, and I call for a voice
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those oppose.
And I have it.
The Senate floor Amendment #3
Thank you so much, Senator
Malley. On that, we will go now
sort of the new members this is
a process that we haven't done
before.
When the vote was called.
If you vote no, you are voting
to overturn.
The ruling of the chair.
The clerk?
to call the roll.
Center block votes yes. Senator
Boone.
Camposs no. Cervantes.
Senator Cervantes votes no.
Senator Charlie, Senator Charlie
Center Figueroa votes no. San
Gallegos.
San Galleco's votes yes. Senator
Gonzalez is excused.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Lanier.
Santa Lanier votes yes, Santa
Nava votes no. Senator O'Malley,
Senator O'Malley votes no.
Senator Padillas.
Pope. Senator Pope votes no.
Senator Ramos.
Santa Ramos votes yes.
Santa Sanchez.
Center share votes, yeah,
Centerendo votes no. Senators
Thornton.
Senator Thornton votes. Senator
Tobiasson.
like to say thank you to all
those who stuck with me.
But I voted 15 in the
affirmative, 21 in the negative.
The ruling of the chair has been
overturned. The Senate bill.
bill. Anyone wishing to debate
on the bill.
See no debate on the bill,
Senator Trujillo to close.
Yeah, OK, I move that Senate
Judiciary substitute for Senate
Bill 180 as twice amended, do
voting all senators to your
seats. We're voting.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senators elbo, you know.
Senator Paul Morino.
Senator Tobiasson voting no.
Senator Block Bodino.
Center C Lopez, are you voting
no?
So
Senator Munoz, well, you know.
Center share, you know.
Senator Boone voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
To explain my vote.
Apologize, you didn't.
By a vote of 21 in the
affirmative, 16 in the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 180
as twice amended has passed the
appreciate the, um, uh, training
that we're all receiving on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. I really
appreciate that you appreciated
my defeat.
it in there.
Thank you Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that all actions.
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
see no objection, Senator Nair
explained the bill.
3 years and uh unfortunately,
he's tied up in a meeting right
now, so you get stuck with me,
um, the bill is swatting and I,
I assume most people know what
swatting is. If you don't, let
Against somebody and it's
falsely called in and the SWAT
team goes in and say they kicked
the door open or something like
that.
Then that is.
unfortunately Senator Sheer and
myself, we've had a couple of
these incidents in, in San Juan
County and so that's kind of why
we're.
We're jumping on board with
this.
Um
felony and, and that's what this
bill stands for. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Lanai.
Cents we're debating Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 18.
Anyone wishing to debate?
I move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 18.
affirmative, uh, except for
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands. Thank you all
senators to your seats, please.
We are voting.
I'll send it to your seats.
By a vote of 36 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 18
Senator Padilla, Mr. President,
that's one way to do it. That's
On the calendar that's going to
be Senate Tausiness
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 20.
And I'll yell to Senator Hickey.
of Senate Bill 20.
Now be put on final passage or
And Mr. President, may I ask
that uh Mahesh Sita joined me as
an expert.
Seeing no there's unanimous
consent request for an expert
This bill is really
A youth health, safety and
family safety bill.
and, uh, what we are now seeing
youth move to pouches, nicotine
pouches of various chemicals.
as such.
There is no tax increase on
cigarettes, no tax increase on
cigars or little cigars.
into a fund.
Called the nicotine prevention
Fund.
be used by the Department of
Health in working in conjunction
On the dangers of nicotine,
basically ages 5 to 25.
gateway drug to addiction.
And particularly in youth and
younger people who are still
developing their mental pathways
go on to, uh, the ability to
crave.
Much more severe.
substantial evidence throughout
our uh decrement of smoking in
the country, the higher the
cost, the less the uptake.
The
increase in e-cigarettes
resulted in a 4.1% decrease of
use in 30 days and that a dollar
help our Department of Health,
which only has $5.8 million to
do education.
And cessation, it will raise it
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senators, we are debating Senate
transportation business and tax
committee substitute for Senator
Bill 20 and we do have debate,
Senator Tobiasson.
nicotine is a gateway drug. Um,
could you give me an example of
what type of drugs it could be a
gateway to.
Alcohol addiction and uh
once a youth learns to that
nicotine
Which has a, a buzz effect and
the more that it, the higher the
And the connections are firming
up between the frontal lobe and
the rest of the brain.
Those pathways tend to move
lead to over usage of other um
drugs of the sort like
mushrooms, mushrooms, while can
be used for recreational
purpose, uh, we are learning
that under the proper clinical
Uh, PTSD for police, military,
what have you, and
End of life and addiction.
Uh, an increased uptake of
mushrooms for recreational
purposes. Senator Tobiasson,
thank you, Mr. President.
Well, just like what you've
that nicotine can help in
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, schizophrenia, an
associated conditions, cognitive
in vitro studies investigated
nicotine's effects on oral
cells, um, in, in the baby's
body, so I think it's important
to note that
addiction while I know that's
possible.
I think that the focus on
education would be one thing,
but to tax the general
nicotine products on the market
today to stop smoking to
continuously lower their
dependency upon nicotine,
whether they were in a program
or not, and I think it's an
make it through the month, um,
with their current income, so an
undue tax is untimely, and I
think it would prevent people
from using nicotine in other
ways that all studies have
Thank you Mr. President. Would
the sponsor please yield for a
few questions.
Yes.
your question. Would taxing
cigarettes or these uh tobacco
products, the same, wouldn't
that be a better strategy
through the chair.
this tax 40% wholesale is very
similar to the cigarette tax,
which is about 37% of all sale.
Thank you Senator Hickey,
uh,
Mr. President, Senator Ramos,
there are some studies that show
if they're really using a lot of
the vaping and the pouches to
move on to cigarettes.
Which are are more harmful
because the cigarettes also
Well, God bless, uh, Mr.
President, God bless, uh.
Uh, Senator Munoz, because I
chew with him, but uh.
Um
Our tax on the actual cigarettes
because we knew back then and
studies showed that many people
that's why today I ask you to
vote against this, uh this
increase, this increase is gonna
be, uh, I believe 40% is what I
read in the bill and this is
going to really affect the
work, work hours, Mr. President,
our most vulnerable is already,
uh, taking up a a lot of their
pay and, and their earnings on
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
with a good doctor, the good
sponsor, uh, yield, please.
understand exactly what this
bill does. This, this is a tax
on nicotine products, is that
correct?
Senator Hicking.
Excluding
cigarettes, little cigarettes,
um, or cigars. It is on vaping
products and pouches and again,
you Senator, um.
So Senator, can, can, are you
telling me it's just the vaping
products, that's, that's it.
25% of high school students, uh,
or 30%'s come down to 25%, but
we have seen a dramatic uptake
in pouches because the vaping
you're going here. Let, let me
just give you some, some data
here of where this country is
going in regards to
Nicotine use, uh, senator.
Only 1.8% of students reported
using nicotine pouches as you
just mentioned, that is a huge
decrease. Is, is that a good
thing, um, senator?
that we that dad is or the
validity of that data, the data
I just gave you is New Mexico
data and high school students
from surveys of New Mexico high
school students. Thank you,
downward trend which is
positive. That means what we're
Doing is the right thing to make
sure that students aren't doing
this, there's no reason to tax
people even more as a senator to
Mr. President, Mr. President and
Senator Block 25, if that helps.
In 2011,
19% of these people, young
people smoke cigarettes, but by
sin taxes on these products, or
number 2, education.
Uh, is the reason for the drop,
so I think we're going the right
way.
In addition,
as well by about 7% points from
20 20% to almost 21% to almost
14%.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you Senator Block. You
just made my point. Um, the
reason that cigarette use has
gone down because we in New
where the adult smoking rate is
about 16%.
Senator.
to studies, this is the issue
right here. We are taxing,
calling these syntaxes of
certain products.
And these people can't afford
them and like my senator to the
I think we can probably the the
trends are going in the right
direction.
Absolutely going in the right
direction to take more money
Thank you Senator Block. Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Block. Uh, I am in
this bill talking about nicotine
trying to save our youth from
building those neural pathways
that become craving and lead to
other addictions, and we are
trying to then as those
this is kind of really the
beginning of stopping this chain
reaction of addiction that
plagues this, uh, state. We are
a state with the highest alcohol
have to spend more to buy it.
They don't take it up. That's
what the data shows.
And I've never heard of any
nicotine use in all the things
that my colleague Senator
President. While I would argue
That what we really should be
focusing on, uh, besides, and I
agree with the senator about our
We ought to be taking a look and
focusing on what we're putting
into our bodies for food that
has been a huge issue of all the
rates of diabetes as well, which
is going to cost trillions of
dollars in healthcare costs. I
think we should be.
adults in New Mexico where the
tax that you talk about the
additional taxes, they're
already going down when it comes
to usage and here we are taxing
um, uh, noble cause in trying to
save children like we all do,
but when you're penalizing those
who already are taxed at
incredible levels and can't
Thank you, Senator Block. We do
have further debates.
We have Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President.
In a statement you made early on
in in you're probably the right
guy with the right uh.
Not utilize the tobacco
products. Is that correct?
Center Hickey.
Senator Townsend,
um,
It kind of makes sense to me to
And people have whatever the
level of income, they have to
make choices.
Will I buy this? Will I buy
that? When we get the tariffs
price sensitivity. It's a
fundamental concept of.
Elasticity as I learned the
other day, and uh it's the
concept of work, the higher the
Mr. President, um,
I'm gonna switch gears just for
a minute, uh, Senator Hickey.
Uh, this bill originally had
Mr. President, can you, um, and,
and Senator Hickey, can you
explain to me why?
Send me the Hickey.
high, uh, as they are, and
again, as we are seeing much
less uptake.
by use of cigarettes and this
nicotine, but to hopefully spend
it on, say, sports or other
activities that reduce stress
rather than trying to use
nicotine.
Senator Townsend.
understand that. I think it, it
makes sense. I, I understand,
uh.
Senator Ramos says, uh, thought
on
Sector utilizes nicotine, but I
want to switch gears a minute
and go back to something you
said.
Reluctant to use because they
have to make choices.
And, and that I think that
happens in most, all walks of
Uh, Senator Townsend and Mr.
President, I think that was the
argument I was making when I
pulled cars into this.
Senator Townsend.
When we think about crime.
When we raise the
penalty
The act
is reduced.
Hickey. Hickey.
Mr. President, Senator Townsend,
well, I'm not talking about
crime here today. Uh, what I
understand, I think I learned
not necessarily the length of
the sentence or lengthening
sentences. But again, I, we're
here to talk about, or I, I can
really only knowledgeably answer
The brain is thinking about, um,
Reaching for another cigarette
or thinking about breaking into
It causes us to rethink.
And we have done just the
opposite, Mr. President. This
body has reduced.
I, uh
I have just a couple of more
questions. Um, Mr. President,
Senator Hickey, can you talk a
Uh, Mr. President, and, and, uh,
Senator Townsend, um,
There's always potentially a
People who purchase cigarettes,
do so within about 5 miles of
where they live.
So I'm not sure that they're
always a black market.
Thank you Sander Hickey. Senator
Townsend.
And Mr. President and Senator
Hickey.
Is there data that shows that
we're
That the black market moves
upward with the, with the
influence of higher taxes.
Mr. President, Senator Townsend,
product or activity, there is a
potential black market, whether
it goes up in this area or not,
I can't really say.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senator Townsend.
is that.
And I understand the issues. I
mean, I, I, I completely
understand that.
We're trying to drive.
invoking a penalty, higher taxes
on this, this, this, the
decision that they're making.
So, Mr. President, um,
That we ought to, to consider
and, and I think you and I
agreed that when we
Raise the
I, I appreciate the time that
you've had today, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Hickey, for
your answers. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. We do have further
debate. We have Senator
Cervantes followed by Senator
Charney.
Senator Cervantes.
And I think we all realize as
long as I can remember the
harmful effects and the efforts
at a national level to try and,
and reduce those harms among our
youth, so I applaud the effort
reducing the harms of alcohol
smoking, I'm sorry, tobacco
smoking. Shouldn't the harms of
cigarette tobacco smoking
shouldn't those same harms apply
equally with the goal of, of
Mr. President, Senator
Cervantes, I, I am not like the
magazine, a cigar aficionado.
Um, I don't know how much people
cigarettes. There is certainly a
much higher incidence of
squamous cell cancer in, uh, the
neck, uh, with chewing tobacco
and
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senator Cervantes and Mr.
Hickey, Senator, I should have
asked that you yield, but I know
that I may pass that over, so
Frequency and and use whether
it's cigarette or cigar that the
the damage, the injury, uh,
potential risk to our youth
would be the same.
In other words, we're talking
about an increase in tax on
cigarettes from 25% to 40% on
cigarettes.
going up on cigars. Are you
telling me that the tax is gonna
go up on cigars as well.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Senator Hickey, Senator
Cervantes and Mr. President,
know, the taxes are not going up
same rate as cigarettes, which
is at about 37% of wholesale
price. The taxes of this bill
brings because there's virtually
no taxes on uh
reading this incorrectly is not
the tax on cigarettes, and I, I,
I don't, I don't want to go into
vaping or patches or anything
else. I just want to stay with
cigars and cigarettes for a
minute. Am I incorrect that the
no, it would not uh cigarettes
are about, it's $2 a pack and
that works out to about 37% of
wholesale price.
And but it does not raise that
price in this bill.
Mr. President, Senator
Cervantes, you have that
correct.
Alright, and I must be missing
something because I thought for
sure I've been hearing all this
debate for the last several
sponsors saying there's not an
increase in taxes on this bill
and so maybe I'm not tracking
any amendments or changes that
occurred along the way, but in
my reading of the bill, it
looked like there was an
But I, but I do have a couple of
other, uh, questions related to
the bill.
We yield, thank you for
yielding. I, I, I, I think that
costs, demands on providers,
hospitals, Medicaid, Medicare,
all, all of these are noteworthy
goals that are served by trying
smoking is a gateway drug. You
said it was, and when you're
asked about it's a gateway to
you referred to alcohol.
Opioids and amphetamines.
Alcohol perhaps or opioids or
amphetamines.
Mr. President and Senator
People are beginning to look at,
is there some addictive
component, uh, that moves on to
other drugs when you isolate it
out from all the other
lot of confounding variables and
the studies get better and they
get better, but there is a small
indication that marijuana may
small percentage of the
population, but again, that's
very early. Madam President,
welcome, um, and I, and I
appreciate the science center
and I appreciate having.
doctor here in the chamber, I
I think what you were referring
to in your answer is whether
marijuana smoking is a gateway
to something else. Um, and I
think they're different things.
I think, I think what you were
there is some beginning uh
science to emerge statistical
data that smoking marijuana will
lead to other recreational drug
use as a gateway, but, but the,
the point earlier was the
between young people starting
out smoking cigarettes.
Um, and maybe even small
cigarettes and then moving into
marijuana, any correlation there
is a gateway?
And Mr. Madam President,
Senator, did you look for those
correlations or, or did you, uh,
just, did you reject the
correlations or you just didn't
look for them?
President, you, your, your hand
signals are great. I love it.
Thank you, Madam President and
Senator Cervantes, um,
I
have my, uh, uh, medical student
assistant, uh, do the research
on that. We'll use GPT chat and
maybe we can find out, uh,
pretty soon and get an answer
And thank you, Madam President,
Senator. I appreciate that. I
think we need to do that and,
you know, Senator, um,
We shouldn't avert our eyes.
And yet because we are the body
with the house, and the governor
decided to do this in New
Mexico. I think we cannot just
simply say because we, we
we're, we're not gonna we're
we're we're gonna ignore the
fact that I've got 32
dispensaries in Sunland Park
with one grocery store.
Uh, that we're gonna ignore the
fact that I've got 32
that we recognize that it's
equally important that we try to
prevent our young people from
smoking marijuana.
Uh, for the same reasons.
And I, and I've got to believe
really we were looking at the
byproducts that are in
cigarette.
And tobacco products, then is
even being regulated when we
smoke marijuana.
And, and I'm concerned that
The fact that there may be,
there are, let's be honest,
there are harmful consequences
of that decision and that
policy, and we, we're gonna
That we not try to prevent and
reduce young people smoking
marijuana.
And really marijuana smoking
generally.
Simply because it was
party's initiative, motted by my
party politically and
Simply because we were the ones
to promote it and enact it
shouldn't mean that we then
ignore the consequences of what
we wrought.
Entirely.
Thank you, Madam President, and
I don't need the sponsor to
yield. I just want to add to
this conversation as a mother of
a teenager.
social media. They can have it
delivered to where they are. It
is incredibly incredibly easy
will be and where's the camera
right here? Olivia, Madeline,
and all your little friends. I
will be supporting this
initiative. Thank you, Senator
President, I learned a lot um in
sponsoring the alcohol tax bill
over the last 3 years about
elasticity and inelasticity and
how important it is um that
these marketed toward teens and
and how they're flavored like
candy and how you can get them
any any place you don't have to,
um, there's no age limit on
them. They're all, they're just
Lopez, I certainly yield.
Thank you Madam President, on
page 3 of the bill, it says
e-liquid means liquid or other
Is that correct?
Or was there another amendment
or?
Lopez, yes, that was lined out
to uh
Be sure that people didn't think
that sis uh applied to cannabis
OK, but by striking it out,
Madam President, doesn't it make
it apply to cannabis oil?
Eliquid means liquid or other
substance intended for use as an
don't have a problem with that.
I was just the, the, the debate
by Senator, um Cervantes made me
kind of curious about what the
intent was, um, I actually
cartridge like that in the park
where my kids play, um, or
played when they were young and
um it is very easily accessible,
so if the intent was to include
That's great. I was just curious
if that was in fact the
intention.
form of chemical nicotine,
including any salt or complex,
regardless of whether the
chemicals naturally or
synthetically derived and
includes nicotine alkaloids and
nicotine analogs, which are now
containing cannabis or oil
derived from cannabis.
Madam President and Senators, so
people don't confuse it.
because you struck out exempting
them.
Am I, do you follow me, Madam
President?
Hickey
opinion that that that that
should be struck so that there
wasn't a confusion. I understand
as uh I, I've learned, uh, um,
according to the drafters in the
legislative council.
Service. Thank you.
OK, Madam President, um, I do
think it's a little bit, uh,
higher rate. I'm pleased to
support this bill because it
taxes nicotine, uh, products in
a higher rate and it is so
prevalent among our youth that
this is, I think, a very good
add.
But I learned about the paradox
of harm and the paradox of harm
is that these harmful products.
Harm
Healthy food, who, who don't
have the same access to healthy
air, it hurts them more. So
when, when it was said by um
products hurts poor people more
than it hurts people who aren't
poor, so for me that's another
reason to support this bill, and
I hope that you look at.
that um
appreciate the debate and I'm uh
looking forward to supporting
this bill.
Thank you. Next we'll hear from
Senator Sher.
with the closed captioning TV
is.
That's where I was standing. My
mother was a reporter for the
Albuquerque Journal, and we were
here on closing day.
And I just happened to come with
Because this room was filled
with smoke. Now, that was only
what, um, 30 years ago or so, I
could barely see all the way
across the room.
But just the volume of smoke in
here was amazing. And today, I
think there are only 2 senators
that actually smoke today. I
could be wrong.
It was, it was said that in
2019, we dramatically raised the
taxes.
But in 2019, there was nobody
So something else happened.
Something drove that.
And I think it was education.
and senators.
Thank you, Madam President. So
you said that you you you you
raised the, the price, you get
less of whatever it is, doesn't
matter what it is. You've
mentioned cars.
elasticity, which I think, oh,
I, I'm sorry, Senator, I don't
think you were in finance that
day, but elasticity, price
things. There's, there's always
a peta factor. The PETA, oh,
Peter, that's pain in the rear
factor, OK? So you got a peta
factor no matter what you're
doing. If you're gonna, you
know, just put on your shoes,
tax is really an effort to raise
the PIA factor, so you get less
of it.
It's it, is that a, is that a
elasticity explanation, Senator,
states, uh, in cigarettes and as
I just uh went in my opening
quoted the American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, uh, and
raising a tax on
decrease in the 30 day period.
Um, thank you, Madam President.
So there was also a discussion
about cigarettes and cigarettes
were in the bill, cigarettes
raising the tax from $2 a pack
to $3 in that whole section is
now gone away. Is that correct,
Madam President?
Madam President and Senators
here, uh, yes, that is not in
Madam President and Senator, uh,
You know, if, if this body and
it in New York State has some of
the lowest, uh, smoking rates in
the country.
So thank you Madam President,
yet.
Uh, and then we, uh, I'm not
sure we got around to it. I know
that Senator, uh, Sadil Lopez
was talking about the difference
between nicotine vape and
cannabis vape. Is it, is it not
Is, is that correct, Madam
President, Madam President and
Senator, uh, yes, I, I'm not
familiar with cannabis oil
vaping. I can't.
Um, but then we came, uh, from
the chair of, of judiciary, uh.
If, if this is a gateway drug,
Certainly when I was younger and
even today a little bit, my drug
of choice is adrenaline.
So I didn't smoke.
In fact, I don't like smoke of
any kind, cigars, cigarettes.
That's how I got my high. I had
to do something stupider and
stupider every day because,
well, once, once you're used to
jumping out of an airplane,
jumping out of airplanes is not
a big deal. Once you're used to
climbing up a rock face,
We're seeking something.
And while I don't like smoke of
any kind, I believe that just
I, does that make sense to you,
Madam President, Senator?
Madam President, Senator, uh,
who are addicted have cravings,
um, so that's a type of seeking.
So Madam President, I think my
point is.
that I think helps us the most
here because the reason that
this room isn't smoke filled now
and it was
Whenever I was 8,
Um, was because of education.
Um
Will this increase the PIA
factor on, on nicotine? Sure it
will. Will it increase it enough
to stop anybody.
And yet people in New York still
smoke. Now, maybe they smoke
less.
But they still smoke.
And I would be interested to
know what else they do.
So
I, I understand the, the, the
desire to reduce nicotine use.
difficult on anything, we get
less of it. So when we make it
more difficult on businesses,
any kind of business in New
Mexico will get less business
when we do the Peter factor on
oil and gas, we get less oil and
Will reduce some.
But the difference is when we do
those things.
When we decide, Madam President,
that we want to add $25,000 to
the price of a house to put in
This is Pennies. It's not a huge
beta factor.
It will be for some.
But I think we ought to be
comparative in what we're doing.
cents.
I don't think so.
And I just want to point that
out that our effort to do the
Madam President and Senator, I
do yield.
Thank you. I, I wanna first say,
Senator and Madam Chair, I
mother is is is well intended
and it is noble and it is clear
to this body that you have a, a
heart of service and a just a
I understand also that there's
been attempts across the nation
to do something similar. Could
you tell me, Senator, is there
an effort to put additional
Madam President and Senator, I'm
not aware of that, um, as my
are, uh, you know, grossly
addictive. We know that average
teens spend about 3 hours after
school on video games instead of
homework and instead of being
outside, it leads to obesity and
even across the nation to a to a
tax, um, cell phones.
Madam President and Senator, uh,
maybe that's something you would
like to work on next year and
8 hours. That's hard to imagine,
and with the cost of a telephone
being a brand new one of these
iPhones costing around $1000.
I've got to tell you the
To make up that tax increase
because they are so addicted to
a device like this that we
can't, we can't overprice them
out of the addiction.
creams that keep us driving into
the same coffee shops again and
again. The price of those are
unbelievable. I think I'm paying
$8 when I leave Starbucks this
routine, I guess the ugly word
is maybe it's becoming a morning
addiction.
Senator, Madam President,
Madam Chair, and, uh, Senator,
uh, no, I don't. I'm, I'm not a
Red Bull guy.
Madam President, I don't either
and I don't care.
us, and it doesn't change
behaviors, and it's certainly
not going to, unfortunately
change behavior in our youth.
You know what can change
behaviors and as a legislator,
within our schools. There were,
we are in front of these target
audiences that we are trying to
influence here. We need more
engaged parents who
think this is misguided and
unfortunately, I would say it's
not going to make a difference
at all. Unfortunately, but I do
want to thank you for the
attempt to come in here and
thank you for your service.
Bill before us.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you Madam President.
for a question?
Madam President and Senator
Thornton, I do yield. He yields.
So there's a lot of questions on
whether or not this bill has,
will have any impact on people's
Activity that you mentioned that
this bill is gonna be creating a
new
Fun called the nicotine use
prevention and Control Fund, is
that correct?
be used?
Madam President, Senator,
somewhere between 5 and $6
million upon its implementation
program aimed at high school,
middle school, uh, adults, uh,
also for cessation and um that
our state specifically and so
this will help get those
activities spread much further
throughout the state and
answering the question that was
these drugs, and there are some
very effective.
Of campaigns. Thank you, Madam
President and Senator.
Thank you for that response, uh,
Madam President, so the, so
you're conceiving of.
Madam President and Senator, I'm
not conceiving of they already
exist. We just don't do near
enough of them.
was curious as to how it was
going to be used and I
appreciate that that response.
That's all I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Thornton.
Sir, any other debate on the
bill.
Seeing none
Bill 20 as amended by the
Senate. OK, yeah.
And do the substitute committee
first. Read it just like it is
For Senate Bill 20 do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the records show
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 22
your seats if you wish to vote
no, please raise your hand.
Senator Calleos and Townsend
voting no.
Senator is.
Voting no.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Block.
Voting no.
Senator Paul.
Thornton
voting now?
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 20
has duly passed the Senate.
Thank you Madam President.
for placing Senate Bill 274 as
amended on final pass has been
taken. It's now subject to
debate, amendment or
substitution.
Seeing no objections in the
thresholds for state approval of
real and tangible personal
property dispositions by state
agencies, counties, school
districts, special districts and
$5000. It's going up to $30,000.
That hasn't been changed since
1987.
Uh, for a, for real property
finally, when a state agency
disposes of land and we see
these, you've got to come with a
joint resolution to dispose
land. Uh, that's, it's raising
it from 100,000 to 550,000,
counties, uh, again, by just
raising those thresholds. Hasan
for questions.
Is there a debate?
On this bill
President. I move that Senate
Bill 274 as Amanda do not pass
and asking them as consent in
the Senate, the records show the
rolls been called and all those
presidents vote in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Bill 274 as amended has
duly passed the Senate.
Madam President, as unanimous
consent of the Senate, the
records show that all action for
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507 has been taken on final
several years, we've been trying
to address gun violence in New
Mexico and we've, we've proposed
various different alternatives.
Last session, I sponsored and we
passed together all of us, the 7
not, uh, assault weapon used to
kill people.
Uh, gun violence typically takes
place on a Friday and Saturday
night with some young people at
girlfriend the wrong way, and
words are crossed.
Or not just young people, but
adults.
On a bad weekend, alcohol, other
drugs involved. These are the
back in 2003, we really haven't
touched it since then. And the
goal of this bill is to
recognize the fact that we want
to recognize there are
We embraced the classes, the
training, the requirements, the
fingerprinting, the affidavits
that are required because we're
responsible gun owners. This
bill will increase the penalty
rethink whether they want to go
to the movies with a gun,
whether they want to go out on a
Friday night with a gun or not.
So this our our existing law now
it makes that only a petty
misdemeanor.
And I'll tell you when I got my
petty misdemeanor. If you don't
have a concealed carry and you
carry a gun, so it's not almost
even worth going through the
effort of going and taking the
classes and showing your
proficiency.
about guns for 15 hours, uh,
without having to get to the
place where we had a couple of
hours on the types of holsters
that you can buy and the purses
concealed carrying, and we also
want to increase the penalties
for those who are irresponsible
again to try and discourage the
casual carrying of firearms. And
Madam President, that summarizes
Senator Pinto. Thank you, um.
Madam President, in the senator.
So,
on page 2,
Line 23 to 25.
located in New Mexico.
Allowed when we know we have
quite a few people that are
Out of state, um.
I yield and thank you, Madam
President, for keeping me there,
uh, Senator, the language you're
referring to is all existing
language. This was all adopted
carry license. The only change
in the entirety of that section,
Section 2 does two things it.
Change is the fact that right
you can buy a gun legally and
own a gun as a legal permanent
resident, you should be able to
get a concealed carry as a, as a
permanent legal resident as
well. We shouldn't restrict the
Senator Cervantes to close.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
President. I move that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
in the nega by a show of hands.
We are voting on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 507 to your
Senator Pope.
Voting no.
Senator Maestas.
voting now.
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator Stewart.
Madam President, members of the
Senate.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Thank
you, Madam President. Unanimous
consent, we go to that order
business messages from the house
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 156. House
Appropriations and Finance
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The message from the house will
be entered into the journal.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
substitute for House Bill 137 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will reflect the
message has been received.
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
will reflect the message has
been received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
The message from the house will
be reflected in the journal.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Journal will reflect the message
has been directed to and from
the Senate that the House has
passed House Bill 323 as amended
by the House and request the
Madam President, I'm directed to
and from the Senate that the
House has passed House Bill 365
as amended by the House and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted
Lisa Martiz McCutchen, chief
clerk.
has passed House Bill 84 as
amended by the House. House Bill
101. House Labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 158 as
amended by the House. House Bill
The journal will reflect the
message from the House has been
received.
Siner Worth.
out those scripts.
The reader will read.
Madam President, your education
committee.
Respectfully submitted. Senator
William P. Sole's chair.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all four of the House
bills, um,
shall read all the committee
reports
do pass and then referred to the
finance committee.
House Bill 260 as amended do
pass as amended and then
referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted Senator William P.
So's chair
of the committee report.
We're an adoption of a committee
Your judiciary Committee, to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 213, has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with the recommendation
Uh, Madam President, I.
Script
I, uh, I move, I move adoption
of the committee report.
Madam President, your Indian
rural and cultural Affairs
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Memorial 9 has
had it under consideration
reports same with the
committee reports we vote on
them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read all the committee
reports
Sell your souls. I adoption of
the committee report committee
report,
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
A Poney committee report is
adopted.
the recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
conservation committee
respectfully submitted. Senator
Katie Doig, chair,
reports. Memorial 13 do pass and
that referred to the health and
public affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Katie Doig, chair.
Madam President, your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
submitted Senator Carrie
Hamblin, chair.
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
that Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 168
do pass.
Senate Bill 383. do not pass,
but the Senate tax business and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
of the committee report.
We're an adoption of the
committee report, all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Posney
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 170 as
amended, has had it under
consideration. The reports same
with the recommendation that it
do pass as amended respectfully
one motion and that the journal
reflected they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read all the committee
reports 376 as amended, do not
to read all the committee
reports 376 as amended, do not
pass, but that Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 376 do pass, respectfully
submitted, Senator George Munoz
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read all the committee
reports 376 as amended, do not
pass, but that Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 376 do pass, respectfully
submitted, Senator George
Munoz's chair
of the committee report adoption
of a committee report. All those
consent, we go to that order of
business introduction of
legislation.
no objection we're on that order
of business introduction of
legislation.
A reader to read.
A memorial requesting the public
education department to study
the feasibility of developing a
water conservation and
management curriculum to be
and referred to the Senate
Education Committee, Senate
Memorial 22.
How's education committee
requiring every high school to
install an automated external
defibrillator.
House Education Committee
substitute for House Bill 54.
thence to Senate Finance, House
Education Committee's substitute
for House Bill 54.
House Bill 84 introduced by
from captive audience speeches.
Providing remedies for
violations of employee free
speech. House Bill 84.
Is 101, introduced by
Representative Andrea Reeb.
An act relating to firearms,
making an exemption to unlawful
He spill 101 have been read
twice by tidal disorder referred
to the Senate Judiciary, House
Bill 101.
substitute for House Bill 137.
An act relating to water.
Enacting the strategic Water
Supply Act.
Creating the strategic water
supply program.
reliance on fresh water
resources, creating the
strategic water supply program
fund providing requirements
before a person drills wells or
substitute for house agriculture
asecas and water resources
for House Agriculture and water
resources committees substitute
for House Bill 137, having been
read twice by title is or to
Husk Bill 156, introduced by
representatives.
Representative Garrett and
Senator Stewart.
and school administrators. House
Bill 156.
I'll spell 156 hemiotypes by
tidal disorder referred to the
An act relating to military
bases enacting the
military-based planning and
impact Act, creating the
military bases impact fund.
Amending repealing and acting
and recompiling sections of
chapter 9 Article 15 NMSA 1978.
Repealing the sunset for the
military affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 158.
House labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee
Health appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 191.
An act relating to public funds.
making appropriations,
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191.
finance, House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 191.
House Bill 233 introduced by
Representative Joshua Sanchez,
Maintenance Organization law and
the nonprofit healthcare plan
law to require coverage for
certain durable medical
equipment for the treatment of
active diabetic foot ulcers.
Tax Business and Transportation
Committee House Bill 233.
House Bill 240 introduced by
representatives Susan Herrera,
Christina Ortiz.
the drinking water state
revolving loan Fund Act.
Allowing the Mexico Finance
Authority to provide grants for
the construction or
rehabilitation of drinking water
Redistributing duties held
between the Mexico Finance
Authority and the Department of
Environment.
Extending repayment period
requirements for loans made
pursuant to the drinking water
state revolving loan fund Act.
wastewater facility construction
loan fund.
House Bill 240.
I'll spell 240 have been read
twice by title as sort of
referred to the Senate Finance
Committee, House Bill 240.
representatives Joseph Sanchez
and Randall Pettigrew.
An act relating to professional
licensure.
Revising exemptions for
engineers.
Business and Transportation
Committee, House Bill 323.
House Bill 365 introduced by
Representative Joy Garrett, an
I'll spill 365 and we read twice
by title is order referred to
the Senate Education Committee,
An act relating to geothermal
resources.
Amending the provisions of the
geothermal projects Development
Fund, making an appropriation
House Bill 289.
House Bill 405 introduced by
representatives Anita Gonzalez,
Art de la Cruz, Joseph Sanchez.
job retention Act.
Requiring employers to provide
leaves of absence to employees
who are volunteer firefighters
for time in service and training
in certain circumstances.
Cultural Affairs, the it's to
Senate Taxus and Transportation
House Bill 405.
House Bill 449 introduced by
Specifying requirements.
Requiring the higher higher
education department to adopt
space and design standards.
Senate Finance Committee, House
Bill 449.
Siner worth
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go to that
Thank you Madam President. Your
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee will be meeting at 5
minutes after 5 today.
floor. I just was visiting with
Senator Scherer. I don't think,
probably a couple hours on the
floor tomorrow and I know
committees are going to meet
after the floor. Uh, at this
point, we're not going to come
shape on the floor. Uh, so
that's the plan, and now is the
time for committee chairs to
make announcements based on that
scheduling for the weekend.
Uh, Senator Hamblin, thank you,
schedule. Um, it will be in room
311, not 321 like we normally
do, it will be in 311. Breakfast
will be provided, uh, so that we
will be full of energy to have a
Thank you, Senator Hamblin, uh,
who else?
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Madam President.
Senate Finance is gonna go in
see him send finances going in
tomorrow at 11.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator. Other
announcements, Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Madam
thank you to them for them, uh,
continuing to go ahead and keep
us, if you will, uh, with
flowers, with plants and uh just
thinking about our landscapes.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
afternoon after the floor. So,
um, I'm gonna take center word,
maybe we're gonna be starting
around 3 or so-ish. it could be
a long night tomorrow night. So
Senate Judiciary, saddle up.
he's left, so I'm gonna speak on
his behalf. You have an
AmeriCorp bag backpack and um I
would just like to see by a show
of hands, Madam President, who
great opportunity for our young
people to serve the country. So
thank you for giving me just a
minute
to join later.
Uh, any other announced senators
so.
I just burst everybody's bubble
remember to set your set your
clocks ahead. Thank you, Madam
President. Where is Senator
I think I could vote yes for
that.
Other announcements.
Uh, ener Hickey.
increase the day after, uh, we
do the time change. Sorry.
Yeah, we're already not getting
enough sleep, so we probably
need that to sibillate.
Madam President, I ask you to
ask consent, uh, that the rules
be suspended that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session?
If there's no objection, it is
suspended that the records show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee, Madam
President.
Seeing no objection that is so
ordered.
Uh, Madam President, I ask you
to consent that the rules be
suspended to the Journal show
all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session.
There's no objection is ordered.
Center work.
Madam President, you knowanimous
consent, Senate recess until one
o'clock tomorrow afternoon.
