Center Cervantes.
Center Charlie.
Senator Do Hick.
Center Hamlin.
Senator Hickey is excused.
Samio.
Center Lanier.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Centeredia Lopez.
Senator chair.
Santoso.
Center souls.
Center Tobiasin.
Senator Townsend.
Santa Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Mariner, Deanitarian Universal
universalist Church in Santa Fe,
New Mexico. Please remain
standing for the Pledge of
Allegiance to be led today by
Senator Block.
I am honored to offer the prayer
this morning.
This is a challenging and
important time to serve in
and beautiful New Mexico is more
important than ever, as we care
for one another and protect and
live into our cherished
democratic heritage.
I'm a Unitarian universalist.
of universal salvation that all
of us are cherished, beloved,
and included, regardless,
regardless of our ethnicity, our
gender identity, our age, or
I ask that the ancestors of this
place, the God that shelters
your soul, the holy mystery of
many names and beyond naming,
May compassion and courage fill
our hearts.
so
Uh
May love and wisdom light our
minds.
people.
So
And work to heal our world.
Shalom namaste blessed
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it
Puro fideliad a la bandea de los
Estados Unidos the America la
Republica quea unaacion bajodios
indivisible liberiatodos.
Once again we'd like to welcome
you to the New Mexico Senate.
Thank you to.
All those who let us in the
pledge and I began today by
yielding to Senate majority
He no objection. We are in that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President, before
I yield upfront to the two whips
for any uh excusals and for
have you and I just.
Again, appreciate your blessings
and.
Kind of going over the
importance of what we're doing
here and for all those reasons,
to Senator Padilla for cameras
and any excusals and then
Senator Woods, if he has any
excusals, and then we'll let you
all know what we're going to do
today. Senate majority.
Whip Senator Padilla, uh, good
Padilla.
Thank you Mr. President you
consent to excuse Senators Doig,
Cervantes, O'Malley.
Hearing no objection, so
ordered. Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President. I do
have some members that are
absent, but they are in
vote, then I will.
They sure put a call on for him,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Woods. Senators, we're
on that order of business
announcing miscellaneous.
Elevate the Spectrum Autism Day,
Otero County Day, Valencia
County Day, and League of Women
Voters Day at the legislature.
Uh, we have 3 certificates, 2 of
to the Saint Michael's Girls
volleyball team, and I'll talk
about the
extraordinary accomplishment,
uh, that they've had when we get
to that, uh, second, uh,
Matanza on the east side of the
building. So we'll do that
Valencia County day and then as
I mentioned, Senator Munoz,
Gallup McKinley Day. Uh, we've
got a whole bunch of guests I
would just ask that for uh
economic development corporation
of Lee County is hosting an
evening with Lee County
reception and dinner tonight.
El Dorado Hotel at 5:30 p.m.
Woods can educate in a bit.
They're having their legislative
dinner at the Amire room at
Hotel Santa Fe 6 o'clock by
invitation.
Uh, McKinley County, City of
Gallups having its legislative
invitation and Otero County
Chamber of Commerce has its
legislative reception at the Irv
Wine Bar, 6 to 9 o'clock by
invitation.
Tomorrow morning, uh, the New
County Day Legislative breakfast
at the El Dorado Hotel 7 to
10:30 a.m. by invitation. And
tomorrow we will have a joint
Thank you, Senator. Senators,
we're on that order of business
announcements miscellaneous.
I'll begin with Senator Sher,
followed by Senator Block and
Senator Hill, Senator share, uh,
thank you, Mr. President. I
serves as a cultural ambassador
for the school as Miss
Njoho Nasha, I almost said that
right, sorry.
OK. Uh, Addison is enrolled in
has a passion for dancing.
Next is Bradley Bradley
Redhouse, also in 11th grader,
an ambassador at the school as
Mr.
Atsa Hostin.
planning to study political
science, which I also tried to
talk him out of because I have a
degree in it, it's no good.
But he does stay in the new
then finally Carla Clach, also
11th grade, she, she resides in
Farmington and she has a really
troublesome neighbor. She
actually lives next door to
Representative Rod Montoya.
debate club and she's won some
awards. She's enrolled in the
Paleo tribe from Washington
state. She's a runner for the
Navajo Preparatory School cross
country team, which won 3rd
interested in dentistry, so
speaking of young people, Mr.
President, we have so many young
people here today, uh, for
different events, but I also
have, uh, honored to introduce
to the Senate a young lady here,
shadow senator today from the
amazing and beautiful District
12. She has 3 older brothers.
She's homeschooled.
in Albuquerque, uh, currently
Ninjaf Force Obstacle gym, which
I will not go to. And the
second, she also is a caretaker
for her grandparents and her,
uh, parents are up there uh very
and members of the Senate, the
Christian Association of Parent
Educators Cape, the walking
family, the Mick family, the
Randleman family, and the other
want to thank my wonderful chair
of the public health, uh,
Senator Linda Lopez, uh,
unfortunately she's not here for
the autism day at the
today for Autism Day. She has a
beautiful young six year old
boy, and she has told
me some of the issues and
challenges, Mr. President. It's
well. So I know Julia is up
there somewhere, there she is
right there and um I just want
to thank all the homeschoolers
and all the young people for
being here. And I would also ask
Senate to welcome my.
Yes, thank you.
I'm sorry, Mr. President, I was,
uh, daydreaming about a beach
again. That's OK. I believe you
have another guest here with us
today.
Oh, Mr. President, thank you our
President, uh, for my failure,
I'd greatly be, uh, um, I would
greatly appreciate that, but
she, uh, is gonna be going to
either West Virginia University
to be a mountaineer, and she is
Lieutenant Governor, uh, here
from Rio Rancho. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you. I'd like
to welcome my honorary
lieutenant Governor Alena,
please stand up and be
recognized.
President. I'm really honored
today to have a dear friend of
mine, a guest here today. She'll
be shadowing me throughout the
day, Tanisha Owens is the
director of operations and
have just uh continued to be
very close friends. She has been
taking classes.
Central New Mexico in integrated
studies and psychology. She
little 5 year old girl, Tyana,
please help me welcome Tanisha
to our chambers today.
No, what I'm about to say and,
and, uh, are, are gonna
recognize what I'm about to say
and that those of you that don't
we figure it out pretty quick
after you're around me for a
while.
ranching business, uh.
Doing what we do out there on
the eastern plains and.
Therefore, being very, very
Senator Boone, if you'll, uh,
I'm very pleased this morning to
have Sheila Rogers.
Riley Rogers.
And Kay Rogers.
So,
Thank you for letting me have
them here today and I also
appreciate and welcome the
support.
That you can give them for being
Leonard Townsend. Thank you, Mr.
President.
From one ranch over.
Laney
And Mr. Cade.
Um, mom and dad, I believe, uh,
Cole and Megan Gardner are in
the, in the, in the gallery.
Thank you very much.
I've got kids from Clayton here
today. And let me tell you, I'm
so proud of them.
I, I, they're up in the gallery.
Carson, Lawrence, if you would
stand up.
Recker Scott, Naomi Jacobs, Dub
Mercy victory.
Marcy Decab.
Serula.
Adrian Jones.
Dalan
Thank you for being so kind to
invite our delegation from our
small town.
how government works.
And I know these kids have
worked hard to get to come on
this trip, and I am exceedingly
proud of them all.
Mr. President, please welcome my
guest.
Center would you still have the
I have today.
Last year
2 years ago, I sat up in a
corner that
Senator Townsend was in.
to me.
And let me just read a little
bit of her bi.
Senator, would you stand up for
me?
From 1993 to 2003.
And as an associate coordinator
vacancy by Governor Gary
Johnson.
She won re-election 5 times
serving till July 2023.
enhancement of the nurse
licensure compact, the
improvements to the educational
retirement system and the repeal
of days in determining school
for healthcare careers.
And more importantly, she was a
voice of reason who is willing
What center always a senator.
Thank you for being here today.
Big round of applause for
Senator Gay Kernan.
Senator Woods, thank you for
that.
Senator Sanchez, do you have
some guests to introduce?
Yes, Mr. President, but I'll do
Thank you, Mr. President, and uh
I appreciate this and, and
Senator Kernan, I'm so pleased
to see you up on the day I'm
gonna come up and give you a big
I have uh two folks up in the
gallery we have Josh Smith from
the Donana County, uh, Water
Association and also Greg Davie
from Elephant Butte Irrigation
District. Behind me though, I
a pecan farmer, uh, with salmon
farms and uh I always enjoy my
conversations because, uh, Rafa
is one of those who really wants
to work on uh efficient water
send a buddy, if you will,
please help me.
welcome Rafael Rovioso from to
the Senate body.
Senator Pinto.
I have a couple of guests with
me today.
I'm honored here today to
introduce Santa Fe Recovery
Center.
A dedicated provider of
detox residential substance use
treatment intensive outpatient
services and most recently
crisis services and outpatient
services.
care as one of the first CCBHCs
in New Mexico's demonstration
program the organization leads
the way in providing accessible
integrated care.
accessed residential services.
Many of these individuals are
among the most vulnerable in our
state facing homelessness
significant behavioral health
our communities. Thank you for
recognizing the importance of
behavioral health in New Mexico.
I have Mr. Barry or.
He is a.
and recovery officer for the
Santa Fe Recovery Center. He
served nearly 3 years as a
program director of Four Corners
detox Recovery Center overseeing
addressing the social drivers of
health.
Of people served.
He is passionate about mental
and physical wellness and is
dedicated in his career to
I have one of my sisters, Lisa
West and I still want to say RV
so.
So this is also one of the
granddaughters of Senator John
this field, um, as we've learned
from our grandparents in service
to those in our community, so
thank you for joining me today
that is in the Gallup area.
And uh visiting the school, it
they are dedicated to the
education of our students and
the not just in Gallup but also
surrounding areas and I also, I
believe I do have my school
president Chris Mortensen, the
president, Priscilla Benali,
Kevin Mitchell, and Michael
Schaf, um, thank you and please
welcome my guests.
Spences.
Mr. President, thank you very
much for that. I have such a
special young.
able to introduce Vivian Kobel,
if you will stand up, and she
loves history. She is also
involved in tennis and dance we
have Maverick Roebuck.
subject is Latin. We have
Catherine Hicks, she is a
history buff and she loves
playing basketball, tennis, and
have Braley corn, Braley loves
dance. She's a member of Miss
Minnie's. Is that correct?
And her favorite subject is
upstairs for another important
thing that is going on tomorrow
and that is what folks?
What?
pack.
they're gonna be driving up here
on their own and taking our
places. Mr. President and
members, will you help me?
Welcoming this wonderful group
Senator Thornton, did you have,
uh, announcement to make?
I have some families up from
Edgewood and also from Sandia
responsible for homeschooling
their families, uh, they believe
in the liberty of parents.
To direct the upbringing and
education of their children and
the fundamental right and while
I don't have the names of all
Thank you Senator Thornton.
Senator Pope.
autism and recently opened up in
my district. She has locations
in Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, Los
Lunas, Belen, and Las Cruces.
Uh, she's worked with children
affected by autism for 8 years
Welcome, Nikita Wiley.
Thank you. I wanna make sure I
you, Mr. President. So what
we're gonna do is the two
certificates that are gonna get
read this morning and then
Senator Munoz has uh is gonna
talk about Gallup McKinley Day
and has two guests that he's
here in the chamber and I'm
gonna ask the reader to read the
cer
Certificate and listen carefully
because this is a really
extraordinary accomplishment. So
I'd ask the reader to read the
certificate.
the New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its
congratulations to Saint
Michael's High School girls
volleyball team, whereas the
Saint Michael's girls volleyball
the team defeated Santa Fe
Preparatory School, 3 to 0 in
round one.
Robertson High School, 3 to 1 in
round 2. West Las Vegas High
School, 3 to 0 in round 3 and
have been named to the All-State
volleyball team and seniors Maya
Pino, Marisa Sandoval Moya and
2022 record of 26 games won and
1 game lost, a 2023 record of 24
games won and 3 games lost, and
volleyball team since October
2022, and
Whereas that outstanding record
has been reached under the
guidance and leadership of head
whereas the team not only exceed
excels and exceeds on the court,
but also in the classroom with
an average grade point average
of 3.75. 5 players hold a great
Jane Erickson holds a 4.458
great point average. And whereas
all 14 student athletes
represent Saint Michael's High
School with class,
extended to Mayaino, Marissa
Sandoval Moya.
Ericson, Victoria Victorino
Sienna Montano.
Larisa Rodrigueziano Sanchez.
Emily Villanueva.
And Sophie Lopez for their
outstanding achievements on the
Peter Wirth, Mimi Stewart,
President Pro Tem, Sherry De
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So just before we
as the father of a daughter who
played 4 years of volleyball,
not at Saint Mike's,
unfortunately, I think she was
somewhere that got rolled by
Saint Mike's, uh, but Corinne
the court, number one is
something to celebrate, to not
lose a single 3A game since
October 2022 is unbelievable,
extraordinary, but again, it
just shows what a commitment you
all have made not only to
athletics, but also to your
educations and everyone here in
to any other members that want
to talk a little bit about the
Saint Mike's volleyball.
Maybe I'd yield first to Senator
Trujillo, fellow Santa Fe
senator. Thank you, Senator
Wirth, Senator Hill.
many of you probably live in my
district. I'm just incredibly
proud of you. The work that
you've done together as a team
shows as you win your games, and
how proud I am of all of you and
um I'm just kind of wondering if
maybe the Chiefs are gonna be
able to follow in your footsteps
this weekend with a 3 back on
Espanilla Valley, but I'm a
proud supporter of Horsemen
volleyball and watched you
ladies for 3 years, do what you
do on the court, yelling at my
computer screen, Our Lady of
sister's school, so we worked
hand in hand with Saint Mike's
and ensuring that we cheered
each other on so knowing that
that state championship comes
every year.
back to northern New Mexico
thing I want to say, coaches, I
told your team, if I got to
choose which teams I wanted to
be on at Saint Mike's, it would
be the volleyball team, the Pony
Express, followed by the
football team in those orders.
I certainly am not going to
object.
See, no objection. You know, I,
I had an opportunity to be at
that state championship game,
uh, seeing the girls compete,
they played against the Colbert
ladies that were out there not
only competing.
But they were out there also
having fun. And I think that was
a testament not only to
themselves, but their whole
program and all the parents who
state championship, um, to honor
tribute to Marissa, who got her
2000th kill during that state
championship game, and it was
wonderful to see all the
celebration, uh, in addition, I
hesitation you were there, so
you do your work on the public
service side while educating,
uh, training and producing
champions with our young women
so congratulations and I'll turn
that back over to Senator Wirth.
name, uh, co-captain Maya Pino,
co-captain Marissa Sandoval
Moya. You guys can just stay
standing up, uh, Jane Erickson,
Penelope Alean Gilbert, Casey
Bowen, Larissa.
Rodriguez, Giana Sanchez, Emily
Villanueva, Sofia Lopez, who's
the manager, the head coach,
students, people.
A huge welcome to the state
senate and congratulate them for
their accomplishment.
Once again, big round of
applause for our state champion
Lady Horseman.
this is for Valencia County Day.
I'd yield to Senator Sanchez.
Thank you Senator, uh, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent to the reader to read
2025. The New Mexico State
Senate does hereby extend its
recognition and acknowledgement
to February 6, 2025 as Valencia
County Day in the Senate.
Spain granted the famous town of
Tomay land grant Merced to 30
families established
establishing a foundational
community in what is now
Valencia County.
expansive population growth and
whereas Belen officially known
as Nuestra Senora de Belen was a
strategic point along the Camino
Real, also known as the Royal
and cut off of the Atchison,
Topeka and Santa Fe Railway now
known as the BNSF Railway
Company and whereas Belen is
importance as a major hub for
logistics and commerce and
whereas Peralta was the site of
a minor engagement during the
American Civil War and whereas.
agricultural community.
And whereas real communities is
home to Valencia County's only
and whereas the original
pre-1937, United States Route 66
runs through the heart of
Valencia County linking it to a
inscription interpreted to be an
abridged.
Virgin version of the 10
commandments in Paleo Hebrew,
adding to its historical
Arts, which preserve the history
and cultural heritage of the
region and whereas Valencia
County is home to parts of the
Cibola National Forest and the
world, a symbol of the rich
Spanish heritage of the Rio
Grande Valley hosted annually by
the Hispano Chamber of Valencia
County to preserve traditions,
growth and expansion in the
region by fostering
collaboration among local
businesses, providing valuable
resources and supporting
initiatives that enhance
technological advancement and
economic development in New
Mexico.
and whereas.
Valencia County is now a growing
hub for manufacturing and
And whereas Valencia County's
central location, transportation
infrastructure and business
friendly environment position it
and community engagement
opportunities.
And whereas Caitlyn Maria of
Belen Valencia County rodeo
queen was crowned the 2025 New
continued to be a center of
economic growth in New Mexico
with an expanding population,
thriving industries and
innovative development projects
Mexico that February 6, 2025 be
recognized as Valencia County
Day in the Senate, signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
Thank you to our readers.
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Reader, and thank
you, Mr. President. um.
I would, uh, ask the body to
help me uh recognize some guests
people from Los Lunas, Bosque
Farms, um, um, Bolen. I have
Erica Demi, council member of
Boke Farms.
Tanya Marabol and Representative
Baca.
Who helped us put together all
the Montantas outside and the
food that we're gonna the great
food we're gonna be having here
shortly.
guys with Stan. This is a
Valencia County.
Class of 2025 with our teacher
Krista and her husband Chris, so
just want to honor them and last
but not least I have some of my
family members here.
I have uh my sister-in-law
Valencia County. Luisa here is
12th generation in Valencia
County. We've been in Valencia
County over 450 years, our
family, but she is a 12th
Thank you Senator Sanchez. Thank
you to all our guests who are
support, uh, because has all of
you know, uh, I'm I was raised
in Los Chavez, New Mexico, which
I know didn't get a shout out,
just hint for next year, um, and
Actually might be a 12th
generation uh uh person in
Valencia County. Valencia
County, when I grew up was just,
well, at least Los Chavez was
preserving the the culture of
Valencia County but also the
culture of New Mexico and I will
say my brother was.
state capitol. It's very
important to recognize their
value and some people look at
them as maybe a bedroom
community of Albuquerque, but
that is not the case. Valencia
And they also have a deep pride
in being from Valencia County,
as you can tell by me standing
up here and always being proud
of my roots in Valencia County,
you, Senator Lopez. Senator
Sanchez, thank you, Mr.
President. Well, now that
Senator Cedillo Lopez called me
out on that. I'm gonna try from
the top real quick. I want.
hold us up too long, and I'm
Los Chavez Bosque Veita Jarales
Publitos.
And if I forgot any of you guys,
I'm not sure. You have to, you
have to correct me, senator.
certificate, um, and we forgot a
lot of Pueblo in Valencia County
and I just wanna recognize,
recognize them and I, I, I just
deepest relationships and
understanding of their
community, their values, their
land.
Um, and I just, I'm so excited
for Valencia County to be in the
house today. Thank you, Mr.
and all the Valencia County Day
celebrations.
With that, I'll yield to Senator
Munoz on the next certificate.
Thank you, Mr. President. We're
not gonna read the proclamation
year we honor citizens from our,
from the great community of
McKinley and Gallup, and we got
a few here today and we're gonna
honor them in just a minute, but
historically and and people
communities that said we're not
gonna do that. And they didn't
allow the federal government to
go and get, get the Japanese
migrants and they stayed in
there they stayed in Gallup.
godparents once that was
Italian. And, and so it's such a
melting pot of diverse people
from the Italians that came in
Uh, I, I bring me no better than
me, but I bet his parents were
immigrants as they moved in and
so my father was an immigrant.
is just, you know, you talk
about great places to live, we
have everything in, in Gallop
and McKinley County from Red
Rocks, uh, to the desert, to the
2 hours, 2.5 hours from Gallup.
And that's what makes us so
great as a community, as a
county, as part of the state of
us all day long and, and so we
have certain terms and with
that, Mr. President, let me tell
you a little bit, there's,
there's a pin on everybody's
desk, and I hope they all got
them passed out if he didn't get
basket represents the
interweavings of life and, and
what happens and, uh, their
wedding gifts during wedding
day, but you also have a little
brick. This is not the brick
and the students that are, did
the bricks are right behind me,
so maybe they got a CT.
and they're opening a brick
factory and they'll take some
advice from Frank on the
concrete, but they're right
behind me and they're standing
wanna talk about our honoreries
and I'll start with uh Richard
Malone, um, Richard Malone was
the chief investigator for the
Le Judicial District at the
Mexico office of the OMI we, we,
as we know it, the, the medical
investigation he got his
bachelor's degree from in
science degree in criminology
from Indiana State University.
from communication and
administration to homicide
investigation.
He's been involved in more than
5000 investigations for 43
Drunk drivers for his dedication
and commitment to eliminating
drunk driving and keeping New
Mexico roadways safe. Mr. Malone
is a nationally recognized
professional instructor in the
That's, that's a large number
throughout the United States and
he's been in in magazines New
Mexico explorers, Discovery
magazine and news programs and
The Hunter virus was killing
people and nobody knew what it
was and it kind of discovered in
New Mexico along with a couple
other doctors. You know, we hit
harder than anybody else in the
US per capita and he helped us
resolve that. Now he currently
teaches at the branch with 38
years of experience, uh, and has
about a person because it's not
really that great of a subject.
It's kind of depressing some of
the things that you see are not
really, not really.
Their life bearing and changing
and, and we'll welcome you both
together in just a minute. The
next one, you know, I don't, he
probably knew me before I was
born. I know he knew my dad
before I was born, uh.
when we all were little and our
parents would punish us, we'd
run away and Lucille's house
because she had a peanut butter
and jelly sandwiches. And so
that's how much I remember in in
is so productive that you don't
forget what he taught you. He,
he knows everything about
concrete. If you want to
Concrete business card in the
state of New Mexico. He can make
you one. He didn't think I'd
Mexico State University. He's
operated in Gallup sand and
gravel since 1976 and it sold
the business in 2007.
Uh, he's the president of the
um, he was taught and lectured
on concrete and
Topics in 25 states, 9 in
25 states, 9 foreign countries
and they beginning each session
interest in in jewelry business
and in Gallup.
In the state of New Mexico he's
held numerous leaderships
positions, promoting concrete
and state organizations like the
uh, the state paving conference
in areas he's been a leader.
Has been a teacher for many
years in the New Mexico concrete
school that held it in MSU, uh,
long time to be in the concrete
business. It's almost as, as
long as some of the concrete
poured when I was younger, uh, I
still have some of that
concrete, still see those
is, it's roughly 60 years old
and they've never replaced the
concrete, uh, some light
patchwork, but that's normal
what happens, um.
He's always
and through that and why they
should use concrete and what
their mix should look like,
whether they're pouring footings
or flat work or or what it is.
Um.
He's taught concrete placing and
construction needs those skills.
We talk about the housing
shortage and housing in New
Mexico, but concrete is the
basis for every foundation that
you start, whether it's in
Heart Cathedral for church for
80 years and has been an usher
for over 50 years. Um, his
retirement makes a small
concrete gift item in his
and so Mike was there, uh, his
daughter has great
accomplishments, but I know he's
most proud of Barbara who sits
by.
almost every time and, and kind
of leads the family and, and has
the body, Richard, would you
please stand with the body,
please welcome me, these proud
two members, and I'm proud to
present them to the state of New
and the Wariess.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
did you enjoy your Gallup pen
today?
I, I always enjoy Galant
McKinley Day. Thank you, Senator
for that beautiful tribute that
you just paid. Thank you, Mr.
the citizen of the Gallup, uh,
concrete junior concrete guy, if
we, we get him there. I think he
would absolutely love that.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
you members of the body.
Thank you to Senate Majority
Floor Leader Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. If
there's no more announcements,
we'll get to the workup on the
table, unanimous consent. We go
down our business committee
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 85 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
Senator, says if you can just,
uh, um, redo the, the motion.
There's 3 that will need to be
Thank you, uh, the reader will
read.
Senate Bill 124 as amended do
pass.
Senate Bill 220 do pass as
Move adoption of the committee
report.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee report.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those opposed day, the eyes have
it. The committee report has
unanimous consent. We go that
our business announcements are
miscellaneous objection we're in
that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President, our Senate sergeant
there in the lounge, uh, with
that, Mr. Perezi, unanimous
consent, we go out our business
introduction of legislation.
There no objection we're in that
order of business instruction
legislation the.
worried.
And Figueroa
An act relating to taxation
creating the physician income
tax credit. Senate bill 296.
that Senate Bill 296.
Zenabel 297, introduced by
senators Tobiasin.
block
Doig.
assessments require an increased
Medicaid reimbursement for
health care services. Senate
Bill 297 297 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
Woods
Block
And Gallegos.
An act relating to taxation.
Exempting health care
and referred to the Senate Tax
Business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 298.
Senate Bill 299 introduced by
An act relating to the
legislature requiring the
Secretary of State to provide
notice of a legislative vacancy
to the county commissioners of
all counties in the district of
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
that's Senate Bill 299.
Senate Bill 300 introduced by
An act making an appropriation
to expand access and enrollment
in adult literal literacy
program statewide. Senate Bill
Senate Bill 301 introduced by
senators Paul and Jaramillo.
An act relating to courts.
Creating the court emergency
Judiciary Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee, that's Senate
Bill 301.
Senate Bill 302 introduced by
Senator Paul.
gaming control board, amending
application and renewal
requirements for gaming
licenses, certifications of
findings suitability and work
permits.
sent about 3002302 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate taxus transportation
committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 302.
meet the standards and
specifications of state laws and
rules. Senate Bill 303303 having
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
An act relating to taxation.
Creating the qualifying foster
care organization income tax
credit, Senate Bill 304 Senate
Senate Bill 305 introduced by
Senator Tobiasson.
An act relating to families.
Grading the quality foster
Senate Bill 305 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to Senate
Health uh Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
305.
Making an appropriation for new
police departments in
communities within Valencia
County. Senate Bill 306306
haven't been read twice by title
Senate Joint Memorial 2
introduced by Senator Campos, a
joint memorial requesting the
infrastructure network model for
the improved delivery of
necessary services. Senate Joint
Memorial 2.
Senate Joint Memorial to having
Senate Bill 307.
Introduced by senators Doig.
Bergmann's
Bradley
Stuart
acting the office of child Umbut
Act.
Providing for the state child
umbud.
Creating the office of child
Umbu and establishing the powers
and duties of that office.
Making an appropriation.
Sen a bill 307.
Senate Bill 307 having been read
Senate Majority Florida leader
Peter Worth.
doing joint session, uh, at
noon, uh, so now's the time for
committee chairs to make
announcements, and I think
Senator Sher has got
announcements. I yield Senator
She first. Thank you, Senator
a 15 minute caucus in the Senate
lounge, so the Republicans 15
minutes in the Senate lounge
right after we break here
promise won't be more than 35
minutes. Thank you. So Senate
Republicans will be caucusing
committee will meet at 1:30,
giving you time to have some of
those amazing chicharrons, uh,
beforehand, but we will be
meeting at 1:30 in room 321. Uh,
Thank you Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Education will be meeting in
room 311 tomorrow morning at 9
a.m. Uh, we
have on deck uh Padilla,
Any further announcements seeing
Senator Doig.
Mr. President, uh, your Senate
will go. Let's go in at 1:30
today and we're still talking
budget and issues with agencies
and so we'll, we'll hear, uh, I
think we hear the courts today,
so it'll be interesting. Thank
you, Mr. President.
there was a bill that went in
that needs to get a referral.
Changed, it does have an
appropriation on it, and I'm
just gonna yield to Senator Doig
to let us know what the bill is,
Doig explain what it does.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President. So this is a bill
that would create an office of
uh an an ombuds, uh, for CYFD,
finance.
OK, thank you. Any further
discussion?
See no further discussion, so
Senate Bill 307 will now have a
community referral of Senate
Judiciary, then Senate Finance
Committee, that's Senate Bill
