Senator barca
senator brant
senator do hick.
Sender guy accounts.
Sent you gonzalez.
Center meal.
Center lopez
Santra naville.
Santerneiber
senator onion.
Center pope.
The.
Senator rodriguez.
Santa chandel
center south
center step by next.
Senator steinborn
senator woods you do not have a
core mr president thank you all
senators please report to the
chamber we are lacking a core
centers you're needed in the
chamber.
I'll send iters when you're
needing you in the chamber.
The.
today by reverend schroy tray
Let us gather in prayer.
Motor for god are creator and
sustainer we give you thanks
this day for the beautiful state
people and it's history.
I pray that you blast all these
leaders who have been chosen to
serve the well being of the
people of new mexico
it is a great honor and
responsibility.
We pray that you got our
governor and all those who work
in the administration and the
senate and the house to serve
the people with energy
justice mercy and compassion
are the ends to which all of our
human endeavours expire.
We thank you for your wisdom and
the majority florida to pet a
word to get a started on today's
business thank you mister
president and good afternoon
everyone unamazed concern we go
without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
for your words
again I think it is forty seven
hours
navigating so far and we're
going to continue to do do that
moving forward because there
really is
an important common good that
we're working for and while we
legislature and senator soles I
have some guess in a certificate
that's not going to be read but
he'll introduce his guests
center nivert has a certificate
of recognition for senator
stewart ingle who is here in the
building he was in here in a
minute ago and so we're going to
senator compose as a certificate
of recognition for senator or
teasy penalty and will do that
second certificate
doctor new zone is setting up
now in the senate lounge you'll
in terms of a van says I
announced yesterday tonight the
annual round house feed
sponsored by the new mexico
agricultural group will be held
at five thirty this evening a
officiating at a brief ash
wednesday ceremony at seven
thirty a m in room three twenty
two tomorrow after which you'll
be giving ashes until eight
for our senate chaplain I did
yesterday when this was
announced want to be sure you
were in the loop on that and how
it was going to work and so it
sounds like that has happened
and again different options so I
thank you senator peter worth
are you to send a microphone and
I think you should president
good morning you names consent
to our cameras in the senate
chamber and in the senate
gallery no objection.
and shandow until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call objection so
order thank you center
microphone center souls.
Thank you mister president I
donation accounting community
college she is the president of
that organization's government
and she is studying graphic
designing and so if you'll help
Thank you mister president today
is our higher edd day and I want
to remind you that new mexico is
a national leader in higher
education and there is so much
nation's most accessible tuition
free college program now mister
president after enacting the
opportunity scholarship act in
twenty twenty two new mexico
mexico remains in the top five
states of college and roman
growth nationwide enrolling an
additional seven thousand
students in higher education
since the opportunity
scholarship each year with the
program supporting more than
eighty seven thousand new
mexican load lottery scholarship
graduates since the program was
enacted in nineteen ninety six
now the new mexico higher
speaking a bright future as I
have some amazing guests with me
today mister president are
senate gallery is field with
some amazing eagles from
northern new mexico college that
presidents for finance and admin
coaches the memphis dukes and
coach t j's duke so you might
know from squid game I was
cheering him on the entire time
These teams if you can rise
against it and athletes you
bring so much pride to us manila
as you compete in national
competitions and you will
Thank you center had a mail we
have senator pinto followed by
center thank you member
presidential body and mister
president the other day on
indian day I honored had recipe
a certificate for inspencer and
i'm lots of gym so much a german
available modern woman enrolled
in the naval nation she is
sleeping rock clan and maternal
grandfathers are salt plan she
was raised on and lives under
graduated from the front
colorado college in colorado
springs colorado and is working
on her master's degree mrs gym
has worked with the naval
nonprofit management not naba
who had start never hope
department of health public
health and community development
she's completed nearly four
years managing and supporting
of the speaker of the navigal
nation council she volunteers
are time to advocate for
indigenous women and humans
right issues impacting the
native americans
daughters and I only think some
of you saw my older sister that
was here the other day they went
to school together and played
volleyball together and indulged
in all the cougar stuff that
because there are a lot more of
the students in the area but
that were influenced by people
like fern and other counsels
international article is that
that do business and japan as
far as nab silver smithing so
that I was also when no
varieties when we talk about CTE
holmac all those article
mechanics
teachers out there then that
that changed over the years but
we see that push coming back so
the members of the barmy and
mister president please welcome
Thank you senator does senator
neighbor
thank you mister president I
rise to introduce my yesterday
he pray previous he didn't
predecess he was a predecessor
to senator stewart angle who we
will be honoring today and so
make a barnet as my guest and
or t c peno was a lobbyist so so
I guess turn about fair play but
it goes to tell you what an
impact
center english had on all of us
Senator brand.
Thank you mister president
appreciate the opportunity since
it's announced it's
you asked three questions and
and I answered the first one and
and where we touched on the
second one i'm gonna answer the
amongst the jews who are being
targeted by hamas
a terrorist organization who
made clear their desire and
intention to eradicate the
state of israel is doing
romance thirteen it says what
every person be subject to the
governing authorities for there
is no authority except from god
and those who reach resist will
encourage judgment
for rulers
or not a terror to good conduct
but to bad
would you have no fear of the
servant for your good but if you
do wrong be afraid
for he does not bear the sword
in vain
for he is the servant of god and
and in accordance with the
christian just a war tradition
israel has every right to
retaliate against those who
initiated this unprovoked attack
coming when this delegated power
will no longer be needed a day
when jesus himself will be the
adventure of evil revelations
And in righteousness he judges
and makes war his eyes are like
a flame of fire and on his head
or many
diadas
is called is the word of god in
the armies of heaven arranged in
finally white and pure were
following him on white horses
He will tread the wine press of
the fury of the wrath of god the
that's what jesus will do thank
you mister president they sent
her brant would you have others
who would like to announce its
misleading as we have senator
incredible movement forward at
donate community college I have
with me my guess doctor monica
thought is who is the chancellor
of donate community college and
have to say I have to put biases
needed in the community in terms
of work force development and
how we can best assess the needs
of our work force is something
that I think is by far stellar
amongst the state in an example
Thank you center handling
as soon as the phonics thank you
he's a park ranger and the real
grand dell north day national
monument of which many of you
have already gone to visit hike
beyond the water he's an
mexico he is an environmental
geology major and new mexico
highlands university and he
plans to go on to work in water
Thank you center standing
to see
Senator compos
thank you very much mister
president and a couple of things
here in a course we're running
around this morning trying to
uh kyle reiner is here with me
again he is in new mexico
highlands university a student
senate president he's also the
legislative fellow and I bring
and this is a distinct honorable
believe that you have placed on
this individual that is coming
up next and that's kylie the
hill she was here the other day
helping if you will
the honorary lieutenant governor
for today which is a very high
honor and she's graduated from
our she'll be graduating from
west las vegas high school at
mister president the
honor that you have placed on
this young lady and to you
kindly there's very few that get
will their aspiration to
continue to help to serve people
in government in the state of
new mexico thank you very much
mister president.
worth thank you mister president
so we're going to go ahead and
do the two certificates honoring
uh two special members and i'm
gonna let senator compose kind
that in center countries will
give us a roadmap thank you
senator worth senator compass
and thank you very much mister
president thank you very much
majority leader worth as we go
forward and to those individuals
that have already started
that have one who has already
left this estimate the other one
who is making plans to retire as
well and and so within that
we're going to go ahead and keep
you and even though the comments
may be short they certificates
definitely outline many of your
contributions so with that
opportunity but senator nibert
is also a very special person
and so with this i'm sure he is
going to do not only a superb
job for the nominee
a certificate prepared so I
would ask the permission of the
president to have the
certificate red to the body.
here by extend its recognition
and acknowledgment to stewart
ingo horaz a senate campaign out
from clovers news journal in
nineteen eighty four described
to problems and whereas for
senator engles first run for
senator his slogans were he's
everything district thirty one
would want him to be and storing
javis curry roosevelt lee and
debacle counties and were as
senator ingle served for thirty
nine years from nineteen eighty
five through october twenty
twenty three and is the second
majority as the senate was
evenly divided twenty one to
twenty one and where as senator
ingle held every minority
leadership position in the
oklahoma state university and
animal science and industry was
a great statement who mastered
budgeting and policy making
anywhere else senator ingle
for never losing this call on
the senate floor or behind
closed doors and whereas cross
and ethics were most important
to sender ingle he was a man of
his word.
on the wrist for unethical
behaviour and whereas former
lieutenant governor diane denish
enjoyed working with senator
ingle because he had a sense of
humor and played a few jokes on
downtown sanity and whereas
in the late nineteen nineties
and early two thousand senator
ingle work to get the lead
stature funds for computers for
clovers community college and
eastern new mexico university
roswell and where as center
ingles bunched bills to use
lottery proceeds to fund
scholarships for high school
and footwear journey three day
period before the start of the
school and where as center ingle
work tirelessly to expand the
united states highway seventy to
information and education and
whereas senator ingles best
advice for new legislators is
in his district the counties he
served and the state of new
mexico signed and sealed that
the capital in the city of south
afraid senator greg nibert.
president it's certainly my
honor and privilege to be
sitting in this seat that has so
long been uh the seat of our
stewart or when he first ran it
was nineteen eighty four and i'd
purchased a house in nineteen
eighty four and his was the
relationship to what it is today
i'm pleased to have his support
I know there are many of you
that serve many many years with
themselves I I will keep my
so I would uh yield my time back
to uh senator compos mister
president.
Thank you senator neighborhood
center companies thank you very
Senator share thank you mister
president for twenty years i've
wanted to be the senior
republican and he finally let me
the governor of the state in
grisham
sinner share mister president I
ask unanimous consent of the
senate that we allow the
governor of the great state of
new mexico to make some comments
know objection the governor to
make some comments
but i'm supposed to do something
did the lieutenant governor do
you always have all the the god
damn money and I said that's
because we do a really good
like stewart ingo he's kind he
smart he's funny he understands
so impactable he puts people
with new mexico first and not
just the people in his district
every single mexican ann
Unexpectedly died the very first
phone call in a wasn't from my
boss the governor wasn't from
as we're recognizing how
valuable your leadership is and
will always be
that we should not be letting
in any number of contexts and
the reality is that's now
falling apart around the global
and so stewart
senator leader
promise as we recognize you
today I will do my part to nat
let it be personal but to always
be substantive and then our
you've done for me and others
personally thank you for making
the kind of differences that
you've made and that's it's all
spelled out in the proclamation
our kidders and young people
going back to college without
your leadership and without the
partnership that he had with the
serve thank you for letting me
come down here and interrupting
your very important floor
session for a very important
in honor the lifetime service of
senator stewart ingo the
governor has prepared to
born in clovers attended in
mexico military and stood and
earned a degree from oklahoma
state university in nineteen
seventy and where as senator
ingle worked as a farmer and
curry debuca lee and roosevelt
for nearly forty years from
nineteen eighty five to twenty
twenty three and horres senator
ingle was one of the longest
serving members of the new
leadership positions a senate
minority leader whip and caucus
chairman with ferment fairness
and pragmatism and who asked
senator ingle representative his
provided financially to one
hundred forty four thousand new
mexicans attending college and
set an example nationwide for
enhancing access to higher
In where as center ingle was a
true statement who doubled down
on good policy regardless of
partisanship in pursuit of doing
christian governor of the state
of new mexico do here by
proclaim february thirteenth
twenty twenty four as senator
february twenty twenty four
witnessed my hand and the great
still seal of the state of new
mexico michelle two hundred and
governor.
Thank you
thank you we do have several
members who would like to speak
senator ingle he came up to
farming tune to interdues
himself to me I just been
elected and I had no idea where
the senate was and uh so he was
serve with him for my entire
time here which was just pretty
short I think although he's been
there for a year so I gotta be
close
pleasure and an honor thank you
mister president
thank you center share senator
worth thank you mister president
thank you governor for being
work and for these possessions
in the leadership that is
absolutely critical and we talk
every morning about
communication about
angle and I was incredibly lucky
when I
kind of drew the straw for this
position in twenty seventeen to
have stewart on the other side
to help me.
critical I work very hard on
that along with our current
minority leader senator barca
and I think you're seeing the
result of all that work in the
that's in large part to you so I
just want to thank you
personally and it's a huge loss
for us not to have you here i'm
glad you figured out how to get
to the other side there's a lot
thank you mister president and
it take you stewart for joining
us here today sen we appreciate
you and thank you governor for
your proclamation and for
years I learned so much about
getting along about i'm being
able to talk to the other side
and and being able to work along
knowledge and i'm sure your home
town of portalises welcomed you
back with a open arms in her or
glad to have you thank you again
without with all respects sender
thank you thank you mister
president so
it's kind of hard to have a
stewart carcass from one of the
stewarts have a scape their own
house I have been looking for my
other caucus member for a while
add my sanks to stewart ingle he
he did make my life easier in
the senate just easy for him to
he always offered that so you
look like you're pretty happy
and relax now so I hope you're a
joint those kids in your
grandkids and everything we miss
in couple other senators told me
that the corn of the legislature
how to keep peace and how to
talk and not get angry and and
held that with such an honor in
way he presented himself and the
way they were with prior protems
and and just watching that I
learned a lot and when you can
say independence where people
downtown at the water hole or
where you are at but it always
says you know that's about like
kissing your sister
and that always look at him l I
senate well you never threw
those ten terms and got off
board and you saw the way you
wanted to go and you start that
vessel that way in we appreciate
as follow a center on the old
and center lotters center more
than you miss president for the
record I did object to the
governor so conversation and and
speech and so I do expect that
invitation to a cabinet meeting
kissing your sister and I was
going to tell that story and I
did channel that saying in rules
just the other day and I did
credit you for that one we're
passed in the memorial so I hope
that lives on you taught so many
new mexico and your wisdom has
always been
inspiring the way you say it is
always true you're talking about
dollar year ego in a way of your
intellect i've i've tried to
always remember that in this
you and without a vote you have
no stroke and I think that's
important for us all to remember
and there are so many other life
lessons you taught us and how to
be a legislator I just want to
thank you for your met
you did and that is a hammerable
and we new mexico is better
placed because of you and now
many people can say that but new
mexico's a better place because
of stewart angle thank you thank
you center more as we have
center on the following center
hearing no objection proceed
senator okay this this palm is
called ice everybody in my first
poetry collection has a suiting
them except for our protempt
but anyway so this is called
gate his head tied tilted
slightly listing for listening
for secret directives the
decades of his service keeps it
new
partisan lines grow fuzzy years
into this place
we joke about our respective
parties in the positions that we
have to take here in the
With its predictable vote of
rebuke
leans his head sideways as if
we talk shop comparing our
dumbest votes ever here's the
seat belts mind the tensions.
then I could have totally had a
said night the audience that is
if he had only realized that
carry okay involves a microphone
I am startled into submission
the jarring fact of our service
thank you.
They get an earlier we have
senator lopes followed by center
ingle for your service.
Thank you for your friendship.
And thank you for your guidance
over all these years
and you were a person that one
could go to and actually you
came over a few times to me and
told me it's okay it's okay
we all have passion on this
floor
as a minority floor leader
and dreams some of those very
interesting emotional times and
committee you were always one
that could bring the temperature
down.
other times it was kind of like
why
and part of it mr president I
say is because those of us who
are um with not that the ten
I learned a lot from you.
I miss you know it's sitting on
that chair because there is
always the chance when i'd
always walk over to you and ask
you a question
retirement as the whole other
discussion mister president
I don't think you're retiring
per se
sen in the mode of what we think
I thank you for your friendship
thank you for your leadership
thank you for your listening to
Thank you center lopez center
several offers.
Thank you mister president I too
rise and support the certificate
in strong support
two thousand nineteen um he was
always so gracious and kind and
I like to little how you doing
kito it made me feel like he
really he really cared about the
integrity and your wisdom and I
just hope that we rise to that
level has we continue going
senator thank you mister
president
stirt probably didn't remember
the first time I met him I was
done here lobbying as a county
commissioner and I had an
me is because the lady has with
was very attractive
and he made it then he knew her
so they visited quite
about that uh stewart over his
reminded me i'd ask him how to
get how do I get this bill
passed he said you need twenty
two votes partner
well I figured that out pretty
be either be a politician or a
policy maker.
And I think that's I chose to do
a little more policy than the
politics but I think uh he he
never saying to me my birthday
june thirty specter phone call
thank you mister president I
guess in an avail said there's
just a few information purposes
we have senator birth senator
senators knew at that order san
diego thank you mister president
you know when I got here as I
was the only new guy on the
block because I have been
appointed in the middle of the
gonna mentor you and I said
who's that they said stewart
angle I said hi mister england
and he says we have a little
schools and even with dimming
math I could probably figure
that one out but the other thing
he said to me was really holds
true was the less we do the
store you're right this is what
this is unless we do the better
off the state is this there is
less areas too because on price
especially sitting around the
table with the the likes of
stored angle john arthur smith.
Dim jennings
So much about how
this this four works and about
how you get things done.
Thank you cynical birth senator
brand.
Thank you mister president a the
swan arisen like sooner ingo for
everything he did for me except
for sticking me on public
affairs for eight years that was
the only mean thing that he ever
did to me
would be in this position as the
whip without what store taught
me and without his friendship
and support and so I thank you
me have some time off should
probably have me and special
sessions all year this year but
you know you just never know
since we didn't get the crime
bills done will this have to
come back right governor that
for everything for the past
twelve years person he said it a
rant senator vanix.
when a resarming but he made the
investments and pensions
committee very lively he would
come in later than I would come
and I always come late but he
would come in late he would sit
friendship.
Thank you centers to finish
senator woods.
I thank you mister president
an accident when I came in
you know
he's done a lot for me and
ones so as he used to say to the
good ones I got education and
contribution so I got a lot of
ending the back up on everyday
republican.
School.
City how everything they let me
talk and then they let stewart
president yeah I do I stand and
want to recognize the person
where highlighting today thank
you senator neighbors and mister
president I don't think senator
stewarting on those remembers
program called business
professionals of american I was
the state president of this
thing and they said you can stay
at this guy's house with his
family they all these homes have
volunteered to host all of you
the what's the guy's name and
they said his name is stewart
ingle and I said oh great I
don't even know who this person
is but i'd loved it to to go
over and spend some time at
their house and they were so
you know fast forward I don't
know twenty five years I show up
at this place and everyone says
you've got to get to know
there's a couple of people you
need to get to know right away
so the last time I was the work
it's but the one you need to
meet on the other side is a guy
named stewart ingle and I
thought i've already met him and
so he looked very different from
the first time I stated it is
I guess III thank you very much
well this is my sunday best I
told him so today store it I
know pine intended or anything
but i'm here my paul bears.
Suit and I guess you're on the
way out thank you
senator should would send your
brand bring a committee
signature I mean
the one zero that they get were
time on friday
so I don't I don't know what you
guys are I don't know what you
guys are complaining about but
stewart I don't think they had a
hospital on stewart was born
show he had to go to clovish by
dare but we're bows from from
mexico turns out to be
but still you know you really
have a you're somebody that
helped all of this when we got
thing that he's done for us as
regulation when we were rookies
is just helped just get through
the process helped us understand
was it was a great learning
experience for me and I couldn't
have ever done it without
stewart
you have been just being
If some our store of you
forgotten or losh carolina
number I still have it show a
few if you need it so thank you
mister president thank you thank
so good to see back in the
chamber you know your presence
in your your absence is
definitely felt in this chamber
by me and you know when I got
elected to set up mister
president everyone said
that to be true and I remember
we had a new pension reform in
your sitting next to the
governor who knew that we had a
new pension reform he was a
tough issue is actually an
election year it was kind of a a
We were debating an amongst us
and you know when you're in the
majority party you really have
the ultimate governing
responsibility because the votes
you gotta lift it or or or kill
feel pain you supported it and
you said we've got a government
and I think that's what I want
to thank you for is taking the
job a public search servant very
store and now I guess we'll have
one still work here that was
kind of fine while that lasted
and last time we saying happy
birthday we didn't know who the
you mister president they just
understand born center sinder
thank you mister president and I
too rise recognize our good
friend senator stewart
she's have a destroyed man and I
think we've all
witnessed you know
his role in this chamber and
dinner somewhere and you said
let's go and pardon I would jump
in the pick up trip where we're
going to I don't know
next to know where a buffer
A missed you always walk about
here in in talking to me and
making sure everything is okay
in a little joke or too so we
miss you
Senator ingled touched in this
body are
very deep.
They meant something.
the lives he touched within the
communities that he served is
even more impactful
many several generations of
are grateful our communities are
better because of the
representation they had and sir
I thank you
you've been my mentor my friend
Mister president could we ask
you now to stand that store sing
us one last happy birthday to
everyone
see no objection would be
honored to hear stewart ingo
everyone sender or j p no you
look you look like it's your
birthday
house clerks for fifteen
work
bird today to you have a
birthday dear
jerry
I think you all the members are
you also sent out majority web
michael by the attitude is that
next order business thank you
very much mister president will
remain on this order of business
therefore some of the higher
education people that are here
right now and up on the rostroom
with you mister president uh you
have people from the adult
education program also up there
is claudia colonel if you'll
stand claudia and she is working
in the area of bilingual
education is my understanding
was their earlier but he had to
leave with a family and mergency
and so these are all people that
have been going through working
on what we used to call a g e d
but the the adult education
learning how the new mexican
said it works.
honor society which are the all
state academic team from our two
years schools I believe they are
all up in the gallery watching
and if I could quickly read
mexico community college don't
have what that is embertailer
central new mexico community
college president wisenet with
central new mexico community
motival central mexico community
college
elaja borrell from central
mexico community college bridget
moral queen eastern new mexico
henry new mexico military
institute in roswell mackenzie
kursh mexico military and
student roswell reney richardson
college liankin northern new
mexico college in espanola jaden
williams send one college
infarming ten elin via lobos
standable university of new
mexico at last alamos megan beck
university in new mexico and
towards common lee university of
new mexico and towels do net the
secretary of the rigors and the
higher education department
honor each of those members that
you just a name they honored
them in the rotanda so as a
wonderful celebration for them
watching a sense of what we're
going to do here so the plan
ah we're going to do house bills
in this kind of first session
just so everyone knows exactly
what we're going to do today
we're going to read in the
committee reports from senate
finance on the clean fuels bill
will read it in in just the way
the process works for roll the
clock and that will be a
senator rodriguez house bill
twenty eight public project
revolving fund projects and then
i'll get you an answer on eight
and nine and it's possible we do
those later today I would yield
objection thank you senator rent
senator peter worth
thank you mister president you
know miss and we go that are
business third reading of
legislation I feel first to
center staff annex for item
house asked unanimous consent of
the senate that the record shows
that all action for plates house
fill one forty eight with the
emergency cause on final passage
but one forty eight is the
annual water project fund
projects authorization bill I am
carrying this bill on
are made up of eight flood
prevention projects seven water
conservation or treatment
recycling a reused project forty
eight it does have an emergency
class now yields a center
servant.
Thank you as president mr
president arise and support of
this bill but with a little bit
background then I think we'll be
into that position the these
funds which I think this morning
we heard about a hundred and
fifteen million dollars this
year and are going to be
authorized to about fifty five
projects.
Communities and not just those
two large projects and we're
good vetting process during the
interim where they water trust
board and and technical staff
our own staff and animal fa and
others review projects that
projects look with shovel ready
decide which to put onto the
list it was a good process it is
a good process
what this building as a simply
authorized and approved those
projects
this is a good process urge
years
which would essential at the
water trust board pick the
projects for two years alone
without the legislature
continuing to have any approval
out of this very process the
process that we're on right now
which is to approve the project
recommendations by the water
trustword and when that comes
gives us that chance to be the
appropriating body and not
delegate that to the water trust
board and so when that comes
you'll have some context what
we're doing here but at the
in new mexico and not just to
the big big boys on the block
thank you mister president thank
you centers to onto we do have
further debate center more swell
by senator had a meal center
mr I agree with you on what you
just said would you mind if you
know off top of your head who
appoints the members of the
water trust board and who's on
the water trustport center
matters mispresident center it's
all cabinet level
if you can please move.
Sanismatis president almost
everybody on water trust board
is an appointee of the governor
either in a cabinet position or
the governor's authority but
almost all of them are governor
authority in the water trustport
has historically been chaired by
the state engineer who is a
governor appointee so you're
water projects and decides which
communities get them whether
their big project small projects
we should abroad the
participation on that water
trustport.
a lot of money that we put into
these projects it's very
important um if we had
appointments to do that board
maybe that be a different but it
is controlled by the executive
this process and to fifty
million dollars in if we had US
acting governor for that time
mister president maybe I feel
more comfortable um maybe we'll
be just make you act in
important that the uh that this
we don't change that in the
future that this project the way
we're doing it works we have
oversight as the legislature and
I think that's very important
for the balance of power in the
several major water issues which
included a time where we had
zero water flowing in the
village and the national
guarantee to come in with a tank
you mister president thank you
center had a mail.
Senator randy
million gallons of water
annually as it leaks out
constantly through to their
consequences forty three percent
of the water is last in that
of water and so what are the
projects it's included in here
is a is a sixteen million
dollars ask to address the
emergency water crisis that the
city or two their consequences
office for coming in and
addressing the crisis on behalf
of the city of tutor
consequences we are very
grateful thank you.
bettered and I thank senator
servantes for always carrying
this bill mister president I
moved out see where we that
from the accept those voting in
the negative by a show of hands
center standard centers where
voting all senators to your
seats please.
If you wish to vote now please
raise your.
The.
in it center so thank you mister
president and members of the
body we're going to go on to the
next item that's going to be
added number seven when your
calendar hospital twenty eight
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitutions in our
objections center there is real
please explain the bill thank
you mister president has been
twenty eight as amended is the
the one hundred and thirty eight
qualifying entities to apply it
does not mean they're going to
get the loan or that they're
approved in any way but it does
you center during the center is
where debating.
See no debate
senator or three years to close
on the bill thank you mister
those voting in the negative by
show of handle senators to your
seats please we are voting.
I'll send it just your seats.
thank you mister president
center there is senator compos
thank you very much mister
president I ask unanimous
consent of the senate that the
record show that all action
Here are no objections center
couples and mister president
members of the senate and if it
essentially the new mexico match
fundamental established a
tribes nations and problems
house bill two includes seventy
five million for the new find
contingent on enactment of this
bill and if I may mister
president members of the senate
this is a very good opportunity
for the state to help local
governments are other minister
periods to uh use a matching fun
for questions thank you center
couples thank you center woods
any debate senators
see no debate senator composed
to close thank you mister
president members of the senate
that the role has been called in
all those present or in the
affirmative except those
boarding in the negative by a
short hands thank you center
companies all senators to your
seats please wear voting
The.
The.
Five out of thirty seven the
affirmatives here on the
negative house bill one seventy
seven as amended has passed with
amazon we're going out of his
announcements miscellaneous
saying no objection where that
order business announces
mislanes senator worth thank you
mister president so here's what
we're going to do that's it for
do two bills item number nine on
today's calendar which is house
appropriations and bonus can be
subject for house bill one
ninety six and then we'll do
house bill forty one the clean
transportation fuel standards
committees
and I think we'll be back.
To night are on the floor at.
Mister president i'm directed to
informed the senate that the
house has passed senate bill two
thirty nine as amended by the
house senate dedicated committee
respectfully submitted this I
emerted my cut and chief clerk
the journal show the message
from the house has been received
mister president I am director
informed the senate that the
respectly submitted the same
artism a cution chief clerk the
journal show the message from
the house has been received
mister president i'm directed to
inform the senate that the house
has passed senate bill one
journal show the message from
the house has been received
mister president i'm directed to
inform the senate that the house
has passed senate bill one fifty
nine as amended by the senate
and returned same here with
has passed house bill three o
three as amended by the house
and request the concurrence of
the senate respectfully
submittedly say marties
mccutchen chief clerk journal
bill one eighty two without an
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted lisa m or
tease macation chief clerk the
And request the concurrence of
the senate respectfully
submitted the cimartism cutting
chief clerk journal show the
message from the house has been
received
reports here no objection that.
Senator i'm sorry reader to read
mister president
you're finance committee to whom
respectfully submitted senator
george munios chair.
Thank you says we are in that
order of business committee
reports.
objection the rate of a read
husband one thirty four as
amended recommendations do pass
recommendation that a dupass
senate bill two forty six
recommendation that it do not
pass but that senate finance
stephanics mister president move
adoption the committee reports
centers as a motion to adopt the
committee reports all those in
favor of significant saying I
those opposing the eyes have at
the committee report has been
to whom has been referred to
senate bill on fifty nine as
amended has had it under
consideration reports the same
has been duly enrolled in a
cliff are all coach
center hample I move adoption of
the committee report centers we
have emotion to doubt committee
report all those in favor
signified by saying I goes
officers as a senate have signed
an open session senator bill one
fifty nine as amended the reader
will read mister president your
conservation committee to whom
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
senator elizabeth lister
fantastic chair center staff at
mister president I move adoption
mister president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred senate
memorial eleven has had it under
consideration and report the
consent of the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports and that
we vote on them with one motion
and that the journal reflect
they were acted upon
amended recommendation that a
due pass.
Hospital won sixty five as
amended recommendation that it
do pass.
selling memorial sixteen
recommendation that it do pass.
The.
House labor veterans and
recommendation that it do pass.
Husband two seventy one as
amended recommendation that a
was opposing the eyes have it
the committee part has been
adopted and the journal will
show that they were acted upon
See no objection when that order
business message from the house
to read it will read mr
president i'm directed to
informed the senate that the
house has passed senator
senate bill one thirty five as
amended by the senate
senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for senate
bill fifteen as amended by the
senate without emergency clause.
lisa emma teased my cutting
chief clerk the journal was
showed a message from the house
has been received sent a major
authority to peter worth takes a
Center memorial eighteen
introduced by senator compos and
memorial encouraging all state
departments and agencies to
participate in the planning
sixty six center memorial
eighteen seven of a moral
eighteen haven't been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate indian
role and cultural affairs
department of game and fish to
open a dialogue with private
landlord owners along the
pickles river in sun miguel
county to discuss private land
senate memorial nineteen seven
moral nineteen haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
to the senate rules committee
the environment trading a cloud
seating weather modification
pilot project in the domestic
department of agriculture
requiring reporting making an
hours bill one two introduced by
representatives chase and little
and act relating to elections
requirements related to the use
of.
Materially decept of media
creating the crime of
distribution or entering into an
agreement with another person to
declaring an emergency husband
one eighty two
possible one eighty two haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the senator district
committee hospital one eighty
two.
program using federal temporary
assistance for needy families
block grant funding to provide
economic support in the form of
monetary stipends to new mexico
residents participating in the
for straining programs for
specific industries or fields
providing definitions making an
thank you mister president's
unanimous constant we go without
our business announcements
miscellaneous hearing no
objection where that order
business announces mistakeness
thank you mister president now
being a eleven fifty nine am and
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there is
no objection it is ordered
mister president I ask you to
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
so we are going to recess until
six o'clock on the senate floor
are now as the time for
committee chairs to make their
announcements thank you said
worth we do have an answer from
several members i'd like to
one years ago today
jennifer and I walked down the
isle at the cathedral here in
santa fe and it was a beautiful
worrying lots of snow on the
years mispresident so I hope
you'll enjoy my anniversary as
much as I want happy anniversary
service centers of on this
thank you mister president of
conserving environmental
whatever you want to call it so
save saving on flowers mister
president mister president also
we have a lot of work to do in
judiciary here at the end the
judiciary committee we've got a
revise agenda please take note
and we're going to make very
good use of the time that we
have worth that part of the
session where we've got to be
thank you about the center souls
thank you mister president
senate education this morning
tried to hold a meeting after
the conservation committee but
evening session three eleven for
education thank you
immediately following the floor
we have a few bills before it
closed down and so it'll be a
wrap.
They can send everyone else and
send me I should look in really
she's at the capital barber shop
just off cordover and should
give you a shave and a haircut
she comes from albert turkey and
leaves about six clock in the
morning so you know mister
look as because we were have to
have or do your make up
but I I do want to congratulate
center circles this other is
anniversary we know he's gray
some great daughters
him out like nobody's business
if you've ever sat and had
coffee or launch or breakfast
with them his daughter's role
the roost so we have promised in
servant this I have their phone
numbers
senate tax business suggested
committee meal meet here at a
two forty five in room three
eleven and there was a lot of
confusion but the room but
hopefully we can be in and out
this morning I didn't get
chanced to
notification there's a cup on
your desk members that came from
edc of lee county I just wanted
gas producing carriers new
mexico other falling page there
is present body shows it the
real gross domestic product
from.
that came from edc of lee county
thank you mister president thank
you senator
see no further announcement
senator worth thank you mister
setting up but we're going to
start at five thirty are this
evening so with that you know
it's consent to senate standard
reses until five thirty the c no
