Send Bill 89 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and reserved to the
Senate tax, Business,
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 89.
lobbyists for a period of 2
years after service as a
legislator prohibiting an
employers or of lobbyists from
compensating former legislators
a legislator in the past 2
years, providing notice to a
lobbyist's employer if a
lobbyist.
has served as a legislator in
the past two years, providing a
Senate Bill 91 introduced by
Senator Doig and Representative
Anna Nanyu.
unpaid penalties or to impound
vehicles for unpaid penalties
for speeding violations detected
by an automated camera or
The horse racing integrity and
safety authority and jockey and
exercise riders insurance fund,
providing a process for paying
the cost of jockey and
Senate Bill 92 Senate Bill 92
having been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to the
Senate Taxusiness Transportation
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 92 Senate Bill 93
public public school students.
Senate Bill 93 Senate Bill 93
having been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee Senate
criminal sexual penetration,
Senate Bill 9494 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
felony.
the prescribing a penalty.
Senate Bill 9595 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
Senator Jaramillo, an act
relating to off highway motor
vehicles, amending section 63.
1 as amended. Amending
definitions concerning tires and
vehicle size. Senate Bill 9696
having been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to the
An act making an appropriation
to the healthcare authority to
increase the Medicaid
reimbursement rates for nursing
homes. Senate Bill 9797, having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Garrett, an act relating to
solar energy prohibiting
covenants, conditions and
restrictions that increase the
cost of purchasing and
installing.
A solar collector by more than
more than 10%. Senate Bill 98.
Senate Bill 98 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 98.
transportation fuels from being
assigned a carbon intensity
value of less than 0. Senate
Bill 99. Senate Bill 99 having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Conservation
senators Woods and Munoz.
An act relating to livestock
increasing fees for services
relating to livestock. Senate
Senate Bill 102 introduced by
Senator Soles for the
legislative education Study
Committee and act relating to
human services requiring that
Senate Bill 102. 102 haven't
been read twice by titles
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Health.
And public affairs committee,
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
services programs to report to
the healthcare authority on the
status of the direct care
workforce requiring the
healthcare authority to develop
reports on the direct care
Senate Bill 103.
Senate Bill 104 introduced by
senators Trujillo and Cedillo
Lopez, an act relating to
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee, the Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 104.
Senate Bill 105. Senate Bill 105
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee.
The Senate Judiciary, Senate
Senator.
Through here and Senator Cedillo
Lopez, an act relating to
professional licensure and
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee the Senate Judiciary,
Senate Bill 106.
Senate Bill 107 introduced by
Senator Pope.
Technology, engineering, and
mathematics.
Providing that all centers of
excellence administer programs
provided for by law creating the
Providing for the selection of
regional and tribal hubs
requiring annual reporting,
making an appropriation. Senate
Bill 107107 having been read
Senate Bill 108 introduced by
Senator Stephanics and
representative Ortiz, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Environment to
Senate Bill 108 Senate Bill 108.
Have you been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 108.
supports the commission,
clarifying agency statutory
duties, making other clarifying
and clean up changes to the
public regulation Commission
Act.
Senate Bill 109.
committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 109.
Senate Bill 110.
Introduced by Senator Wirth.
Senate Bill 110 having been read
twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the Senate tax, Business,
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee Senate
income tax credit and local news
printer corporate income tax
credit. Senate Bill 111. 111
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate tax, Business,
providing the student housing
facilities located on land owned
by an exempt higher education
institution but least by a
non-exempt and.
entity to the higher education
Business, Transportation
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee Senate Bill 112.
Senate Bill 113 introduced by
Senator Campos for the
legislative finance Committee,
have been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee. Senate Bill 113.
association's land grants,
boards of county commissioners
and the legislature prior to
acquiring land or water rights,
instituting reporting
Conservation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 114.
Senate Bill 115 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
Endorsed by the New Mexico
from the public public project
revolving fund declaring an
emergency. Senate Bill 115.
Senate Bill 115. Have you been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
An act relating to public
schools, creating a math lab
pilot project providing for
awards to participating school
Uh, Senate Bill 116.
Senate Bill 1166, having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee, then
An act relating to public
employee retirement, repealing
and reenacting a new section
adjustments that are equal to
Social Security and supplemental
security income cost of living
adjustments, making an
appropriation. Senate.
Senate Bill 118 introduced by
Senator Stephanics and Hickey
representative Ferrari.
forms for applicants to state a
desire to make an an anatomical
gift.
Requiring the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
Princeton referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate tax business
transportation Committee, Senate
Bill 118.
relating to economic
development, amending and
enacting sections of the
bioscience Development Act.
Authorizing investment in
bioscience companies.
Senate Bill 119 having been read
twice by titles or Prince and
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 119.
eliminate behavioral health
services cost sharing Senate
Bill 120.
Senate Bill 120 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Senator Munoz, an act relating
to medical malpractice,
providing immunity from
liability to the third party
administrator that administers
the patient's compensation fund.
tax business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate Bill 121.
Senate Bill 122 introduced by
senators to Fanix and Hickey and
representative Ferrari.
drug donation program to allow
more donors and recipients to
participate in the donation,
collection, and redistribution
then Senate tax business,
transportation Committee Senate
Bill 122.
Senate Bill 123 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo.
Senate Bill 123.
Senate Bill 123 haven't been
read twice by titles or
Princeton referred to the Senate
the Office of Superintendent of
Insurance, providing the power
to issue a civil investigative
subpoena to the superintendent
of insurance, providing
procedures to compel compliance
with such a subpoena.
To the Senate Rules Committee,
then Senate Judiciary, Senate
Bill 124.
enab bill 125 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning and electrical
distribution systems to extend
the useful life of a building
promotes student health and
Making an appropriation. Senate
Bill 125.
15 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee.
section 63-9H6 NMSA 1978 being
broadband program from $30
million less certain expenses to
$40 million less certain
expenses.
million to $40 million. Senate
Bill 126.
Senate Bill 126 having been read
twice by title is order print
relating to occupations
providing an exemption to the
barbers and cosmetologists act
for makeup artists and hair
stylists employed in motion
business Transportation
Committee, Senate Bill 127.
Senate Bill 128 introduced by
Senator Duhig.
Se a bill 128 having been read
twice by titles or print and
referred to in a tax business
transportation committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 128.
infrastructure corporate income
tax credit, allowing the
taxation revenue Department and
the Department of Transportation
to share information concerning
rail infrastructure, corporate
Then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 129.
Senate Bill 130 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
An act relating to public school
Bill 130. 130 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee Senate
Bill 1:30.
environment.
Prohibiting the adoption of
certain rules relating to the
production and delivery for sale
of zero emission vehicles,
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 131.
Senate Bill 132, an act relating
to trials limiting the amount of
punitive punitive damages that.
to trials limiting the amount of
punitive damages that can be
awarded in a legal action.
Senate Bill 132 Senate Bill 132
haven't been read twice by title
Senate Bill 133 introduced by
Senator Wirth, an act relating
to educational retirement.
Increasing the salary, a retired
member may earn without a
Education Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 133.
Senate Bill 134 introduced by
loans to political subdivisions
of the state that have been
approved for federal public
assistance funding from the
federal emergency Management
creating the natural disaster
revolving fund, providing an
annual transfer from the
appropriation contingency fund.
To the natural disaster
revolving fund.
Providing that the state
Cenel 134 Senate Bill 134 having
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the Senate Conservation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 134.
allowing reimbursement for out
of state travel and legislative
business for legislators who are
not on a primary or general
election ballot.
Cen a bill 135.
Senate Rules Committee and
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 135.
Senate Bill 136 introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
appropriation. Senate Bill 136
Senate Bill 136 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Education Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
enhanced 9/11 Act as the 9/11
Act.
Renaming the enhanced 911 fund
as the 911 emergency Service
Increasing the 911 surcharge
updating the uses of the 911
surcharge, expanding grant
Senate Bill 138 introduced by
Senator Munoz.
An act relating to taxation.
Removing distributions from the
Senate Bill 138 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business, transportation
environment, prohibiting the
adoption of certain rules
relating to the production and
delivery for sale of zero
emission vehicles. Senate Bill
139.
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 139.
Senate Bill 140 introduced by
Senator Pope, an act relating to
twice by titles order, printed
and referred to the Senate tax,
Business, Transportation
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 140.
Senate Bill 141, introduced by
presence in New Mexico pursuant
to the gross receipts and
compensating tax Act, providing
a gross receipts tax deduction
Bill 141 Senate Bill 141 having
been read twice by title's order
printed and referred to the
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee Senate
Bill 141.
resolution requesting the
Congress of the United States to
call a convention upon the
application of 2/3 of the states
for the limited purpose of
federal government and limit the
terms of office for federal
officials and.
members of Congress, Senate
joint resolution 5.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee,
that's Senate Joint Resolution
5.
resources department and the
economic development department
to jointly study and make
recommendations to expedite
forest restoration through
the Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Conservation Committee,
Senate Joint Memorial one.
from the house. He no objection,
we are in that order of business
messages in the house. The
reader will read.
Fifty-seventh legislature for
and gross copy of House Bill 1
with emergency clause has been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the house in open
session and request the
Thank you. The journal show the
message in the house has been
received and I'd like to
announce that the members of the
Peter Worth, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go without our business
announcements miscellaneous.
There are no objection. We're on
that order of business
announcing some miscellaneous
senator Peter Worth, thank you,
Senators wearing that order of
business announcement
miscellaneous, Senator Souls.
Thank you, Mr. President, and,
you know, unfortunately, we
don't have all the members here,
but I have a couple of
about the public education
budget, uh, and education budget
101, kind of above the line
between the line below the line,
what all of that is, where the
money is, how much, how things
uh, any introductions and just
kind of processes for that. Uh,
tomorrow, anybody who is in
town, the
be here starting at 9 o'clock in
the Senate chambers, uh, to
learn about the legislature and
about the capital and what's
going on. If anyone is here,
350 of them from all over the
state. Uh, and so we've got some
activities for them to do well,
but anybody who wants to come
and meet with them, talk with
them, please come by between 9
and 11 when they will be here in
education committee will have
the first bills it'll here will
be on Wednesday, uh, let me see
what else here. Um, I also, uh,
the basketball, uh, thrilled to
have arranged with the
management over at Fort Marcy,
and anybody is welcome, male,
female, doesn't matter how tall,
short.
you are, if you can, uh, walk
and chew gum or dribble a
mornings is kind of the pickup
basketball games. I know that's
early. I know it's cold, but
once you get in your, uh, your
sweats and things and running
around, you forget what time of
the morning it is. Yeah, and
oxygen in for, for those of us
that come from lower elevations
and come up here to Santa Fe,
but it's a good time. It's a
place where it's House members,
Senate members, Democrats,
people outside of these very
formal settings. So, uh, please
take note of education
committee.
Students here on Friday and
Tuesdays and Thursdays over at
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senators.
Any further announcements,
Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
tax, business, and
transportation Committee will
not be meeting today. We will
with us on Thursday, we will
have the Secretary of Economic
Development and the Secretary of
Transportation speak to our
committee and then the following
Tuesday we will start listening
to Bills. Um, we meet in room
Hamblin. Senator Doig, followed
by Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senate Rules Committee will be
meeting on Monday at 9 a.m.
We'll be starting with Senate
further announcements? Senator
Padilla, uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President, uh, for
Chairman Munoz, Senate Finance
will meet at 2:30 today.
Senator, what room will that be
in?
that side of the aisle.
the republic
Senate, uh, senator majority
floor leader Peter Worth, uh,
thank you, Mr. President. So
staff, and I've got the list,
legislative council, legislative
Finance Committee, legislative
education Study Committee,
legislative Building Services,
our chief clerk and her staff in
at arms, the committees, our
analysts, secretaries, uh, Zoom
operators, telephone operators,
members secretaries, all the
folks in the majority, minority
and pro tem offices, our
station.
And with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to Senate
stand a recess until 11 o'clock
