question or do you remember it
to repeat his question, Madam
Chair. Senator Woods, do you
remember your question?
The real question of the day.
should think about bringing
little in to here is what I'm
thinking. Madam President, I've
already been suggested we're
looking for Elon Musk around the
building. I don't know.
further debate on the amendment.
Senator Doheck.
Already does this. So judges
already have to do this under
our rules of civil procedure or
criminal procedure.
I moved the Senate floor
amendment number 6 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 as amended, be
A senator voting on Senate floor
amendment number 6 to your
seats, if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Voting no Suor Maestas voting
no, Senator Cervantes voting no,
Senator Steinborn.
Voting no, Senator Campos.
Voting no. Senator Pinto.
Voting no senator
Jaramillo voting no Senator
Gonzalez voting no. Senator
voting no, Senator Wirth voting
no. Senator Shindo.
Voting now, Senator Bergman's
voting no. Senator Stephanics
Voting no senator Stewart.
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 has
failed to pass the Senate.
Senator Paul, you still have the
floor.
Thank you Madam President, you
things, but from what I'm
hearing, not from just the
people in my district, but
across New Mexico is it the
catch and release is not making
amendment was to help codify and
help the judges, the district
attorneys to know that we need
to rely on these things to take
His family now has to live
without their, you know, his
kids have to live without their
father for the rest of their
life. Our community has to sit
intent by this amendment to hold
everybody. It's the violent
criminals,
uh, appreciate the debate from
everybody and uh thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you.
Uh, we're back on debate of the
bill.
OK. Yeah.
It's about to have the closing
argument here.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
substitute for House Bill 8 as 3
times amended.
Amendment sponsor is Senator
Thornton.
Senator Thornton to move his
amendment.
to House Bill 8 as 3 times
amended.
Senator Thornton to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Madam Chair.
house.
This crime would consist of
knowingly using or allowing a
property under one's control.
To be used for unlawfully hiding
The penalty for this crime would
be a 3rd degree felony.
So the intent of this as its
With the district attorney about
6 weeks ago, maybe 7 weeks ago.
And he told me that Albuquerque.
going on in Albuquerque and than
anywhere else in the country.
And while I did uh support HBO
coming out of the judiciary
So that we can make people who
are being held.
Without their will.
To give them an opportunity for
our law enforcement.
not have a stash house law in
this in this state right now.
So while we do have anti-human
trafficking laws.
Chair.
Thank you. Debate on the bill,
we first go to the sponsor,
Senator Cervantes.
do that in our committee that
that I share with you, Senator,
but again, so many of these
other bills, um, I'm able to
respond to because we've seen
them and debated them and I know
the flaws, for example, the,
and I don't know, I'll just ask
the sponsor of the amendment.
What has there been a Senate
bill introduced to make this a
new crime, a stash house.
Senator Thorn, do you yield to
Senator Cervantes.
Senate, this session.
Madam President, it has been
added as an as an addendum to an
existing bill from Senator Cedil
Lopez and Senator Pope.
And uh thank you Madam
President, Senator, yeah, we do
have Senate 74, but if it
hasn't, if this amendment hasn't
been added, then we haven't
committee and, uh, Senator, just
a couple of questions if I may
ask, ask you to continue
yielding, uh, your, your, uh,
proposed amendment would make
the operating a stash house, a
3rd degree felony.
here.
Oh, no, Madam President, those
are my experts. Those can those
Madam President, work that way
this would make a stash house to
unlawfully hide or store certain
things. Is that right, Senator?
Madam President, that is
correct.
And so let's say a president
Well, holding a Corvette,
you're, you're quick and you're
good.
Uh, I'm gonna give you the toe
on that one,
in, in their stash houses, but
I'll give you that one, Senator,
uh, it's an interesting idea.
We're making light of it. I, I
don't mean to make light of, of
people who unlawfully hide or
on the fly here.
Thank you. Debate on the bill,
Senator Sidia Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. This is an
amendment to Senate Bill 74,
so I urge the body not to, not
to support this amendment, but
to consider it seriously when it
comes up in the human
trafficking, uh.
Bill, thank you.
Senator Thornton to close on
the.
Madam President, I move that
Senate amendment number 7.
For House Bill 8 with 3
amendments be now adopted and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the role has been
amendment number 7 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 if you wish to
vote no, raise your hand.
Senator Campos.
Voting no, Senator Figueroa.
Voting now, Senator Siia Lopez.
voting no. Senator Pinto.
Voting, no. Senator Gonzalez
voting no.
Senator Duheck voting no.
Voting no, Senator Shindo.
Voting no, Senator Bergman's
voting no.
Senator Lopez.
voting no.
Senator Stewart.
Voting no.
Senator Thornton, you still have
the floor.
Madam President, thank you very
much. I, um.
I appreciate the hazing from my.
I do believe that it needs to be
strengthened and I look forward
to bringing this back to the
judiciary and incorporating it
into SB 74. So thank you all
Thank you, Madam President. Does
the sponsor yield for a
question.
Senator Cervantes,
he yields. Thank you, Madam
community-based competency
restoration programs that are
court appointed and designed to
restore defended to competency
resides, and my question and
concern is access to those
programs for tribal and rural
citizens what exists in tribal
or rural communities, um, for
easy access.
described and, and defined as a
community based company
restoration program. I'm gonna
emphasize the community-based
part of that term and we don't
community and uh the community
that other parts of the state
may have an entirely.
Different community and
different access to resources,
so the court would have to
decide what would be the
possibly can when they're deemed
not to be dangerous, but really
in need of services and of
course we've committed a great
deal of money and resources
earlier in this session to
right direction.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, it's
just important for me to stand
up here and name the the
communities that I represent
potential with this bill to
partner with those tribally
based programs that are often
for more culturally responsive,
we pass it, um, to fulfill that
request. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam President, and
if the sponsor would yield.
conversion device, but the
federal ATF.
Uses machine gun machine gun
conversion devices. Can you
explain why we use a different
Um, wording in that.
machine gun. I, I believe the
reason that we're really trying
to adopt this is to really
follow the more, I think modern
perception of what is here
defined in the bill itself as a
versus semi-automatic in the
function of the gun. So.
Uh, the, the definitions that
are used here are better to
reflect the current, uh, weapons
that are available in the
So we don't expect to run into
any inconsistencies as we move
forward.
Uh, Madam President, Senator,
we, we won't have
inconsistencies. I think that
machine guns became illegal
under federal law, but, but the
weapons that were available to
the public in 1932 are very
different than the weapons that
Can you explain how this will
work if they go onto the
reservation.
How a court orders the transport
of an individual today, I think
would probably be the same
procedure and process that would
I think most importantly is it
directs a timeline and so that
the adoption of a timeline
wouldn't change the access onto
uh a tribal or reservation lands
are about page 29, lines 23 to
25.
It says that the provided that
such district court is a party
to a memorandum of understanding
did you refer me to page 29?
Page 29 lines 23 to 25.
Um, Madam President and Senator,
that is all existing statute,
about MMIP and some of the
issues relating to crime is that
the perpetrators go out to the
reservations and that's where
not, is not going to happen.
Madam President and Senator,
this bill will not solve that,
really uh uh challenging
question that the courts
struggle with, I think even
today, and, uh, I, I don't think
that, that we're attempting at
all this session to try and
policies really will not in any
way diminish that sovereignty or
have any enforcement on
sovereign lands.
And Madam President, and
Senator, I think.
talk about his letter on the
south side and even our
neighboring pueblos, right?
In the urban area of Albuquerque
Thank you. Uh, further debate,
Senator Brandt.
Thank you, Madam President, and,
and I don't need the senator to
yield. I just wanted to thank
acknowledge, um, that, uh, it,
it's actually in this bill and
that's the shooting threat issue
that we have seen in our schools
and this bill is actually made
that a felony, which is one of
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Feel somewhat at a handicap. I
don't believe.
circumstance we all miss
Senatorber.
Madam President.
Having
Twice now been a victim.
To try to apprehend the
perpetrators.
My concern is that I am voting
on a piece of legislation, a
uh, could I get the good senator
to yield for a couple of
questions.
Doio Sanders runes.
steal.
A few bucks.
What happens to these folks.
Uh, Senator, as a practical
matter, how things exist now, to
my understanding is that what
And without this legislation in
place and without resources an
individual who's deemed not
competent in the case is
typically dismissed and you, and
then that's the complaint for
the revolving door where you see
competent than they would let on
and take advantage of that, that
opportunity now to essentially
repeat the crimes endlessly
really and without consequence,
um, so.
reports, evaluations, the
determination of dangerousness,
to use your example, probably
those examples it's not gonna be
a dangerous individual and the
treatment of that individual is
gonna be very different than
Madam President and Senator,
How does this legislation.
Change that situation where
those low level criminals.
So, uh, Madam President,
Senator, it's a very thorough,
uh, process that's adopted here
and it begins, as you pointed
out, so we, we, we begin with
court, the first of all, first
matter, the, the bill makes
clear that the district court
will be the court where then the
case goes and once it's in the
district court, the court
appoints an evaluator.
report is prepared, this bill
provides for deadlines for court
to have a hearing, and then on
the basis of that hearing to
make a determination of
dangerousness to use your
example, probably not a
What the definition what is it?
Community-based restoration
program. The goal there is to be
able to uh provide services to
is the goal. We have a, a long
standing, uh, Supreme Court and
our entire court system
acknowledges that you cannot uh
essentially convict an
And Madam President and Senator
In the circumstance where this
community-based restoration is
either refused.
Again, one of the one of the
benefits of this bill, there,
there is a consequence then. And
so when the individual is not
cooperative in that regard. Once
prosecutors with regard to that
individual, so, um, the court
could dismiss the case, the
court could refer the case to
the district attorney, uh, we
have to believe the bill even
earlier in the day about
commitment to either a state
facility to a psychiatric
hospital we specify the amount
of time and then the bill really
those efforts are showing some
promise even an extension beyond
9 months of, again, an
involuntary commitment.
And Madam President and Senator
Is that a fixed period and where
is that individual residing is
he back out on the streets while
this restoration is underway.
determination of dangerousness,
so if the individuals determined
to be danger, dangerous by,
again, enumerated crimes, then
there's a different process
committed for 9 months and in,
in my discussions, and I know.
the individuals who've been
working on this is is uh hard.
Well, the goal here is to try
and take advantage of that
period of time to get
can be a true prosecution as
opposed to currently which is
just leads to a dismissal.
Madam President, Senator, I
believe what I heard.
crimes that make life miserable
for law abiding citizens, these
folks will remain on the street.
For an indefinite period of
time.
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam President. Well
the.
Madam President. I'm looking
directly at you, and yes, I'm
yielding.
Jeremiah, thank you, thank you,
Madam President. I may not have
a question, but I do want to
make a few comments, uh, first
not just the last month but the
last 6 months our companies
competency statute, uh, Madam
President has not been changed
since 1988. It is way, way
particularized situations where
folks may be incompetent, uh,
during a hearing, so I, and I
think that's probably worth
voting for this bill in and of
itself, but I do want to make a
You know, the war on drugs,
which, which, you know, started
back in 1971, uh, when the
president named it a national
Every conceivable measure of
gauging any metrics that anyone
wants to use, the war on drugs
has been an abject failure.
qualities that drugs have on
persons, particularly narcotic
drugs, and so any disincentive
that the criminal justice may
have, uh, does not deter that
is convicted of drug trafficking
in New Mexico, that what would
the penalty be, uh, Madam
President.
Cervantes.
trafficking and gets convicted a
second time.
Is there a range of
Of prison years that that
person's facing or, or what
But it is in fact a first degree
felony in the state of New
Mexico, it is 18 years mandatory
and up until a couple of years
and our drug trafficking statute
is actually written uh
exceptionally well because how
do you prove trafficking? you
can know, obviously you, you
have to have an undercover
officer by or be involved in a
someone with possession to
intent to distribute.
So they possess the the the
narcotic, but you convict them
crack cocaine, Madam President,
and you could be convicted of
drug trafficking, um, and so I
like the way this bill is going
in terms of the 100 pills and
trafficking with maybe 5 g of
narcotics, um.
But, uh, the vast majority of,
of, of the fentanyl users who
also traffic because traffic is
years, and so if for the past
2-3 years, Madam President, if
all the drug traffickers got 9
years, and it did not slow down
the amount of drugs in our
communities then then I suppose,
drug trafficker of fentanyl was
approximately 2 years, so we're
raising the penalty from 9 years
to 14 years and hopefully that
will.
You know
but to distinguish between one
narcotic drug and another is
just an inconsistency of the law
that that could go down the
wrong path, so just quick story,
Madam President, so.
drug overdose, and the rumor was
that he dried up died of crack
cocaine but he actually
overdosed on powder cocaine that
didn't deter Congress. Congress
grams or more of crack cocaine,
you did a mandatory minimum 5
years in federal prison.
So they distinguish between one
drug and another.
Then the Congress wasn't done
because later on in the early
90s, they made it 100 times they
made a ratio of 100 to 1, where
to 1. Well, guess what, Madam
President.
Guess demographically who in
this country uses powder
cocaine, everybody, guess who's
abhorrent with regards to uh
those who went to prison and
those who didn't in 2010, um,
Madam President, the, the
federal government said the 100
did a couple other things, Madam
President, just briefly, they
created what's called a a Haida,
a high intensity drug
trafficking areas so if local
busts. So how do you get the
federal grants you do.
more drug busts. Well, if you
were to look at a map of the
high intensity trafficking areas
on drugs leads to easy
convictions. You want to go
after the big fish and the big
drug dealers, but that's not
really efficient, so you, you,
you, uh, arrest and prosecute
also did Madam President, uh,
drug free zones where if you uh
were trafficking within a 1000
ft of a school you got enhanced
penalties. So if you're on in,
once you put a a a crime on the
books, it stays.
There, uh, it stays there so
what we're gonna do today is
distinguish between meth,
I think this will send a strong
message that we we're listening
to folks back home that we care,
but ultimately this is going to
Fourth Amendment, um.
Almost meaningless.
The Fourth Amendment back in
1970 is totally different than
the Fourth Amendment today and
of course the Fourth Amendment,
The Fourth Amendment got bent to
the extreme during the, during
the war on drugs because every
court case allowed the
government further and further
Amendment as it relates to blood
draws, and we didn't talk a lot
about blood draws today, uh, but
what is the, um, what does this
bill do with regards to uh.
committee, of course, right now,
the blood draw is, uh, written
in our statute to deal with
alcohol, so we're screening for
issue as opposed to now, which
is limited only to felony
crimes.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, uh, sponsor, so that's
correct. So right now we can get
a blood draw on a felony of
uh the alcohol concentration of
their blood or presumably other
intoxicating chemicals this
would allow the government to do
relates to blood draws. we would
then be blurring that line. We
would be moving that line uh
further in, in, uh, toward uh
the power of the government, so
I asked my if there's a
is still around, then you should
not be supporting, uh, you know,
the ability for the government.
meant to suck someone's blood
like a vampire on a petty
They are holding on to their
door. They have fumbling
fingers, slurred speech, they
admit to drug use, they do
horrible on the field sobriety
test. They get arrested and this
or they blow a 0.02 or whatever
and instead of just booking them
writing it up and sending that
officer back on the street
dealing with violent crimes and
other things.
take 234 hours, the blood draw,
uh, presumably the fact that you
need the blood draw, you may
lose probable cause at that
moment, so you have to release
the person.
court. They may not show up, um,
given their lifestyle it it just
it just makes no sense to do a
blood draw on a misdemeanor, um,
I think we can, we can fix that
As as the sponsor said, a lot of
these, all these bills need to
be standalone independently we
could put them into a package
House Bill 2. House Bill 2 is
the best crime fighter, and the
best crime fighter, Madam
President, is a job.
The best way to fight crime is
with a job and so hopefully we
can pass some bills that grow
improving, uh, other laws as it
relates to building, building
permits and stuff like that, but
anyway, thank you President
members for the opportunity to
just show these. I, I, I may be
reluctant to contribute to the
the governor and everybody
involved. Thank you, thank you,
Madam President. Thank you,
Senator Ramos. Mad, Madam
President, thank you so much as
as I sit here listening to
Senator Mayer says, I, I see
but, uh, Madam President, um
made the sponsor please yield
for a question.
you.
Um, Mrs.
Madam President,
Madam present and Senator,
that's a really good question
because of your use of the term
automatic, um, and so I, I would
answer that in the affirmative,
predates, uh, the band. So yes,
you can, you can lawfully own an
automatic weapon, but, but
generally the federal government
has tried to make use of
automatic weapons or.
conversion devices.
If
Someone has one currently if
they were driving down the road,
a police officer picked him up
and, and stopped him for
under federal law so that
individual could be charged
under federal law. We're simply
trying to help law enforcement
who want, uh, and have been
pretty supportive of this bill,
uh, and some of the biggest
Federally it is illegal, but
here in the state of New Mexico,
it is not, that's what you're
saying.
Man present.
Um, Senator, the way you're
wording it, it is still illegal
by a US attorney, uh, which we
know today don't have in New
Mexico, uh, a US attorney in
place, but this with the
adoption of this law, we would
in support of this bill. We, we
definitely, I think it's a, it's
a step in the, in the right
direction. I just was wondering
why we enter this if enter the
much and that's the only
question I have, Madam
President.
Thank you
S
concerns.
That I've heard from both sides
of the aisle from Senators Pinto
and uh Maestus and uh from my
fellow senators on my side.
I have to tell you.
That this bill.
I was hoping for like a filet
mignon, but right now this bill
is like chips and dip.
Surprise me.
I've heard chairs put amendments
on that I've heard members of
has its privileges and I'm used
to, I was used to that in the
military.
You know, these amendments that
And I know there are some on
both sides that are afraid to
cross the aisle.
Sometimes crossing party lines
is like getting between a dog
and a fire hydrant.
And I agree with Senator Ramos.
That this bill does not go far
enough for Senator Brant saying
this bill does not go far
enough.
This bill again.
Is not filet mignon.
It is chips and dip.
weapons.
We have been cruel. We said, no,
you can't have treatment if
you're finding competent and
need help, we said no to that.
Mar a Lago, which was a skiff,
it wasn't a garage or a former
senator, former VP didn't have
any.
Need to have classified
documents, we can debate that
one. I'd be more than happy to
debate that point with 30 years
I can't remember who said it,
but one person said,
Well, 100 fentanyl pills is not
very much.
4 Americans aged 18 to 45.
In the war on drugs, I would
agree with Senator Maest it's
the great society of 1965. We've
spent trillions of dollars
there.
And poverty is higher than it
Amendment.
It's different in 1971 compared
to today. And I got to tell you,
I, I agree with him.
Is when the legislature is in
session. Senator Ma is right.
About the libertarian point of
view here of less government,
We can't accept that.
We can't accept the amount of
people dying in the streets in
New Mexico and in one of the
It's been a complete failure,
which is one of the reasons why.
Nobody wants to come to New
Mexico when we're losing people
when our neighbors are
Record drugged overdose deaths
here.
In New Mexico.
But we gotta do something.
I can't imagine.
Going back to our constituents.
When they ask us, why didn't you
at least just give me some chips
and dip.
And you do nothing.
I'm in the minority party.
I'm not happy about the
amendments not passing with no
bipartisan support.
While not perfect by any means.
We'll improve the lives and
safety of New Mexicans, even a
can, you can do those amendments
later and make a bill, and we'll
hear him and we'll get him to
the floor.
I think he's a man of his word.
And I would ask
The accountability of juveniles.
Drafting a swatting bill.
Drafting a bill providing for
Drafting a bill making stash, a
stash house illegal with the
most unspeakable things.
Going on in those houses.
You've seen the news of women
But I'm proud today that we're
doing something.
And Madam Chair,
And Representative Chandler.
And I hope next year our
appetites are quenched.
With filet mignon instead of
chips and dip.
Because I'll tell you that
people are hungry for safety.
Thank you, Madam President,
Madam President, let me, uh,
quote some stuff from LFC went
over this pretty hard this
summer and I think the courts
and corrections committees had
rest, I don't remember the exact
numbers, exact percentage, but
some of the cases, the evidence
wasn't collected correctly to
prosecute.
Prosecutions were down, where
they were.
Um
Number of court cases are down
across the board. We've
increased the court funding in
the last 4 years in all areas of
And crime still up and
prosecutions are still down.
We keep funding things at a
higher agency. But if people
don't do their job.
happening there, but if they
aren't doing their job, then the
DA's aren't going to get the
cases and they aren't going to
get them correctly.
Then they're not gonna get
prosecuted in the courts. And if
President.
surround as to yields. Madam
President, Senator, would you
agree with that statement? If,
if everybody's not doing their
jobs. We're not going to change
crime in New Mexico.
certainty, and more effective
prosecution and incarceration.
Madam President, Senator, we put
$234 million into recruiting new
officers. We're not going to
gain traction with crime, with
only 27% gain for that dollar
amount. Would you agree, Madam
President, Senator, would you
agree with that statement?
Uh, we just selected a new
district attorney in Donana
County. He took office January
1. He came into a district
attorney's office with 7
prosecutors Donana County. There
And Madam President, Senator, we
have the opposite problem in our
county. RDA has fired every
single attorney in the office
except for her. We have 600 and
magistrate judge and they took
him to the, I think, judicial
standards or DA standards,
whatever commission that is, and
they slapped her on the hand for
That that's something that
really worries me and and that's
our county's problem and that's
our lecture's problem, uh
because we do that. But the
number of cases that the, the
court
since 17 and, and they still
have that capacity, but they're
only hearing about 1000 cases,
but it's not just the court's
fault.
It's everybody's fault.
So, pass a law.
want to, but everybody had
better stand up and pay
attention that every police
officer has to do their job and
has to do their job correctly.
Every DA has to do their job and
hire employees and do it
correctly.
Um, Madam President, um.
The point I want to make is, is
let me maybe the sponsor yield
for another question, Madam
President.
If I'm pulled over, somebody's
pulled over for DWI and say
they're impaired, they're on me
they're on medication, heart
medication, and, and the, the
vehicle's gonna be towed. Um,
they're gonna be taken to the
hospital and then if they're not
found guilty, they're gonna have
to pay for that vehicle to be
worked with law enforcement
myself and prosecuting DWI
offenses, law enforcement
officers gonna ask the driver
where they've been, if they've
consumed any alcohol when they
eyes, slurred speech, um,
impairment of motor functions,
field sobriety tests. So there,
there's a lot of things that go
into law enforcement officer
getting beyond a reasonable
a blood draw.
Madam President center, but at
the end of the day, you say that
person is not innocent. Is there
a car towed when it happens?
My understanding is that if
Thank you, Madam President,
senator. So we, in the DWI
scandal in Albuquerque.
I mean, this
Hopefully it never happens
other day with the building
inspector. No reason to be
there, but showed up, um, and
so, Madam President, but that's
the most worrisome for me that
And not being rich and being
poor.
It will cost them a lot of money
to get out of that, even though
they didn't do anything and
died. Not even one pill, just
exposed. A police officer died
because he was exposed to, to
the, the 100 pill count means
nothing to me. It's, that's.
we change it to 25, they'll
carry 24 pills. And, and we know
that fentanyl is ruin our
schools. It's the easiest drug
to access and it's the cheapest
So Senator Townsend, I think
you've already spoken, haven't
I
I hear something totally
different, um, and I, and I
think it's.
The body, um,
Has to
I think our arrests are down is
because we broke the spirit of
many law enforcement officers
because they knew.
When they arrested somebody,
But my friend,
Senator Block
Made the comment that maybe we
We have.
Had
terrible problem on the border
with immigration and people
coming over and it's, it's just
been a mess down there.
To say we didn't do anything. I
just want to set the record
straight. We did do something.
We allowed it to continue, and
now we got a real mess.
We have people.
country.
That are causing
Problems in our own cities,
Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Rosville,
Artesia, Carl's bed, I mean, I
with this bill is better than
doing nothing, and I, I
appreciate what has been done,
but it's not nearly what people
It's not even, it didn't do what
people expected us to do.
Madam President, thank you for
the opportunity. Thank you,
Senator.
In light of what we have passed
here today or fixing to pass.
We had an incident last summer
where we were driving through
pulling into Roswell, going to
fuel up a pickup. We had a
trailer hooked on. We had a
horse in the back of the
And all of a sudden he reaches
in his coat pocket, pulls out a
chunk of cement and throws it at
the window of our pickup.
We had to duck.
3rd chunk of cement and threw it
at the horse trailer.
My husband.
Just for the safety of us and
Other cars stayed there while we
got parked while we were calling
911 for help to get something
when he might go before a judge
and lo and behold, guess what?
He was out in less than 7 days.
took place that scared the heck
out of one of my constituents.
She lives over on the
East side of Roswell, and it can
be kind of rough over there.
Good people live over there.
In October of 2023.
She got 2 driver's licenses in
the mail at her house.
one, lay it aside and said,
well, they just misdelivered it.
She looked again and on these
driver's license, that was her
address on those.
In a 3 day span, she got 18 more
driver's license that were
addressed to her residence. She
was fearful for her kids and for
her life as well.
Madam chair, whenever we have
problems with what we are
experiencing coming in from
south of the border whenever we
by that.
Whenever we have judges that are
slapping them on the wrist and
letting them go.
Madam Chair, we do have a
problem with mental issues, but
we also have a problem with
people that are out to do harm.
that they are.
Going down a road to become rich
or to become famous or whatever
the case may be.
But Madam Chair, my constituents
are gonna say, what did you do
up there to help us?
Be protected.
We have a good staff down in my
But we don't have the capacity
to hold everybody that they do
send to jail.
To be able to hold them for any
length of time.
And until we address the mental
issue, mental health issue.
that they want dealt to them,
Madam Chair, I think that uh.
As a legislator.
My, my constituents are not
We have to be stronger than what
this is coming across as.
Madam Chair.
I am going to yield. Thank you
very much for the time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. As a
member of Senate Judiciary, I
had an opportunity to see this
bill before it got here to the
floor.
And I think
I think when we're considering a
agencies including the sheriffs
and police officers in my
district and beyond.
And they continued to say that
they had 2 priorities. One of
those was addressing the
competency issue.
enforcement's top priorities.
The competency section.
Is in depth.
And I hope that it puts an end
to
important to our law enforcement
agencies.
My biggest heartburn over this
whole bill.
Was the gun conversion devices.
very clearly, both from members
of the committee and those
presenting this bill, and most
importantly, from my law
enforcement officers that on
these devices, the sole purpose
That device needs to be
outlawed.
When it came to the bomb scare
and shooting threats, I think
any parent in New Mexico would
agree.
That was certainly a debate that
was a learning moment. I think,
uh,
I think Senator Cervantes is the
chair, teaches me a little bit
of law and I had an opportunity
Mexico and for all these
reasons,
This bill
It's a good bill.
But I think we've heard this
loud on our side. It's not
enough.
And I hope that we all agree
I appreciated the conversation
about jobs and who's doing
theirs and who's not. In my
short time on judiciary, I will
say this, there's a lot of
judges in New Mexico not doing
their job.
making it happen and forcing it
and doing their job. We have a
job to do too though.
And this isn't enough.
And so we'll spend the next half
of this session, working just as
And together we need to unite,
we need to pass this, and we
need to pass a lot more to put
them out of business.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
debate?
To your share.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Almost none of them were
enacted.
These, these, these bills
covered things from DWI.
We have to ask.
How much suffering did we allow
in those 10 years.
How many abused children did we
How many murdered and missing
indigenous women. Did we allow?
Because we didn't
Enact
Most of this package.
How many families?
questions here and Madam Chair,
there's, there's an old Chinese
proverb that the best time to
plant a tree was 20 years ago.
The second best day is today.
We had an opportunity today to
do some really great things. We
had an opportunity today to
plant a tree. We couldn't plant
it 10 years ago. That's time's
gone.
the human trafficking.
Those were all they were
presented to us today.
And we chose not to go there.
Tomorrow.
Which of course is better than
planting it.
10 years from now.
But Madam Chair, I do think.
Down the field
But we certainly didn't score.
And I don't even think we got a
first down.
But we moved it
We can plant a tree so that we
don't have 1400 more bills that
just died.
That the chair of judiciary find
flaws, yes.
But they are all minor flaws
that I think we can fix in the
next 30 days. We can plant this
cities in the world in, in, in
New Mexico, the most dangerous
state in the nation. And who
would have thought New Mexico.
My goodness, we're filled with
great people and great
The worst state in the union for
crime.
We can do this, Madam President.
We can do this now.
And I ask
Let's do it tomorrow.
Let's get these bills together.
And really solve the problem.
Let's do it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Siner Cervantes to
close on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for AS Bill
8.
Undergraduate UNM and then
medical school.
And 2 of them completed medical
school and law school.
Crime became an issue and
and where I began my adult life.
I didn't recognize what they
were describing and so this is
not a new issue for me.
It's something I've been trying
to work on for for many years,
want them to come back to be in
your family, and the reason
they're coming back is not
because of medical malpractice
or any of the other arguments
that are made, they will tell me
want to have to go to the gas
station and make sure they do so
with friends along and do so in
daylight hours. They don't want
to have to go to Walgreens for
limited hours where the stores
related to the border or to
immigration. Let me, let me help
you with something because
Senator Munhoz said it right.
If you haven't read it, get a
look at the legislative study on
What you'll find about that data
is that two of the safest cities
in the state of New Mexico are
in my district.
Sunland Park
Another of the safest top cities
in New Mexico is Anthony, also
in my district.
10 minutes from the border.
And consider this.
Couple of years ago El Paso was
rated the 3rd safest city in the
United States, El Paso has the
border running through the
middle of the city.
front of us.
And so
Taking a logical approach, I sat
down with the chief of police of
the city of Las Cruces, and I
chief of police for the city of
Las Cruces will ask him what is
El Paso doing that Albuquerque
is not doing.
Senator Munoz is right. Many of
you all have made the same
point. It's about enforcement.
It's about swiftness, it's about
certainty. And let me help
illustrate this, this issue.
adulthood, I've lived here my
whole life. I was much safer. My
family was much safer, 20 and 30
and 40 years ago.
Did we have more laws then? No,
have more laws, 20 and 30 years
ago. We had fewer laws and
lesser penalties, and yet we
were safer.
10 and 20 and 30 years ago.
Logic dictates the problem is
The issue comes down to our
ability to address crime in
other ways and this bill does
some of that.
By addressing the revolving
door, and I, one of my
colleagues made the point, I
think Senator Townsend, he made
a great point when you talk to
next morning.
Let's work with our courts to do
that.
Senator Munoz is right, if you
look at the study that our good
What is logic dictate in that
case? Where is the breakdown?
It's not about a lack of laws.
The
training. They require
resources. They require
manpower.
We in this chamber have
appropriated substantial amount
of money over the last several
years to improve, uh,
recruitment and retention of law
money.
To retain and recruit in law
enforcement needs to know that
issue too. We can only do so
much up here, but we've got a
partner and here we're
There must be a law to do this.
It must be a lot to solve that.
And we're up here to be
lawmakers, so it's easy for us
to assume that is the solution.
But
together with a unified vote to
recognize that for all the
criticism we got this last
summer about not being
responsive to crime. We needed
the time.
That was taken and I want to
people that are providing the
services they took up months to
listen to the the needs of
having the evaluators and the
facilities.
And now we've got money in this
I want to loop back to Senator
Brandt's point earlier, which is
this is not anything but a step
in the right direction, but it's
competency cases constitute
about 4%.
Of criminal cases.
Somebody described the issue
we're dealing with here is a
bump on a log. I think that's a
little unfair, but we shouldn't.
They're the visible cases
because we see the same people
and we hear about catch and
release.
And yet we don't do enforcement
up Central Avenue in
Albuquerque.
If you haven't done it, I
implore you to do so.
And I'm looking at those of you
that in Albuquerque, you know
what I'm talking about.
If we're trying to address crime
we triage things. Is it really?
Important to deal with the 4% of
the cases of revolving people
doing small crimes in and out,
people.
In a lot of communities and we
and we need to address that too.
I want to end with a.
Yeah, George, I get it.
mean this, we have 30 more days
to do all of those things and I
wanna, I wanna.
Really discourage anyone from
thinking this was partisan any
time or that somehow I was
I never said we wouldn't take
amendments. What I said is we
would take amendments that
needed to clean up the bill on
minor issues, but we were not
going to consider entirely new
issues, stash houses that had
those flaws. Let us do that
work.
Let, let us and, and, and I've
given you that commitment to
take this time to do so.
So I'll end with Voltaire.
Voltaire said, I loved it, uh,
the public we're serious. We
intend to do the work. We intend
to show the governor that we
intend to give her good
legislation, but let's not,
let's not delude ourselves.
House Judiciary Committee, sorry
about that. House members. I
move that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 as repeatedly amended do
now pass and ask unanimous
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 as amended.
Senators, we are voting on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 as thrice
Senator Block Center block votes
yes. Brandt.
Center Brandt boats, yes, Center
Brantley. Senator Brantly votes
Sent to Charlie votes yes,
centers, yes.
yes. Senator Hamlin Yes
No.
Pope. Yes. Center Pope votes
yes. Senator Ramos. Ramos votes
yes.
Sanchez votes yes.in Scott.
Lopez. Yes. Senator Cedilia
Lopez votes yes. In share.
Santos Center souls center so
votes yes, Intersteponics.
Yes. Senator Thornton votes yes.
Center Tobias and votes, yes,
center town center Townsend
Senor Cervantes. Thank you,
Madam President, Madam
President, you know, we have all
these new House members over
here. I have some sitting back
here, they're kind of wishing we
had a 3 hour limit too at times.
So, uh, Madam President, thank
you all for a good debate and a
See no objection were on
messages from the house.
Messages from the House of
Representatives, Madam
President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
message has been received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 56 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
inform the Senate that the House
has passed the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81 and request request the
clearance of the Senate.
Respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
amended by the House and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted,
Lisa Martinez McCutcheon, chief
substitute for House Bill 10 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted,
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen, chief
clerk.
Bill 3 as amended by the House
without emergency clause and
request the concurrence of the
Senate to the House amendments
respectfully submitted Lisa Marz
has passed Senate Bill 1 as
amended by the Senate and
returns same herewith,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message has been received.
Senator Worth, thank you, Madam
President, unanimous consent we
go that our business committee
Madam President, your education
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 325 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read the whole stack
of committee reports and that we
vote on them with one motion.
The journal reflect they were
acted upon individually
to read all the committee
reports.
Senate Bill 380 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Joint resolution 3.
Senate Bill 387 do not pass, but
that Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 387
committee report, all those in
favor signify saying aye.
Posna, the eyes have it
committee report is adopted and
the journal will reflect that
they were acted upon
individually, the reader to
Bill 21 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
do pass.
Respectfully submitted senator
George Munoz, chair.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to all the committee reports.
Senate Bill 92 do pass Senate
Senate Bill 162 as amended do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator George Munoz,
chair.
Posna, the eyes have it
committee report is adopted and
the journal will reflect we
acted upon them individually.
Has had it under consideration,
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflects they
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read all the committee
reports
Senate Bill 254 do not pass, but
the Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 254
do pass and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
reports on adoption of committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Opposedney, the I have a
committee report is adopted and
the journal will reflect that
it under consideration for its
same with the recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
And that's referred to the
health and public affairs
Committee respectfully
submitted, Senator Katie
That the reader be allowed to
read the ton of committee
reports and that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
amended and then referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 199 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 215 do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 227 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
reports of a committee report,
all those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those oppose
the eyes have a committee report
is adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
We are on introduction of
legislation, the reader to read.
House Bill 77 introduced by
Representative Elizabeth Liz
authority to develop annual
federal supplemental nutrition
assistance program
state out outreach plans House
Bill 77.
House Bill 77 had been read
ordered referred to Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee, thence to Senate
Finance House Bill 7756
introduced by Representative
Herndon for the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee.
An act relating to healthcare
requiring the Secretary of
provided at hospitals. House
Bill 56.
I'll spell 56 and I read twice
by Tyless or referred to Senate
tax, Business and Transportation
Martinez Armstrong, Matthews,
and De la Cruz.
An act relating to law
enforcement.
Establishing the enforcement
bureau within the regulation and
House Bill 10 have read twice by
title is ordered referred to
Senate Judiciary Committee,
thence to Senate Finance, House
Bill 10.
Study Committee.
An act relating to school
personnel.
Creating new licenses for site
administrators, superintendents,
and other school administrators.
Setting criteria.
Providing for a delayed repeal
of current school administrator
licenses.
1 twice by or referred to Senate
education, thence to Senate
Finance, House Bill 157.
therapy licensure Interstate
Compact, amending the
occupational Therapy Act to
provide for state and federal
criminal history background
Bill 81.
OK
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 81.
Senator Peter.
Madam President.
Unanimous consent, we go that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous. Alright, seeing
floor. I know committees, some
committees are going to meet,
um, so, and we'll save all of
our thank yous for tomorrow
since we're working one extra
day this week. It's ideal to
chairs and any other
meeting 5 minutes after we get
off the floor. We have a
presentation to listen to this
evening. Thank you. Thank you.
What room are you in?
math film that's going to be
shown in the Senate Finance
Committee starting at 11:30. I
think you'll find it very
interesting. 11 o'clock. I think
you'll find it very interesting.
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
our committee room. uh, Senate
Finance will go in tomorrow and
let's come in at 9:30, I guess,
and then I guess we can watch a
movie till we come down on the
floor.
Give us something to do.
you look through them and, and
go through them.
And, uh, make sure you know what
you want to do. Just a reminder
for anyone, like if the governor
says, I'm gonna fund a swimming
governor's numbers are in those
capital numbers too. And then as
we move along, we'll try to
visit with the exec and see
where she's putting her money so
we don't have leftover money
require a little help from you
guys. Uh, so just remember that
it's due by Wednesday, so you
should be very popular over the
weekend. Uh, everybody will be
Or, uh, yeah, we're trying, we
create winners and we create
losers and sometimes they create
losers on their own. And so, uh.
Uh, it starts at 11.
I came over and told me 11:30. I
said 11 and you came over and
told me 11:30.
Anyway, they're having a movie
tomorrow. They may have to, may
We'll start racking that up over
the weekend for the, the
general, the New Mexican editors
that say we don't do anything,
we'll probably be in here
Sunday, uh, working on, on House
overages and unders and overs
and where we're left short, um,
there's a lot of money that we
still have to figure out how to
handle. We know.
the education for the funding
through 6th through 9th is short
Bill 2 came over, uh, Madam
chair, so Senate Finance will
try to get the bills that don't
have no funding out of the way
as quickly as we can, um, we're
not gonna meet Sunday, but we
the perfect kind of movie for
finance to watch.
Um,
I mean it's in the right room.
OK, other announcements about
committees or anything else,
Senator Maestas, Madam
President, thank you, Senate
Judiciary Committee will not be
meeting regularly on Monday.
Thank you. Thank you. Other
committees.
Center City Lopez, Madam
President, um, Senate
Conservation will meet tomorrow
too might have forgotten that.
Yes, and a really good, a good
breakfast I'm told that will
come visit.
Senator Boone.
I'd like to speak to you about
it for just a moment here. Uh, I
heard that, that today in the,
in the capital was hunger Action
Day.
hours here.
And in spirited debate and, and
then, uh.
And dialogue talking about how
we need to work together.
Deeply on me and, and I, I just
want to talk about what I do for
a living.
I'm an ad guy. I'm a rancher.
And
The, the
Something that I go out to do
to, to feed my family.
But each each day has its own
challenges, you know, we have to
deal with the weather, we have
to deal with, with the, uh,
And it, it seems to me like
every time we turn around, we've
got something new that's jumping
up in front of us and this.
bills that are not here on the
floor during announcement,
Senator and I talked about this
just for the members, uh, we
can't be debating bills that are
And the challenges, but we just
don't get into specific bills
that are coming.
OK. Well, I, I did, I wasn't
really gonna debate it. I was
just throwing it out there, but,
Putting seeds in the ground or.
Coming back later and harvesting
those seeds that have made a
crop.
And call somebody to come.
Fill in for us at the last
minute so it's, it's just a very
difficult time.
Be compassionate with each other
about the needs of, of what we
need to do, what we have in
front of us.
And my longtime friend and and
now colleague here in the
And I just, I just wanted to
bring this up for.
For just
For just some consideration.
And to close
To close with this, I, I'd just
like to mention one thing.
I'd like to read to you every
day.
and I just open the Bible and
whatever.
Jumps out at me. That's what I
send out for that day.
Today I sent out a.
devour one another.
Beware lest you be consumed by
one another.
So I'll, I'll close with that,
and I'm, I'm sorry if I, uh, if
you.
Thank you. Any other
announcements, Senator Peter
Wirth thank you Madam President,
just before we close, it now
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
What do I say now?
If there's no.
suspended at the Journal of the
Records show that the Journal
has been read in full and
approved subject to revision and
approval of the judiciary
Committee.
Disorder
think we should all thank her
for what she's done.
And just to the whole body, I
think that was a very a debate
I think that's a message that we
are certainly demonstrating here
with what we've done. So with
that, uh, Madam President, you
know we stand in recess until
1:30 tomorrow afternoon.
