get ready for those, uh, number
10 is Senator Maestas, who's not
Scherer on Senate Bill 88 as
three times amended, uh.
Number 13 is Senator Shindo, uh,
that's on Senate bill, uh,
Bill 170 as 4 times amended. I'm
gonna go ahead and get the work
on the table done and then we'll
go to concurrence on those
We're good on those, uh, the
plan, let me just give a, a road
map upfront. We are gonna do
items 30 through 38 on the
calendar. I'll just go through
Bill 203, uh, 32 is Senator
Jaramilo, uh, house, uh, Bill
24, uh,
Item 36, House Bill 458 is
Senator Scherer.
Item 37, House Bill 156, is
go to a consent calendar and
I'll go ahead and pass those out
once we start 3rd reading on the
bills, uh, just so everyone can
see what's on there and then we
do have a final, uh,
house. There are no.
we are in that order of business
messages from the house to
reader will read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 9 as
the Senate.
Senate Bill 146, Senate Bill
197.
Senate bill 236.
As amended by the Senate.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 13 as
amended by the House.
Senate Bill 170 as amended by
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Worz takes that next order
business, Mr. President,
unanimous consent. We go to that
our business committee reports.
There are no objection. We are
for House Bill 398 has had it
under consideration, reports
same with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted, Senator Carrie
Hamblin,
chair,
adopted the reader to read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee to whom has been
referred House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
Senator Munoz, Mr. President, I
consent to the Senator you're be
allowed to read all the
committee reports we vote on
them with one motion and the
juror reflect they were acted
adoption committee reports
motion to adopt the committee
reports. All those in favor of
the logos signify by saying a.
There was an A, the eyes have
an update. I'll yield to Senator
Maestas to give us an update.
Thank you Mr. President,
honorable members the University
of New Mexico Lobos spanked
Marquette, the Big East is Nada
Michigan State University Sunday
afternoon on national
television. Thank you, Senators
for that update. Any further
announcements, senators were on
that order business
announcements of miscellaneous.
Washington DC saying that they
really enjoyed our bolo tie
contest, so all the way from
Washington, so that was nice.
Uh, the second part is, um, uh,
um, I'm staying at the Chimayo
Hotel and I had some of those
New Mexico pins. So I gave some
to the employees that work there
and uh it was very interesting.
Senator Gonzalez.
Mr.
President, I'm gonna ask you
performing Arts Center. I asked
the man's consent to release
that bill from Senate Finance.
Thank you, Senator Munoz. Any
discussion? Any objection?
See no objections ordered.
Senator Charlie
sport and continuing to bring
this chamber together in fun and
enjoy, um, and finding ways for
us to connect, especially across
the aisle. um, thank you so
So no further announcements,
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So we're gonna go
to concurrence. I just want a
heads up again, Senator Maestas,
you're up number one, Senator
President, unanimous consent. We
go to that order business
concurrence, and I yield to send
Maestes for concurrence calendar
number 10, Senate Bill 375 as
amended. There are no objection.
Senate concur with House
amendments to Senate Bill 375 as
amended. Thank you, Senator. If
you'll explain how those
amendments were in the house.
to prison instead of your good
time credit correlating to what
brought you back to prison it
it's consistent with your
original charges makes it a
minute uh quick uh easier to
administer. Thank you, Senator
See no discussion center my just
to close.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you,
Mr. President. I move that the
Senate concur to the House
amendments to Senate Bill 375 as
Those oppose
Those opposed?
The eyes have it. The Senate has
concurred with the House changes
to Senate Bill 375 as amended.
Senator Campos
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
clause. Thank you Senator
Campos. If you'll explain those
amendments. Thank you, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, in essence, uh, there's
4 amendments that are made, uh,
3 of them go ahead and take the
then of course, uh, uh, I think
it's amendment number 2. It also
indicates instead of equal to
it's gonna be not greater than
and that's gonna be the amount
of the 50 million. That's, uh,
See no discussion, Senator
Campos to close. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, I move that the
Senate do concur with the
amendments, all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Goa Poney the eyes have it, the
Senate has concurred with the
House amendments to Senate Bill
13 times amended with the
uh, Mr. President, I moved the
Senate concur with House
amendments of, uh, Senate bill.
88 as three times amended.
Medicaid Trust Fund, we're using
the transfers from the overnight
deposits at the state
treasurer's office. We need to
allow those to sit for at least
6 months before we make a
Mr. President, this is the
finest concurrence ever. Thank
you, Senator Sheer.
Any debate senators say no
debate, Senator anyone else to
close. I thought Senator was
And I asked for a, uh, I just
asked
including the lieutenant
governor, a voice vote,
including the lieutenant
governor.
The Senate has concurred with
the House amendments to Senate
Bill 88 is 3 times the mandate.
We'll go on to the next
Item in the next incurrence
challenge that's concurrence
I if you'll explain those
amendments uh this is really my
amendment in the House
Appropriation Finance, uh,
really on page two line 19,
distinct, uh, tribes Tiwawa, Toa
Kiras, Apache, Zuni, and Dena
and then also uh that we would
report our progress uh by
November of every year to both
Shindo. I move that Senate, uh,
concur with uh Senate bill, 13
as amended and uh that's for
voice spoke. Thank yous been a
request to adopt the House
Move on to the next one that's
gonna be.
Occurrence calendar number 14.
I'll to center but yeah. uh,
thank you very much, Mr.
President. I move that the
discussion that happened here in
this chamber as well, Mr.
President, but essentially
wanted to make sure that the
site selection work is on
industry standards and there are
many of those out there, so we
agree with that. um, and then
these need to be showing uh good
work or they're gonna sunset on
July 1, 2035.
Thank you, Senator Padilla any
discussion on the House
Amendment senators.
been a request to adopt the
House amendments. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Those opposed, the eyes have it.
The Senate has concurred with
House amendments to Senate Bill
We're on that order business
send me Mr. President, so as I
mentioned, we're gonna do items
30 through 38 on the calendar.
I'm gonna have our sergeant at
arms, hand out now Senate
senator Tobiasin and Bergman's
to work and I'll go through on
an
announcements, who the sponsors
are on those bills, uh, Mr.
President, with that unanimous
consent, we go to that order
Thank you, we're on that order
of business they read the
legislation center.
Thank you Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the
Senate of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Pope. We'll explain the bill.
Mr. President, House Bill 159
amended requires the developer
or owner of renewable energy
project in New Mexico to provide
this notification has to be done
within 30 days of submitting a
notice of a proposal or proposed
construction or alteration of a
renewable energy project to the
commission within 30 days of
obtaining approval or or finding
of adverse impact on military
operations by providing a copy
Senators, we're debating House
Bill 159 is two times amended.
See no debate, Senator Pope to
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in a negative by a
show of hands. senators, we're
voting. All senators to your
seats, please.
in the negative. House Bill 159
is twice amended, has passed the
Senate. Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that all action from placing
House Bill 203 as amended on
final passage has been taken. It
is now open for debate.
of state-issued electronic
devices including cell phones
when performing department
duties and requiring the backup
and retention of those electric
as well as union policies and
procedure, Mr. President, I
stand for questions.
Thank you, senators. We're
debating House Bill 203 is two
times amended. Anyone wishing to
present are shown voting in the
affirmative, except those shown
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. All senators to your
seats, please. We are voting all
senators to your seats if you
wish to vote no, please raise
By a vote of 42 in the
affirmative is in the negative
House Bill 203 is twice amended,
has passed the Senate. Senator
Bradley, thank you, Mr.
President. We're going on to the
next item that's gonna be item
number 32 on your calendar and
judiciary Committee substitute
for House Rural Development land
grants and cultural Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 24 on final passage has
been taken and that it's now
subject for debate, amendment,
attorney Act established in 2020
as a tuition waiver program for
3rd year, UNM law students to
engage in providing free legal
services to our Spanish land
See no debate. send her how to
made clothes, Mr. President. I
move the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Rural Development land grants
negative by show of hands. Thank
you, senators. We're voting all
senators to your seats please.
affirmative 0 in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Rural
Development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24 has
passed the Senate. Senator
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing House Bill
117 is twice amended on final
Uh, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, this adds physicians
assistants to the list of
individuals who can declare
deaths if from natural causes if
Bill 1170 is twice amended in my
do you wish to debate?
See no debate, Senator
Stephanics to close Mr.
President, I move that House
a show of hands. We're voting
all senators to your seats if
you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
I vote of 40 in the affirmative
0 in the negative. House Bill
117 is twice amended has passed
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill 102.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
uh, statute, uh, when we raise
the penalty for vehicular
homicide back in 2016 we forgot
to uh correct some language in
House Bill 102, anyone wishing
to debate?
Senator Pope, you wish to
debate.
Center Pope, Mr. President, with
violent felonies this bill deals
with.
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
Senator Pope, uh, homicide by
vehicle.
Uh, we basically a DWI, uh,
homicide.
essentially, uh, homicide by
vehicle was a 3rd degree crime
back in 2016 in the middle of
the night, uh, the legislature
category, uh, and so just to be
consistent, uh, this bill
corrects that and so a judge
could has the.
discretion to.
To deem it a serious violent
Allows judges to release it, um,
allows them to maybe increase
sentencing or just have more.
for 15% uh meritorious deduction
or good time.
So it it was uh DWI homicide.
Listed on it was listed as 3rd
the serious violent offense list
didn't take out the words 3rd
degree.
And so, uh, so to be consistent,
uh, this bill takes out 3rd
degree and just keeps in the
offense if the court deemed it
so at sentencing, it's uh, it's
not an automatic, it's
discretionary.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
President, Senator. So in
actuality we've already
correct?
Forgive me, Mr. President,
Senator Paul, would you mind
seeing that again, Mr.
President, Senator, so it sounds
like we already made the
decision on the severity of this
if it's uh.
Reckless driving, uh, vehicular
homicide, then.
You're in the series Violent
That are incorrect that
inconsistency in the criminal
code and it's not automatic I
mean.
Most of the homicides are, are
not by hardened criminals, so
Thank you Senator Pope. Any
further debate, senators?
Senator Pinto.
and if the senator, yes this
will yield.
Send a message to you yield, Mr.
President, yes.
Mr. President, the self-driving
vehicle would be eligible for
good time.
Mr. President, in all
punish in the criminal laws, uh,
but there would be civil
liability for, you know, the
computer software or the maker
of the car, I suppose, but that
has absolutely nothing to do
with this bill.
first time I'm seeing the bills,
so I just like a little bit more
insight, uh, Mr. President and
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Pinto, so in statute
It's, it's bad public policy for
an inmate not to have good time
eligibility, so back in the day
there was what's called
indeterminate sentencing. So
which your sentenced to a
particular year.
And so that's when the good time
kicks in, uh, uh if you're on,
if you're a serious violent
And this is all, uh, you know,
the, the.
The lawyers, the judge, the
victim, the defendant, they're
all aware of this at sentencing
in terms of uh the eligibility.
you're correct. This bill, the,
this bill is discretion of the
judge. Vehicular homicide is
discretion of the judge whether
to deem it a serious violent
offense or not, but the good
time is up to the, the prison
President and Senator. Thank
you, Mr. President, uh, Senator
Pino, basically the warden, the
department of corrections, uh.
You're eligible for good time
you don't get into fights, you
don't get caught with
contraband, you don't threaten
the guards if you just are a
model inmate, then you receive
all of your eligibility just
because you're eligible doesn't
mean, uh,
only eligible to 4 days a month.
Everyone else is eligible, uh,
uh, up to 15 days a month, so
it's, it's just a management
tool to keep our correctional
Mr. President, uh, Senator
Pinto, correct, this is just the
way prisons are run, uh, in the
United States.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President,
members appreciate that the
debate, Mr. President, I move
that House Bill 102 do not pass,
and I ask unanimous consent of
Senators, we're voting all
senators to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senor Maestas
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Majority Leader Peter Worth, Mr.
President, we'll just take a
whom has been referred House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 493 has had it under
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President,
I move the adoption of the
committee report. We have a
motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those pone, the eyes have it,
the community port has been
adopted.
being 11:59 a.m. I move we
adjourn until 12:01 p.m. The
Senate will come to order.
Mr. President, I ask you in
consent that the rules be
suspended, the journals show
that all those present in this
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the judiciary
Committee. You see no objection.
It is so ordered. Senator or Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
go back to that order business
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all actions for placing House
Bill 458 is twice amended.
Uh, be put on final pass final
What this does is it creates
the, the, uh,
A carbon, carbon dioxide storage
stewardship fund.
The reader will read
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to House Bill 458 as twice
thought Senator Cedil Lopez was
going to do that, but I move
Senate floor amendment number 1
to house Bill 458 is twice
amended.
And I'll let her explain it.
Thank you, Senator. No
objection.
Senator, we're on but I have to
do the amendment
Mr. President, this amendment,
um,
would have established privacy
did not advance out of Senate
conservation, and I said there
at conservation that I thought
that.
Clarity in the ownership of poor
that poor space is owned by the
surface owner and it also
clarifies that poor space rights
are severable from the surface
rights, just like other, like
mineral rights are severable,
this issue, modernizes it.
Um, and I suggested it in a
conservation and so I suppose um
Senator share, uh,
that, this bill came out of that
comment and like, my apologies,
I actually thought that she was
gonna sponsor it, but yes, it is
very friendly amendment.
Thank you, it's friendly because
Thank you, Mr. President. I do
not need the sponsor of the
amendment to yield, but it's
been brought to my attention
that perhaps poor space should
be owned by the state.
poor space is, uh, the space
between the rocks where, uh,
supposedly carbon sequestration
may occur. The problem is when
people bought the land and the
have extensive value and it is
ripe for the
The exploiters to come in and
buy that up. There is also lots
Mexico for the poor space to be
owned by the state of New Mexico
as a long term resource and
managed by the state land
people know what the real value
of this is going to be, and I
worry about the corporate greed
coming in and taking over for
the, the people's need. Thank
you Senator Soles.
So share Mr. President, case law
from 1920s something has
determined that whoever owns
this owns it all the way to the
to the center of the earth, and
already have. So with that, Mr.
President, I move Senate floor
amendment number one to house uh
House Bill 458 is twice a minute
and ask for a voice vote.
Senators there's been a request.
Please raise your hand.
Center Stephaic voting no sinner
souls vote you know.
Senator Lopez Bono.
Senator Hamblin voting no.
Send Munoz voting no.
Senator Stewart, you know.
Senator Gonzalez voting no.
Center Pinto Bodino.
Senator O'Malley voting no.
Singer Charlie voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator Pope Bonino.
Center Maestas so you know.
Senator,
I wrote a 10 in the affirmative,
25 in the negative. Senate floor
Let me, uh, let me start over
here because what I just heard
is not.
is not
It's not.
How this works overall in the
big picture, this, this bill
only deals with the fund.
But there's carbon dioxide that
Under the Obama administration,
so this is not a weird Trump
thing.
This came from the Obama
administration and it actually
came from before that, but it
was under the Obama
and and.
Carbon sequestration.
Among that, amongst all of that.
So what this particular bill
There is a fee for putting it in
there.
It goes to the state. This fund
would then collect that and that
fund then was is responsible for
Captures all of that.
They're gonna put in tons of it
per year.
And eventually when it's closed
and capped,
But the state would take over
stewardship after 5 years after
all of these things are done.
case law from 1920s something.
So a 100 year old case law.
And the modern
Uh, operators, the people that
owned by the surface owner.
They just wanted to clarified in
our law, so it wasn't 100 year
old.
What the amendment was supposed
to do here was make that
definition so that the operators
knew who to deal with.
This is valuable to landowners.
Just like pulling minerals out
of the earth, except in this
case, when you're putting the
time.
What we're talking about here is
the surface.
There's a lot of geologic
formations down there that would
include
When we're injecting the CO2.
We go down to a point where
there is an impermeable cap. So
you're going through that and
likely to go, and then there's
an extended buffer around that,
and 90% of the landowners.
Have to be involved in that.
That is more than if you're, if
But in this case, it's 90%.
So much stronger rules than we
have for oil and gas.
They just need to know who to
deal with.
This is already happening, Mr.
President.
In fact
that.
34 other states and the Navajo
Nation have applied.
And there's a couple of reasons
for that.
One
do it, and this would be done by
our OCD or oil uh conservation
division, and that's who would
manage this.
But it's important.
For the people that are actually
putting stuff in the ground.
To know who owns it.
Clearly in law.
There are 276. This is not a
weird technology. 276 carbon
sequestration projects in the US
alone.
Into these, into these class 6
wells.
So
With dozens of things going on,
hundreds of things going on
worldwide or nationwide.
Can come into being.
I think that's, that's hugely
important. We sit on this floor
all the time and say, gosh, we
need something besides oil and
gas.
But there's some things we need.
One,
Who won't support space. 2.
With that, Mr. President, I'll,
I'll gladly stand for questions
now.
Thank you, Senator. She,
Senators, we are in the bill.
purposes of a call. No
objections. We'll have Senator
Pope followed by Senator
Cervantes and Senator Steinborn.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President, with
the sponsor yield? Absolutely,
Mr. President.
Um
This is just setting setting up
the fund in the the the the
mechanism to actually um create
the revenue correct?
sequreration, um, but this bill
is only with the fund. I just
want to confirm.
Mr. President, without the.
Without the uh.
Amendment.
in committee and you talked
about.
Really and all above approach or
using all these different tools.
I'm sorry, Mr. President, I.
Can you repeat the question, Mr.
President, Senator, we
You mentioned different tools
and.
Kind of a, an approach, you
We are not part of that in any
meaningful way of the all the
above, but we are a prime place
to be all of the above.
So, why not allow us to be part
what the benefits of that would
be?
So, Mr. President, there are a
few benefits. First of all, this
will take literally billions of
Hearing no objection, I'd like
to introduce my witness, Bob
Ball Doctor Bob Balch from New
Mexico Tech. Thank you, Senator.
There's unanimous consent
request for expert witness.
Seeing no objection, Sergeant
Removing the CO2 from the, from
the atmosphere.
As defined as a greenhouse gas
Currently, they can't absorb
enough.
So?
Let's do it
Thank you, Mr. President,
you're trying to get me to say,
hey, let's do this because of.
Global warming. I don't care,
Mr. President, does it matter
why? I believe we need a new.
My question, Mister President,
is
If one of us is getting on a
train to go on vacation, and
another one of us is getting on
So that's the first time Mr.
President, that I've gotten a
question the reverse way, does
that usually happen in debate? I
just want to make sure.
I understand what you're trying
to do, I just think
If we're really trying to deal
with an issue.
The issue is Greenhound
greenhouse gasses, carbon
With
Going this route.
The long term impacts.
it all and sequester it
underneath the ground and we see
some of these plants that it's a
very low percentage where that's
happening.
But for me,
I think it's important that.
We're doing this for.
A good reason as well.
And I'm just not hearing that,
Mr. President.
Lopez what I think we should do
is let's just roll this over for
a minute, let senators share and
Senator Sadil Lopez visit here.
This was an amendment which
fixed so we don't spend, you
know, 2 hours on a fund, which
isn't gonna get you.
where you want to go on the
bill, so I would just ask for
that. I think a visit with
Senator Sha. I agree, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President. It's
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
156 as amended on final passage
President. House Bill 156 just
increases the three-tier teacher
salary by $5000 per level so
that beginning teachers would
make 55,000.
public postsecondary teacher
preparation programs. I stand
for questions. Thank you,
Senators. We're debating House
Bill 156 as amended.
purpose of a call.
See no objection, so the
Senator, thank you.
Seeing no further debate,
Senator Stewart to close.
Mr. President, I move that House
hands.
Thank you, senators. We're
voting all senators to your
seats, please.
I'll send us your seeds if you
wish to vote no.
156 as amended has passed the
Senate Senator Stewart.
It's about to go to sleep. Thank
you, Mr. President, members of
the Senate. Thank you, Senator
that all action for placing a
House Bill 449 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution.
Senators to explain.
A new fund for major higher
education capital projects and
the statutory framework for the
fund. The bill does not include
Uh, this bill and enhances
accountability in several ways.
The bill requires higher
education institutions to
provide data on the number of
on-campus students served and
partial completion of design
prior toward of construction
funding.
Uh, the bill also provides or
requires HED to develop space
applied based on need. Also, it
requires matching funds from
institutions and then lastly,
uh, what it does is it gives the
See no debate, Senator Campost
to close. Thank you very much,
Mr. President. I move that House
Bill 449 is once amended, do not
pass, and I ask unanimous
seats.
I vote of 37 in the affirmative,
0 in the negative. House Bill
449 as amended has passed the
from the house.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has concurred in the Senate
The Journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has failed to concur in the
from the amendments respectfully
submitted, Lisa and Marti
McCutchen, chief clerk.
Journal shows the message from
the house has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
go to Senate consent calendar
number 2. so tonight we're gonna
do something a little different.
Senator Bergman's is gonna do
the openings and Senator Paul is
those show up, we'll adjust
those. Item number 1 is House
Bill 449. That'll be Senator
Campos.
Item number 2, House Bill 433.
Senator Pope. Item 3, House Bill
6, House Bill 291, Senator
Steinborn. Item 7, House Bill
398, Senator Maestas. Item 8,
House Bill 63, Senator Stewart.
Bill 172, Senator Ramos. Item
12, House Bill 336, uh, Senator
Woods, uh, we did item number
Senator.
compost just to again give us
the the time and how we do this
just so everyone remembers and
then we'll jump right in. Thank
you very much, Mr. President.
lieutenant governor and within
that time it means that you go
through the, uh, we'll be going
through the script you go
through the description, uh,
there'll be maybe a little
debate and then from there you
close it up.
good understanding of uh the way
it's gonna work.
It'll be on the bill as an
example, um, the first bill, uh,
Uh, with the bill number, and
then from there go to the
original sponsor of the bill for
the explanation.
The vote will be taken and then
the lieutenant governor will go
ahead and call again on the
original bill sponsor and the
original bill sponsor will go
ahead and basically indicate,
well, uh, as it did last night,
uh.
We're gonna continue to go ahead
and break records here in the
Senate as we move forward with
the number of bills that you all
continue to consider.
ways. Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you very much,
uh, Majority Leader worth. Thank
you, Senator Campos.
Senator Wirth, uh, Mr.
President, unanimous as that we
go to that order of business,
go to item #2 on item number 2,
Senators. I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action
necessary necessary for placing
Apologies, Mr. President.
I opened up the wrong bill.
Alright, Mr. President, uh,
study committee regarding the
current and anticipated
availability of career technical
education and structures,
instructors and courses in New
Mexico. The study is also to
ready for any questions or
debate. Thank you, Senator Pope.
Senators, we're debating House
Bill 433 is amended.
See no debate. Senator Paul to
close.
Mr. President, I move that House
we're voting all send two seats,
please, if you wish to vote no,
please raise your hand.
going on to House Bill 195, 2
times amended.
Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action necessary for placing
Thank you Mr. President. House
Bill 195 codifies in law a
three-tiered school nurse
licenger system that mirrors
what already exists for public
House Bill 195 is twice amended.
See no debate, Senator Paul to
close.
Mr. President, I move that House
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you all senators
to your seats, please. We're
voting.
You wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
the negative. House Bill 195 is
twice amended, has passed the
Senate. Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. President and
body. We're going to item number
As you, that the records show
that all actually necessary for
placing house bill 209 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
Information Technology, do it to
add links under the sunshine
portal that directs users to the
statutory provision of each fund
listed on the website.
Was that, Mr. President's
Mr. President, I move that House
Bill 209 is amended, do not
pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the roll has
been called and all those
president voted in the
Please raise your hand.
to item number 5 on the consent
calendar. That's gonna be House
Bill 361 and I'll yell to
Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
Explain the bill.
Mr. President, I wasn't ready
for that bill. Can we skip to
the next one?
Senator you
Oh, Mr. President, what this
does is it's a conversion of
certain wells. The act would
geothermal energy development.
With that, I sent for questions.
Thank you, Senators. We're
debating House Bill 361 seen no
debate.
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you all send us your
seats. We're voting. If you wish
to vote no, please raise your
hand. Senators are voting no.
And Steinborn helping Senator
Jaramillo and voting no.
Senator Woods voting now.
Senator Ramos voting no.
Center block will you know.
I vote of 26 in the affirmative,
12 in the name of the House Bill
gonna be item number 6, and
that'll be senator Steinborn,
but first I go to Sander
Bergman's. Thank you, Mr.
President. I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Thank you, Mr. President,
colleagues, colleagues, let's
just updates the uh what's known
as the raid fund of the state,
which is the municipal
still prioritizes that. It also
uses this fund which has a
multi-million dollar balance to
hire a new recycling coordinator
for the state and a circular
economy coordinator with that
stand for questions, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 291 as amended do not
pass. Can I ask unanimous
unanimousness in that unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record showed that the role has
been called and all those
hospital 291 as amended has
passed the Senate.
Senator Steinborn
Thank you, Mr. President. We're
gonna go on to the next item
that the records show that all
action for placing house Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 398 on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
Superintendent of Insurance and
it goes way deep in the weeds on
insurance law, uh, it's amending
the insurance holding compact
law, adding definitions and
providing for group capital
Anyone wishing to debate, seen
no debate, Senator Paul to
close.
Mr. President, I move that House
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Senators, we're voting I'll send
us your seats if you wish to
vote no, please raise your hand.
He Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 398 has passed the Senate
center Maas.
Thank you Mr. President. We're
going to go on to the next item
that's item number 8, Senator
thrice amended on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution no objections.
Senator Stewart to explain.
Mr. President, these revisions
responsive to the martini
Martinez Yasi lawsuit.
it creates a standalone unit for
English learners, increasing
that factor to 0.33, so it'll be
more responsive and more funding
this is 132 million. The House
sent it over with 74 million
missing and our Senate Finance
made it whole.
Stanford questions or not. Thank
President, uh, just, uh, real
quick question, I guess.
I remember seeing this coming
through the education committee
and one of the issues that came
out was there were several
schools, uh, charter schools
gonna ask for an amendment.
Tonight, but I, I'm gonna remind
everyone next year that we're
gonna try to get that uh whole
harness extended an extra 2
years so that they have time to
Thank you, Senator Tre see no
further debate, Senator Paul to
close.
Mr. President, I move that House
Bill 63 is thrice amended do now
pass, and I ask unanimous
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 63 is 3 times the
mandate, has passed the Senate,
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 171 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
change in the Pharmacy Act to
allow detox and recovery, uh,
facilities that deal with
addiction.
This is like the Santa Fe
recovery center and the problem
is, is that they are dependent
on local pharmacies to uh get
these drugs currently and they
needed medications and improve
access and make it 24/7. And
with that, I stand for question.
Hicks, we're debating House Bill
171 as amended.
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by show of hands. Thank
you all senators to your seats.
We're voting if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand.
I vote of 39 in the affirmative
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 172 on final passage
the law naming public holidays
chapter 12 Article 5 to
designate August of each year as
red and green chili month.
Thank you, senators, we're
debating. Anyone wishing debate?
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands. And
as we're voting, I'll senators
to your seats, please.
We are voting
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative
House Bill 172 has passed the
actions necessary, necessary for
placing House Bill 336 on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
objection. Senator Woods to
explain.
peace officer without pension
suspension, potentially
benefiting agencies like the
Livestock Board, the Department
of Game and Fish by allowing
close.
Mr. President, I move that House
Bill 336 do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
roll has been called and all
those present voted in the
woods. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, buddy. We'll go on to
item number 14, Senator
Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action necessary for placing
Bill 77 would require the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority to
seek federal funding, a federal
funding match for charitable or
other funds used for community
outreach and enrollment of New
President, I move that House
Bill 77 do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that the
roles been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
voting. All senators to your
seats.
You wish to go no, please raise
your hand.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Gallegos, be
prepared for the next one. We'll
go to San Bergmans to start us
off.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
Mr. President, body, a House
Bill 456 would allow state
agencies and other entities
under procurement code to use a
price agreement for your
architectural or engineering
period.
Mr President, I stand for
questions. Thank you, Senators.
We're debating House Bill 456.
Anyone wishing to debate?
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
I'll send it to your seats,
please. We're voting.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By vote or 39 in the affirmative
0 in the negative. House Bill
456 has passed the Senate
Senators, I just want to
compliment you on that nice
looking vest that you're
wearing, by the way, Senator
Galgos thank you, Mr. President.
Oh, you had to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter Worth, uh,
Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We go to that order
business announcements and
uh, item number one, House Bill
89 will be Senator Pope. Item
number 2, a House Bill 20 will
be Senator Padilla.
cross that one out. Item 6,
House Bill 36 will be senator
Stephanics.
Item 7, House Bill 284 will be
Senator Woods.
before we
Head to 3rd reading unanimous we
go that our business messages
from the house.
See no objection in that other
business message from the house,
Bill 274 as amended have been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the house in open
session and return same herewith
respectfully submitted the San
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate to
Senate majority leader Peter
Worth.
House Bill 89. Thank you,
Senators. We're on that order of
business. They read the
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill 89 on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
Has amendments to the graduate
scholarship Act. Uh, what this
will do will actually stop the
limits on the amount of the
resident.
Um, and with that, Mr.
President, I will take any
questions. Thank you senators
we're debating House Bill 89.
Anyone wish a debate?
Senate that the records show
that the role has been called
and all those president voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you all senators
to your seats, please, if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
Senator is voting no.
Senator Boone voting no.
Senator block voting now.
Senator Brantley voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
B
My vote of 27 the affirmative 11
in the negative House Bill 89
has passed the Senate. Senator
Pope.
Thank you Mr. President, thank
you to the body. We're going on
I ask you didn't consent to the
Senate that the records show
that all actions for placing
house.
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20 is twice
2021, we started this push and
all of this work related to
innovation and government,
innovation and and uh and uh
economic development, etc. and
so as a result, uh, we're coming
forward with a comprehensive
initiative to accelerate New
juncture. We have a lot of
businesses looking at New
Mexico, so the emerging sectors
like artificial intelligence,
aerospace, clean energy,
quantum, AI, you name it, uh,
Development department. It
establishes the research
development and deployment fund
and it creates a.
Technology innovation prize
program and New Mexico actually
right now is in the running for
See no debate center by the
close on the bill. Thank you,
Mr. President. I move that.
House commerce and Economic
Senators. We're voting everybody
wishing to vote if you wish to
vote no, please raise your hand.
Senator O'Malley voting no.
Center Figueroa voting now.
By a vote of 32 in the
affirmative, 4 in the negative,
house commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 220 as twice
amended has passed the Senate.
Senator Padilla, thank you, Mr.
President, members of the
be substitute for House Bill 493
on final passage has been taken.
It's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
See, no objection center what to
explain.
local entities of capital outlay
and other special
appropriations. In 2013, former
Governor Martinez issued an
the Attorney General, there were
some issues with the
constitutionality of that, uh,
former Attorney General King
agreed, yet this executive order
has stayed in place all these
puts those guardrails into
statute and it's again, it's
something that we, we really
worked hard to get to the right
place and I think this is a good
step to put the
See no debate, Senator award to
close. Thank you, Mr. President
and members. I move that House
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you. We're voting senators
I voted 40 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 493 has passed the Senate
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
members. We're going on to item
on the um purple page uh number
7. Senator, this is House Bill
398.
HMO contract providers. Correct.
It was on the purple page I
believe we just, I believe we
record shows that all action for
placing House Bill 36 as amended
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
modernizes optometrists scope of
practice by authorizing
optometrists to perform in
office laser procedures for
treating glaucoma and after
diagnosing and providing
post-operative care.
this legislation ensures that
the expansion of optometric
services is accompanied by
Thank you, senators uh
Stephonics, anyone wishing to
debate?
Senator Steinborn.
curious scope of practice, you
know, how did the
ophthalmologists feel about, um,
This for the optometrist.
was 72 and House Judiciary 8 to
2 on the house floor 56 to 7
Senate Tax Business 90 Senate
OK. Thank you, Mr. President.
You know, it's interesting. One
of my first bills when I got
elected was the scope of
practice between optometrists
and ophthalmologists. And I
mean, they were like sitting in
lot, but uh we'll keep
listening. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, senator.
Thank you, we do have a floor
is.
Katie Doig. Senator to move the
amendment Mr. President, I move
Senate floor amendment number 1
for House Bill 36 as amended, be
adopted, uh, subject to debate.
but I sure have, um.
And so the folks who are doing
these procedures now
ophthalmologists, their medical
before they're authorized to
treat patients on their own.
What this bill would do would
have it changed to optometrists
who have about 2500 hours of, of
scalpel, um, and they can, they
can do a lot of harm if you, if
you have not had the appropriate
training to use them.
And so what this amendment does
this was heard in the house, uh,
Health and Human Services
Committee on February 8th.
The expert on the bill said that
the training was being held the
There was
There was not training, these
are training on models. Over 90%
of optometrists who do this
doing it on models. And so
sometimes the first time they're
doing it on a human is on there
for the first patient that comes
along after they've had, uh,
now in the bill. So there's no
minimum hours of laser training
that's required. There's no
curriculum, there's no minimum
time required assisting in laser
surgery. There's no requirements
for a few hours in a hotel
ballroom and never on any human
could use this laser than on an
unsuspecting patient or someone
amendment does is it sets out
credentialing requirements
that's let's say that if you're
Um, once you've obtained your
training, uh, but if you don't
do it for 12 months, you need to
Is that there's no requirement
to report adverse outcomes. Now,
Mr. President, we had when this
bill was in Senate Judiciary, I
think there was a comment made
and then from another provider
in another state where they had
done this, who started listing
out all the adverse outcomes
that had happened there.
The adverse outcomes aren't
being collected, so
What this amendment would also
do would be to require the
adverse outcomes be reported to
the board of ophthalmology or
optometry, I'm sorry.
something goes wrong, and it is
reviewed reviewed by the, the
board, uh, we want to make sure
there's someone on the board who
actually has this training,
give these procedure to to do
these procedures, then a
licensed ophthalmologist or
An optometrist who is certified
to do these procedures would
And Mr. President, that is it.
Thank you senators we are
debating Senate floor amendment
number one, and I'll yell to the
sponsor Senator Stepanics, uh,
thank you, Mr. President, with
please identify who your expert
witness is. My witness is Doctor
Sarah Bortz, and if uh we could
bring a chair in for her,
please, and Mr. President.
if you can please escort an
expert witness into the chamber.
President and uh while I confer
with my experts, so first thing
I would say, Mr. President,
members, is that some of the
things that are in this
amendment is really left to the
Mr. President, have the mic in
my hand, would the sponsor of
the amendment yield for a few
questions.
ophthalmologists also have a
similar program where adverse
outcomes are appropriately
reported.
Senator here.
22,000 hours of training, uh, of
clinical training on this as
opposed to 2500 hours of
clinical training on this, so
Uh, Mr. President and Senator, I
thank everybody freely admit
that the ophthalmologist or
significantly, uh, higher.
Question Mr. President of the
one of the lobbyists that uh had
called.
On this particular amendment and
Will now be in competition with
the ophthalmologists.
Of for these procedures.
Review processes, uh, with an
ophthalmologist in order to
Uh,
perceived the required training
if this.
Amendment
To the ophthalmologist training.
As to how long that might take.
Senator Hick.
practices where they are both
ophthalmologists and
optometrists together in the
practice already, so I would
think that certainly in those
situations, it would not be
difficult to, to get that
successfully perform uh perform
some of these procedures with
the with the in-person
supervision, a supervision of
would be 10 of the 1st 2 and 4
of the last one.
Senator Scott, and Mr.
President, in those
circumstances, particularly in
Just training be uh acquired in
those circumstances.
ophthalmologist, so I think it
would be a very small percentage
that would be uh 2 or 3 hour
drive or anything more than
that, but Mr. President, if they
can drive.
a couple hours to do the kind of
training to make sure that
patient's vision will be
protected with an ophthal with
an ophthalmologist.
Human or would it involve
observing the procedure
performed by the
ophthalmologist.
board. So this would just be
requiring that same standard for
optometrists, but, but, but for
your present question, yes, so
it would require two things to
under the direct in-person
supervision of an
ophthalmologist.
Senator Scott
And Mr. President, last question
for the good senator.
understand the question.
Mr. President and Senator in
the, in the event.
That the there is an adverse
Mr. President, that's probably
gonna depend on the insurance
policies of of the people
involved. I don't think that's
something there is a global
answer to.
Mr. President, it sure could be.
In fact, Mr. President, I think,
I think that we are very
unfairly studying these
optometrists up.
without requiring them to have
training, have sufficient
training first.
So we are, we are setting them
up, we are setting patients up
have allowed them to do a
surgical procedure without.
Without appropriate training.
Thank you, Senators. Senator
I believe it's on the amendment,
uh, Mr. President.
And that is how many other
states.
Have these.
other jurisdictions required to
have this ophthalmological
training.
Mr. Chair, I want to say it's 10
don't know what what those other
states require. I do know that
in Senate Judiciary, we heard
public comment from people in
those other states where they
have done this, talking about
OK. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator, for the
answering the questions. Thank
you, Senator Scott. Senators
we're debating the amendment.
Senator Block followed by
Senator Brantley on the
Mr. President, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
Senator, I think you have a, an
expert witness over there who is
a, uh, a dock.
optometrist shall not perform
the following procedures
independently unless the
optometrist has obtained
credentials required by the
board to perform the procedures.
Laser application to the lens
glaucoma, uh, senator
do optometrists.
Do they go if they want to
enhance their skills in
uh, and these techniques, this
is as Senator Scott was asking,
I'll just throw this in. There
are 12 states, um, that have the
optometrist performing these
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator, again though, just
going back to those two
skills to go, um, acquire those
to go get instructed to perform
those skills.
Thank you, Mr. President. OK, so
Senator, they are certified then
in those procedures by a medical
board. Is that true?
for a minute.
And just walk through this.
To obtain the credentials
required by the board to perform
the procedures listed in
subsection A, what we just
Now
in the state of New Mexico or in
the other states where this is,
I think you said it was 12
states where this is going on
have the same ability, uh, to go
do that here in New Mexico if
this bill passes to go work with
an ophthalmologist or do they
have to do something different
there are those 10,000 hours and
the 4 years of training to be uh
certified and licensed as an
optometrist and optometrists are
reimbursed by Medicaid and
procedures wouldn't
ophthalmologists have to go.
Somewhere to go, um, get
So Mr. President and Senator, I
think you used the word
ophthalmologist. Mr. President,
I, I, I did for a reason. Yes
ma'am ophthalmologists are
Senator, on the amendment, I'm
trying to draw, um, I'm trying
to draw a line between new
procedures that this amendment
covers showing that
those as your optometrists would
as well to go, uh, practice and
learn new skills and new
techniques. Is that fair?
to be certified.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
uh, can you just remind me again
how many states uh this is in
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
um, if this amendment passed.
Would optometrists in New
Mexico, would they have to go to
state lines, um, to go, like for
instance, if uh optometrist is
in Clovis or Portales or Las
Cruces, where they could cross
state lines to get trained and
certified.
Mr. President and Senator, um,
I'm being told that our board of
there in New Mexico or how short
are we on ophthalmologists that
would, uh, do this, uh, training
for these optometrists.
optometrists, no
ophthalmologists and if you are
like uh several of us if you
make an appointment with an
ophthalmologist, they probably
make it a year in advance when
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator, I don't think we are
because we're showing how hard
it would be to comply with this
um, eye care. Is that fair to
say?
Mr. President, Senator, that is
correct. We're trying to expand
access to care.
the sponsor of the bill yield
briefly. Mr. President, uh, I
will yield.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, Senator, yes,
they are practicing and learning
our New Mexico optometrist
traveled to states.
And practiced on human beings.
Mr. President, Senator, it's my
understanding that these
optometrists have not actually
practiced this procedures on
actual human patients. And so
of
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, when
you go to school in one of the
hopefully you will come back to
New Mexico and go through the
board here so you can practice
here in our state.
Thank you, Mr. President. If you
humans. Could you clarify then
these optometrists are not going
to school and then returning
back would be allowed and
permitted to practice this
procedure and have never
So Mr. President and Senator,
uh, when you start your
training, you are starting on
model ice, not cadaver eye or
Go to school to practice for
this procedure and come back to
the state of New Mexico and I as
a patient walked in. Would I, is
Fans, Mr. President, Senator,
that could happen unless our
board actually sets up the
board, and I hope they would. I
think the fear here is all of us
as legislators want to expand
access to healthcare, but we're
end this legislative session in
the spirit of compromise.
I absolutely support this
amendment, and I hope that the
senators on the floor are paying
close attention to what the
are able to perform the
procedures on your eyes or on
your children's eyes, and your
neighbors or loved ones have
actually gone through more
extensive training. I would like
Senator, to clarify, you went
over the amount of training
differences between an
optometrist and an
state of New Mexico.
Mr. President, yes,
ophthalmologists go to medical
school and they are certified as
President, that's not accurate.
That 10,000 hours of training,
that's them going to optometry
school, which consists of basic
Thank you, Mr. President, and,
and Senator, that's my concern
is it looks the difference to me
that an optometrist has
approximately about 2500 hours
And, and again, I make this
point because please play close
attention to what this
amendment. It is not, it is not
a poison pill. What it is is
receiving safe access to health
care for their eyes and I think
that's important. I was, I was
joking around with the senator
in judiciary by saying that I
have spent the last 59 days
But make no mistake, I have no
business coming out of 2 months
on judiciary and offering legal
require our real estate brokers
to train under qualified agents
for a number of times before
they will let them sell New
Mexicans a house. We require our
them cut hair and dye hair in
the state of New Mexico to ask
that our optometrist receive a
little bit more training before
they start cutting into New
amendment, and I urge the body
in joining me in doing so. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley. We
do have further debate on the
amendment we have Senator Til
followed by Senator O'Malley,
Yes, Mr. President. Thank you,
Mr. President. So Senator, I was
just looking at the optometry
act, and I do just want to point
out that actually the
optome optometry degree from a
school or college of optometry
approved by the board in the
event that the applicant applies
for license or by endorsement,
which means your licensed in
college of optometry approved by
accredited and approved by the
board.
But it says which has had a
minimum hours, 4000 hours of
requirement for individuals who
get licensed here just that it's
an approved school, um, that is
accredited, so I just want to
point that out. I know there's
it's my understanding, Mr.
President, Senator, uh, that
those states that allow this
procedure, those 12 states that
I'll tell you I don't know the
answer to that question, but it
sure would make sense to me.
Thank you, Mr. President and so
the other thing I would just
at paragraph A and paragraph B,
um, of this amendment.
You'll please note that it
doesn't say how many hours.
to provide this training, it
really leaves those kinds of
requirements up to the board, so
even though this is slightly
because there's no hours
requirements and there's no
requirement that it be an
accredited trainer, um, oh, it
just has to be someone approved
board to make the decision as to
how much that training and who
is uh authorized to provide the
training and then, um, Mr.
President.
who actually is certified in
this procedure. Now I am a
little confused and I, maybe you
can clarify for me, Senator, um.
I do Mr. President, so, so yeah,
no, I mean, we, I think we have
to have the certification here
in the state in order to ensure
order to keep patients safe.
Yeah, so Mr. President, Senator,
um, I, I agree. I think we have
to have someone on the board
that's certified in this, that's
licensed here, so they may have
to set up those requirements.
Anyway, I'm not gonna go too
deep down into that rabbit hole,
but it kind of made me confused
mind too is that the board
provides um does investigations.
The board's responsible for
investigating complaints.
And the board members themselves
completed and then a decision as
to whether a licensed individual
in this profession should have
their board, uh, license.
Revoked
Suspended.
denied renewal and truly it
seems to me if we're adding in
this, um, authority and and
again I, as Senator Brantley
board that can
Answer the questions and they
can give an opinion as to
whether or not there's been uh a
a the need for disciplinary
action is actually um.
if I may. So if an optometrist
who's certified in the
procedures as unavailable to
serve on the board, the governor
shall appoint a licensed
but anyway, I, I do encourage
the body to support this
amendment. I think it's
reasonable, uh, guard rails, uh,
it still gives the board a lot
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
not gonna ask um the uh senator
to yield, um, I agree with some
of the statements that are
optometrists from, from, uh, you
know, getting trained and, and,
uh, and doing this procedure
they do need training and I
don't feel comfortable, uh,
just.
Thank you, Mr. President. With
the Senator Yale for a question
which senator senator of the
sponsor of the amendment
apologize, Mr. President. Yes,
the, uh, sponsor of the bill
practice bill that allows
optometrists to now do laser
procedures, so does your
amendment, Mr. President,
to do this procedure. Uh, they
would still have that scope of
practice widened. This would
just make sure that they have
appropriate training to keep
patients safe.
never actually studied under a
live human scenario, um, and we
would be given him that
authority. That is really
concerning, uh.
And um
So I, I think, um, I think it's
a really interesting middle
ground that you've proposed here
that seems completely reasonable
close.
Thank you, Mr. President. So
members, I would just have you
take a moment and ask yourself
took a 32 hour course on a model
in a hotel ballroom.
Or do you want it to be someone
it on you, your children, and
your loved ones. And with that,
Mr. President.
Ah, I move that Senate Amendment
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, Senators.
We're voting on the amendment if
you wish to vote no on the
Senator Boone voting no on the
amendment.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator Stephanics voting no.
Senator Worth voting no.
And thereonics, I already got
your vote. Senator Pa vote you
know.
Senator, I'm sorry, Senator uh
uh Shindo voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Center Maestas Bodino.
Center block voting now.
Senator Gonzalez, do you wish to
vote?
Are you voting no, Senator
Gonzalez?
failed.
To pass the Senate, we are back
on the bill. Senator Doig.
I do.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
I regretfully, uh, can't support
the bill without the amendment.
I thought the amendment was a
good way to kind of get us
there, um.
And so, uh, for all the
Mr. President, um.
So yes, I think without this, I
think this is a very bad idea. I
think we are putting patients at
risk, uh,
require someone to have training
before performing surgery. Uh,
I feel like we probably require
vets to have more training, then
this would require optometrists
have no, no objection to that.
Uh, I don't know that the
The, the data that we have
actually shows that it does
increase access to care. There
privileges to optometrists did
not reduce travel times for
patients needing care. In fact,
in states like Oklahoma and
Kentucky. Patients had longer
travel times to receive laser
drive from an ophthalmologist,
and 88% within an hour now.
Um, but the study, that study
that 2023 study concluded there
is insufficient evidence to show
showed that when optometrists
did these procedures, uh, the
patient was 3 times as likely to
have to go back for a second
likely to have to go back and
have second procedures is either
due to complications or failure
to do uh the complete procedure
idea. I don't know how much
impact it'll have, but it might
not do harm.
If we don't require at least as
much training as we would
require for someone caring for
of optometrists get sued and no
net.
Gain to the state.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. President.
Thank you. We do have further
debate on the amendment we have
cinder block. I'm sorry, on the
you, Mr. President. Well, the
sponsor yield.
For a question.
Mr. President, I do yield.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
Well, let me ask it this way.
Mr. President, Senator, do
optometrists.
They care about their patients,
correct?
not going to willfully put their
patients at risk. Is that, is
that fair to say?
Mr. President, that is correct.
Mr. President, Senator.
Mr. President, Senator, are
there more optometrists in the
state of New Mexico versus
ophthalmologists?
Mr. President, Senator, um, is,
is glaucoma a, a condition that
would require some type of
surgery.
treating glaucoma.
Mr. President, Senator, our
optometrist qualified to do that
procedure if, uh, they go and
could you repeat that? just so I
don't answer incorrectly, Mr.
President and Senator, if an
optometrist for some reason is
It's getting kind of late. I
think I just lost my train of
thought, Mr. President.
OK, here we go, Mr. President.
It's an optometrist is not
certified currently.
glaucoma, they would be, um, go
get that training, go get
certified and, and go get signed
off by a board, correct?
Mr. President, Senator, that's
correct.
statistics are we seeing an
uptick?
In malpractice in these 12
states where optometrists are
providing the better, better
access for patients.
malpractice claims and that when
people go back for repeat
procedures, uh, they're being
cautious and they're miss being
misrepresented is a
complication, but they were
training, uh, to, uh, to do new
procedures, where do they go?
Are they going to a hotel
ballroom or they go into some
type of eye, eye doctor facility
or a medical school.
and then they go to a uniform
training for procedures and Mr.
President, I'd like to point out
that in the amendment it was
certified, so we were asking the
optometrist to do 10, but we,
they would have to have.
have these the training and be
certified by the board.
education or be observed or
evaluated by an ophthalmologist
or are they good to go, or do
they, or they, again, do they
have to get some type of
education and these optometrists
need 22 hours every year.
In addition to their original uh
license and 10,000 hours.
Health care, whether it's your
eyes or uh specialists, uh, here
in New Mexico or even social
workers, I think.
of optometrists to provide much
better care and much better
access for New Mexicans who
right now don't have that.
And I want to thank the sponsor,
this isn't just some willy-nilly
thing, uh, Mr. President, of
just given these optometrists
some type of hominis dominus
here you're certified. I mean,
this is a lot of training that
Mr. President and Senator,
everyone is held to a high
standard when they touch a
person for medical care.
Mr. President, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, uh, madam, uh, senator, I
The Stephanics, Mr. President,
uh, Senator, they were notified,
in fact, I was at a meeting, uh,
this last summer with the
believe that some
ophthalmologists came to the
Capitol to speak, but I wasn't
in any of the committees that
heard this bill.
Senator Nova
the, it's um let me check,
Department of Health. It's the
analysis from the Department of
Health and it expresses some
concern about liability, and it
also states that there's
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
this is the first that the
sponsor, the house sponsor has
heard of this, but as I
indicated the uh statistics that
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, sponsor, um, Mr. Mr.
President, Senator, are
optometrists required to report
surgical complications to a
medical board.
Mr. President and Senator, if
it's a surgery that's done in a
clinical setting, uh, such as,
you, Senator I yield.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes
next.
Thank you, Mr. President, Mr.
President, after many years
here.
I'll tell you that the scope of
Psychiatrists versus
psychologists and who has
prescribing authority we see
these routinely in this chamber,
and I hope that I'm speaking not
only to my colleagues here but
also to hopefully a lot of
some interest and, and I implore
them to recognize that we're
ill-equipped in this chamber to
decide whether, for example,
Senator Duke's training and
education is the right training
and education or adequate or
It's improper really for the
professions to expect this to
this chamber to be the arbiter.
Between different disciplines
and and different professions.
So I hope that they're listening
tonight and, and I've supported
And debate among themselves and
try to reconcile where they
should and shouldn't be.
I think if we turn this bill
down, we really just favor one
The, the proposed amendment, I
know we're not going back to
debate it, but it required that
An optometrist.
Have training in person under
Mr. President, I do yields
Mr. President, Senator, in, in
your work on this and and that
of your uh colleagues from the
house have, have there been any
ophthalmologists agree that this
should be done.
And then, uh, a my
ophthalmologist personally spoke
to me about being supportive but
didn't write anything or come to
testify.
Yeah, Mr. President, Senator, I
effectively
Cutting into their patient
resources and opportunity and
economics. And so you're not
going to get a lot of
ophthalmologists that are going
to support this initiative.
have an ophthalmologist on the
board and they have to have an
ophthalmologist do the
proceedings if the amendment had
been adopted and of course,
that's gonna be an impossibility
or near impossibility because
an impingement on their area of,
of.
expertise.
And so I'm using the
opportunity, Mr. President, to,
to call upon those professions
right thing to do.
I realize many of you all
sometimes may disagree with what
I think is the right thing to
do, but when I vote here, I
vote.
Believing that I'm doing the
right thing.
I don't have the confidence.
That I'm making the right
decision. I'll make a decision
here because I'm compelled to do
so, but the profession should do
this on their own, Mr.
See no we do have further
debate, Senator Shindo.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
don't need the, uh, sponsor to
you, but I just want to say a
few words, you know, um, a few
in the rural areas and the need
for that, so I see this in the
same light. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Senor Gaos.
docs and losing them in the
state. Matter of fact, I got the
opportunity to introduce the uh
president of the doctors
association up on top who is an
ophthalmologist and
would leave or make it a
hardship for them to stay in the
state, uh, but Mr. President,
with the sponsor of the bill
yield for just a couple of
questions.
you, but, uh, do you perceive or
does your expert have an idea of
how much work the
ophthalmologist would lose if
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. President
and Senator, as I mentioned
earlier, we don't have
ophthalmologists in um all of
our counties and right now wait
individuals might seek out an
optometrist.
Well, thank you for that, Mr.
President and Senator, I guess I
was trying to get to the effect
of their business because Mr.
to the doctors of ophthalmology.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
thank you, um, right now the
the regular ongoing glaucomas
and cataracts and so on.
From his preen uh I'm wondering
times, uh, because it seemed to
him that it would be uh
affecting his, his practice, but
Mr. President, Senator, uh, I'll
go on, uh, I did have a question
You're, your expert witness is
she an eye doctor?
Doctor Sarah Borst is a doctor
of optometry.
humans or is it still practice
on
Other options.
Sengo,
thank you for that, Mr.
President. Senator, then that
tells me she's from here and,
and actually I have a lot of
respect for my optometrist back
through the training, but Mr.
President, Senator, I want to go
back to earlier you talked about
you had schooling and then
Was there another training that
hours of training at over 4
years, but then they would have
specialized training, how long
does that take? Mr. President,
Senator?
writes into the rules of how
many hours of training that they
would require.
Mr. President, Senator, then can
model, Mr. President, Senator.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
after their degree, they usually
Well, Mr. President and Senator,
I appreciate that. We, we
finally got down to 32 hours,
but I think I heard during the
debate on the amendment. Uh, I
knowing that such few hours are
put into it, um, I don't have
that comfort of someone, uh,
doing surgery on my eye, knowing
that my eye doctor's probably
I thank y'all. I, I just know
that uh a couple of years ago we
gave our word and now, Mr.
President, it looks like we're
going back on it. Thank you, Mr.
President.
tonight that this is an
expansion of access. This
provides access to New Mexicans
out there.
And don't kid ourselves. First
of all, our ophthalmologists
quality access to healthcare for
New Mexicans. There are plenty
of opportunities to have done
that. We could have addressed
the ridiculoused mal rates.
They don't cover cost of
their services. There are a
number of steps that we could
have done.
To invest in our healthcare
profession that would have
increased access of quality care
have told you the difference
between an optometrist and an
ophthalmologist, and yet we're
going to pass legislation and
hope that most New Mexicans know
the difference. When they walk
And unbeknownst to them, they
have not received the proper
training. We have a shortage of
school nurses. I would compare
Mexico, we should just do away
with actually in-flight
training. You watch Top Gun
enough, we'll go ahead and let
you fly a plane without actually
having been in a cockpit before.
especially when there was an
opportunity tonight with a fair
and balanced.
Proposal of how we could ensure
that they would receive proper
first. And because of that, Mr.
President, I cannot support this
bill without the amendment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
See no further debate, Senator
requirements, and could, uh,
identify all the trainings that
were in that amendment or
something different, but that
would be left up to the board to
Mr. President, I move that House
Bill 36 as amended do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record
showed that the role has been
Please raise your hand. Sanel
for now.
Senator Brantley for you now.
Senator Doig, but you know.
Senator Jaramillo voting no.
Senator Charlie, are you voting
now?
Senator Charlie voting now.
By a vote of 26 in the
affirmative, 12 in the negative.
to our next item.
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection. We're in that
order of business announces
miscellaneous Senator Worth, Mr.
President, we're gonna go ahead
and do the conference committee
come back as well. Uh, so, Mr.
President, unanimous consent, we
go to that order of business
conference committee reports and
I.
to Senator Hamlin, uh, for the
conference committee report on.
Thank you, Mr. President. So,
Mr. President, I move that the
Senate concur with House
Amendment.
Let me see where it is.
Oh.
discussions that happened today
in the in the amendment.
Thank you, Senator Hamblin. I
know the body is eager to hear
what those amendments were, what
the discussion was about.
have multiple meetings today,
and I'll give you a little bit
of body of a background of where
we were, uh, when we originally
started this discussion about
To remove the funds from oil and
gas as the source of the
revenue, and this was because it
was raised there was a concern
raised over using one-time money
for recurring expenses. So what
that the available reserves were
designated by the incoming LFC
chair. And after a very busy
day.
Here's what's in the tax
dropped down to $250 million a
total of $125 million per
chamber, and then it dropped
down to $150 million which meant
$75 million per chamber. That
A solid number of 113 million to
work with, which means we
divided that amongst the items
that were discussed in the
original tax package. So after a
very busy day, here is what is
in the tax package.
And the liquor excise tax from
Senator Scher.
Now, this is something that I
believe, Mr. President, and body
initiatives, the taxes for
volunteer firefighters and EMTs.
The taxes for search and rescue.
As disappointing as it is just
because of capacity that we
don't have those in there.
will be ready for those for
inclusion and a potential 2026
tax package. I'm grateful for
the work that the Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Committee did. I'm grateful for
discussion.
On this, I'll begin with Cen
Celia Lopez, followed by Senator
Padilla.
Senator Steinborn Sinner.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
to one of the the committee, um,
community representatives here
and then we'll go back to you
Senator Sanders.
tax, uh, business and
transportation. We had such a
great committee.
Sorry, Mr. President, I'm with a
lot of breath run all the way
over here. But what an honor to
It's an amazing tax package, and
I cannot say how much I
appreciate working with Char
William Hamlin to support this
tax package. Thank you, Mr.
the sponsor of the concurrence,
what is the concurrence report?
I don't know what it is I don't
conference committee the con the
conference committee report
yield,
come over here next to me, so
that he doesn't have to speak so
loudly through Senator Munoz's.
Talking back here.
Substitute
Whatever it is, um, on page 13.
It, it, um, the distribution to
Did, did someone figure out how
much that would be, whether that
would be a net decrease to
these, to these, um, these grant
Inner se of Mr. President, so
just to clarify, it's flat based
on current consumption.
And the, and the change in the
And so somebody did the math to
figure out that this was flat.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator, yes,
this is going to maintain this
in terms of how that money would
be distributed.
OK, um, that, that's
disappointing because it would
have been nice to see them grow
I lined through
What is, what does that mean?
I'm sorry, Mr. President.
Senator, can you clarify where
you are on, on the same page,
What is
What does having it crossed out
means?
Mean
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
thank you for, for uh clarifying
Thank you, because it was
confusing. OK, um, and then,
then I'm really pleased to see
the dry the tribal alcohol harms
I guess what I'd like to know is
how much is that gonna be to the
tribes to address, um, to
alleviate the
with this because, um, we wanted
to make sure that that was
directed where it deserved to
be. Um, this is
This is the increase and it is
things I've learned in the last
3 years working on on an attempt
to um to modernize and and to
try to achieve the twin goals of
that Native Americans drink
less, but their health outcomes
are so much worse than other
communities to a lesser degree,
disparities. And so I'm really
pleased that the fund, the, the
increase, however modest, is
because in our bill it was going
to go directly to um
To AID and then AID would, would
distribute it the grants to
this. And so I believe that the
intent that you have been hoping
for for many, many years, um, is
going to start here with that.
It's not going to be the
that work, um, because one of
the things that bothered me
Most about doing this work is
the health disparities and I do
not believe that we're going to
move the needle in the state on
misuse as well as substance, uh,
misuse, um, what I see in our
state is um disparities over
that we're making a start, um,
and as I said before, I'm
disappointed that the education
bill that we worked on so hard
didn't make it over, but I'm
glad to see a star.
Committee substitute. Thank you,
Mr. Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We do have Senator
Padilla, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Allen, I know I missed a
few others.
Sanchez. Just real quick, uh, if
one of the sponsors of the
yield. Hamlin do you yield? I
do. Thank you, Mr. Perez. I've
been trying to read as quickly
as possible. I'll just focus on
It was the Mr. President and
Senator, it was the amount that
was voted on the floor the first
time, so it did stay. Thank you,
friends behind me who cannot
control their phones.
Thank you, Mr. President and uh
Senator Hamblin, so did that
remain at per child or is that
per child or did that remain
asking that question and and
recognizing your devotion to the
foster care system. This is per
family.
Thank you very much and so, uh,
the other question I wanted to
ask you is on, on items related
trying to read as quickly as
possible here related to
quantum, uh, the quantum economy
that we're trying to build here
in New Mexico, some of the other
items that we've um identified
as innovating our economy here.
different things that would be
able to be included in this, but
because of the amount changing,
unfortunately, um that uh
quantum facility infrastructure
Exactly, Mr. President's a big
whopper out there. I just have
to say, Mr. President, I mean,
we have so much opportunity
here, uh, to truly bring a
quantum economy into New Mexico
and I wanna make sure I heard
Were there other innovation, um,
tax credits of any kind added as
a result of for economic
development. No, Mr. President
and Senator, the ones that we
have included, as mentioned
OK, thank you, Mr. President.
That's, uh, that's what I needed
to know. Thank you feel
frustration, Mr. President and
Senator.
Thank you, Senator Pad uh
Senator Steinborn, thank you,
especially when you got to go
multiple rounds having been
through one of those before, and
so good job and I know tough
choices had to be made and, and,
you know.
Uh, Mr. President, Madam Chair,
so did we basically leave the
co-insurance piece exactly the
know the, the sunset date still
seems to be the same 5 years
from now, 5 fiscal years from
now, and then, um,
How about the extending the
sunset on the copays and
well, at any rate, I didn't see
it specifically listed here, but
maybe it's referenced or
whatever. OK, well, that's good
to hear too. Um, and I, I
actually had a kind of a more
fundamental question, which is
at the beginning, you had
How is this funded? Is that a
future commitment in next year's
budget or what did that mean?
Mr. President and Senator, you
nailed it right on the head. It
is a future commitment.
level with $113 million total as
a tax package, um, and so we are
basing this on future revenues,
Mr. President.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I don't have a question. I
found it. I've answered my own
question. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Zen further
Committee, um, report on House
Bill 14 as amended, uh, as a
result of our conference
committee meetings all day
What the conference committee
recommendations.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Those opposed.
party. We couldn't do this
without you.
I yield to Senate Majority floor
leader Peter Worth. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
calendar number 4. 1st up is
Senator Woods on House Bill 284
and then Senator Sidil Lopez on
House Bill 131, Mr. President,
unanimous that we go out of
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
actions for placing.
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment, and
substitution.
See no objections. Center woods
if you can explain the bill.
How's Bill?
What we have in New Mexico is an
overpopulation with free reining
horses, and this bill seeks to
reduce the population of free
Bill also prohibits the
slaughter of free reining horses
once they have been adopted or
relocated.
The reader will read
Substitute for House Bill 24.
28284.
presenter of this bill. I am
withdrawing this amendment. I
would like the opportunity to,
to ask questions, so thank you.
The amendment has been
withdrawn.
Yes, I will yield, but, uh, I
asked unanimous consent to, uh,
have an expert witness come into
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we can
identify who Nina is with and
who's representing.
See no objection, Sergeant RSP
escort our expert witness into
the chamber.
you, Senator.
Mr. President, thank you very
much, Senator Woods, I have a
question on the very first page
President. One raise is we're
gonna use a, a chemical for the
mayors. It's uh called uh
abbreviated PZP.
President.
Mr. President and Senator Wood,
thank you very much for that,
the, the, uh, trade name for the
darting of the mayors that you
about the ways to have fertility
control in the studs or the
stallions, whichever way you
want to call it, is to have them
gilded, is that correct?
That's true, Mister President.
For the darting of mares to to
control the the feral horse
population and that is what I'm
gonna call them. They are not
free roaming horses. They are
feral horses, and that's how I
herd, there has been a decrease
in the has been used for 5 years
and there has been a decrease in
reproduction in that herd, Mr.
Chair, Mr. President.
Whoa, that said that they were
going to make sure that mayors
in the Ridoso area and the
Placidus areas would be darted
with this trade name of Reguate
Ladies and gentlemen, there is a
fail rate because sometimes they
miss with dart. It has to be
given on a regular basis, and it
regular basis, it's not very
effective. So I do want to point
that out to the population here
on the Senate floor. Mr.
President and Senator Woods
whenever we're talking about a
Senator Wood?
Uh, yes, Mr. President, that's
true.
And Mr.
President and Senator Woods
management services, those
people will probably, my guess
will be trained in the, uh,
Uh, probably in degrees of
survey the landscape to see what
kind of vegetation is out there
trying to, uh,
Determine the, the
An animal science range
management, I would also expect
them to be
Um
qualified by
You know, years of service.
Many ranchers
the rangeland trying to
Manage that range, Lynn. So,
Uh, I would expect it would be
expertise.
And hiring someone that would
have that ability and would
recognize that expertise through
just their worldly experience.
Mr. President, Senator Woods, I
guess I would be qualified to do
that too.
Because I can look at a pasture
and determine whether it has any
President and Senator Woods.
I think that the board, the
livestock board is gonna have
their.
Hands full with going through
because whenever I find whenever
I do go back and read what they
are supposed to be looking for,
you can understand the quandary
that they're gonna be faced
Well, actually to start on page
2, line 1. It's definitions that
are currently being used in the
livestock code and it's making
And Senator Woods.
Let's see.
Mm mm mm mm mm mm.
not include canines, which are
dogs, felines which are cats or
free roaming horses, so Mr.
The thing that came to mind on
where this bill was changed, it
Mexico, ladies and gentlemen,
horses are not required to be
branded.
So my horse is over my west
pasture, would they be
On page 4, line 10.
It says
Free Ramon, uh, free roaming
domestication and does not
include horses subject to the
jurisdiction of the federal
government pursuant to the
federal while free reining horse
can recognize where the horse
has been handled, they can
recognize whether their horses,
has got
Got white hair on him around
the, the, uh,
Probably those are the kind of
things they would look on that
animal to determine whether that
was uh
A horse is found at large or
Well, Mr. President, Senator
Woods, I, I, I see what your
language says, but that's not
always the case. There's horses
coats do grow out. At one time,
those were all domesticated
animals and all of a sudden
because people did not have a
place to go with these horses.
Senator Woods, I'm not going to
argue with you about it, but
whenever we're talking about a
and borough Act. I do understand
that.
But Mr. President, whenever that
person, whoever that free
roaming horse expert is whenever
Mr. President and Senator Woods,
my amendment was going to have
on page 2 line 8 have or free
to this bill if this free
roaming horse expert does round
up these feral horses.
Turned loose whether they do
belong to somebody if they were
strayed off the person's land or
whatever they have to hold them
for a while to make
yeah, uh.
Maybe I should give you a little
more history of the, of the
problem, Mr. President.
A few years ago in Riodosa,
And those studs was trying to
come around some of those
domestic mayors because that's
what studs do.
and she was, it got dangerous
out there.
On those horses because you had
that band of, of
Feral or free ranging or
Lored those horses into a corral
with feed and trapped them.
And she called the livestock
Board.
man and beast here.
So they picked those horses up
and they move those horses, and
there became a lawsuit. There
these horses because this law
was written somehow, some way it
was written.
To just knock the livestock
board out of this altogether.
He said the way the law is
written,
All we can do is let these
horses roam.
And I said, well, they're a
danger.
And I said, well, what can we do
about it? He says, I'm a judge.
I don't make law.
And I said, well,
I don't know how many years ago.
I don't know if I witness
remembers when I started this
process.
But, uh, years ago, I tried to
start trying to figure out how.
And so in that particular
lawsuit, they ended up, then
they, as those horses, as you're
talking about when those horses
you throw hay over the fence
every day. They get gentle, Mr.
President.
Well, the judge finally told
him, says, no, no, you gotta,
They just hung around the corral
there because that's where
they're getting fed.
They just kept hanging around
there. Now, was that fair?
What I'm trying to do with this
bill is to make it such that
when there's too many of these
horses in an area.
To be able to pick some of them
slaughter those horses, all it
does is, is give a mechanism to
do that.
So I don't know whether that's
an answer to your question or
By human owner.
At some point in time, or they
just flat escaped.
From a human owner. These old
during the fall around the, the
antelopes were those, were those
old antelope bucks get out there
and they may, they get them a
harem together, Mr. President.
they'll, they'll have a little
hair.
And it's a dangerous place
because if you try to pull one
of those mares away from that
herd.
You're asking for some real
overpopulation of these things.
And I'm trying to
With the help of Representative
McQueen, which I didn't
He's here with me and, and he
had a lot, the big part of doing
right in this bill, Mr.
President. And, and
Senator, I'm, I'm sorry that I
Center
Mr. President, thank you very
much, Senator, I do understand
what you are talking about there
roaming around and the ones that
are now being called the free
roaming horses do carry
different diseases that will
affect.
President, uh, a senator, you
said that those horses became
domesticated whenever a certain.
Group said we will, we will
horses could no longer afford to
feed them. What they did was, we
can't do this. What do you want
done with it? The group that was
that failed in their obligations
again to free roaming horses or
feral horses as I know them.
on those roads so bad that
people start hitting them, and
they got to be accidents.
People believe that everything's
a pet.
you know, don't, don't feed the
bears, they'll become depending.
Same thing happens with these
horses and Placita I've got
people calling me all the time.
do something about it?
Please do something about it.
And again,
I try.
He's got it so much further than
I ever had.
I never got it this far. So,
I'm, I'm happy to, that he's
senator to know and the rest of
the body to know that I am
supporting this bill, but it
does have some flaws in it. They
need, there's some
misconceptions in here that I
cloudcroft area, those that are
up around Placidus, they are a
nuisance.
In the in the redoso area we
have people coming in
vacationing there during the
Mr. President, Senator,
But whenever they become
nuisance to the point that they
They dug up the water lines.
That I had put in for
underground irrigation for some
trees up there. They flat dug
had all of their fences torn
down because these feral horses
were trying to get to the
hummingbird feeders. Mr.
President, whenever we are
The herd was running across the
road, ran over the guy on the
bicycle, and he had to be hauled
to the hospital in an ambulance.
facility for these feral horses.
Does that make them domesticated
horses then.
That is my question. When did
they become domesticated again.
start training on for their
children.
When does that, when does that,
uh, handle that we've put on
them a free roaming horses
change.
problem with or free roaming
courses.
Included where canines and
felines are described in the
animal livestock code.
Once you get these horses.
caught.
And you bring them up for
adoption.
And the question is, are they
still free ranging?
And I think that's a question
that I've been asked.
But
We don't, we don't brand these
horses.
As such or anything to to keep
them.
are adopted. They're no longer a
pound animal. They're a family
pet or they're a work animal.
So
Are we just talking about a
someone can put these animals to
use more power to them, Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Senators is.
Mr. President, thank you very
They do fall into the livestock
board whether they livestock
code, whether they are out there
Like I said before, these, these
animals are not required under
our laws to be branded, but a
person can brand the horses.
lady's property whenever she had
to report them to the livestock
board to come and remove them
from her property because of the
damage they were.
We do have a problem. The horses
in Rioso get on the soccer
field, they get on the football
field, they get on the baseball
diamond. They have made their
way to downtown and during the
Riosa. These horses are a
nuisance, and whenever a human
being actually gets killed by
For the demise of these horses
to be euthanized in a humane
manner. Mr. President and
Senator Woods.
I do my last question that I
Well, Mr. President, I will tell
you this.
There is one stud in the Ridoso
area that has been up there for
I don't know how many years now
breeding.
The elder mares, those mirrors
babies, which are his
granddaughters and his great
granddaughters, Mr. President.
My dogs, I have two Australian
shepherds are smarter than most
people I have met Mr. President.
dog, Sammy, my good dog, but I
don't have any anymore.
Went out to bark at him and run
run him off the property.
I went and got my rope, and it's
a little kid rope because I
teach my nieces and nephews how
to rope.
And I went after him and he
charged at me. I swung my rope.
I got both heels.
And then it dawned on me I don't
have any place to dally.
that did not stop him from
terrorizing that neighborhood.
Every owner of houses up in that
area do usually have 1 to 2
duds we have veterinarians up
there that say that they will do
this free of charge. All they
need to have happen is to have
these feral horses rounded up.
I'd thought I would never see
the day whenever I would be on
the same side aspresentative
McQueen on an issue.
standing here and visiting with
me about this problem that is
only gonna get worse before it
gets better.
That sounded like a heck of a
story, Mr. Perez did. I'd like
won't ask the sponsor of the Yi,
but I mean, this is a start to
fixing the problem with the free
roaming horses. There's a story
of, of a horses in that.
shoot him.
Horses are hit on the highway
all the time because people
don't claim that they're horses
and they jumped the cattle
guards because they're filled
with dirt.
Just on horses alone.
Horses, wild horses don't have
any value.
was what, 294 per 100 today. And
and so the market's high for
cattle if you want to make
money, you run cattle. But this
horse situation has gotten way
out of hand and, and people are
yourself.
But this horse issue is
completely, they're everywhere.
They're like elk and they're
like rats. They'll breed and
Middle of winter, we didn't have
a rough winter this year.
Those horses will starve to
death.
No water in the summer.
For those of us that don't have
horses, I mean, I have 7 head of
horses in my barn.
You walk in there and look at a
horse, and if you take care of
your animals, you'll love them
and you'll take care of them.
You'll do anything for them. But
that animals sitting there
starving. I believe the ones I,
I created the horse rescue fund,
I don't know how many years ago.
But that was over there at
Placitas where they were feeding
Well, if you want to own a
horse, take care of him. Horses
aren't something that are pretty
nice to see on the side of the
road like an elk or a deer that
can manage themselves in the
They don't really save them
horses are very finicky in their
health situations, um, they
break a leg out there. They're
just gonna lay there and suffer.
But it's not the right start.
There's too many of them.
People are valuing a horse's
life over people's life.
And it won't work.
of that animal when you show him
love and compassion, that they
know who we are. Cattle will
know who you are too.
You feed them enough, they'll
recognize Senator Woods when he
gets out of the truck and gets
pretty to look at. If you really
love them, go look out there in
the winter when there's 2 ft of
snow and their legs are cut
because the snow's crusted and
they're breaking through the
crust and you can't do anything
to help that animal.
You're actually hurting them,
you're making them suffer. Thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to excuse
I
Thank you set up for the.
We do have further debate,
Senator Pinto.
Pinto.
Um, Mr. President and senator,
have you ever been on a wild
horse roundup.
Mr. President and Senator.
Um, for 3 days.
Just a little bit north of of
where I live, um, and there's
But that movement um with those
horses, it, it, uh, we used
other, they used other horses,
um, quite a few gentlemen there,
It was a very long day and
within those 3 days, I think we,
there was about 300 horses.
And
Within that and then the reason
fences and uh things like that
in their, their area.
But it, it, it's hard, it's hard
to decide whether you should let
We're, we're not natural for
them.
And on one side of the highway
where you see the mountain and
the vegetation very different
horse.
trying to chase the horses into
an area where um we had the the
panel set up.
Some of them collapsed.
Uh, you putting them into that
confined area, you know they're
wild, by the way they treat each
other.
within it, you know, 300 horses.
In that time.
In less than a small span of
miles.
Mountain tribe.
Up in my district.
They said they went out for one
day.
One day and 500 horses.
squeeze them in.
And to get them in there is
And I think a lot of our, our
ranchers here and those that has
been exposed to cattle.
In that aspect when you're
saying about the methods.
That I really hope the oversight
is there and that they're really
suffering and uh when they
collapse, one of the things that
was.
Missing was a firearm, um, we
And it's not something you do,
just.
You know, to, to do it, it does
take it you're, you're not um.
they even those that were in
there, they brought their own
horses to round up those horses
and um so you know they they
were very capable and knew about
the care and stuff like that.
within that 11 time had to um.
Go do and probably have to do it
again because of the.
What is, what are, because it's
accumulate and it will no longer
be standing.
And of where the horse knew
there was water out.
And uh
So we'll, we'll see more of
We're able, they went out and
you caught a horse and it became
yours.
And that's how you started your
hurt.
Are, are your horse.
won't be able to do that
anymore, um, so, um, thank you,
Mr. President. uh, thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Senator
Pinto seeing no further debate,
Senator Woods.
To close on the bill.
House, judiciary.
Committee substitute for House
Bill.
284.
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, senators, to
your seats please. We are voting
if you wish to vote no.
Senator Padilla, just as an
update for the members of the
body, Senator Shendo found his
other shoe.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
38 in the affirmative.
You know, in the negative how
judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 284 has passed
I yield to Senator Peter Worth,
Mr. President, unanimous we our
business announcements are
miscellaneous. There ain't no
objection. We're on that order.
Business Senator Worth. Mr.
President, we're going to do 2
more bills, but before we do
that, I need to yield to Senator
come down and find out who stole
Senator Shindo's shoes.
Mr. President, Mr. President, is
there a reward for this because
consent that we release, uh,
House Bill 158. It's a military
base planning and impact Act
came into the Senate Finance
kind of late and, and we missed
do number 8, that'll be Senator
Sadilla Lopez, uh, and then
we'll go back to Senator Sheer
for the final item on the poor
space bill. Yanous consent. We
go that our business third
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate bill
131, um.
has been taken and and that it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Thank you, Senator, if you'll
explain the bill.
29-17-5 that builds on work
completed in 2005 that permitted
the division of Health
Improvement previously was with
the New Mexico Department of
Health and now it's with the
Healthcare Authority to
applicants outlined on page 4
section D, numbers 9 through 12,
and it just adds human
trafficking, assault of a peace
officer, identity theft, cruelty
to animals. This bill also
With that, Mr. President, I
stand for questions. Thank you
Senator Cio Lopez.
See no debate.
I move, Mr. President, I move
that House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
has has duly passed the Senate
Center Cio Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, members of
the Senate Majority Leader.
thank you Mr. President, for the
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate record
showed all actions for placing
House Bill 458 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken
about carbon dioxide storage,
uh, stewardship fund.
And that's all it really does is
create the fund so if we have
some
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 458 as twice
amended. Amendment sponsored by
I move the amendment.
Oh, here it is, um, thank you,
Mr. President. I move Senate
floor amendment number 2 to
Thank you, Mr. President. To
give some background, there is a
companion bill to this bill that
did not get out of the
conservation on a tie vote.
And what this bill does, with
458 does is it allows the part
where the department.
really have the, the correct
identity of the owner of, of it.
It seemed to me problematic, so
I suggested to Senator Scherer
complicated because about about
100 years ago, there is a there
are a couple of cases.
And basically they said that the
space because that wasn't a
thing then. So relying on that
old precedent is a little bit
problematic, so that's why this
this as a way to deal with this
bill.
Now this bill did not go to
conservation, but it made it
all, all the way to the floor,
the fee, and some people may
say, well, um,
Maybe this isn't happening. Why
are we assessing a fee? The
truth of the matter is it is
happening and because we did not
And like I said, it's really
important that we understand who
we assess the fee from. So, um,
otherwise and it's friendly.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the sponsor of the amendment
please yield.
Core space was defined in 457
because it's not a companion
bill actually for 57, um, is a
duplicate bill, but we'll talk
about that when we get there.
consultation was outlined.
Um, and it was.
In reference to poor space
consultation policies pursuant
to the law, the energy and
minerals and natural resource
department and division shall
consult with the New Mexico
Indian nations, tribes and
wondering why tribal
consultation did not make it
into this amendment.
And see Lopez.
Mr. President, this amendment is
an amendment to the.
important section talks about
the regulation of the injection
of carbons into this uh carbon
dioxide into the poor space and
That bill didn't pass all this
bill does is it sort of sets it
up for rule making, um, and I
think that there should be
vicinity are to receive notice
and or to be invited into
participation, um, but my
amendment is much more limited
than that, but I think you make
Instead of the what I would call
consultation light that is in
the administrative code, um,
that we have more vigorous
consultation about this, Mr.
President.
impacted communities, far too
often when it comes to the
resources that are being
extracted across our state, but
particularly around vulnerable
the disproportionate impact of
um an unintended consequences of
whatever extraction or injection
Amendment and um or or couldn't
even get it through and and I
urge us not to accept this one
as well. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Souls next.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
the one that we killed about 1.5
or 2 hours ago. I don't believe
it's different at all. I think
it was just not explained last
time and there was multiple,
rulemaking, the the the
rulemaking authority in this
case cannot do two things. They
cannot assess.
Um,
that we must do if we're gonna
allow that uh department to to
engage in rulemaking and to um
assess fees.
Mr. President, I have enormous
respect for the EPA. It is one
of the agencies that I've ever
dealt with it it has individuals
with incredible expertise and
with the fact that the law in
New Mexico is not clear about
poor space. I don't know whether
this bill is going to pass, but
I think the bill would is much,
Mr.
President, that was a long
description that answered only
the first piece of it. I asked,
else's name on the exact
amendment and rehear it. Is it
Groundhog Day forever and ever.
This exact amendment was not
Thank you Senator Soul's, uh,
according to our Mason's rules,
uh, the bill was pulled and it
is uh always the opportunity to
bring an amendment back.
Or be senators.
we pulled the bill off and then
we wait until the makeup of the
chamber changes, we put the
exact same things on and we're
going to revote on the same
in
Conservation.
And is now being revised and
tacked onto a different bill
that deals some in the same
area.
the Senate Judiciary, lots of
legal implications about
ownership of poor space which
when the initial landings were
there was never contemplated. I
huge market in this area and
most of the landowners that
would be affected by this have
no idea of the value that their
what they are actually worth.
And I don't think that we
should, should be doing that. I
would urge that we again.
Not pass this amendment at this
Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment number 2 to
Sure.
Uh, that the records show that
the role has been called in all
those presidents voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
Senator Charlie, voting no.
Senator Stewart wrote he know.
Senator Doig, but you know.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Senator Bran
Voting no.
Center Shindo, well you know.
senators, uh, Senator Steinborn
on the bill. Thank you, Mr.
President. Will the senator
yield?
San share deal.
Yes, Mr. President. Thank you,
Mr. President. So, Mr.
I was like, did this bill go to
another committee where we
stripped out all the other stuff
about basically what the fund
does and what the purpose of the
because it went through one
committee and most of you aren't
on that committee, is it creates
a
It creates a scheme, and I don't
mean that as like it's illegal.
It creates a structure, a
oil and gas companies to do
create these carbon capture
facilities, and then in 5 years,
the state then takes over
responsibility of having to
And then in theory, the fund is
going to be enough to pay for
the state liabilities. But to
me, Mr. President, Senator, this
about is twofold of its shifting
liability.
Of dealing with carbon from the
ones that are generating it from
capture facilities that if you
do a little research, are prone
to leaking.
That economically that this is
still, even though it's being
And, but, but they leak and, and
we're, we're proposing these
facilities can be a half a mile
wide, we heard it described. I
mean, these are technologically
great goal, storing carbon, we
can all share that, and I would,
if that's the right thing for us
to do, I would like to find a
different way to do it, but the
idea that we're going to allow
business on a massive scale
scares the heck out of me, Mr.
President.
This is a state with a legacy
of, of, of being left holding
the bag.
And, and even though we have one
of the most profitable
industries.
In the history of the state and
certainly in the world.
New Mexico. I do not agree with
that. I don't agree with it as a
strategy for the state of New
Mexico.
I think if we want to, um,
private sector to do that on
their own, so that we move them
in that way and we should even
be regulating that as a cost of
doing business in the state of
New Mexico, quite frankly, if,
uh, uh, for severing those
strongly against it, and I want
to urge the state, I wanna,
wanna urge everyone to think,
not do they support creating an
innocuous little fund, but
what's section 6 in this bill?
what is that liability look like
well into the future.
Thank you, Mr. President,
Senator.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn.
In the yield. Yes, Mr.
President. Senator Charney,
thanks, Mr. President. um,
Senator, with the passage of
the definition in the bill and
the um
The fund
We can then apply for primacy so
that the state of New Mexico is
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. And when you say
we, um, I assume you're talking
about the state of New Mexico.
We on this, um, but moving more
specifically into the bill, Mr.
President, Senator, on page.
was outlined in Senate Bill 457
that was killed.
Um
Mr. President, yes, carbon
dioxide means carbon dioxide
you, Senator. On page 2, line 2,
the definition of division. Um,
can you confirm that that came
different. I don't know if it
was Dee and the other one or
not, but the division is still
the oil and gas, I mean the oil
conservation division.
Uh, of energy, minerals and
through this and save us a
little bit of time cause I know
folks are tired. Page 2 line 4
geological sequestration was
originally in Bill 57 labeled F.
Page 2, line 14, sequestration
facility was originally in Bill
457 labeled H.
And Mr. President, what I'm
trying to substantiate here is
that this is not a brand new
separate companion bill, but
committee.
Um,
President and senator on page 3,
the effective date. So the
geologic carbon dioxide storage
stewardship Act applies to
sequestration facilities that
commence injection of carbon
Um
Section A assumes carbon
sequestration is currently
Thank you, Mr. President. And
then moving down to section B.
But more particularly line 4,
promulgate issue orders for the
implementation of the provisions
of this act, um, Mr. President,
Senator,
Why would the
Opening a couple of hours ago,
hours ago to Senator Pope that
all this bill was doing was
establishing a fund.
witnesses
first is, uh, well, one of them
is, uh, Doctor Bob Baltz from
New Mexico Tech and the other is
the chamber.
See no objection.
Please bring Sergeant Ars please
regarding section B.
On page 3.
What would, why would the
We were just establishing a
fund.
So Mr. President.
therefore we are in charge, we,
meaning the citizens of the
state of New Mexico.
Then this is part of that
application process.
establishing a fund. Is that
true?
Well
Mr. President,
Implication earlier that after 5
years we were going to own this
thing and that's not true. The
thing will probably operate for
35 years, then when it is
capped.
The, the operator still has
responsibility for everything to
do with this for an additional 5
years, and then the stewardship
It means that we now take
stewardship.
Over that.
That well
you say is we are not just
establishing a fund with this
bill. I know I'm new here, Mr.
President.
That not all fund establishment
requires this in-depth.
creation of
section 4 to new material
starting line 11, an operator
that has obtained a permit for
geological carbon dioxide.
Sequestration.
Mr. President, at the moment,
no, they've got a license or
permit to start doing something,
but it doesn't mean that they
457 that did not pass Senate
conservation. Um, this is the
only subsection of section 4
section. So in Senate Bill 457
section
was the establishment of um
section B line 1919 through 25,
that came directly from Senate
Verbatim came from uh Senate
Bill 457.
Um,
457, um, Mr. President,
Senator, would you like to
same?
Mr. President, that is such a
simple question.
Therefore, they have the same
language because they were meant
to work together.
It was 33 vote, which means it
didn't pass. It wasn't killed.
It's just hanging there waiting
for somebody else to come in to
Senator Charlie. Thank you, Mr.
President. Um,
I, I don't, I don't agree with
that.
the amendment is duplicate
Senate Bill 457 and
Let's go to line 3 section A.
OK
Um, the division shall issue a
completion and not a permit to
operate.
Mr. President, because this
There's whatever going on in the
middle, and then you come to the
certificate of completion of
injection operations.
And so that's why it's about
completion because it's in the
completion section.
where the permit operation
exists within this bill?
Mr. President, Senator, I
withdraw that because it does
certificate of completion and
not a certificate or a permit
for operating because that was
what existed in uh 457,
operation just to hope, keeping
our fingers crossed that
operators get this right, and
then we can give them a
certificate.
talking about the operator here,
shall be released from all
stewards stewardship
sequestration. What is
stewardship.
Mr. President, Senator, I'm
going to go ahead and withdraw
that question as well, because I
think my colleague, Senator
the state absorbing all of that.
And let me tell you, I come from
a district where, um, we
Mr. President,
And on that point, moving on to
page 8 lines 1 through 5, which
sequestration facility, um, Mr.
President, Senator, can you
So Mr. President, I think that's
exactly why we have this bill
here because once we have the
fund, the operators fund the
Making the the uh stewardship
fund.
Which we won't tap into for
probably 40 years, if ever, but
40 years is when the operators
We have the money to deal with
it, but this is also not
radioactive, it's not
combustible. In fact, it's
what's coming out of our mouth
right now.
And neither one of our mouths
One of our mouth looks more than
the other.
Sorry, Mr. President.
President and Senator, if
there's an issue for us to deal
with. Line 4.
The sequestration unit is
I don't what is reasonably
expected mean?
the oil conservation division,
uh, does that, and they do that
now when, uh, when we drill a
hole in the ground for whatever,
whether it's water or gas or oil
or whatever else might be down
Shall be in full compliance with
the laws governing the
sequestration. So there's these
things that have to be done
before.
these things are done.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. I'll just
reemphasize my point that we
new
Technology, um, in the state.
Mr. President, Senator, in, um,
mentioned earlier during the
amendment, tribal consultation,
but also the measurable
community benefits, um, where
did
What we do have is the EPA
standard for rulemaking. We also
have the oil conservation
division out of M nerd
rulemaking, and so how you
instructions on how to drill a
water well. There's certainly
permits, there's some, some
guidance that comes, well, some
rule laws that come around those
kind of.
Get to make that decision. One
of the things that has to happen
though is, is we cannot have
less.
Uh, dictate that there's tribal
consultation.
So again, whether it's in this
In New Mexico we're we're
working very hard.
To to work these things out
anyway.
In fact, our own lawsuit we have
to do it.
OK, I'm almost done, I promise.
uh, Mr. President, Senator,
pool, where is that in this
bill?
So, Mr. President.
Once again, we're debating a
bill that's not in front of us,
minerals works.
So, Mr. President, if we were
going to drill for water,
So if only 60% then then they
call it pooling. So only 60%
said yes, you can drill in this
pool, because the pool goes
me, 26% said, nope, you're not
going to drill, then there could
be no drilling in this area.
Under this one, and I did
misspeak, Mr. President, it's
Their land is part of that, but
that's in a bill that's not in
front of us. This bill is about
creating the stewardship fund,
Mexicans get to go through the
process and figure out what's
right for New Mexicans.
But
And you're right, this is Bill
458 now, but it doesn't change
the fact that when you opened
um.
We would have 90%.
Um
And now you're saying 85%.
And that caught my attention
understand why, um, why that was
confusing. There's so much of
Bill 457 and 458.
Um,
Um, I think we've substantiated
that it's not true. Thank you,
Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Charlie. We
have Senator Souls next.
no truth police here in the
legislative chamber. People
can't say anything that they
want. It's all listener beware.
Um, and I think the carbon
legislative, uh, sessions, uh,
lots of bills and establishing a
fund usually is a 1 to 1.5 page
bill, not an eleven-page bill
fund, set up all of the
processes for it.
So let me, Mr. President, uh, if
the sponsor would yield for a
couple of questions.
error on my part.
But
Calling me a liar on the Senate
floor is inappropriate, Mr.
President, and therefore I have
a real problem with what we're
So I apologize on that if I did
not hear that and uh.
The question was if you yield.
To in our souls.
Mr. President, as long as he
House, um, what is it, uh,
house, uh.
So, Mr. President, this bill
went through House Energy and
then it went through House
Appropriations.
Center souls. So, Mr. President,
the answer is no, it did not,
through Senate Finance because
the purpose is to set up the
stewardship fund.
Center souls, Mr. President, and
senator does, does this bill
sequestration.
Sin.
Mr. President
This.
An energy bill.
And so it went to the
appropriate committees. This is
what this bill does.
But we don't send every
So
Yep
so
So, Mr. President, you know, I'm
reading through here and, and
remedied the approval of site
closure applicable statutes
limited have not run, um, almost
all bills that I've seen that
have that level of legalese tend
particular ones that dealt with
legal questions as opposed to
educational questions, uh.
This particular bill is filled
Has was written by lawyers
somewhere who is behind this?
What corporations or companies?
Mr. President.
Mexico Tech.
And Emner.
Neither one of whom are paying
me.
In fact, we pay them.
Mr.
thing that, that just comes
about without some group that
has already done it. Did this
come from another state that
does carbon sequestration.
Center, Mr. President.
uh, regulations. This is where
this really came from, so.
Are there people that wanna do
this? Yes, there are people
doing this all over the nation.
you can get in technology, uh,
in the, in the country and our
own energy, minerals and natural
resources.
Center souls. So, Mr. President,
So, Mr. President, I don't think
that.
Don't think that matters for
this purpose of this bill, but
it's the same as asking what's
the value of
And in fact, the natural gas
value not long ago was in fact
negative numbers.
Because
People like
The value of anything is based
on what somebody's willing to
pay for.
Sinner souls. So Mr. President,
Senator, what are people willing
can have a new economic base
industry in the state.
That also helps.
core of things is that there is
likely very
Very high rates for poor space,
and most people that own the
amendment. You don't know that
value.
And I worry because we've seen
it in New Mexico before when
we've been exploited when people
came in for the uranium.
And exploited it.
the oil and gas, uh, for
multiple other areas, uh,
currently the wind turbines
where all that energy is going
off to California, New Mexico
formations for the poor space,
they're not able to make good
decisions.
About whether they should sell
and uh I believe it's uh.
them and poor space is very
different from Severance, and
that we're not severing
anything. We're putting things
into it.
Mr. President, Senator, uh,
this poor space for the
landowner.
Is the landowner gets paid.
For this
it up there, that untested,
unreliable source.
And so we're suggesting that
Senator Woods also can't figure
out how much his poor space is
worth.
Was it oh leakage.
So Mr. Mr. President, at least
in the United States here.
there's leakage back to the
surface. Uh, there are other,
under
Underground areas that could be
sensitive to carbon dioxide
leakage, does it migrate from
where it is injected ever?
In a share. So Mr. President,
what I've learned here is that
there was a
A, uh
immediately shut down and
recapped. So it didn't come back
to the surface, um, but the
monitoring well leaked.
Sinner souls.
how we know where it is.
So, Mr. President, the concern
is this is not a foolproof way
of locking up carbon dioxide,
that, most of which is to stop
burning fossil fuels, but let me
ask you a different question.
What is the federal subsidy for
carbon sequestration?
Center share
I lost the word now. The, the
federal subsidy for carbon
sequestration.
paying people to sequester
carbon as a mechanism and so
what would it be for a
formations of what we're talking
about here. What is the Q45
Uh, Mr. President, it's 185.
Per ton.
$180 per ton for direct air
And $65 a ton for just from
source.
Storage.
Sinner souls. So, Mr. President,
Carbon is carbon capture is
capture, doesn't matter where it
comes from.
And Mr. President and Senator,
I, I think my point here is that
And it seems like we're paying a
couple of times.
This is a false climate
solution.
It is not a solution that
It costs money to take the
carbon out, to put it into
someplace else.
All of those have a cost. This
is not inexpensive and is going
to be born by the people of New
I think it has problems. First,
I think it needs a very deep
review by the judiciary
committees with people who are
lawyers who understand land law,
The areas that are gonna be used
for poor space are fully
informed about the potential
value before they start cutting
deals. Uh, we've heard lots of
well, you signed, too bad. And I
think we need to protect the
people of New Mexico better than
that. This is something that's
moving too quickly that people
Uh, Senator talked some in his
opening and I realize it's not
directly in this bill, which is
supposed to be just about a fund
as we were told.
when we talk about it needs to
be 85%.
Of the landowners is that of the
owners or of the area of the
land.
And Mr. President, that is a
going into, then there's only
one owner. But if
If I own, if it's gonna be 100
acres, and I own 60% of the
acres. That's not enough. It's
Center souls. So, Mr. President
and members, please think about
what this might be is somebody
owns some of the land and the
inside knowledge as to which
geological formations are going
to be the most valuable for
that, and they go to the owners
and say, oh, here, we'll give
you a $100 an acre.
they realize that that value
really might have been $1000 an
acre.
Making up the numbers, I don't
know. I'd asked whether there's
actually anybody that could put
But until we know all of those
things, I think we need to stop
this bill now. We need to make
sure that the interim committees
barons coming in to once again
exploit the people of New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
President. I encourage people,
please vote against this.
Thank you, Senator So Senator
Cervantes.
questions. I am excited to this,
yes, Mr. President, I'm ready.
And Cervantes, the chairman, uh,
I don't think it'll be quite as
entertaining as the sponsor
expects, but I, I'm, I have been
references to the
Owner of the poor space being
essentially the owner of the
surface area.
So, here, here's where I, I'm
And then when you talk in the
bill in, in the amendment about
the surface area that to me is
also going to be measured as
dimensions, I'm, I'm unclear
where in the bill. How do I
understand the third dimension.
Uh, in other words, we've got
the two dimensions of the
surface area to establish that
but what, what, what is the
up the, uh, stewardship fund.
So a lot of that is still rules
making EPA rules and should be
our rules once we get primacy.
Where there were terms that were
used that are not specifically
legal terms, but, but it would
be the, the amount of space.
in had a 100 ft depth and uh,
and 300 ft width and 400 ft.
Breadth, OK, that's what what
you'd use, it's volume.
hearing about poor space going
back as you and I talk back back
to Senator Harden. I think it's
probably been 20 years. This is
not anything new in this chamber
we've been talking about this
for a very long time. I'm just
Space extend and you're gonna
tell, I think you're right,
you're telling me that's gonna
depend on any given location.
The and and I guess I understand
So.
So
the third dimension of the
volume. And, and, and you, you,
everybody here is talking about
lawyers, but this is actually
more fun. This goes back to high
school geometry for me, which
Uh, what I understand you'd be
saying is that is gonna be a
variable in all cases because
you may have a condition where
you're hitting solid rock and
unable to take advantage of any
depends on the geology in the
area. There's some places where
this is probably not a good
thing to do.
But
As as we're looking at things,
What we're looking for here is
something that is now below.
What we would call a non uh uh
permeable layer.
it goes in there, so that you
have the monitoring wells before
that, and so because we've got
smart geologists in New Mexico,
uh, they'll know where they're
going with this.
of your bill essentially
declares that a surface owner
owns effectively all of the
subsurface rights below that
theory and and it's one that
that I find intriguing, but, but
you're, I think you're doing
something very novel here, which
is to say that you, you are
declaring a right to
is that the service owner owns
everything below the surface.
So any practicable death, death,
is that right?
Um, Mr. President, with the
definition that we put in with
And so this, with this
amendment, now we've put it into
statute or will have will, uh,
doing the same thing the court
did.
I'm intrigued by it. I, I wonder
if you're, if you're gonna think
logically the corollary of that
is that as the surface owner
then I own all of the airspace
above my surface area, which
else above the surface area. I
realize that's certainly not the
scope of your bill, but if
you're, if you're thinking
logically and saying the service
owner owns everything below the
surface, then presumably the
all the implications of the way
you're thinking again in the 3rd
dimension. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Cervantes.
I don't see Senator Stein
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, I, I, I do wanna
And I'm going to read the the
title of the bill.
Enacting the geologic carbon
dioxide storage stewardship act.
defined in the bill.
Mr. President, I want to take
you to those that are interested
Apologize, Mr. I actually wanna
go down on page 8 of the bill
because I'd made a comment
earlier, Mr. President, that the
state would have to take over
ownership of these sites and a
it sends, as somebody who's
worked
For years to try to remediate.
And draw attention to the 1000
abandoned uranium mine sites in
the state.
I am quite aware of the PAS
contamination in Clovis, in
Holleman, forever chemicals,
long term legacies. This bill
with all due respect,
to read kind of before this, but
The owner, the operator, owners,
and all persons who generated,
transported, or injected carbon
dioxide into the sequestration
responsibilities associated
with.
Or related to the sequestration
unit and sequestration facility.
All bonds posted by her on
can tell us what that means, but
that means we assume, we become
the next responsible party. The
state shall succeed and be
subject to the terms of all
agreements, permits, rules,
remediation required by a law
shall become the state's
responsibility.
To be overseen by the division
Mr. President,
This bill says very clearly that
the operator
this. Do you think the operator,
Mr. President, is still going to
be around in 30, 40 years.
Sin share.
Mr. President, exactly. That's
right there. We've got the
money. We also have the
monitoring so we know if
anything's happening.
So it's gonna run for however
long it runs, probably 30, 35
years.
problems.
Then we take over the
stewardship.
Stewardship is not ownership.
Stewardship means we're
monitoring to see what's going
ownership, and you just heard me
read the word ownership.
And responsibility, Mr.
That that's not uncommon.
Then share.
Mr. President
It is very uncommon. You take uh
The, the CO2 then mixes with
that salt water and starts to
solidify. Yes, it takes long,
well, some of it solidifies
fairly quickly, but it takes a
long time for it to actually
become a rock.
the monitoring well said, hey,
it's leaking, and they fixed it.
So uncommon is the right word.
Well, Mr. President,
cited as a not uncommon, um,
technical issue involving these
facilities. Again, colleagues,
we, this is the last bill, this
motion. This is us. We're
signing the pink slip to this
issue.
So let's be real clear of what
we're signing up for long term.
change and do care about climate
carbon sequestration.
But I think this idea is a
little crazy that we would be
wanting to get in the business
The reality is, I can't think of
very many contamination issues
that end up costing exactly what
you think they'll cost.
things change, then you can go
back to the operator, but as we
just heard, Mr. President, if
the operator is no longer there,
who do you go back to?
When you have signed away your
That's just terrifying to me,
Mr. President, given all known
experience I have working on
contamination issues across New
Mexico. And yet we're asking for
it.
maybe there's carbon credits.
That's great. That's all short
term stuff.
But this is a massive long term
liability to the state.
And I'm just, you want to talk
To man, what is the future M
nerd staffing requirements.
To manage a whole fleet of
carbon sequestration facilities
and all the problems. Have we
there.
The, you know, what they, what
they need to actually do for it,
but right now it's 2.
people.
Mr. President, I'm really
talking about, thank you. I'm
going to take care of our
liabilities.
You know, 30, 40 years from now.
Or 20 years from now or 10 years
from now.
effect July 1st, Mr. President,
what's to say July 2nd, there's
not a facility that's ready to
wrap up and be transferred to
the state of New Mexico.
So we're not talking about
liability 30, 40 years from now,
President. uh, but I, I just
wanna ask, have we modeled,
let's say that we have 10 of
these things that we now own.
We're going to be the owners of
Senator, No, Mr. President, I
find the
I find the tech uh technophobic,
dealers, uh, uh, 43% of their
entire inventory be EVs, uh, or
did we just pull that out of our
ear. In this particular case,
there is a dramatically more
super smart people from New
Mexico Tech that are looking at
all of this, and the whole idea
that we can't do this because
it's not perfect, just boggles
not perfect and so we should
never do it. We should ban all
cars. We should ban all tires.
Have you ever torn a pocket in
your pants?
We should ban all pants.
not a brand new novel, never
been tried before, 34 states
right now are trying to get
primacy. Why? Because they want
There's
20 and wherever it is.
276 carbon capture projects in
Once we set up this fund so that
we can deal with any issues that
may happen 40 years from now.
Once we set up the the rules
that the EPA, uh, the statute
That's when we get primacy.
But this is happening.
Whether we like it or not, it is
happening. We're trying to make
course not perfect.
But neither are your pants, Mr.
President.
Mr. President, there are 4
states who have achieved
primacy.
And there's 34, 34 states, uh,
asking to hand to asking these
facilities to hand over the pink
slip of ownership and long-term
responsibility to the, to the
state to own these facilities.
talking about the pink slip.
I understand where it's coming
from because we're technophobic.
But 4 states have primacy, so 4
had to have this kind because
this is EPA wording here. They
had to have this kind of of uh
statute to begin with.
The difference is, Mr.
So that's the big difference is
we just put this in the right
place in New Mexico.
Well, Mr. President, so primacy,
as you described it is so a
No, Mr. President, this is, this
is class 6 wells which are, uh,
injection well, CO2 injection
wells.
stunned, um.
You know, with all due respect,
you know, yeah, things break
down. That doesn't mean I'm
technophobic, Mr. President,
gonna give you 200 bucks a month
and you're going to believe that
that 200 bucks a month is gonna
pay to restore that car or
maintain it because we all know,
Mr. President, things become way
deal never works out, Mr.
President. And, you know, we all
have enough life experience to
know that that's the reality,
Mr. President, I have enough
experience to see how it worked
out for the uranium.
Near Los Alamos that are dealing
with a chromium spill that are
threatening tribal tribal water
supplies.
How's it working out, Mr.
It always starts with a great
sales pitch and don't, don't
worry, Mr. President, things are
going to be fine, but this bill
is downright scary, Mr.
President, because I just read
long is this?
Responsibility, how long is this
status? Is it go away at some
point? I believe the word he
used in committee was forever.
Mr. President.
This is stewardship.
Where we monitor what's going
on.
The legal responsibility.
So unlike uranium mines that had
no fun to clean them up.
Unlike the, well, a big part of
Nuclear nuclear waste in. Plus
we're also more technophobic
because we won't even reprocess
it or deal with it because
everybody's afraid because well
I guess talking about nuclear
But if we simply used the
technology we have.
We wouldn't have the problem.
In Los Alamos right now we would
and if we have primacy, then we
really can.
Watch what's going on where we
had no control over the uranium
mines. We had no control over
can, once we have this fund that
the operator pays into, this
isn't tax dollars. The operator
pays into this fund.
The, the, the fees for doing
license $25 in 1968 or whatever
we said.
And so we had to pass a law to
change it. Well, in this case,
rules can change that. So if we
But we don't have any control
over.
This legislation is to give us
control.
Over what's going on.
That's what the fee is for while
it's happening. It's not after
they're closed.
It's while it's functioning. So
It could be $1000. I don't know.
I don't know what the value of
that is or what the, uh, M nerd
would say they might need.
But that's what that's what the
way, so that it could grow.
Mr. President, that's why I
asked the question earlier. Have
we modeled how many staff it's
Because this is the only time
we're collecting this fee is
while the operators are still in
business, Mr. President, I'm
gonna answer that question.
Who's gonna pay the fee? It's
gonna be New Mexico taxpayers.
inevitably, especially when it's
forever, Mr. President, because
nothing lasts forever.
And anybody that tells you it
is, come on now.
It's going to be taxpayers that
we come to because we'll have
to. We own it. It will be the
disaster of those local
landowners.
So
crawl, uh, with what I know
about contamination in the
history of these other sites.
I would urge everybody to read
page 8 of this bill.
If you're comfortable taking
that on.
legacy that, in my opinion, we
need to stop before we create
it.
I'm all for carbon sequestration
if that's a good solution, but
let's require the industry to do
it. Let's require them to run
it.
President.
Uh, I'll yie for now present.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
further debate.
Center.
Yes, Mr. President. Senator,
thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator. I'm not
going to
Continue the conversation we
were having on climate change.
I think we've been having those
conversations and the fact that.
We can't even really talk about
that.
Or admit that.
That's a big problem.
Mr. President, why do we need a
fund now?
Well, Mr. President, so just in
case something happens we have
So that we have the money.
But we need the funds so there's
a place to put the money.
We need the primacy so that we
have.
have that. All of the things
that we talked about before,
uranium mines, the state of New
Mexico had nothing to do with
that. That was all federal
government.
This fund,
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator. So once again,
Where's this money gonna come
from?
If we haven't passed a bill to
regulate.
Carbon sequestration.
Mr. President, the federal
government right now issues
permits without a fund.
And without our say.
This creates a whole safety net
because of the fund. Where's the
money come from? From the
operator, not the taxpayer. The
operators putting this money in.
With the federally approved and
permitted.
Sites
They can already pay into this
fund?
have to pay into any fund on our
state level or the federal
level.
So they're not
So
This allows us.
Whether we want them or not.
They're doing the permits today,
so all this really does is make
it so that we have some charge
Right now, we do not have a
bill.
Where
We are doing this at the state
level regulating because once
again,
This bill is just supposed to be
Would any of that money go into
this fund if we pass this today?
So, Mr. President.
Once again
Uh, if we have primacy we have
the rulemaking story we do
rulemaking on all kinds of
things.
So you know.
Hundreds, thousands of things do
I, I'm, I, I'm missing, I'm
missing the problem here, Mr.
President, because the solution
is that we take charge.
And, and, and I'm not, I'm, I'm
missing what the problem is, Mr.
President. Can, can you try
again?
Fees into this fund from what is
currently going on now because
in the state of New Mexico we
have not passed a bill to
regulate.
This
We get it when we have primacy
and that's what we're trying to
do with this.
This is this fund.
So Mr. President, Senator.
We right now, even if we set up
this fund.
Mr. President, we don't need to
pass 457 to get primacy.
And primacy is the first step.
If we don't have primacy.
So no, we're not getting
anything from the federal
government right now, or from
operators that are licensed
under the federal government.
Because we don't have primacy.
So I think we've established
that.
Right now, if we just pass the
fund.
It's just a fun that doesn't
collect anything because
President.
What would we, would we be
establishing primacy?
Because I have concerns with
that as well, because
We were discussing primacy.
The whole picture is to
establish is to gain primacy
from the federal government.
That's a whole rule making
process that we have to go
This gives us primacy so that we
can create other things.
So, I think that we're talking
beyond what this bill does. This
We have no control.
We have no money.
We have nothing.
This gives us the opportunity
through rulemaking.
that New Mexicans should take
care of New Mexicans and look
after New Mexicans.
Just seems to make sense to me.
Thank you, Mr. President,
You know, I think it's great
that we're setting up a fund.
We're preparing for what could
happen in the future.
But that also doesn't mean that
we should just.
So, Mr. President, Senator, I
want to ask again, I mean, once
again, we have a bill here that
was supposed to be a fund.
And this isn't a one page bill
page and a half.
Is that something that we do
with the bill?
Is that, is that something we
set up by establishing rules, is
that something that we
establish?
I, I believe it was Senate Bill
21, uh, 21 and 22 from Senator
Wirth.
That we passed with a whole
So, I don't see the difference.
Why, why would we, why would we
want to have control of our
It's the same, same thing that
Senate Bill 2122 did. Mr.
President, Senator, could you
tell me where that's at in the
bill.
To establish primacy.
New Mexico statute.
That the federal government give
us anything.
What we do is we establish the
rules.
get to you guys have got it
together enough. wow.
And so that's how we get
primacy. There's nothing in this
did not state.
To the federal government, thou
shalt give primacy.
But it established the rules so
that we could get primacy.
fund.
And we're talking about primacy.
I, I agree, you know, Senate
bill.
21 when we were talking about
with water, but.
That's
Mr. President, Senator.
Why do we need and why do we
need an amendment to talk about
Mr. President, because where we
are right now in the process,
that amendment.
Took part of what 457.
Makes uh any operator, know who
they're supposed to deal with.
Right now, we have 100 year old,
100 plus year old.
And that's, that's part of how
you get the, the primacy is
everybody has to know the rules,
uh, at least the basic rules.
Through regulations,
But with this, it's a step to
where we're going to go so that
we control us.
So that New Mexicans
Senator. So
Want to talk a little bit about
poor space.
And
I think Senator Cervantes talked
about a little bit as well.
So Mr. President, Senator, say
someone owns an acre of land and
sets up a project.
And they drill down.
So Mr. President.
If you could keep all the CO2 in
your own acre.
Yeah.
But
That volume would go where that
CO2 would go. So it's a geologic
study.
So if it's going into other
acres than those other acres
It's going to spread out.
And so every acre of land above
it will be compensated for the
use of that space thousands of
feet below them.
land because the oil is coming
from other places in the, in the
vicinity. And that's
unitization, so we know where
the oil is.
Senator, I, I just guess I have
concerns. I mean, it's a lot
easier.
From the surface to understand.
Who owns what and where the
property is.
And so
Space, poor space to do this
injection, but.
Maybe uh
Mr. President, that's
interesting.
The smartest geologists on the
planet live in New Mexico.
world can't figure out where the
space is because they know where
the oil is, they know where the
gas is. They know where the
water is.
They know where the coal is.
But we've also set up a buffer
around that.
So you get whatever you get, and
then we add another half mile on
top of that. But we, but, but
Again, I think we're, I think
we're in a technophobic world
here at the moment because we're
now saying that the smartest
geologists in the world aren't
smart enough.
you're right, uh, you know, we
live in a state with.
Caves and caverns that go
throughout the state, you know,
we have to really be careful.
What we do, but once again.
So Mr. President, by the EPA
standards, there's extensive.
Um, what's the word I'm looking
for, Mr. President?
And it has to meet at least the
EPA standards once we have
primacy, once we as New Mexicans
Because it's New Mexicans taking
care of New Mexicans.
Mr. President, Senator, you
know, same question in the same.
Um,
Mr. President, yes, in places
where, in places where people
are interested in doing this.
good.
And they have done it.
So Mr. President, Senator, uh, I
guess that brings up another
concern. I think that was
I worry about New Mexicans being
exploited.
For their land.
by this industry.
We have a long
History
In New Mexico.
New Mexico in its current form.
Does not have any authority over
these wells.
Doesn't have any monitoring over
these wells.
The EPA does.
That's how we protect ourselves.
We protect ourselves because
They can come to the Capitol and
say, hey, senator.
What are you doing?
But if we do this, this bill.
And we achieve primacy.
paid for by the by the operator
not paid for by taxpayers.
Paid into by the operator for
however many years they run it.
At a price that that are.
minimum EPA standards, but we
can go higher. That's, that's
how we protect ourselves.
If we're gonna protect ourselves
I'm, I'm, I'm having a real hard
time here, Mr. President. I'm
having a real hard time figuring
out that.
That some of our farmers don't
know what their values, the
all too stupid. The smartest
geologists in the, on the planet
who live here in New Mexico are
too stupid to figure out where
the oil the the poor space is
and gas, and here we have a
whole new industry.
A whole new industry. Who's
who's purpose.
Is to clean up
which means it brings in money
as opposed to the ancillary but
you know when the, the
restaurants, those are great
businesses, but they don't, they
don't bring money into the
This is an economic-based
industry.
Designed to clean up whatever
mess we made.
And we fear it
fear it so much.
This to me sounds like a win,
win, win, win, win, win, win,
everybody wins.
That all cars should be banned?
Does that mean that every car
has to have
Whatever security system.
Nothing is perfect.
But this is great.
Doing great things, high paying
jobs.
As we do this.
And we know they're high paying
jobs because oil field people
the facilities around it. Great
union job, boilermakers make a
lot of money.
So a union.
Yeah, for them.
mess we made.
Because
You should always leave the
place cleaner than you found it,
Boy Scout.
Code there
The New Mexicans.
Get primacy.
Just like we want New Mexicans
to have primacy over the waters.
That's what this is about.
It's not about trying to find a
reason not to do it.
This is trying to find a reason
to do something.
that it's late.
The hours late, we're tired. I
just wanted to be clear that I
have not heard anybody to call
anybody stupid during debate. I
purposes I want to share.
Senator Pope, thank you, Mr.
President.
Once again, I'm hearing more
But I'm still not convinced.
That this is the way that we're
going to clean this up.
How we're going to ensure that
there's
Integrity in the poor space.
Inner sure
Mr. President, Senator.
I
I, I know you're just joking,
And that the poor space is
secure. Can you talk about that?
Absolutely, Mr. President.
The monitoring wells or what
does that.
know whether you've done
something or not. And if, if, if
for whatever reason it goes
beyond where you thought,
Well, that's trespassing and so
now you have to deal with the
whole trespassing issue.
wells.
Thank you, Mr. President,
Senator, and, and that goes back
to the prior discussion and.
Go ahead and just start kind of
closing, um.
Mr. President, Senator.
I just want to tell the body and
those online and those still
That's not what this is. This
wasn't presented as a fund.
Now this bill has been amended.
And showed where a lot of this
matches.
Another bill
And Mr. President, my concern
federal level would not go into
this fund.
I still haven't got an answer
why we need this fund when we
didn't pass the legislation.
At the state level.
And this isn't right.
and we're acknowledging that
there could be some issues and
the reality is some of these
operators.
could go bankrupt or have issues
and leave and leave it to the
taxpayers.
Metric ton.
We have no idea what the cost
could be.
To remediating one of these
sites.
So Mr. President, Senator, I, I
just urge the body, look, if, if
this
is scientifically sound and we
know that this is gonna work.
We don't have to rush this. We
don't have to decide this in the
last few hours.
On the last day of a session.
It's gonna be.
A reflection of the future we
leave.
For everyone else here in our
state.
And Mr. President, Senator, I
don't enjoy the fact that New
Mexico continues.
So I just urge the body to
reject this because once again,
Um,
she shall, uh, pursuant to 18-1,
shall the main question be now
put?
Senator Ramosa, that is not the
correct um motion to put.
Center Ramos, you still have the
floor.
Mr. President.
Mr. President, I move the
previous question Senator Ramos,
you have the floor and you can
debate the bill, but because you
didn't give the proper motion.
You're unable to call that
question. It has to be done with
This bill would help.
Um
On the different types of
For a question. Senator, Mr.
President, I believe he needs
Red Bull, but yes, I will yield.
Mr. President, um, can you tell
Mr. President,
We've managed to talk so long
that the, the, uh,
Expert witness from New Mexico
Tech, who is on his way to
witness from New Mexico Tech to
answer that question because
he's on his way to Amsterdam,
where they are open to economic
development and open to the idea
of cleaning up whatever messes
sponsor, you know, I worked with
New Mexico Tech for quite a
while. We did a lot of great
things there and
They've literally have led the
nation in very many projects.
Have them do the research that
Uh, Mr. President, what
Are,
has a power to promulgate rules.
Um, yes, Mr. President, uh,
what is happening.
Mr. President, um,
That's all I got for now, Mr.
That is the proper.
That is the proper motion.
for
And I asked for a roll call.
So after 2 hours of debate, the
main question can be put in
motion. So the main question be
now put.
It's a non-debatable motion.
What happens if we vote yes is
that you're asking that we end
debate and we go to the vote.
roll call.
The clerk
To call the roll
Sandra Bergman's Sandra
Bergman's votes yes. Senator
Block.
Santer Boone.
Senator Boone votes yes, Santa
Brown.
Senator Brandt votes, yes,
Senator Brantley.
center block. Senator Block
votes yes.
Center Charlie.
Senator Charlie votes no.
Yeah. San Figueroa votes yes
Gallegos.
Center Gallego's votes, yes.
Sentra Gonzalez is excused
Sandra Lopez votes no. Senator
Maestas. Senator Maestas votes
yes. In Munoz.
San Padilla votes yes. Senator
Paul. Senator Paul votes yes,
Senator Pinto.
Center Pinto votes no Senator
Pope.
Sandra Scott votes yes, Center
to Lopez.
Centered Lopez votes yes,
Senator sharer. Yeah. Sent to
share votes, yeah, sent to
Sendo.
No. Senator Steinburn votes no.
Sandra Stewart. Sandra Stewart
wrote, yes, Sandra Thornton.
Senator Thornton votes yes.
Senator to bison.
Santaor votes, yeah, San Woods.
Center Woods votes yes.
6 in the negative.
Senator Sheer, to close on the
bill.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate, the record showed that
all the role has been called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Roll call Senators, we are
Anyone in the chamber that when
the clerk calls for the role.
Then nobody answers for the
senator, but the senators
themselves.
We had a senator's name that was
Senator Bergmans.
Senator Bergman's votes, yes,
Santa Block.
Center block votes, yes, Senator
Campos. Senator Campost votes,
yes, Senator Cervantes.
Senator Cervantes votes center
to Charlie.
Senator Charlie votes no.
Senator Doha.
Centraallecos.
Yes, ma'am.
Sentra Gonzalez excuseent
Hamlin.
Senator Hamlin votes no. Senator
Hickey.
Lopez
Senator Lopez votes no.
Senator Maestas.
Center Maestus votes yes.
Senator Padilla.
Sandra Padilla votes yes.
Senator Paul.
Center Pavo Centra Pinto.
Senator Pinto
Senator Scott.
Senator Scott votes yes,
centered Di Lopez. No. Lopez
No, and exclaimed my Steinburn
votes no. Senator Stewart.
Center Stewart votes no, San
Thornton.
Santa Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Wirth.
Center worth votes, yes, Center
Woods. Center Woods votes yes.
House Bill 458 is three times
amended, has passed the Senate
Senator Pinto to explain her
vote.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I guess I hold my constituents
don't have some of this in their
district, not in just one place
but several places to see and
Such a great high value.
To my people in the area of the
And she still at this time,
nationally still, those
regulations will change years
We are resilient.
All those health disparities
continue to plague not just the
generation that worked there,
but their children.
President. Well, it's great to
be first in something, but I am
just really stunned that we are
choosing to be the first state
in the country.
That wants to take on.
And we will, many of us will
probably not be here to, uh,
reap the consequences of it.
But you know what, Mr.
President, there's still time
left in the session for other
Thank you, Mr. President. I am
sorely disappointed in Senator
Cervante's questions though.
Senator
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 53,
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation many substitute
for Senate Bill 481 as amended
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate bill 327.
Center be 377.
Senate Bill 495.
substitute for Senate Bill 59
and return same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa
Amartiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
Journal show the message from
the house has been received.
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk the
journal will reflect that them
my in the house has been
received.
concurrence of the Senate to the
House amendments respectfully
submitted Lisa Martis
McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The Journal will show the
message from the house has been
received,
House Bill 14 as amended by the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa Amartiz McCutchen, chief
clerk.
Journal will show the message
from the house has been
received.
Senate Majority floor leader
we'll be back at 8:30 tomorrow.
I do want a flag, a Senate
resolution 2. this is a rules
changes that Senator Doig and
tomorrow and there's, again,
it's, it's a
lengthy document, but it's, it's
not a bunch of substantive
things, but I want to make sure
everyone knows right now, uh, we
need to make those changes and
When heel to Senator Brantly,
but if I can please have your
attention on this announcement,
Senator Brantley. Thank you Mr.
President. I received a very
disturbing text message tonight
victims so far and in the last
text that I got up, there's been
3 dead children. It's now
estimated at 5. Children, it's
playing out tonight, so for the
coming home tonight. I would ask
for just a quick moment of
silence.
We are in that order of business
announced it's miscellaneous.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Wirth, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to Senate
