Has been received Senate
Majority floor leader Peter
Wirth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent, we
go to that our business
introduction of legislation. no
objection. We are in that order
senators William Burt and
Elizabeth Stephanix, an act
relating to general
appropriations making
appropriations from legislative
agencies for flooding and fire
response recovery and
mitigation, making an
appropriation.
From the general fund to the
administrative office of the
twice by title.
is referred
To the Senate Finance Committee
that's House Bill One.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
in recess, subject to the call
of the chair. Thank you, Senator
want to announce the room
number.
That'll be Mr. Chair, in room
322.
In 5 minutes.
Right.
Seeing no objection. The Senate
will stand in recess, call with
the chair.
