Committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 6 has had it
under consideration and reports
same with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes's
Seeing none.
The committee report has been
adopted the reader to read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
had it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chair,
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
House Bill 64 do pass.
House Bill 117 as amended do
pass.
amended.
House Bill 244 do pass.
House Bill 340 house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report. have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
That was a pose, the eyes have
it. The community board has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect.
referred House taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 450 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
I suppose nay, yeah I have it.
The community report has been
adopted.
Senate Majority floor leader
Senate will come to order.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you in
consent that the rules be
suspended. The journals show all
those present in this morning's
session.
Are present in this afternoon
session.
and approval of the judiciary
Committee. no objection. It is
so ordered.
Senator.
Uh, Mr. President, so again, the
plan is to hear house taxation
business 3rd reading of
legislation, and I yield to
Senator Munoz for house tax and
rev Committee substitute for
House Bill 450.
So no objection on that order of
business. 3rd reading
committee for House Bill 450 on
final passage is now subject to
debate amendment and
substitution.
Uh, Mr. President, the House Tax
and Transportation Commission
fund, 292 million severance tax
$1133 million in state funds,
nearly 60 million in general
funds is appropriated for
projects prioritized by the
House and the Senate members and
Bill 450.
Uh, Mr. President, can I ask you
Maincent of Kelly Carswell from
LFC on the floor.
Unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Cervantes until he
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call no
objection.
Senators were debating how tax
revenue Committee substitute for
houses for House Bill 450.
President. Will the gentleman
yell for a question or two.
Senator Mr.
President, yes, I will.
Senator Townsend, Mr. President,
I'm
In the house around the, uh, $10
million appropriation. I mean,
it is what it is, is there
Was there anything else in that
You know, Mr. President, I
looked through it and we're in
Senate Finance. There, there's
such a small appropriation for
$4000. I dug into that. That was
for signs for a school district.
outlet play bill other than
there's a lot of projects that
are probably underfunded or not
funded correctly.
Senator Townsend,
Um
probably deserves.
Um
Maybe a look at to make sure
quick, that we don't have money
hung out for sometimes years and
years, I think I heard you say
the other day, I forget the
number, but there, there's a
process for capital outlay going
forward that might
Um, make it more efficient.
session, uh, as we came into the
session capital outlay was due
earlier than ever in December.
Uh, we thought we could bet more
projects quickly. We thought we
appropriations? The Senate did a
really good job in trying to
match those up and, and local
counties, cities that met
together, did a really good job
capital outlay bill in capital
projects with over 6000 projects
managed by 18 people. It's
almost 600.
Projects per person. It's almost
turn the golden shovel at the
next groundbreaking for whatever
it is, the water project, the,
the hospital, uh, we know that
we go there, we cut the ribbons,
In a 20 year project since I've
known that that's been around. I
think this finally fully funds
him, uh, completely. I looked
under uh Valencia County. I
constituents, but we're really
helping them correctly.
We all want to make sure that
you know we don't have lead
pipes in Gallop or we, we have
chapter houses that are safe
things in New Mexico, uh, but
Capi Oley is one of the hardest
things we do that we can never
seem to get right.
Thank you, Senator, Mr.
President, you're probably gonna
Olay. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Senator Townsend.
Seeing no further debate.
Senator Cilia Lopez.
And I thought that the
understanding was we wouldn't
put in less.
At least as a group, then
$100,000.
of these projects have such
minimum minimal amounts of
funding. Mr. President, Senator,
last year we had a gentleman's
agreement to to fund projects at
$100,000. Uh, this year, we
know why, but, you know, uh,
it's a very interesting
situation. I will tell you the
smartest person in this building
is Senator Rodriguez.
Because when we put a limit, uh,
smartest person in the room that
figured out how to fund her
capital projects correctly and
then come back and reauthorize
the rest of the money and, and,
and still get a second bite of
have to work on, uh, worry about
it. Thank you, Mr. President.
Lopez. Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
President and of course members
has gone into it, but again, and
this is going back to some of
the examples that the, uh, chair
of finance has, has used, but
for 30 years we were seeking
when you have the resources and
you don't get the projects that
you need, whether it be for life
safety, whether it be for water,
whether it be for roads, when
For those resources to be
properly utilized, the ones that
we're continuing to affect, of
course, are the taxpayers in the
communities and of course the
hear things like, well, there's
gonna be 5000 projects that are
held and there's about $6
billion that's held.
And then with the resources that
are going into all this now, we
as you submit your requests,
make sure that there's a full
plan in place. Make sure that if
you will, that there's been some
collaboration.
that area have been uh
communicated with the intent of
these resources is to help to
make New Mexico better in every
corner of our state.
idea is, how the project will
continue to progress, how the
resources are available, how
it's going to be maintained and
how it's going to be operated.
that we have to be very careful
with is the arbitrage and I know
as we go forward.
We talk a lot about, well, how,
how as an example with our bond
uh, the life of whatever it is
that we bond that project for,
um, maybe it's not the full life
of the bond.
So we have to be very careful
with that. And the last thing
and to work on that strategy.
Been trying to go ahead and make
these changes in capital outlay
now for over 3 decades.
We make some changes, we
continue to make those
there.
But it's important for all of us
to get out into our districts to
talk to people, to encourage
them.
whether it be through the
appropriations Act through
reauthorization or in this case
through capital outlay is to
have that communication in the
planning and to work together.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. Well, the good senator,
yield, please.
Mr. President, do I have to?
President? It scares me,
Senator. Oh jeez.
Mr. President, that's good to
know.
to leave my microphone down a
second so I can get back to
where I was.
But on page 99 of your bill
section 29.
design, construct, renovate,
repair, refurnish, equip
facilities at the New Mexico
State Fairgrounds in Berlio
County and to acquire property
remember asking if the state
fair going to move. That was not
in there. This does give a full
scope on what is being planned
site has the site been selected
yet.
Mr. President, Senator, I don't
know that that they're still
Senators, well, Mr. President,
it's kind of like going to a
banker and say, Mr. Baker, I
need to borrow a bunch of money,
and I want it for this type of
project, but I don't know where
a big deal for all of the
peoples of the state of New
Mexico, but whenever we are
asking for $14 million
there.
Mr. President, Senator, the
state already owns the state
fairground and in the initial
round of this, $7 million was
Microsoft's got its beginnings
is on that.
South west corner of the
property, and we know that they
President and excuse me, Senator
Munoz, I understand the why they
want to do that if they're going
that property and everything so
they can do whatever they're
going to do there in light of, I
don't know how much was spent on
those new seats that they just,
can you tell me where that $10
million appropriation is that
just suddenly showed up. I've
been looking for it and I can't
seem to find it.
pages or multiple counties, uh,
it's page 19 of 31, and you look
on multiple counties, it's, uh,
number 50s.
Mr. President.
Senator Munoz, do we, it is 5201
Mr. President and Senator Munoz,
do we know where that
reproductive health clinic will
be constructed.
people that want to have kids
that can't have kids could go to
this, um, you could have people
that can't conceive.
Go to this clinic at UNM to help
Doesn't have a good seaman
count. It may be for multiple
things, but to label as one
thing or another is not fair to
the process.
Until we really know.
to this particular bill being
debated over on the House side
yesterday and it was pretty
Clear about.
on page 242 under item number
26.
It is just saying it's going to
be built in Northern New Mexico.
We have a big state, Mr.
President, and Senator Munoz. So
built on state land, Mr.
President and Senator Munoz.
Mr. President and Senator, we
don't know where it's going to
be built. It says northern New
is a is a telling story. Where
do they have UNM facilities and
hospital facilities. I, I don't.
No.
I couldn't answer that question.
I don't know what the exact
rights and that could happen
when you can't have children
and, and so it could be a number
of things, but just to
automatically assume it's one
thing or the other is not my job
with this budget being the
topic.
It was very clear because of.
The terminology they used in
That's taxpayers' dollars, and
they do need to wear it's need
to know where it's gonna be
located and specifically what it
will be used for, Mr. President,
Senator Munoz, thank you very
and Senator Munoz, can you tell
me how much capital was
allocated?
Uh, by county.
Um, Mr. President, that would
McKinley County, 18 million,
Lunar colony, 5 million. I'm
just hitting some highlights
that I'm no particular order, no
particular dollar amount, $16
amount of appropriations.
Thank you Senator Munoz.
Mr. President and Senator Munoz,
I, I was just.
Thumbing through here, I'm
Going over to Lee County and you
told me that one.
And
Then I, I, I know that the most
representatives and senators
that they have from those
particular areas.
Mr. President, Senator, I would
assume that's correct.
outlay because these are
projects that are citizens in
those particular areas have told
us we need help with.
A or the uh industry that we
have to thank for that is the
oil and gas industry, Mr.
President and Senator Munoz,
along with agriculture, so thank
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Will the senator yield for a
question or two.
Senator, Mr. President, yes, I
will.
For this capital outlay
allocation. Is that accurate?
Mr. President, Senator, yes,
that is.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator
How much money is left in that
fund after this 16 million
allocation.
we hear complaints all the time.
That the oil and gas industry is
not able to uh provide
appropriate funds to clean up.
consequence of the oil and gas
conservation tax, which was
specifically designed to provide
those revenues, so.
gas industry not stepping up to
clean up their problems if we're
raiding this reclamation fund
those monies will be sufficient
to cover the expected
liabilityities.
That are, uh,
Oil and gas related.
up. Uh, so we may have just made
the transfer from the fund we're
looking right now to verify
that, uh, to Mner so that they
can clean up the oil, uh,
was appropriated, uh, for well
clean up out of the fund, uh,
to, it's for orphan well
plugging. So it came out of the
fund and into an appropriation
for Emner to do orphan well
that that fund will provide
sufficient revenues to cover all
of those problems and I very
much appreciate it going into
Munoz to close on the bill, Mr.
President, we close on this. I,
I wanna tell you one process
that was really cleaned up in
the in the legislatures. We talk
about Cavalley, the good
and making it alive again.
Kappa Alley, what we do with
Kappa Ola in New Mexico.
is we love to get money out. We
give you the winning lottery
my district, it's the hardest
thing I do as a legislator.
I I turn on the sprinkler and
everything gets a little green,
but nothing really grows because
we don't complete projects the
way we should.
Gonzalez, uh, Senator Near, we
negotiated with the exec to hold
50 million back in their woods
to 50 million back to complete
projects. And if we look in and
2 million for a skilled nursing
facility in Rio Reba. We
completed that project. 1.3
million for a childcare facility
in Eunice. We completed that
project.
million for a water system in
Maxwell. We completed that
project where it was short of
funding and it can go on and on
975,000 from transitional
we completed that project. 1
million for a community service
complex in Jemez Pueblo, we
completed that project, so don't
give up on capital. It, it's a
slow process. Cities and
costs with.
We will fulfill those projects
if you let us do it, but don't
come with a worldwide slew of
projects that the legislature
would love to see and write
With almost 6000 pushing project
plus projects pushing almost $7
billion in capital. The messages
to the state of New Mexico on
Capitol projects.
We're going to look at next
completed. Those people deserve
a new hospital and they deserve
a new clinic. Uh, water is the
lifeline. We're gonna complete
water projects, we put an
it's a million dollar project.
Make sure you have your ducks in
a row, uh, the lesson learned is
when we do come back, I hope we
reclamation fund, and we talked
about a lot of things, but the
thing you need to look up on
that sheet is, is where we took
about 24 million from our
capital development program
with what we built.
We will be less and less
dependent on the cash economy or
the bonding economy to fulfill
capital outlay.
this in and they're being called
and the role is being called in
all those present votes in the
affirmative except those voting
in negative by a show of hands.
Thank you all senators. We are
voting. All senators to your
seats, please.
Senator Brantley, voting out.
Saint Lanier, but you know.
Senator Tobiasson voting no.
Senator Ramos, Bodino.
And share voting no.
Senator Scott Borino.
Senator Boone, but you know.
Senator Brandt voting no.
And her block voting no.
I voted 25 in the affirmative,
16 in the negative house Tax and
Revenue Committee substitute for
Senator Hamblin, you know, I
shouldn't have those
conversations right before
closing, but members of the
body, thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
majority floor leader Peter
Worth, Mr. President, unanimous
bills, just go down the list.
Let me, let me read them out.
Uh, number 24, uh, House Bill
99, that'll be Senator Hamblin,
number 25, House Bill 20,
Senator Lopez, uh, number 28
House Bill 340, Senator
O'Malley.
House Bill 29, House Bill 219 is
Senator Steinborn and House Bill
of legislation, and I yield to
Senator Hamlin for item number
24, House Bill 99 is amended.
Hearing no objection. We are in
that order of business. They're
reading legislation center I'm
gonna to start us off. Thank
you, Mr. President. I ask
amendment or substitution.
He objectionsator Hamlin, if
you'll explain the bill. Sure
thing.
President, this bill really
addresses a targeted issue when
an insurance company is unable
what it does is it, um, allows
the state to actually have a
process in place. Uh, they've
had this for several years, but
they recently decided that
enabling language is needed and
so this is just a simple fix to
that, Mr. President.
Sure, I'll be more than happy
to, to yield. So, uh, Mr.
President and Senator, what if
the
Mr. President and Senator, I
believe that is, is that what
they're trying to do is have
access to that title, um, after
the vehicle is declared a loss
how do we have evidence of the
vehicle being non-repairable.
Uh, Mr. President, and, uh, and
Senator, I believe they work
with the insurance companies to
vehicle was in an accident, but
if it's sitting in their yard
and they're unable to repair it
they're not able to, uh, and
then they can't find the uh
certificate.
senator doesn't have the uh
comment or it's not a question
but more of a comment because in
some areas we do have quite a
and they might not have, I don't
know really what happened with
the title, but they're not able
to.
Move it or have the ability to,
debate, Mr. President, not
really, but, uh, to, to Senator
Pinto's question. This is only
if the insurance company owns it
because of an accident. So if
it's just abandoned, well, the
the insurance company now owns
it because they paid for it.
Thank you, Senator Sheer.
See no further debate. Senator
Hamlin to close on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
records show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands. We
are voting all senators to your
seats, please.
Mr. President.
Center, you can always try, Mr.
President, unanimous consent.
It's too late there, Senator,
on the negative. House Bill 99
as amended has passed the
Senate. Senator Hamblin. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senate. We're gonna go on to the
next item that's gonna be item
number 25 in your calendar and
I'll yell to you Senator share.
So Mr. President, I ask
unanimous Senate Senate record
show that all action for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 120 on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate.
Uh, make sure that state
agencies, the websites, their
mobile apps, their actual
facilities, uh, come into the
best ADA compliance that we
have, uh, there has been some,
much, Mr. President. I do rise
in support of this legislation,
and we've been doing it in any
number of things, Mr. President,
from, uh, those with hearing
impaired issues and any number
of other things I'm really glad
might as well utilize them for a
very positive reason. And with
that, Mr. President, I'll ask
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Munoz until
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Bill 101,120 do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The record shows the roles been
called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting and they by show of
We're gonna go on to the next
item, item number.
26 on today's calendar House
Bill 281 as Amanda, I'll yel to
Sinner Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
And on final passage and has has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution. He no objections,
Senator, if you'll explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
Braiding is more than just a
cornrows of West Africa to the
sacred braids of indigenous
communities every braid tells a
story. In African cultures,
braiding is an ancient.
tradition passed down through
its aesthetics, brady served as
an act of survival and
resistance enslaved Africans
stripped from their homeland
used braids not only as a way to
preserve their cultural identity
but also as a means of
Their hair became a road map to
liberation.
For indigenous communities,
Brady also holds a deep
spiritual meaning. Beyond
history, Brading remains a
It is a bonding moment, a time
of storytelling laughter and
sharing wisdom.
Braiding bridges generations
keeping traditions alive and
strengthening relationships.
Wyoming, Hawaii, New Mexico are
the only three states in the
nation that require a
cosmetology license to braid
hair.
Currently in New Mexico stylist
who only wishes to practice
Hair braiding is more than just
a simple hairstyle choice. It is
a safe, non-invasive
chemical-free practice of
generational tradition and
stand ready for any questions.
Senator Pope. Senators, we're
debating House Bill 281 as
amended.
See no debate.
Senior seal office.
and this bill doesn't raise any
kind of safety issues at all.
Braiding is something that is
done in our homes. I remember my
mom braiding my hair, um, when I
was growing up, and it, it, it
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. You
know, I think I'm always good
for a hairbi, you know, my 2nd
bill ever, uh, in 21 was a, uh,
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
presented voted in the
affirmative except for those
voting in negative with a show
of hands, uh, let me let me fix
your hand.
on the negative House Bill 281
as amended is duly passed the
Senate. Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you thank you to the body.
We're gonna go on to the next
item, that's item number 27,
Senate that the records show
that all actions for placing
House Bill 487 on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objections,
Senator Lopez. Explain the bill.
By replacing educational success
with academic success, it
removes references to closing
the achievement gap and and
Education Act by adding um
protecting and preserving New
Mexico's heritage Spanish
language and culture.
With that, Mr. President, I will
stand for questions. Lopez.
Senators we're debating House
move that House Bill 487 do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the records
show that the role has been
called in all those present
By a vote of 41 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
House Bill 47 has passed the
Senate. Senator Lopez.
Mr. President and Senate, thank
you.
We're gonna go on to item number
action for placing Senate House
Bill 340 as amended.
Um, on final passage as on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
representatives. House Bill 340
adds a section.
A new section to the DNA
identification Act, the new
material specifies the condition
that must be met for a person's
by motion from the district
attorney and an order from the
court that would have jurisdi
jurisdiction over the felony if
charges had been filed. The
person was in prison when they
it will help law enforcement
solve cold cases.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator O'Malley. Do we have
debate? Senator Pinto to debate.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
This part of the of those
offenders so thank you Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Senator Pinto. Any
further debate, Senator Senator
Senator, I if I understand this
correct, this is capturing the
DNA upon the death, is that
correct? That is correct.
Mr. President, uh, senator, if
Why only after the death. Why
don't we do it?
While when they come into
prison, I mean, what's, why not?
Heard Townsend. So, Mr.
President, this is only if
That was not collected
originally that we're just
making sure that every inmate
upon leaving.
Townsend.
I do have someone who could be,
you know, he's my an expert
witness. He just kind of showed
up, so would you like me?
in my expert witness. Yeah. Mark
Baker.
So, Mr. President, and my right
to infer from that answer that
some who enter or have been
And Mr. President, Senator, if
we're
If we're really trying to
capture and, and
can address those crimes.
Senator O'Malley.
Mr. President, Senator Townsend,
and so I, um,
I unders I believe I understand
what you're trying to do and why
you're trying to do it. I would
just tell you if you're trying
So my question.
Still remains.
If we're really interested in
solving cold case crimes, why
Senator Townsend, my expert
tells me that I guess we could
amend the constitution.
Mr. President, uh, Senator, can
a constitutional issue.
Senator Townsend, Mr. President,
Senator, I, I think that's
probably
Betters better than never, so at
least we would have.
Maybe some some victims would
have closure, uh, when these
possible. We have identified the
problem and that is DNA of many
inmates is not captured. I guess
the only problem is if we
captured it today.
I, uh, thank you for your
answer. Senator Townsend. We do
have further debate. We have
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President, with
What we're talking about here
when I read.
On page one of the bill, the new
material from, uh, line 18.
If the person dies before being
charged with a felony. Are we
saying in this bill that you're
forcing, uh, somebody to turn
block it's my understanding that
the DNA of the person was not in
prison, the DNA can only be
entered in CODIS by motion from
the district attorney and an
So you're collecting and one,
OK, upon the death of the
person, the person dies before
being charged.
And then what happens uh to that
There's a resident Senator
Block, um.
system CODIS.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, Senator is, so is
there a date where the DNA would
this bill.
Center block
Thank you, Mr. President.
further debate, Senator
O'Malley, to close on the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
that the Senate.
the affirmative, except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you Senators,
we're voting. I'll send it to
your seats, please.
If you wish to vote no.
Senator Townsend voting now.
Senator Thornton voting now.
Center center block will you
know.
I voted 35 in the affirmative, 6
in the negative. House Bill 340
as amended has passed the
We're gonna go on to the rest of
for placing House Bill 219 is
amended, uh, be put on final
passage that all action has been
taken is now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution.
Mexico's 36, I know, that,
that's usually a flag, but it
happens to be true. Uh, how
spell 219 creates New Mexico's
thirty-sixth state park.
In Donana County called Slot
access to the slot canyon, but
also goes down to the Rio Grande
River in a really beautiful
piece of riparian habitat.
And, uh, and it's gonna be a
great park, uh, Madam President,
Bill 219 as amended I'll yield
to Senator Brant, followed by
Senator Woods. Senator Brant
with the sponsor yield,
I yield.
using any state money to buy the
land. We already own it and
you're just wanting to designate
it into a state park and.
Mr. President, that's correct,
and the money that's been
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, Senator, that's a
good question. I don't know the
answer to that, but they will do
a management plan for the park.
mandate to create it.
Mr. President, I, I understand
that there were like
3 options.
You actually went with the
highest price option. Why not,
why not the middle priced
option?
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, Senator, you know
that the state parks director,
and their complete support of
at the, the higher end option
because the higher-end option
provides for camping. It
provides for full-time staff.
This is their, their feasibility
study that by law we are
really was kind of inadequate
for the opportunity we have
here. It wouldn't allow for
camping. We have to use staff
from another park and, and this
is gonna be a really marquee
of it. State parks is.
Uh thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, senator. So how hot
does it get?
During the summer in this area.
by beautiful cottonwoods,
nature, literally river access.
So it's gonna be, you know, a
few, few degrees cooler and, uh,
and shaded in some parts.
mean, I don't know this area at
all, and you know I like to go
out and do some RVing.
So that's why I was wondering
about the RVing, uh.
So it might be a good place for
might create a rapid situation,
so, but we'll try to be nearby
to help you out.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator, um.
Mr. President, Senator, so to
get it going is a $9 million
appropriation to create all the
facilities, recurring cost is
estimated around 300,000 and
President. Thank you, Senator,
but we are making a commitment
today that if we do this and
turn this into a state park, it
will be a recurring expense, uh,
but I understand most of our
with general fund and so it's
kind of a combination of the
two, really.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator. I'll, I'll
listen for more.
We do have further debates. We
million appropriation, this
appropriation was struck in
house finance, house
appropriations and finance. Does
that appear in the budget?
Mr. President, Senator, that was
putting the investments in our
state parks brings tourism and
activity. This is the benefit
not just for Southern New
Mexico, um, but, but anytime we
actually make the investments
at New Mexico's, uh, favorite
state park, Elephant.
Lake there, um, and, and I don't
see the addition of any state
parks bringing any competition.
I think that, you know, it
champion for the outdoor
recreation and beautiful
southern New Mexico. I'm happy
to stand in support of the bill.
Senator Brown. We do have
Senator Scott followed by
Senator Hamblin.
During the committee
presentation that these very,
very narrow slot can canyons.
during a sudden rainstorm. Could
you address what, uh,
is being considered to mitigate
near Santa Fe, the what they
call the narrows in Zion
National Park. There are times
when you have flooding when in
you manage a Park where you
close it off to the public. But
I think certainly the benefit of
really no active management.
When we do this, people are
going to be able to park in the
state park, have safe access to
the slot canyon and have more
system or type of system
contemplated to get people out
of those areas during conditions
when, uh, things are less than
way you know that you're gonna
have an issue is depending upon
how much rainfall you have and
knowing the hydrology of the
region that depending upon how
that rainfall and how fast it
comes, you know it's gonna end
Senator, it will take a little
bit of common sense on the part
of those hikers to uh keep them
out of trouble.
And I would hope that the park
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't need the sponsor to yield.
I actually stand in support of
this as a sponsor and I have
worked, uh, a great deal for
many, many years on outdoor
recreation as Senator Brantley
Sands National Park, and the um
prehistoric trackways national
monument and so we see this in
this community as an additional
um site.
Uh, this is something that is,
uh, we own the there are many
groups in the community that
feel ownership over Slot Canyon,
over the national monument, over
invested in protecting this and
enjoying it, embracing it and
making sure that it truly
benefits the community. So I
stand in strong support of this.
Um, I'm glad to see that Slot
strong support.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. see
no further debate. We do have
further debate Center Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the sponsor please yield.
that we're looking for, uh, the
following year or years.
Mr. President, um, Senator,
that's what's anticipated to
complete the park, to build out
and river access and campsites
and power and RV um spots.
Well, Mr. President, I think I
said camping as far as RV spots,
you know, that's probably falls
supporting this bill. The last
question I have is does this
state park have any connection
to Espanola.
And Steinborn. Mr. President, in
hike from Slot Canyon to
Espanola.
Mr. President, I yield. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator, uh,
Block. We have Senator L.
Steinborn, does this tie in with
the bike trail that will go from
our southern end of the state to
the northern end of the state.
Mr. President, Senator, it
speaks about tying into the Rio
Grande Trail because it is on
the Rio Grande.
And Mr. President, the reason I
bring that up is uh Senator
Steinborn carried that
Steinborn, we have heard that
it's also a kind of a trail for
some unsavory stuff that might
be coming up from our southern
Particular state park if it
passes, does get finished.
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, Senator, I would
parks.
And so Mr. President and Senator
Steinborn, my other question I
know is important to me. I know
Mr. President, Senator, I think
only positively because we're
bringing in tourists into Donana
County, into that area, into
where where private landowners
are actually, you know, using
their land as another
opportunity to make revenue for
themselves. We have some
agricultural entities, in fact,
in um in Roswell, there's an
amazing ranch that uh brings
synergistic if they choose it to
be, but otherwise it won't have
any negative impacts, I don't
believe Mr. President and
Senator Steinborn, I guess that
would be up to the individual
Cross the fence and that is
trespassing and something
happens to that person that is
trespassing. I am concerned
about the agricultural.
there. The other concern I have,
Mr. President and Senator
Steinborn has already been
brought up and that is in the
case of a torrential rainfall
I want there to be some sort of
a system in place, and I think
that needs to be spelled out in
the appropriation for this get
going to be able to escape,
especially whenever a wall of
water is coming down and folks,
that is a real thing.
Thank you, Mr. President,
couple feet. So there's an, I'm
not saying that can't happen,
but I'm just saying it doesn't
happen to where someone's at
drowning level instantly, but
having said that, we all agree
help keep this safe. Keep in
mind, Mr. President, Senator,
this is already a very popular
uh visited site that doesn't
have active staff management. So
we're actually going to be
particular people that are out,
uh.
Hiking or exploring whatever the
case may be, but you're exactly
ft of water coming down, you
have a ton of water coming down
that will hit you, knock you
down and drag you, drown you,
Mr. President, good luck with
this bill, Senator Steinborn,
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
thank you, colleagues. I now
move that House Bill 219 as
amended, do not pass ICUS
consent of the Senate, the
record show the role has been
The vote of 4 in the affirmative
0 in the negative House Bill
219.
As a man did.
Has passed the Senate.
Senator Steinborn.
Miss.
that we're on item number 30 now
and that'll be you Sander
Steinborn.
OK, thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senate. OK. So, uh,
Substitute no. Yes, yes, that's
right. How's judiciary Committee
substitute for House Energy and
Natural Resource Committee
substitute for House Bill 212 to
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, colleagues, this is a
bill that bans a variety of PAS
products here in the state of
we've learned that it, yes, it
causes cancer. It is very
dangerous and very small
amounts, much smaller than we
previously appreciated.
And that, uh, it, it poses a
contact with human health, and,
uh, with that, uh, Mr.
President,
Um, I'm happy to stand for
questions. Thank you, senators
we're debating Center woods.
Environment Secretary James
Kenney unanimous consent request
to bring out the expert witness
see no objection, Sergeant at
Center woods, you have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. President.
products in the following
categories with PAS are
prohibited. These categories
include cookware, food
packaging, dental floss,
juvenile products, and
firefighting foam.
feminine hygiene products,
textiles, upholstered furniture,
and ski wax, and then in 2032,
other products with
intentionally added PFOS may be
prohibited.
Senator
What are we going to do with the
products we have right now.
We've got, we've got many
products. We've got a, a water
So Mr. Mr. President, when you
say the products that are here,
We, we are going to, we've got
contamination in groundwater
and, uh,
water. My question to you is,
how do we dispose of the product
that we have already.
Ute Reservoir, uh, up by Logan,
uh, they found POs in that,
that's going to be drinking
water, it's gonna have to be
filtered out of that drinking
water before it could come into
the
That we filter out that we have
on hand, how do we dispose of
it? Thank you, Mr. President,
and you know, Mr. President,
Senator, uh, you know, I've been
sitting behind me. I mean, he's
really been our fighter for the
state, you know, taking on DOD
where we not only have PFOS at
one base but at 2,
and so what he is telling me is
the DOD is doing in part, but
the state has also been involved
in, um, you know, trying to fund
some of that work.
works up in Los Alamos and I
said,
You know, he was asking me about
different water matters and
different things, and I says,
remove this from the water in my
area and
And he says, I'll just, I'll
just go over there and check
with the, the group that do
that, Mr. President. And so he
place to dispose of him. He
said, I can dispose of
radioactive waste. I can dispose
of different other kind of
waste,
stuff? We've got a lot of it in
carpet. We've got it in clothes,
we've got it in cooking pans.
We've got it everywhere in the
world.
there in Clovis, they said,
we're going to inject it into
the ground.
That kind of disturbs me a whole
lot because that's the problem
we have now. It's in the ground.
to badger the witness anymore,
but it, it's a problem we have.
It's a forever chemical.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Woods.
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Steinburn to you Mr.
President. Senator Scott.
Mr. President, first off,
You know, we've developed some
Uh, at kind of cross purposes.
Does this legislation help with
Mr. President, Senator, I'm
wondering if this piece of
legislation is necessary to
allow the state.
Not exactly, I guess, to an
extent, because we're we're
banning firefighting foam, but
that is another bill that
hopefully we will be hearing on
military.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
how would this legislation
will we be uh kind of middle of
the pack in that regard.
Mr. President, what, what my
expert, the secretary is telling
step of banning P5. OK. That
answered all of my questions.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. President, I yield, thank
you, Mr. President. Senator, you
know, I, I didn't have any
questions until other questions
started being asked I just one
of those things and, and I've
I've decided that I, I've got a
questions, so uh, Senator Scott
just asked about um.
the hazardous waste part of it,
um, I'm taking it the feds have
not.
Mr. President, uh, it sounds
like they have not, although the
EPA has definitely increased
their parts per million in which
they determine it to be
extremely dangerous. But in
Is that the reason there's
nowhere to dispose of it is
because it's not labeled as
consumer products, right? And
right now these consumer
products are going just a
regular municipal landfills and
so this is a bill about keeping
those kinds of products from
the other senator's question
that do take this, and so, but
as he said,
You know, we have to find a
solution for this, and this is
gonna be something that, you
know, hopefully there will be
our, our chemistry professor
would be able to answer some of
these questions better than me
for sure. Um, but, you know,
Here and in England and, and uh,
you know, so you know I it does
concern me a little bit.
Because I was exposed to quite a
bit of that stuff.
I mean, that's, that's what
we've all learned in in the last
10 years and so I asked Google
about that.
And
You know, Google says that there
may be, while the evidence
deals that like in California,
you go to California and
everything is labeled that this
is known to cause cancer in
California. And I always
wondered why it only causes
cancer in California and not
um, my, my, my expert says that
of the really dangerous stuff
used in chemical uh firefighting
foam that they are
scientifically proving and
linked to causing cancer.
Senator Bran
twice.
But uh I I've met Google many,
many times, and we have a really
long lasting relationship and he
scientific evidence, you know,
I'm told this constantly, right?
Well, this scientific study says
this, and this scientific study
says that, and, and then you get
down into, I'd like to see it,
and there was no control group.
You can't have a scientific
study without a control group.
Um, and so, you know, efficacy
some of the things I used to
talk to Representative Harper
about when he was around. I used
to be able to go and say, OK,
you know, tell me about this,
and he'd say, well, I haven't
I just think it's really
important that we don't
overstate something as a
scientific fact.
Because one of the things we
know.
are very few things that have
become a law in science and
everything is constantly, you
put out the hypothesis, you do
the study and you try to
disprove your hypothesis.
And it really isn't and I'm not
saying this isn't, I'm just
saying that.
Show me, maybe I'm, maybe I
should have been from Missouri,
right? The Show Me State because
If PFOS is dangerous.
I hope not, because it's
probably gonna lowered my life
if it is, and the kinds of
cancer they think it might
There are studies that suggest
that this right here causes
cancer, and I'm not talking
about the plastic bottle.
Talking about the water in it.
Yeah, we know if we don't drink
Thank you, Senator Brandt. We do
have further debate. We have
Senator Block followed by
Senator.
Mr.
problem up there at the air base
in Clovis, uh, it, uh, caused a
big deal of alarm there.
But whenever I'm hearing this
Everything I'm picking up from
this.
To this.
To this.
this right here, Mr. President,
and it is all natural.
And Mr. Chairman or Mr. Speaker,
President, gosh dang, here we go
People want to see the meat that
they get. They put on Styrofoam
trays that are covered up with
plastic crap.
You get your salad in a bag
Because
I don't know. You're going to
have to do it all yourself
because you can't use your phone
because it's got PFOS in it.
where we thoughtfully take a
look at the situation. We
recognize that it's a toxin,
it's a hazard, it's dangerous to
humans, and we say what's a kind
and looked at what were some
common sense steps to take,
looking at some other steps are
done. So we got to start, Mr.
We can't say because we can't do
everything, we should do
and nano nanoparticles, I mean,
also being dangerous. So I mean,
we need, there, there's nothing
wrong with looking at how we can
eliminate the sources of some of
those things in a thoughtful
disagreeing with you.
But whenever people have a scare
put into them, oh my gosh, we've
got to get rid of this and that
and everything. Are we actually
Sorry, uh, Mr. President,
Senator, are you talking about
like municipal landfills or
talking about creating new
hazardous waste landfills,
whenever we're talking about all
that sets in. We have to get
these things out of our house,
so does that mean that, uh,
well, I can see people rolling
up their carpets taking their
that we are the one of the
highest nations, uh, to have
incidences of cancer.
But we're also one of the
highest nations of having the
Actually people are becoming
aware of medicine has come out
now to help people lose weight
or they're struggling with
safe food, safe clothing,
because if you wear clothes,
folks, guess what's in your
clothes too if you wear makeup,
guess what's in your makeup?
Your shoes, everything else.
Mr. President and Senator
Steinborn, everybody is going to
have to raise their own food,
they're gonna have to make sure
that their water is clean
to the source to be able to
drink the milk because we can't
put it in plastic cartons
anymore, Mr. President.
we can, especially whenever we
have to have most of our
products shipped into the state
of New Mexico.
And that's the long and short of
Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
like to ask the sponsor to
yield.
Mr. President, and I yield to
the Senate chemist.
um, Mr. President, Senator,
would you agree that
From a lot of
peer reviewed
Scholarly articles that.
Uh, kidney cancer, prostate
cancer, testicular cancer?
Yes, Mr. President, that's
correct. In addition to thyroid
disease, fertility issues,
immune system changes and other
yes. And Mr. President, senator,
you know that that could be the
tie and you know there's other
things going on in our country,
but that's also a factor in
Yes, Mr. President, absolutely,
um, PAS exposure can, uh,
negatively impact fetal and
child development.
Thank you, Mr. President,
Senator, and I, I won't keep
And we might not know the full
extent, but the fact is it it
is.
I understand the concerns of
Banning these products and how
they're used in a lot of our.
Every day
But these chemicals.
are bad for us. Not only are
they bad, but they're forever
chemicals. That's the name for
that carbon fluorine bonding, it
And so this is part of that, not
the bill per se, but.
Not using this.
Um, in our state. I will also
total ban. There are still some
uh folks can still use this in
certain instances in certain
industries.
So folks need to understand
that.
But I'll just end, Mr. President
and say.
Of a young child.
Being harmed from PFOS.
That's really the cost that we
should be thinking about.
that.
With the sinner yield for a
couple of questions. Senator
Steinburn do you yield. I yield,
Mr. President. Senators, Mr.
many years the PFOS and the
makeup takes to become critical,
Mr. President, Senator.
Mr. President, Senator, then uh
I'm wondering why it's an issue,
uh, with age, uh, she's gotten
better looking, uh, with the
makeup, so I, I guess I'm
department going about
rulemaking, Mr. President,
Senator.
Mr. President, Senator, it will
be done through the
we know what's going on and have
some input, Mr. President,
Senator.
giving them, but through the
rulemaking process, you know,
there's public hearings, there's
public comments, so the public
is definitely involved.
giving them, but uh with that
all, you'll, thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you Senator. There he
goes.
See no further debate. Senator
Stein wanted to close on the
but we appreciate him and his
team. I also appreciate my
colleague Representative
Ferrari, who's joined us who's
been fighting this fight as the
chair of the state's radioactive
and hazardous materials
Committee and carrying this
Bill 212 do now pass IUCN can
send the Senate. The records
show that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative, except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Senator Thornton vote you know.
And Gallegos voting now.
Has passed the Senate Senator
Steinborn. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Oh, you'll just Senate majority
floor leader Peter Worth, thank
you, Mr. Perez and business
House Bill 91. That'll be
Senator Stewart. Uh, so
unanimous consent we go that our
business third reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
Stewart for item number 31.
House Bill 91 as amended. There
action for placing House Bill 91
as amended on final passage has
been taken. It's now subject to
debate amendment, or
substitution. Senator, if you'll
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Mexico a new tool in addressing
the disproportionately high
utility costs faced by far too
many New Mexicans, especially in
consider approving rates or
programs that aim to reduce
energy burden on our most
vulnerable populations.
So these rates or programs would
New Mexico gas if this bill
passes, the PRC would be able
for the first time to evaluate
whose rates or programs should
be considered just and
spent 20% of their income on
energy bills alone. We have 5
Bypassing 91 in Mexico will
align with 20 other states,
including our neighbors, Arizona
and Colorado, which have
Bill 91 and we'll have Senator
Scott followed by Senator Woods
and Senator.
And here's Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well
the sponsor.
on the floor today. It's Michael
Kenny with the Western Resource
Advocates.
It's been a uh unanimous consent
request to allow the expert
witness into the chamber?
witness situated.
This bill, while it does not
create a new rate class does
allow for
Uh, consumers within similar
explain how that might work in
practice.
So Mr. President, how it works
right now is that the PRC, uh,
industry already baked into our
approval process. We have rates
designed to retain load. I'm on
one of those I 25 bucks a year
gets me to say, OK, you can
burden of energy costs. It's
only voluntary and it has to
come.
from the investor owned
utilities, so if they develop a
utility to come forward with a
program or a new rate. So
there's no other detail in the
bill because it's part of the
two households, uh, right next
to one another.
That would, uh, nominally be in
their income. Is that accurate?
Uh, Mr. President, no, it, it's
not accurate. It this has to be
working in other states, um,
let's see here. So Colorado has
a program like this, um, they
their monthly income we have
folks in Mora Tas
Rio Riba that are paying 28, 26,
California, their program
provides that customers below
the federal poverty level will
have a monthly bill cap of 3.
$7.
on this. They suggest that what
this does to other people's
bills is raised by 50 cents a
month.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator,
while I do appreciate the
answer, the, in the circumstance
that I just articulated, you
lower income of one and these
folks would be paying lower
rates than the folks paying.
bill, that would be a long way
away after if the utilities did
come up with the program or rate
they would have to go to the PRC
and then they would have to
And Mr. President, Senator, with
regard to that 50 cents more a
month, that would be completely
price, would that not be
accurate and does this bill
address the maximum increase
that the folks paying full rate
might be subject to as a
in it, uh, I don't know about
you, but I, I trust our investor
owned utilities to come up with
a good program.
and good rates and it's
Where businesses are paying
lower rates than consumers. You
have a situation right now. We
have a business next to
residentials that are paying
lower rates than the
be job creation or some economic
benefit to the state as a
consequence of that policy. This
Uh, Mr. President, I, I don't,
uh, agree with that. I think
when you have people that can
have a reasonable rate so that
they can pay for their energy.
to worry so much about food,
etc. because right now if you've
got 28% that's you're paying,
that's in Taos.
Uh
The good over the perfect.
Uh, so it's working in 20 other
states. They're taking care of
their low income folks, um, I
PRC have to uh a vote on and
approve and it's right in line
with what we do for our economic
development and our rates
designed to retain our load.
For the forgiveness of utility
bills that were in arrears such
that, uh, you might have
rate and the adjacent household,
not paying anything at all. Is
that a possibility?
Uh, Mr. President, I, I wouldn't
think that's a possibility. I
Would we develop public policies
that increase utility rates on
all of our customers, not just
the low income, but the
bills as opposed to the folks
that are not, uh, with all that,
Mr. President, I do have, uh, an
amendment to have a floor
amendment.
to House Bill 91 as amended.
Amendment sponsor is Senator
Scott.
I got to move the amendment.
Uh, Mr. President, move for
consideration. Senate floor
Senator Scott to explain the
amendment.
household at less than 400% of
the federal poverty level.
Senators already debating Senate
floor member number one and I
yield to the sponsor, Senator
Stewart.
programs that the investor own
utilities will suggest to the
PRC that they then could
approve.
So we don't need this, we
for amendment number one.
Senator Townsend did debate.
Thank you.
Mr. President, with the sponsor
Based on the comment that I just
heard that we shouldn't be
involved in the middle of the
utilities rate structures.
Haven't we been doing that for
uh, between two identical
households, both of those
households have had their energy
costs increase, but without any
differential in rates.
done on several pieces of
legislation that I can, can
recall, we in the legislature
have defined.
power must be available to
consumers, uh, we have shut down
certain types of power because
we decided it wasn't the right
thing. So I think you're.
Decide what the guardrails are.
So,
Mr. President
I think, you know, we've talked
in this body a dozen times about
Asking for is exactly what we
ought to be doing. We ought to
be setting the, the parameters
for those bills going forward.
So I look forward to supporting
On the amendment, Mr. President,
thank you very much. Will the
senator yield?
I will yield to the senator from
Chavis County.
Mr. President and Senator Scott,
I'm certain that you you are
probably very aware of the light
Utility help for low income
people, that's correct.
Mr. President, I know that with
the light heat program that has
been in effect for for I don't
Scott through all sorts of um.
programs that helped them with a
winterization, insulation, air
Scott,
Mr. President, Senator, that is
exactly correct. However, the
bulk of these programs involve
other customers of that utility
to subsidize the low income
folks rather than the state.
Mr. President
And Scott, Mr. President and
Senator, this would be the same
and in fact,
It does provide a guard rail or
Or uh maximum and minimum.
And, and Mr. President, Senator
Scott, that being these people
that are already
Being uh.
Mr. President, and Senator, I
can't.
Say for sure whether li heap is,
Thank you, Senator Scott. Thank
you, Senator, do you have
further debate?
No, see, no further debate on
the amendment.
Mr. President, you're gonna have
to give me just a second to get
my script out here so I can do
this correctly.
the adoption of house bill of
house floor amendment number one
May, uh, Mr. President, move for
adoption, Senate floor amendment
number 1. House Bill 91 as
amended. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those supposed nay.
The nays have it Senate floor
We are back on the bill,
senators Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
read this bill several times
here in a row.
problem with the memorial like
that. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Woods. We
have Senator Dial next.
track. Will the good senator
yield, please?
Yes, of course.
Mr. President.
what those are, please.
Uh, Mr. President, that's P&M El
Paso Electric.
SPS and New Mexico Gas Company.
companies do offer LIIap
assistance to low income
customers, isn't that correct?
Uh, Mr. President, the LI heap
does not come from the util from
rate programs so we're talking
about and they all compliment
with light heat. Light heap only
applies to heating or cooling
costs for a crisis and the once
also have light heat. There's 3
states that do their state like
heat, but it's safe.
Federal program.
But Mr. President, what I'm
trying to get at these companies
have a problem with it because
of the redistribution cost.
And Mr. President, as was stated
before by another person that
was debating this bill.
Oh
The low income customers will
benefit.
But to subsidize these costs.
These rates will be redistric
So Mr. President, you know,
it'll it'll follow along what
we've done already, which we've
given a rate cut to economic
development.
load is too high. I talked about
the PNM part that I'm part of
this would just add a rates and
Uh, they have a 6%.
Cap
For low income and it means that
everybody else pays 50 cents
more a month. That is the one
only an offering to the investor
own utilities to do these
programs or low income rates and
then they would have to be
Mr. President, I, I know that
the center senator went on and
on about this, but in my
opinion, whenever we're looking
services make or grant any
unreasonable preference or
advantage to any corporation or
a person with that
classification or subject to any
corporation or person within
classification to any
unreasonable.
Section C or as item C on page 2
is the only change in this bill,
rates designed to reduce the
this bill is about. These
companies cannot discriminate
against somebody else because.
Anybody could say hey.
With this amendment that did not
get passed, I think it made,
made that bill very clear on who
would be able to make
application.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
Sen souls followed by Senator.
Can go send her had a meal, then
send her Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. I was
wondering if the sponsor would
people and their low, um, and
lower their electric bills, we
should be working on lowering
everyone's electric bills, uh,
but could you tell me under what
Where's Stuart?
like a separate per kilowatt
charge.
It could be a flat dollar amount
rate reduction from general
Uh, it could have multiple tiers
for multiple income levels like
one rate for people 100 to 200%
of the federal poverty limit,
certainly require the PRC, uh,
to look at whatever rates or
programs are offered, um, to be
fair and reasonable, and.
I believe they're very capable
Of those rates, ultimately isn't
it the other ratepayers who do
pay for it.
You know, Mr. President, I, I
can't really answer that
I'm sure the cost is spread
around to the rest of us when we
do the rates designed for the um
retaining the load when the peak
my uh AC uh when their peak gets
too high, so these programs are
different depending upon what
the
people pay different amounts,
um, but I believe that our
investor owned utilities
understand what kind of programs
Mr. President and Senator, and
you kind of answered my next
question in that is it, does
this require anyone to do
anything, and I think you
indicated it's entirely
need in our state. Uh, we have
lots of people that struggle and
down in my area, particularly
during the summer when the high
electricity rates for the air
conditioning goes up because of
the very high temperatures and
in general though, we need to
remember the investor owned
utilities are not going to lose
money. This does not cost them a
thing and the economic
development rates do not punish
their, uh,
Trying to get the right word,
their map of their, uh, service
area. So it's all paid by
everyone else, but I think it's
food or other necessities
because of high electric rates.
And if we can't lower the rates
in other areas and ways, it's
incumbent upon us to make sure
that we take care of that by
having these sorts of rates that
Thank you, Mr. President, with
the Madam Proin yield for a
couple of questionsuart.
Gas company in New Mexico. I
just want to give you just, and,
and actually the last senator
brought up on guaranteed rate of
if I have a truck wreck on a
highway that comes directly out
of owner's equity. The same
truck.
Through P&M is put in the next
that uh those entities are no
risk decision makers sort of
like we are here in the
legislature. We make laws that
affect everyone else, but we
months, but it's never gonna
come out of owners' equity, um,
that, that rate of returns
guaranteed, but I did have a
question earlier, madam prote,
Uh, Mr. President, so people at
or below the poverty line in
Taos
over 20% and 5 of those are over
26%. Taos Coro Ria Ripa, Mora
debaca.
Well, thank you for that, man,
President, Mr. President, Madam
Protem, uh, Taos was under Kit
Carson Electric, is it not?
Mr. President, Madam.
agree. I looked it up and it is
Kit Carson and they're total
wind and solar, so they're 28%
because they're member owned.
Is their choice.
talking about apples and
oranges. I totally understand
the 28% that is their decision
because they're members of Kit
Carson.
P&M that is guaranteed rate of
return, Mr. President, Senator.
Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President, I did, I
wasn't talking about PNM.
my personal situation where I'm
part of their uh load program
they reduce the load program. I
didn't say anything about PNM
and Taos.
28%.
Cost for low income in Taos
where you do started out on this
bill talking about the
investment Excel.
PNM
because we're talking two
different entities. Do you know,
Mr. President, Senator, then
what a low income rate would be
for PNM in your area?
to go to the PRC with a program
or a rate on the PRC would have
to approve it, so all these
given multiple times here in the
chamber. I'm just trying to
understand the decision where is
the body you're gonna make
because of the
To another customer, and I think
this bill needs some long
thought.
that I yield. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senators. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
keeping the lights on or putting
food on the table, keeping the
lights on or helping raise their
grandchildren with expenses that
are happening. This bill makes
sense for the most vulnerable
stays with the family to help
with those children, and I want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator. I mean, we
have Senator Townsend next.
I've read the bill and the
analysis of a couple of times.
I, I think I get what you're
that you talked about has
guardrails. You have to do
certain things there first, it's
for a certain period of time,
isn't that correct?
And Stewart.
Uh, Mr. President, yes.
allows the investor own
utilities to come to the PRC
with rate program for low income
right above the sea, the guard
rails are proposed by the
utilities and the PRC.
Well, maybe you are thinking of
this. Do you think that a person
that is a low income meets the
threshold for a low income.
Rate
should they be given a special.
Rate just because they live in a
colder climate.
gonna be setting them up. Our
investor own utilities are and
the PRC will then ensure that
there's guardrails, that they're
fair and reasonable, and they
And you know what I'm really
proud about is that the investor
own utilities support this bill.
They recognize the need to
assist low income households.
bills. So they are developing
their own suggestions and
programs, and they will be
approved or not by the PRC with
guardrails.
I think the legislature has done
a disservice to the people of
New Mexico.
And
Recent years trying to get
What the raid is, what the
returns are, because ever since
we got into the utility business
in this body, rates have gone
up.
The provisions of the PRC and
years ago, I had to go through
the PUR guide and, and get past
the test for.
Ingenuity, entrepreneurship of
delivering the lowest cost rates
to a customer that wants those,
that's the way customers in New
rate is going to do anything for
anybody except drive.
A few rates down for some and
drive everybody else's rates up
See and then uh Senate President
pro tempore.
Stewart to close please.
to develop these programs and
this uh issues around low income
households, um, I believe this
reduce the burden of energy
costs on low income customers,
so I think.
This lays it out for both
utilities and the PRC.
affirmative except for those
voting by show of hands.
Thank you very much, senators
we're voting to your chairs if
you vote no, please raise your
hands.
Senator Gallegos.
Boats no.
Senator Brandt.
Boats no.
Sen Ramos votes no.
Senator Sanchez.
no
Senator Scherer.
Wo no.
Senator Lanier.
Boats now.
Boats no.
Uh, let's see, yes sir.
Is there a couple more in there?
By about 26 in the affirmative,
16 in the negative. House Bill
91 is once amended, has duly
really like the way that you
held up that sign. I hope
there's gonna be a picture of
that that was really cool. Thank
you, thank you very much,
Senator Peter Worth for the next
order of business. Mr.
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the House has passed
and concurred in the Senate.
Has concurred in the Senate
amendments to House
The journal reflect that the
message has been received, the
reader to read. Mr. President,
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the House has failed
amendments in the event the
Senate refuses to recede, the
House appoints the following
conferees to meet with the
Senate conferees Representative
Lee, Representative Parajon.
message has been received, the
reader to read, uh, going back
to Senator Peter Worth for the
next order of business, uh, Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
go without our business
committee reports. So no
that same has been duly enrolled
and engross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Senate.
ly submitted, Senator Cary
Hamblin, Senator Heather
I heard it. Maybe, maybe it's
just really the end of the
session.
Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President.
I move adoption
thinking of something else right
It is so ordered and so just to
go and let everybody know that
uh your judicial committee to
have been referred Senate Bill 7
Senator Hamlin, did I really
say, what did I say? No, Mr.
President, I have a feeling that
that you said my name correctly.
Did I say it too fast? Let's go
hamster, that's for sure. No,
that's true. No, I, I think Mr.
President, you did get it
correctly.
It's just it's been it's been a
day, right? everybody? It's been
a day.
to Senator Paul next as part of
the enrolling and engrossing. I
will do that. Thank you Mr.
Hamlin, thank you very much,
Senator Paul. So we're going
then to the next, uh, order of
business.
Or are we still on the same
consideration reports the same
has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory to signing by
the officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Senator
Hamblin and Senator Heather
Bergmans, Senator Nicholas A.
I'm not hearing anything yet.
There's a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
favor signify by say nay.
Opposed the eyes have it. Your
officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted. Senator
Kerry Hamlin.
Uh, Senator Heather Breghounds.
Or is it Regman's?
then Senator Nicolas A Paul.
It all sounds good. Let me tell
you what I'm doing.
You know, the day gets long and
as senator Hamblin indicated
earlier.
a lot of times because the day
drags on that these things
happen, but anyway, so that's
the whole purpose of some of the
things that I'm going through
right now and again, I thank
each and every one of you for
your indulgence.
referred to Senate Bill 39 as
amended, has had it under
consideration, reports that the
same has been duly enrolled in
and grows preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate,
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signified by say
I.
Pose
The eyes have it, your judiciary
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 39 as
amended has been.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Memorial 24 has
had it under consideration in
reports that the same has been
Bergmans, Senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs.
Senator Paul, thank you, Mr.
President. Move adoption in the
committee report. There's a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signified by say I.
Opposed, yeah I have it.
has been duly enrolled and
engrossed preparatory signing by
the officers of the Senate.
Going back to the next order of
business, Senator Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go that our
thank you, Mr. President. So,
uh, that's it for this.
and we'll be back at 6:30
tonight. A lot of burger has
agreed to provide us all with
announce, uh, just before I
yield to other chairs that we
have put together a consent, uh,
committee, it's gonna be Senator
Campos, Senator Bergman, Senator
probably do try and do those
tonight. And what I'll do, Mr.
President, is once we start
tonight, I'll have you, uh, kind
of walk the floor through the
have passed unanimously, uh, or
those.
that have lower very few in
opposition and so you can
explain the process later on
tonight. So again, we're gonna
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
ask unanimous consent to remove
my name as sponsor from House
Bill 255.
Mr. President, just for the
request to go forward. OK, thank
you very much. There has been
that request. It's unanimous,
uh, request, so, uh, all those
in favor, here we go, signified
OK, now we're going to Senator
Hamlin. Senator Hamblin, please.
Thank you, Mr. President.
You're, uh, the very, very last
tax business and transportation
will finish our very busy over
200 bill committee, um, today
with a bang. So that's gonna be
at 4:30 in room 321. Thank you
very much Senator.
announcements committee
announcements, miscellaneous uh
there you go Mr. President, uh,
point of personal privilege,
please state your point,
Senator.
Senator Lopez is our most senior
female member of the Senate, so
I do have a gift for her from
that was just taking care of
I don't want to call it a gift.
It's uh New Mexico state flag
and that's something that
Senator Pinto has begun, if you
to the individual and uh with a
certificate and she does present
that to the individuals and
since there was no uh opposition
to doing that, um, if you all
Senator Pinto, you're really
good at that. You, it comes from
the heart and I've noticed, uh,
business going to Senator Munoz,
please. Thank you, Mr.
President.
I missed something yesterday in
in House Bill 2, I, I really
want to thank the members of
Senate Finance, Senator Campos,
Hill, uh, we could have done it
without you. I, I appreciate you
guys, uh, I appreciate all your
support. Uh, nobody can do this
job alone. It's a big job and I
says a big message across the
state that we're all in
agreement, we're not fighting
over something. Uh, we did a lot
of good in that House Bill 2,
whether you like it or don't
like it, but a lot of people
Steinborn, thank you to, uh, I
appreciate you guys.
Thank you for the support on the
committee. Thank you very much,
Senator for the bad news.
Thank you very much, Senator
Padilla, I, I appreciate you
too. Uh, I'm sorry if I missed
some names. I'm looking around
the room in chairs, but I don't
want to leave anybody out, but I
couldn't have done it without
the support of my committee. So
other day, uh, talked to him,
had a great conversation with
him.
Uh, what does 4 fingers mean?
You wanna.
Quadruple hamburger or what?
and Senator Padilla mentioned
the four-legged chicken one
time, uh, over a brackish water.
And so we're going to go up, uh,
Thank you very much, Senator
Munoz and to you, we thank you
very much for your leadership,
your tenacity and the long hours
you put on uh to help us
President. The Senate Judiciary
Committee will meet now at 4:45.
Please, please be prompt, uh,
Senate Judiciary Committee 445.
In room 311, we're going to hear
caregiver background checks and
House Bill 284 free roaming
horses and livestock code. Thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you very much Senator,
you know I'm going to, uh,
to answer a question for me,
please?
Uh, Mr. President, ask away. OK.
Thank you very much, Senator
Scott. I just, I'm curious. I
dangling.
Who, who ties your bow ties?
Mr. President, early in the
would say that Senator
Townsend's ties look a little
bit better more often because I
see him more often and I usually
adjust it.
Very good and I think Senator
Townsend wants to respond to
that.
Scott's condo and make sure he's
uh tidied up proper before he
comes out in the morning to the
two of you, thank you very much
for being a good example with uh
those bow ties. They always look
good.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
asked for Yunnan's consent that
the proposed Senate Indian and
Rural Cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for Emergency Senate
See, no objection. You wanna
explain a little bit in terms of
what the bill does. The title of
the proposed substitute is
related to the public peace
is 232-065.1.
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
Thank you very much, Senator
Pinto.
go up, I know you really have
something to say what are you
gonna be talking about tonight?
Thank you, Mr. President. I
appreciate that very much. Just
want to take just a quick moment
and tell you a little bit about
and Charlie Holland and, and
they put this thing together
and, and it is, uh, authentic
real-life ranch kids around the
state of New Mexico and, and,
chambers here and I hope you
enjoy it and, uh, if you have
any questions, well, maybe I can
answer them, but anyway, just
glad to share it with you and
wanted to tell you a little bit
about it. Thank you.
would bet that the President, I
would bet that the biggest
percentage of them are because
they're ranch people.
We all said, going to Senator
Michael Padilla for uh an
announcement.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Uh, going back to Senator
Michael Padilla, thank you, Mr.
President. So I'm actually
noticing this book that we have
here and uh you might wanna take
I constantly get the question,
what is the majority whip do?
And there's a really nice little
description there, but that's
actually not why I wanted to
draw your attention to this. Did
you notice in this book and in
you take a look at the photos,
it just seems like uh we've all
been to the beach when in fact
we've been underground for about
60 days, Mr. President. So I'm
just, it looks like we were all
at the beach and, but instead,
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous unanimous
consent, the Senate stand in
recess until 6.
: 30 this evening. I see no
objection to disorder, the
