We got the thumbs up. We're
ready to go. Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
You know, the wisdom to listen
and just appreciate the moment
that we're all in here. It's
always good to stop and just
realize that every morning. So I
very much appreciate you being
and then to Senator Woods, and
then I'll go through some
announcements.
Thank you, Senator Michael
Padilla. Uh, good morning, Mr.
President. Thank you and
unanimous consent to allow
consent to excuse Senator Hickey
today, Thursday and Friday of
this week.
Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator Woods.
Mr. President. What a delightful
time for us all, and
Look at all of the blue and
gold, Mr. President.
It is something else here.
Mr. President, I haven't had a
member to actually ask to be
excused, so I think they will be
in shortly. We will march on
announcements today is New
Mexico Public Health Day and
Alzheimer's Day at the Capitol.
It's also Lincoln County Day and
the Lincoln.
invitation, I think you should
have received a ticket to go get
lunch if you'd like to do that.
Uh, today is also Future Farmers
of America Day and we do have a
right moment, we'll read the
certificate and then we'll
introduce all the guests, and we
might do that right up front,
given the number that are here.
Uh, today is also New Mexico's
events, um, tonight, the growing
up in New Mexico legislative
reception is in the president's
room at the Rio Chama 5 to 7:30
by invitation, the League of
Women Voters are having their
The Rio Delso Valley Chamber of
Commerce, Lincoln County
Legislative reception, uh, at
the Irv Wine Bar, 139 West San
Francisco Street, 5:30 to 8
a flag that.
Uh, tomorrow the New Mexico farm
and livestock Bureau legislative
breakfast is at La Fonda 7:00
a.m. to 8:15 by invitation only.
9 a.m. and just again in the
announcements, the legislative
Finance Committee for new
members and any member who'd
like to attend tomorrow room 307
by sector.
State programs and spending,
economic development
coordination, cost and benefits
of tax incentives,
accountability, the role of
state investments, the
Uh, Mr. President, since I have
the mic, I would like to
introduce a guest to his serving
today as one of your lieutenant
attends Carlos Carlos Gilbert
Elementary School in the 4th
grade. Uh, his father Drew
Lovelace is the acting director
of the Office of Broadband
Access and expansion. So
give him a big welcome to the
Senate.
Senator and just Mr. President,
as I mentioned, I know there's a
lot of folks here who are part
have it read and then we can
introduce all the guests on that
if that, I think that makes
sense, I ideal to senator is.
think that's very appropriate.
Thank you. So there's a request
uh unanimous uh request consent
request that the reader be
allowed to read the certificate
saying no objection.
The Reader to read.
State Senate does hereby extend
its recognition and
acknowledgement to February 5,
2025 be recognized as FFA Day in
Boys in 1928. The National FFA
Organization now has more than 1
million members in all 50
growth and career success
through agriculture education
and whereas the FFA is an
intracurricular organization
that accomplishes its mission by
focusing on its 3 circle model.
rural and urban areas throughout
the state.
And whereas today the New Mexico
FFA Association has more than
And whereas FFA Youth
Development programs are diverse
and help participants to acquire
important life skills such as
leadership, responsible
people into productive adults
and whereas students enrolled in
agricultural education today
learn a variety of skills,
including career readiness.
demonstrating that FFA is no
longer about cows, sows and
plows, but teaches vital skills
that will be useful in any
career. And whereas FFA
And whereas FFA participants
also report that they set goals
and take responsibility for
their actions they take pride in
many things in their lives have
will celebrate national FFA Week
and in New Mexico members across
the state will celebrate and
highlight their time in FFA.
Mexico that in recognition of
the contribution of the FFA to
the state and in celebration of
the achievements of the young
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Crystal Bradley, Senator Candy
Spence,
Senator Jim Townsend, Mimi
a few comments. Uh, we do have
several guests, uh, here, here
in the chamber. So at this time
if you have guests for FFA will
be able to introduce them as
well, so I'll be going to those
statewide at this time with
Victoria Lopez please stand up.
She's seated on the rostrum. She
is a proud graduate of Mesa
Valley Christian School who is a
driven her to serve as the New
Mexic.
FFA state president while also
holding the position of
marketing chair for the Caoga
contest and leadership roles in
both the chapter and district
levels she remains actively
involved in collegiate farm
bureau and collegiate FFA
Michaela Klinger linger.
Klinger, OK, thank you. I'm
sorry I mispronounced your name.
Her supervised agricultural
experience and poultry
production has led to
outstanding achievements,
including winning the grand
champion and reserve grand
extends beyond FFA as she
represented New Mexico at the
New Mexico FFA Convention in
food science earning.
National Roundup champion for
each parliamentary procedure
team. She officiated her first
season as an NMAA wrestling
with aspirations of becoming a
poultry veterinarian, a very
well rounded young lady.
Next we have Jada Goodson.
president with a deep passion
for agriculture, she enjoys
riding horses, competing in
rodeos, showing sheep, steers,
gold emblem individual in meats
evaluation.
And I can't find the other
sheet. Here it is, and
agriculture sales. Jada's
continue making a meaningful
impact. Congratulations on that.
Next we have RJ Grey.
district 6 president as well as
the hatch FFA chapter president
dedicated to leadership and
service RJ aims to make a
and pushed the limits in his
racing career, working towards
the goal of becoming the
youngest driver to hold a
national title.
very important guest I have on
the floor. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you. There's
several on the list so I wanna
make sure that we we give time
to have all of our guests
introduced in specific,
an honor to host the future of
New Mexico and the roundhouse
today, and I will say that the
future looks bright. Thank you
all for being here. I'd like to
introduce some of the FFA
members that are attending from
stand Las Cruces FFA Esmeralda
Gibbs, Paisley Anderson,
McKenzie Malone, Preston Koenig,
Case de Ruer, Grant Pipkin, and
Josiah Malerez, Emily Chavez,
Brianne
Saro, Elise Rosas, Jacob Angel,
and Cassidy Cordova.
Also visiting from Hot Springs
Jordan Barto, and advisor Julian
Marta, I leave the last two
introductions. I'm a little bit
partial to my two favorite FFA
members joining me on the Senate
floor are my daughters Reese
Senator Jaramillo
the Senate to help them with
what they're doing in rural, uh,
Ria Riba County. Now, FFA is in
a world, in in a world, Mr.
President, where there are
building FFA is building
outstanding youth for the future
right here in New Mexico and I'm
so proud of the students who
participate in northern New
for the past 40 years. She's
extremely proud of the many
members that have gone through
the Mesa Vista FFA program. She
believes that many agriculture
opportunities this organization
has.
running against each other. And
so, Mr. President, I have
Leandro Lopez who's the Mesa
Vista FFA chapter president.
He's planning on running for
District One New Mexico FFA
the Mesa Vista FFA chapter vice
president. He plans to pursue a
career in welding and eventually
own his own business and in the
gallery if they can stand are
Senate, if you can help me in
welcoming my guests into the
chamber.
Thank you, Senna Jaramillo.
Senna Jaramillo, I noticed that
you have a beautiful FFA jacket.
Uh, would you first like to ask
See no objections, uh, senators,
you may remove your coats.
Senator Jarami, thank you, Mr.
President. Being an honorary
member of the FFA means that
I've dedicated time, energy, or
agricultural skill agricultural
skills and their leadership
skills. The students in Ms.
Luhan went to the state FFA to
ask to make me an honorary
member. I've been told by those
jealous of Senator Brantley, and
now I have the official jacket.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator.
Senator Munoz.
Mijo, who's also the vice
president of the school board
and they'll stand at the end
and, and maybe at the end, we'll
introduce them all uh uh Aador
is right here behind me. This is
the teacher, uh, Monica Ruiz,
So Nahara and Jules Pratt. And
so these are from grants and
these are FAA members and they
do a great job for us and and
they're in the and they're
Very
Thank you, Mr. President, again,
welcome to all the FFA members
that are here. We really do
appreciate y'all coming all the
She's a 12th grader and she is
pursuing a career in the medical
field when she gets out of high
school and uh we also have Perla
Cuevas. She, uh, she's, she
uh, you know, we also have her
father who is the uh the uh
teacher of over at the animals
High School and the sponsor for
FF.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
I've got some guests today I'd
like to introduce Mr. President,
Travis Lee
Nathan Ure.
Um
Piranda.
And their adviser.
in
We in
Marin
Marin. I wanna, uh, I thank you
Because, uh
I was, uh
First election I ever won, Mr.
President.
I was an officer in FFA.
lost, Mr. President. But, uh,
later on in life I did finally
get elected to something, so I
was very lucky. But this
contest. I've had grandkids that
have been national winners in
speech contest. I appreciate you
guys coming in so much.
Yeah, I forget what that is, but
yeah, and I was also an honorary
state farmer.
And honorary national farmer,
and I did receive the American
definitely the leaders of the
future, Mr. President.
Thank you for the opportunity to
introduce my guests from San
Jose.
thank you for all the.
Um, blue jackets in the
chambers. I always look towards,
uh, seeing you again here as
leadership in the Senate, uh,
my bosses. Uh, he like myself
married into the family, but,
uh, he's here as a board member
for Habitat of Humanity and it's
a nonprofit they're the
nonprofit of the year for Lee
construction, and I take a lot
of pride for uh what they do.
It's been 12 years they've been
working for Habitat, providing
material, labor, all the dirt
work, anything we can do for
order to help habitat.
Provide those homes, but I'd
like the body to help me welcome
Joel Gomez for his first time to
the Capitol and first time in
Thank you, Mr. President. I have
no guests with me, but I just
couldn't pass up the opportunity
to speak to the value of, uh,
this FFA.
chapter, and I was just kind of
flogging along there, kind of
putting in my time.
A tall, slender young man from
Dalhart, Texas named Lou
Catlett.
I got involved in the leadership
side of FFA and became a
district officer and an area
officer and went as far as I
could, as far as my capabilities
could go.
office.
So it's a very valuable program.
It, it goes way beyond just, uh,
growing a pig or or showing a
steer.
It teaches leadership. It
them the very best. And, uh, I'm
just glad you're here today and
uh hope you'll just keep working
hard. Thank you.
today. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. You
know, yesterday, our chambers
were blessed with a sea of
green, and today that's blue and
Building leadership in the
Mexico from the ground up.
Um, today, we have a number of
people from
Rowdy Gray
Cameron Price.
Land in Lucero.
And Luke Gray.
uh, please help me in welcoming
Hagerman's best to the chambers.
Thank you.
follow in my footsteps because I
am a farmer and a rancher.
Mr. Mr. Chair, uh President also
upstairs I if you would
and I do believe that they are
setting up there
along with cloudcroft chapter of
FFA. So if we could recognize
Senator Brantley.
was walking around with her FFA
jacket on, she received that, I
participate in FFA.
My have times have changed,
isn't that right, young ladies?
today. She is from the Aricia
FFA chapter and this young
lady's name is Bailey Trujillo.
Her parents went to school at
This is not an award just a
Bailey Trujillo folks this is an
award to the state of New Mexico
for what this young lady has
done.
He became such a mentor to those
young kids that he was teaching
down there they would come over
to his house at night he would
help them with learn the creed
now.
Bailey Trujillo from the Artiia
chapter went to the state
competition.
This young lady learned the
creed whenever she was 3 years
year old walking through the
house reciting the creed and
here's this little bitty child
and she is just saying it all
out so at this time, Mr.
President, thank you very much.
So let's all stand up and say
it. I'm gonna ask these young
people right.
behind me to start it off, OK?
agriculture
of words or deeds
by generations to the problem is
a pleasant as well as
challenging, I know the joys and
discomforts of agricultural life
others I believe in my own
agriculture can and will hold
true to the best tradition I can
insert and influence in my home
and community, which will stand
solid for my part in that
inspiring task.
And
I want to thank each and every
one of these members, their
advisors and their parents for
And folks, I do need to ask the
rest of the body, how many of
y'all are involved in
agriculture?
President, thank you for
allowing us this special
opportunity to have our future
right here in the chambers.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Another round of applause for
all of our FFA members who are
business andounce miscellaneous,
so I have some other members who
are on the list, but I'll yell
to Senator Peter Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. Just
want to let the members know
that the brisket lunch is in the
So back to you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Werth. We
have Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senate body. I also have the
honor of introducing the
honorary lieutenant Governor.
governor, and that is Riley
Kutinak. She is 17 years old.
She is a hawk from Centennial
High School, uh, and is in the
11th grade and Riley is very
Company and all of that good.
stuff she is the president of
the Centennial High School's
gender sexuality Alliance, and
she has been an active member
all throughout high school.
Thank you very much, Riley.
films, you and my wife would get
along so well.
And also spending time with
friends and family. After high
school she intends on, uh, she
intends on attending a
university she will major in
chamber, our other honorary
lieutenant governor, Miss Riley
Kutinac.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, I have two guests today. I
inherited these from uh Senator
We're joined by Doctor Brand
Newland.
And Patrick Madigan of Goldfinch
Health. Goldfinch Health Works
nationally with government
fewer opioid prescription drugs.
Uh, the organization mission is
to erase 1 billion unnecessary
leftover pills after surgery for
served 20 years in Iowa's
attorney General's office.
Doctor Mario Leba board
certified general surgery serves
Senator Charney.
Thank you, Mr. President. I am
assault programs is in the
building today and they're
advocating for survivors of
sexual violence. And today with
serves over 300 victims per year
and over 1500 community members,
the vital resource that exists
in our rural communities and
um seeing because victims who
come to their shelter, they come
with just the clothes on their
back, but when they leave
Roberta's shelter, they're
Leaving with housing
so close to my heart as the
previous executive director of
an organization called the
Coalition to Stop Violence
Against Native Women who works
on sexual violence and domestic
will experience violence. It's
not if it is when and more than
half of that will be sexual
violence, and so I ask that when
these advocates come to your
much, Mr. President, please help
me in welcoming these two
important women.
Thank you. We have Senator
add on to Senator Charlie's, um,
information which is not only
are they here in the roundhouse
today, but they're in our
communities and throughout our
director of sexual violence
prevention, and I have Rachel.
Cox, who is the deputy director
of programs. I will just say
that they provide not only
outreach and education, please
welcome and yes, please take the
time to sit and talk and find
out how we as a body can help
protect the victims in our
you, Mr. President. Uh, I have
with me today Nick Chignoli. He
is from Joliette in Michigan
area or Illinois, Illinois.
internship in macroeconomics,
which means it's talking about
policy, so he is shadowing me
today, learning about what the
processes are in the capital.
in the Senate in the roundhouse,
is from Illinois, New Mexico's
got their hooks into him and
he's very much thinking about
staying here in New Mexico and,
uh, helping to build the the
community of our people. And so
Thank you Senen to Fanics.
Thank you, Mr. President, on
your desk today you have an
Agfest bag. It's sponsored by
legislators and their guests are
invited to come at 5:30, 30
minutes early, and you no
tickets are required for
legislators and their guests
with the New Mexico farm and
innovations please join us
tonight at Agfest. Thank you.
introduce?
Senator Campos
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, uh, I ask unanimous
consent that, uh, the reader be
Thank you, there's been
unanimous consent requests, no
objection. The reader will read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, 5-seventh
5, 2025 as New Mexico's small
business development center
network day in the Senate,
whereas small business small
business development is vital to
work ethic that are the heart
and soul of the American dream
and whereas small businesses are
the lifeblood of New Mexico
which salutes small business
Mexico and encouraged the
continuing development of new
small business.
For the wealth of all residents
and whereas the New Mexico small
business development centers
assistance to entrepreneurs has
contributed to the creation of
in capital infusion in more than
10,0214 new businesses. Now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state.
Mexico that the New Mexico, a
be recognized as New Mexico
small business development
center network they in the
Senate.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
Thank you to our reader, and
I'll you'll to Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, as the certificate is
indicated this organization
continues to go ahead and be
development centers that we do
have uh they're they play an
integral part in everything that
we do here in New Mexico, they
continue to go ahead and build,
if you will, the small.
ensuring that our vitality, our
economic strength continues to
go ahead and be part of the full
New Mexico fabric. So with that,
Mr. President, I do have some
guests and I'm gonna go ahead
Development centers and of
course the people that are here
with us today.
So Mr. President, if I may
please, the people that are here
with us and the individuals that
Small Business Development
Center network.
He's been that for the past 11
years. He's a former
entrepreneur who started in sold
several companies. He leads the
and I'm gonna have them stand
stand and then if we all could
after, um, go ahead and uh
express our, our, uh, applause
and if you will, our
congratulations to them.
He's been doing that for the
last 2.5 years and in over 20
plus years working with the
network. He served 30 years, uh,
in on active duty with the US
consulting business for many
years.
Also with us is Anna Lena Speck.
And uh she serves the New Mexico
network with COVID-related
assistance for New Mexico's
small businesses for 11 years
she served as a senior
immigration paralegal
business. She is a key member of
the network's lead center who
provides guidance and support
throughout the entire network.
and she has a total of 16 years
with the network in other roles.
The network database she manages
containing over contains over
expertise to so many small
businesses throughout the state.
And that is Mr. Patrick
Vanderpool, who is the executive
director of Regional Development
Partnership and the chair of the
New Mexico Small Businesses
Development Center network on
the state advisory board and Mr.
President, if I may please
congratulations to the this
group with that, uh, uh, would
go ahead and uh be fine with
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator.
us we do have others who would
like to speak, and I'll go ahead
and first, uh, as he doesn't
have any guests, but he wanted
President. I do rise in strong
support of the certificate. I
know that Senator Campos has
done a fabulous job in the
entire time I've been here
lifting up small businesses here
in New Mexico, as you know, I
it's been, uh, you know what one
person kicking contest the whole
time. And so as a result, I will
say that the small business
development councils were
actually there for me.
It was called something else
back then, but they were
heard uh Senator Campos
recognize Pat Vanderpool back
there. He may or may not
remember me from back in the day
when we were building call
centers from scratch here in New
Mexico and we organized the call
and, and there are so many small
businesses in Senate District
14, where I, uh, where I hail
and where I'm from, and they
always get, you know, help from
uh the small business
need that start in the beginning
and that help. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Senator Jaramillo, thank you,
Mr. President. Joining me today
is Janice Kris, who was recently
named the director of the Small
focusing efforts on small
business community at the SBC
SBDC she provides essential
business counseling to
entrepreneurs to help them
start, grow, and succeed. Often
councilors, and the Los Alamos
local Business coalition
coalition, Janice has an
extensive background in economic
development, having worked at
the city of Santa Fe and
her own business when she
graduated from college. All
these experiences make.
an excellent fit for the role.
And Mr. President, we'll have
the mic and we're doing some
announcements. I'd like to also
DNA and as proud percientes and
as members of the Aseca, I wanna
welcome them if they can stand
and also joining right behind me
is the president pro tem Matthew
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
colleagues, it is my honor to
introduce a natural constituent
of mine who I just recently met.
retired as superintendent of New
Mexico Air National Guard's 150
55th Special operations wing
serving as a combat search and
rescue flight engineer and
security training solutions
recognized by Money magazine and
expanded into additional
ventures including 3D security
services group 3D Securities
SBA.
foreign owned business of the
year in 2019. Thank you very
much for that, um, and also most
recently he was named New
fellow entrepreneurs,
particularly veterans. His
ongoing leadership continues to
strengthen New Mexico's small
business community and Chris's
service to our country did not
end when he took off the
Mr. President, uh, members, I
also have with me Mr. Vernon
strengthening local businesses
and driving economic growth in
our state with an MBA from the
University of Michigan and
experience spanning in 9 states
and 3 continents, he brings a
Please join me in welcoming and
celebrating Vernon Ronnis and
his outstanding contributions to
small business development in
New Mexico. Thank you gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. President.
capacity as CEO of the Las
Cruces Green Chamber of
Commerce. We talk about the
importance of supporting locally
owned businesses, and I do want
to uh give a lot of props to the
small business development
brunt of that and really helped
all of our small businesses.
And in some cases helping them
start an email helping them set
up their QuickBook account,
helping them get their
facts about what it means to
support a locally owned
business.
Locally owned businesses give
back to local charities 350%
more than do national chains.
and also they are the ones that
we see on a daily basis. Also
when you support a locally owned
business, you're supporting
local jobs, you're keeping money
Cruces, we have one of the best
farmers' markets in the in the
state that you are buying local
produce you are supporting local
farmers. We had the FFA in here
earlier. And so just in case if
If they cannot provide you with
that product, ask them if they
can order it for you.
If they cannot order it for you,
ask them if they know of another
because of contributing to our
small locally owned businesses,
which are the backbone of our
economy. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, sponsor
for doing this. Thank you for
everybody in this room who is
Senator Woods, uh, thank you,
Mr. President.
I stand in support of this
certificate, uh, I guarantee
They don't understand the rules
and the regulations and laws to
follow, to be able to be
Legal, so to speak, and they get
businessmen, and it's uh it's a
huge deal in my heart to see
things like that because small
business, New Mexico is where
And they need the training that
they can receive, and I
appreciate Senator Cervantes,
Senator
appreciate it. I'm sorry I
stumbled so much. It's probably
I ate some beef a while ago and
it just gave me all this energy.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
small business development
centers throughout our state and
of course our small business
people as they move forward to
continue to provide so many
services to, to our population.
become one Senate as we deal
with, uh, so many of the people
that come around from around the
state to participate in a
citizen legislature.
need here, uh, in the New Mexico
State Senate and so I thank you
very much for that.
Mr. President, members of the
Senate at this time, I am going
every one of you to join me in a
Thank you, Senator Campos. We
did have Senator Ramos and
Senator Scher who would like to
speak to this as well, Senator
Ramos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. I, I, I've been a
product and uh I just wanna
thank the, the people that are
working every day to bring in
more small businesses into into
the state of New Mexico and
if we continue to to bring in
these bills that that really
hurt small business it's going
they're going to be very busy
because they're gonna, they're
uh Senator Campos, thank you for
bringing this bill. Senator
Ramos. Senator Scher.
Um, thank you, Mr. President. I
too applaud the people that are
you, uh, one of the things that
I think we struggle with in
economic development in in New
Mexico is.
Just all of the regulations that
anywhere, don't have that herd
of attorneys.
And
And so I think that it's
incumbent upon us to realize
little events that happened and
We really need to honor them
beyond belief because they are
the heart of each one of our
communities.
herd of attorneys that big
business can have.
To help them out, so.
Thank you
Thank you.
Thank you Senator. We have
Senator Gregos.
we were a small business. I just
talked to my boss, he texted his
wife. We currently have 140
employees, I think for Christmas
we bought 117 gifts, so we
And his father that continued
the work, they hired a guy ended
up being a son-in-law, so at one
time there are only 3 people, 1
on a roller, one on the blade,
when we had a downturn one time
and my job is in the office to
manage things to help look at a
25 year view. I told our owner
that let's finish.
owner's equity. We're losing
money at the time. I was paying
people to go fill holes for
ranchers with rock because we
had absolutely no work for them
look, we've got family paid
medical leave coming back up.
I would hope that we would look
to see what that is going to do
to the individual company and
business and I proudly stand
with Senator Campos, a good
friend of mine across the aisle
because he always looks at small
business and what good it does
stand in support and honor our
small businesses of New Mexico,
really the backbone of this
state. We thank them for their
investments that they make in
profound impact on small
business owners and as a result,
New Mexico workers, you know
what they want most? They simply
want us
to get out of the way.
That's how you honor your small
business. It's not by applauding
them and welcoming to the
Senate, with your vote.
Recognize that overreaching
legislative session. Thank you.
Thank you, Su Brentley. Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Colleagues, I know it's
healthcare day today, Mr.
President. Is that the deal?
trying to build a competitive
environment for providers. So
working with many of you and
docs around the state, we've
just introduced legislation to
eliminate all the gross receipts
from health providers in the
all hearing about and I just
wanted to flag it for you and
kind of give it a high-level
shout out.
And I hope we, we can find the
resources to do it and move the
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, again to uh my
colleagues, to the people that
are paying attention that are,
uh, watching us online and
listening.
continues to bind us together
that's gonna make us much
stronger as we move forward.
Points well taken, but as we do
move forward again, it's the
small businessmen, the small
support.
our communities wouldn't have
that fabric, if you will, for
the community-based parts that
make us who we are. Everything
very strong economy in the great
state of New Mexico. Thank you
very much, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President, and in
your offices today, you should
have received uh this uh flyer,
um, we'll be starting, uh, a new
committee room because we're a
little too late, but we're gonna
be eating in the lounge
tomorrow, uh, where we will
have, uh, breakfast burritos and
coffee, um, so I hope everyone
last line, as friends of Israel,
we believe that Israel has the
right to exist.
That's been one of the big
issues, right, is, is.
And so, um, I hope you'll come
to that just to get the
information and then decide if
you want to be a part of that
caucus. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Bran.
Senator, honorary FFA member
Jaramio gracias, Mr. President.
The Senate Democrat caucus will
be meeting immediately following
the floor session in room 322.
also like to announce that since
the Democrat uh Democrat side of
the senators, uh, meeting that
the Republican caucus will be.
right here in the chambers.
completion of the Democratic
caucus and so we'll have to do
that kind of subject to call the
chair we'll try and start 30
minutes after we're done with
the Democratic caucus and, you
know, Mr. President, we haven't
for trying to get some
especially these newer
colleagues to get an idea of
where they're gonna wind up on
this on this game Sunday. So I'm
looking forward to hearing more
about that, Mr. President. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator
Uh, you have to send a majority
floor leader Peter Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent. We go that
our business messages from the
governor. Hearing no objection.
We're in that order of business
message.
Stewart, president pro tempore
and members of the New Mexico
State Senate. Dear President pro
tempore Stewart and members of
the Senate in accordance with
appointment as the secretary of
the department of.
Health, Mr. Blasi's term
commenced on January 30th, 2025,
and to be served at the pleasure
Senate, respectfully submitted,
Michel Luhan Grisham, governor.
Journal show the message from
the governor has been received.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth to take us to that
Mr. President, your rules
committee.
To whom has been referred Senate
Joint Resolution 1 has had it
under consideration and reports
finance committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Senator Doig, Mr. President, I
ask the unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
Certificate of appreciation
certificate number 4.
Certificate of appreciation
certificate number 5.
Certificate of appreciation
Certificate of congratulations.
Certificate number 3.
Certificate number 4.
Certificate number 15.
Certificate number 16.
Certificate number 17.
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee reports.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those are Poney?
The eyes have it. The community
referred Senate Bill 29 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the journal
reflect that.
They were acted upon
individually no objection, the
Senate Bill 33, do not pass, but
that Senate Conservation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 33 do pass and then
referred to the finance
motion to adopt the committee
reports. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those oppose.
The eyes have it. The community
report has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Linda Lopez,
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually
no objection, the reader will
read.
Senate Bill 2 do pass the
referred to the Finance
Committee.
chair Lopez,
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report.
Senators, there has been a
motion to adopt the committee
reports. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
Mr. President, your tax business
and transportation committee, to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 9 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually no
Senate Bill 51 do pass as
amended respectfully submitted,
Senator Carrie Hamlin, chair.
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President,
I move adoption of the committee
report. There is a motion to
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Carrie Hamblin, chair.
Senator Hamblin.
Pardon me, Mr. President, I move
adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
Mr. President, your education
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 64 has had
it under consideration and
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually no
enab bill 130 do pass and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 136.
Is that it under consideration?
report.
Cents there is a motion to adopt
the community report. All those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Those are Poney, the eyes have
it. The committee report has
out and I wanna specifically
thank the chairs and the vice
chairs for using your scripts to
make sure that we're able to get
those committee reports read out
so I wanted to make sure to
mention that now you have to
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Senate Bill 285 introduced by
senators Townsend, Paul Thornton
Senate bill 285285 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
Transportation Committee the
Senate Finance Committee. The
Senate Bill 285.
An act relating to education,
enhancing the education Freedom
Account Act, providing powers
and duties.
Providing for education freedom
accounts.
commission making
appropriations. Senate Bill 286
286 haven't been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the Senate Education
practices, exempting from the
provisions of chapter 57,
Article 16, NMSA 1978 dealers
manufacturers and distributors
recreational vehicle, providing
requirements for manufacturer
dealer agreements providing
limitations.
the termination cancellation or
transfer of ownership.
Providing warranty obligations
on the warranter and dealer,
providing the inspection and
rejection procedures for damage,
violation of the recreational
vehicle manufacturer and dealer
Act.
Providing penalties.
Repealing a section of chapter
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee, the
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 287. Mr. President.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Sher, just double checking.
The reader to read.
Senate Bill 288, introduced by
network. Senate Bill 288288
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 288.
vehicle excise tax
distributions. Senate Bill 289
289 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Taxus
An act relating to marriage
licensing fees, raising marriage
licensing fees.
Adjusting the disposition
disposition of fees. Senate Bill
Bill 290.
Senate Bill 291 introduced by
Senator Bradley.
An act relating to enforcement
of laws.
fish laws, providing
conservation officers with the
authority to enforce provisions
of the criminal code, the motor
vehicle code and the boat Act,
Committee, Senate Bill 291.
Senate Bill 292 introduced by
senators Cedillo Lopez and
Lopez.
return to work under certain
conditions. Senate Bill 292292
having been read twice by title
is order, Prince and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
An act relating to development
districts, amending the tax
increment for Development Act.
Amending definitions.
Senate Bill 293 293 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Tax,
Business Transportation
Chandler.
Senators Charlie and Nava.
An act relating to taxation.
and referred to the Senate Tax,
Business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 294.
Senate Bill 295.
An act relating to taxation.
Providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for the sale of
medical equipment, supplies, and
Medicaid patients.
Removing the sunset sunset date
of a gross receipts tax
deduction for receipts from
co-payments or deduct
Extending a grosser's seats tax
deduction to receipts from a
patient paid to a healthcare
practitioner or an association
of healthcare practitioners for
care provider receiving Medicaid
reimbursement shall be
reimbursed reimbursed for all
applicable grocery seats, taxes,
that the provider is required
to.
Hey,
Bill 295.
Senate Joint Resolution 8
include healthcare, nutrition,
safe housing, transportation to
access services, home
visitation, early childhood
programs fully resourced
And to require establishment and
administration of laws to
protect those rights. Senate
joint resolution 8 Senate Joint
Resolution 8, having been read
twice by title is ordered
Senator Woods.
A memorial requesting the New
Mexico Legislative Council to
direct the creation of a
wildfire study group to study
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Conservation Committee,
that's Senate Memorial 2.
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Announced its miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So that's it for
today. We'll be in at 11 o'clock
tomorrow morning, so now's the
time for committee chairs to
Committee will be meeting 30
minutes after the Senate
Democratic caucus.
Thank you. Room 311.
Thank you Senator Lopez. Senator
Stephanics.
and gas. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Munoz. Thank you, Mr.
President. I just need to remind
members that there's a priority
list in the that we handed out
yesterday. The app is on your
left and so fill out those
priorities so we can see what
you're looking at for funding
for this year. Um, we're gonna
go in Senate Finance immediately
agencies that they're asking us
to reauth. It's everything from
the courts to, to everything you
could name in an agency, 32.
need more money. Well, ask him
about the 320 million they
didn't spend the last year. And,
and how we move forward with
that. So, uh, just be aware of
what's happening.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
minutes after the floor, we have
all spoken in committed to um go
through 10 bills, uh, in a
meeting and I'm very proud of
our committee for doing that.
Any further announcements,
senators?
Senator Pinto
Thank you, Mr. President, the
Fab Five Senate Indian to Rural
Cultural Affairs will not be
Mr. President, with that
unanimous consent, the Senate
standard recess until 11 o'clock
tomorrow morning. no objection
to the Senate to send a recess
until 11 a.m. tomorrow.
