Senator Boone.
Senator Brant, Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Santa Figueroa.
Sanecos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Senator Nava.
Senator Pinto, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope.
President
Senator Scher.
Senator Shando.
Senator Stephanics.
Senator Souls.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Wirth. Senator Woods.
to be given this morning by
Reverend Ross Whittaker, United
Methodist Church of Albuquerque.
Please remain standing for the
As we gather here today, I want
to acknowledge the rich tapestry
of beliefs and traditions that
each of you brings to this
chamber.
various faith traditions, as
well as those who may not
identify with any faith at all.
Each perspective is valued and
together we create a diverse and
that he embodies.
I hope that each of you can find
meaning in this moment, whether
through your own beliefs or in
the spirit of goodwill and
shared purpose.
Recognizing the weight and
responsibilities that rest upon
the shoulders of these senators.
We thank you for the gift of, of
their leadership and the
May they always remember.
That their power is a trust from
the people.
And that true leadership is
defined by service to others.
Just as farmers cultivate their
land with care, drawing upon the
lessons of the past to nurture
the seeds for tomorrow's
harvest.
May these senators likewise
cultivate the soil of their
for generations to come.
May they plant seeds of hope and
understanding, ensuring that the
harvest is abundant and shared
among all.
May their decisions reflect a
commitment to justice and
equity.
Ensuring that no one in our
communities is left behind.
Furthermore, we pray for a
spirit of peace among these
leaders in a world often
divided, grant them the wisdom
to be peacemakers, fostering
As they undertake the work of
governance, may they be guided
by the principles of humility,
service, and compassion.
Let their legacy be one of hope
I pledge allegiance to the flag
Republiquea
Good morning everyone. First go
to Senator Peter Worth for our
miscellaneous. Senator Wirth,
thank you, Madam President, and
thank you, Reverend Whittaker,
for being here for your words. I
particularly appreciate your
and then the big statewide
picture, we spent a lot of time
working on that and really do
try and do it in a peaceful way,
so the peacemaker's reference
for cameras and excusals and
then the Senator share and then
come back to me for the.
Run a show today.
Sinner Paa, uh, good morning,
Madam President. Uh, thank you,
Thank you, Madam President, just
in the nick of time, thank you,
uh, for approving that, Madam
President. um, unanimous consent
to excuse senators Stephanics
and Duig until they return to
Senator Scher unanimous consent
to excuse Senator Woods and
Senator Gallegos except for the
purposes of a call.
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
So today, uh, right up front,
we're gonna have a performance
by T Terro Adentro Flamenco
class sponsored by Senator
water and wildlife Day at the
legislature. Uh, it's more a
county day and Senator Campos
has a certificate from Mora
County that he'll read, uh, will
yield to him at the right time.
It's also West Side Day.
Brandt's got a certificate, but
we're not gonna read, uh, the
real rancher certificates. Just
a reminder today is the deadline
for bill introduction. You can
deadline. Lots of guests to be
introduced, uh, we'll do the
guests after we do the flamenco.
So we'll do the performance
upfront, then the guest by
members.
in terms of events, uh, West
The Rio Rancho Regional Chamber
of Commerce, uh, Rio Rancho days
having a reception at the Irv
Wine Bar at 5 o'clock by
312 at 5 o'clock. And finally
tonight is the Food Depot
legislative reception, uh, at
the Food Depot 1222 Sila Road,
Madam President.
It gives me great honor to
introduce the students who are
going to perform for us today,
and this is just a gratuitous uh
for security and for um a
trailer and just things that
that would really help them be
better performers and really
help their school so just a plug
for that, but let me introduce
them. Jimene Jimena.
Dominic Martinez.
Isabel Tickerhoof.
What a great name. Take your
hoof. Um.
is a co-founder and consultant
consultant Sarah Hartzhorn, who
is a co-fund founder and
humanities teacher at the school
if you could stand up.
Lopez's guests.
Thank you so much. What a
students, these incredibly
talented and beautiful students
are able to pursue their
passions in their dreams, um,
it's just, it's just wonderful
to see them. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning, everyone. That was an
amazing performance, and I'm
glad that my guests here who are
students of Truth or
Consequences, middle school got
from truth or consequences today
to join us in the Senate and to
take back all
they learn, I hope also the
flamingo dancing back to Sierra
County. Thank you guys for
joining us.
Let's all welcome Senator
Brantley's guests for the day.
This morning I have 3 guests
with me, um, of course,
Many of you know my wife.
many of us are always.
Very appreciative for the
support that we get from our
families.
Um
And privilege of introducing to
the body, Mr. Peyton Yates and
his wife Linda, and if they'd
stand.
Mexico. He is a force to be
dealt with in many ways.
Um
in action, but those of us that.
are close to them.
Uh, get to enjoy watching, um,
The state kind of begins in with
his family.
He has handsen, Mary Beth, and
tenure, his time in New Mexico
has been
Very instrumental to a lot of
people.
But not today.
Um, Payton Stanley has been
Check that went into the
permanent fund many years ago.
On the Illinois's number 3,
which was the first production
in New Mexico just outside of
And it's been in ways that most.
Never see
I can
Probably stand here for an
More than an hour.
financial support.
I can tell you about the
Hundreds of people that have
been flown all over the United
Is that he's still in the
Mexican.
He still loves the state.
He still is active.
on, when you have a
A person that has been involved
in, in state business at the
level that he has and has
Mexico, not because it has to
be, but because he wants it to
be there.
So, I know there are others that
may want to say a few words, but
at the appropriate time, Madam
still on announcements and
Rancho Day and Madam President,
I don't really like to brag
about my district or my
hometown, so I'm gonna do it
today.
I will say, Madam President,
that we have 4 amazing county
commissioners here today from
Sandoval County. Uh, two of them
are behind me who live in Rio
commissioner John Herr from Rio
Rancho and from District 4,
Commissioner Jordan Juarez from
Rio Rancho as well and I have
one more Rio Rancho guest.
is a great place to live. We
love Rio Rancho. There will be a
certificate being read at a
later time.
And um we look forward to the
Our guests from the great city,
the city of Vision Rio Rancho.
gallery first from Maria M.
Hughes Elementary School, which
is right outside my district,
but, uh, many of my
constituents, um, go there, um,
to that school that they could
have guests from Volcano Vista
High School, uh, George Woods is
here, um, he's brought them here
and they're over here, um.
I believe they they might have
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Munoz.
Laak Taiba,
huh?
Luguti and Kava
Sibata and they, uh, attend
brought it here with the Shawn
in Kalisa, their parents from
the Pueblo of Zuni. So that's
the first part of my
introduction and the, the, the
next ones are even more
interesting because everybody
they all said, oh, algebra and
this, and he said, but he really
shaped our minds.
And so that's an interesting so
Hialea Flores, uh, Gilbert's
Cerna and Joaquin, uh.
them here this morning, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Nava. Thank you, Madam
but it also is West Side Day and
as someone who represents both
of these uh wonderful locations
and communities. I'm very, very
proud to welcome both everyone
commissioner for District 5, a
UNMO graduate brother right here
and an Air Force vet, uh, please
and, and I also have the pre
pref yeah, the privilege,
goodness gracious.
Of representing the great city
know, one of the big things that
Senator Block and I, uh, share
is that we both chose.
Rear Rancho to be our home. We
didn't grow up here. We both
served in the Air Force and and
the privilege of introducing a
couple of people today,
Catherine, uh, Brooch Brock.
Oh that's my family's last name
spelled different, uh, she is
do up here and, and they enjoyed
our great flamingo dancers and,
and, you know, what a, what a uh
honor to be able to see some of
our culture that we get to enjoy
here, so, um, you know, it's
And so, um, it's, we have some
some pretty deep roots here, uh,
as far as Rear Rancho goes. Best
city, the only growing city
right now in New Mexico.
bills, so the Rio Rancho will
keep growing. Thank you.
Let's welcome Senator Brandt's
guests.
today a member, a retired member
from the house at Bob Woolley,
uh, from Roswell that's here
today. He's actually working on
recognize him.
in the Senate. Madam President,
thank you.
Welcome.
the chamber.
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
Other announcements, other
guests.
All right, sinner Cervantes.
Madam President, for your
patience and that of the
chamber. Uh, I have a a guest,
uh, a shadow with me today, Juan
Romero. I'm gonna stand out of
his way so you all can see him.
politics. We'll see how that
goes at the end of the day. Uh,
he's a junior at UNM and is an
accounting major.
He looks to become a CPA and
then eventually go to law school
should be able to keep them
pretty busy trying to untangle
whatever we put together for
him. So please help me welcome
my guest Juan Romero today.
like unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Brantley.
And Senor Sanchez.
Till he returned the
Senate.
Seeing no objection in order.
Senator Worth, thank you, Madam
President. So let's go ahead and
go to the certificates, a center
compost, are you ready for more
uh County Day and this one will
if I may, Madam President, uh,
respectfully ask unanimous
consent that the reader read a
certificate declaring February
20th, uh, 2025 be recognized.
New Mexico 5-seventh legislature
first session 2025. The New
Mexico state Senate does hereby
extend its recognition and
acknowledgement to February
February 1st, 1860, with a total
area of 1,934 square miles and
whereas
The town of Mora is situated at
Waatros, and whereas Mora County
encompasses many spectacular
scenic areas as well as charming
towns and shops and celebrates
many community festivals,
several historic landmarks
including the Mora Valley which
has a long history dating back
to the Spanish colonial period
and the historic town of Mora
rich mix of Native American and
Spanish heritage and the county
is notable for its preservation
of this cultural legacy.
including efforts to maintain
And whereas Moro County has a
long history of tradition of
agriculture and in recent
decades there has been a growing
emphasis on ranching practices,
County's rural character and
whereas Mora County has a
particular dedication to its
military veterans with a vibrant
veterans of foreign wars
community.
Oros and whereas local assets
and points of interest in Mora
County include the Cleveland
Roller Mill Museum, the Mora
Coyote Creek State Park.
Fort Union National Monument and
several historic churches and
whereas Motor County is rich in
culture, resilient and strong,
Now therefore be it resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that February 20th, 2025
be recognized as Mota County Day
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Madam President, and a few
things very humbly, first of
all.
prayers for all that has been
done on behalf of the people of
this area as they've
Undergone, if you will, as we
all have, of course, COVID in
adversely affected the
community, particularly after
some of the big rains.
Within that, the people of
Morter County again are very
grateful to the New Mexico State
Senate.
Throughout the last several
years we've lost many of our,
uh.
People in the community who have
continuing to take care of our
youth, take care of our elderly,
and as has already been
mentioned in the certificate,
continue to recognize the valor
of the veterans of that area.
in case, uh, there is someone
who wishes to make a uh a
statement, if not, I'm ready to
go ahead and introduce some
guests as well. Thank you, Madam
President. Senator, Senator
and it's an
extraordinary community with a
history of in, in our family's
case, uh, Wilhelm Gandert back
names up in Mora just of the
different families and the
blending that's happened in that
community, so I just appreciate
you doing this certificate,
Senator Campos, and it's a very
have looking out for your
interests and they just
appreciate you, Senator Campos
for what you do and for bringing
us.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Senator Gallegos.
the last few years. Uh, I did
have a, a dinner here a while
back, uh, with a gentleman from
Holman and he was quite
Deacon Eloy Royal from Mota, uh,
is a, my mother's first cousin,
so that family there has gone
all over the state. They do
really incredible things, I
Mora is very important to our
state, so I stand in support.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
Thank you, Senator. Other
comments about Mora County Day.
heartfelt, and I really
appreciate that and the
individuals that are here with
us today, uh, we'll take that
back home to their families and
to their friends as we go
to do to support our rebuilding
as we move forward and so with
that, Madam President, at this
time I would like to introduce
some of the guests there that
are sitting to your right there
at the rostrum and then also a
We have Mr. John Trujillo, who
is the county commission vice
chairman.
Mr. Gino Mays, who is a former
coming to the, uh, New Mexico
State Senate for the past 8
years and along with that, she
continues, if you will, to have
that interest, not only in
going to be representing each
and every one of us statewide.
And the individual that I'm
talking about is Kylie Vihe, who
Senator Maestas for West Side
Day and appreciated hearing all
those voices in the chamber
earlier and I appreciate you
doing that with the, with the
students. Thanks, Senator Maas.
Senator Madam President, thank
New Mexico 5-seventh legislature
first session 2025. The New
Mexico state Senate does hereby
extend its recognition and
acknowledgement to February
brought over 10,000 students to
celebrate West Side Day at the
state Capitol and whereas the
west side of Albuquerque and
Berlio County is.
fastest growing area in the
development and job creation and
whereas community members and
local elected officials have
joined forces to create healthy
and safe neighborhoods on
year and whereas the west side
has the highest percentage of
Hispanics in Albuquerque whose
roots date back to the early
residents take pride in calling
themselves Westsiders. Now
therefore be resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that February 20th.
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Maestas, Madam
President, thank you so much,
Group, uh, is the local
nonprofit that serves as the
fiscal agent and the main
organizers of West Side Day. We
toned it down this year, Madam
President. They only brought,
uh, 550 students from the west
security gates and and the and
the sergeant at arms for hosting
us here on the Senate floor.
The West Side senators, as you
know, Madam President, are
Senator Nava, Senator Lopez,
city councilor who was the the
founder of West Side Day and
that's uh Albuquerque City
councilor Clarissa Pena and all
the volunteers lastly, Madam
President, uh, my two guests on
president of the Petroglyphs
homeowners and the Tres Volcaes
Neighborhood Associations, uh,
please welcome my guests, um
Melissa Sanchez and Joshua
Martinez.
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
President. I do rise in support
of the certificate. I, I want to
send special kudos and thank
yous to Senator Maestas. He
continuing to uh to open this
building, Madam President, open
this building and open these
doors and bring students into
these building into these
offices. I had a whole um mess
just no, no ifs ands or buts,
and you heard that I think one
year there were over 1000
students this year, just as, you
know, 500, what are you gonna
do, you know, but, uh, but it's
a fantastic thing that happens
are are growing, um, and these
are.
not just communities that are
popping up like stamped out
subdivisions or this or that
there is a lot of smart
development that is happening
and smart planned communities
Maestas mentioned, um, the
exalted city councilor Clarissa
Pena exalted. She is the senior
member of our city council and
you know she's making sure that
stuff done. And so there are so
many people that contribute to
making this day possible and I'm
just so proud to be a part of it
and I know that uh Senator
Maestas is as well, and I'm very
proud of his work on this. Thank
you, Madam President.
Madam President.
Um, I too rise in support and
thank Senator Maestas for
bringing forward this memorial.
Um, sorry I couldn't be there
on the West side, counselor, um,
Pena's been wonderful working
with her as Senator Padilla
mentioned.
But most importantly, welcome to
our students.
been an inspiration to have them
here. I mean, it's just, it's
just wonderful so again thank
you for bringing us forward and
viva West side, thank you.
Of the recognition and uh
I, uh, did represent a big
portion of the west side, uh,
when I was a city uh county
quite frankly, uh, there hasn't
been the investment and I wanna
thank, uh, a senator, uh,
Maestas and others in part in
there to get resources there to
get employment there, um, and
they've worked very hard to do
that and it's been, I think is
growing area is very successful
dividing line between the North
Valley and the east side, uh,
because as it turns out, so many
people who could not afford,
families who could not afford to
I also rise in support of the
certificate and just wanted to
uplift and thank Senator Maestas
for bringing it forward and
really wanna uplift the students
Big round of applause to you all
for, for being here and for
ensuring that your voices are
heard, Madam President, I think
it's extremely important. I
often speak about representation
portion of the West side and
very proud to stand here before
you all today. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, Senator Pope.
house and and live on the west
side once I got stationed back
out here in Albuquerque, uh, a
little, uh, resistant at first
because of that commuting, only
so many routes to the west side,
if we're like a.
suburb of Albuquerque, but we
are Albuquerque and it's a great
place and it's great to see
community members out here in
the roundhouse uh representing
today. Thank you, Madam
close. Madam President, members,
thank you so much for your
indulgence on West Side Day.
This is the 16th West Side Day
and has brought uh over 10,000
students to the capital through
symbol and it's in Latin but in
English it translates uh New
Mexico goes as it grows and I
would submit New Mexico will.
Go as the west side grows so
thank you Madam Chair. Happy
West Side Day. We're all
Senator Wirth
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
first, and her soul, center Sadh
Lopez, and then myself.
Uh, we've got a whole bunch of.
Bill's up there to introduce and
today, it's the final deadline.
So, Madam President, with that
unanimous consent, we go to that
or business there's a couple of
other folks, uh, I'm gonna call
Madam President, we, we had a
couple of late stragglers
because for some reason they
think the lower chamber is more.
important than us, um, but, uh,
so I'll, I'll yield to Senator
mayor of Riar Rancho, uh, Mayor
Hall join us. uh, if you guys
would welcome them and then I
will yield to Senator Block.
Madam President, you might be
surprised here, but I'd like to
talk about Rio Rancho again.
And of course I'd like to
introduce two people on there
and I'm going to yield to
Aaron Dominguez from the great
city, the city of Vision, the
best place to live in New
Mexico, one of the best places
to live in the Southwest and one
City councilors list in
Dominguez.
Thank you, Sinava.
Thank you, Madam President,
members, Deborah Debson, welcome
to the chamber.
Uh, sing no Senator Wirth, thank
you, Madam President, unanimous
consent we go that our business
3rd reading of legislation, and
I yield to Senator Padilla for
item number one, Senate Bill 6.
Senate Bill 6 on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution.
Senor Padilla to explain the
bill. Thank you very much, Madam
President. I do have an
explanation of the bill and then
when the amendment is passed
out, then you can move the
amendment.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
President, members of the
piece of legislation that really
helps, uh, aging out foster
youth. Uh, you do a lot of
living, Madam President, between
18 and 21, uh, you could be the
wealthiest and most put together
whatever. So this uh fostering
connections program, what it
does is it provides housing,
transportation, healthcare, help
with the behavioral health
system, credit, um, any number
legislation, Madam President, is
because, um, if your case wasn't
completely adjudicated or you
being fostered in another state,
you weren't eligible for this.
business, so I did ask uh the
governor to sign an executive
order earlier this uh last year,
which she did this simply
codifies that so that those
children are eligible as well.
To to Senate Bill 6.
Right, debate on the reader to
read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
through this building sometimes
we catch things for the purpose
of that committee that they're
focused on. And I thought this
was an excellent recommendation
by the judiciary Committee, uh,
over there with Senator, uh,
this, this program would have
started, Madam President, in 3
years from now, it would have
stopped and that is not.
was not at all my intention and
so I really appreciate the
judiciary Committee taking their
special eyes on this bill and
for this, uh, this very
important service.
Debate on the amendment.
Uh seeing no debate, uh, Senator
And I do ask for a voice vote.
All right, we're on a Senate
floor amendment number 1 to
Senate Bill 6,
the bill.
Sir, are you, are you ready for
debate?
Yes, ma'am. All right. Any
grave with me is some of the
proudest things I've ever done
in this building that we made
sure we took care of this, um,
with that, Madam President, um,
Senators, to your seats, we are
voting on Senate Bill 6 as
By a vote of 31 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
on our agenda.
Sciar souls.
Thank you Madam President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
Senate Bill 109 is twice amended
is a bill that cleans up all of
the statutory language around
the PRC. We've had been a couple
of years since we've been under
clarifications and definitions
about which is the commission,
which is the agency and how
perhaps more coffee, seeing no
debate, Senator Souls to close.
Thank you Madam President. I
move that Senate Bill 109 as
Senators, we are voting on the
Senate Bill 109 as twice amended
to your seats if you wish to
vote no, please raise your
hands.
negative. Senate Bill 109 as
twice amended as duly passed the
Senate.
Senator Sos thank you, Madam
President. Thank you,
colleagues.
Thank you
Moving on to item number 3.
that the records show that all
action for placing um Senate
Bill 36 has amended um on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
a new section in chapter 10
called the Non-Disclosure of
Sensitive Personal Data
Information Act. This creates a
uniform policy of how state
employees must handle our
penalties. It also contains
exceptions to when this
information can be disclosed.
This part of the bill was passed
by the legislature in 2021.
But it's got a second part. This
bill has a second, uh, part, and
that amends the motor vehicle
code to add safeguards when it
comes to information within the
MVD database and enforcing.
in order for state government to
function properly and ensure
public health and safety, it
must connect collect information
and data from the residents
within the state.
data is sensitive information
that if in the wrong hands put
would put many vulnerable New
Mexicans in harm's way.
Seeing no objection, the
sergeant of arms can escort the
experts onto the floor.
are you finished with your
explanation?
Yes, I have explained the bill,
and I'm ready for debate. All
right. Thank you so much. Uh, is
there a debate on the bill?
Senator Scherer.
Senator, Madam President, I
yield.
So Madam President, I'm, I'm
wondering specifically what
we're trying to address. I mean,
The motor vehicle department has
been around.
because all that's
Relevant, so.
Why today?
Do we have an uh uh a specific.
Problem today with the motor
vehicle department just putting
out information.
included in 2021 because we
didn't know that the motor
vehicle department sells our
data.
And
The way in which it sells data.
So Madam President.
Mm
When the motor vehicle.
What does the motor vehicle
department sell?
to New Mexico Interactive NMI,
which is an organization that
sells cuts and slices the data
and they sell the data to
or entities um that are both
private and governmental. What
we try to make clear, and we did
make clear with an amendment in
judiciary that data that uh is
agencies and we thought it was
made clear before that, but we
made crystal clear that that's
true in judiciary, um.
And so it doesn't stop the sale
interactive to certify that the
data is not going to be used for
the enforcement of um of
immigration law.
correct?
It can be transferred to the
federal government, but they
must require that the federal
government certified that it's
not stopping them from selling
the data. We're not stopping
them from getting the data using
the data. It's only for
immigration.
That that that we can't.
for and I, I apologize if I
wasn't clear about this. This
is.
They can be, it can be used for
federal criminal immigration
laws and that's, that's very
so it it ends with the amendment
we made it absolutely clear that
it can be used by the federal
government for any other reason.
Or for, for enforcement of
federal immigration.
Immigration law of individuals
and I'll just give you an
example, Madam President,
because we have, we created a
dual tier system of real IDs
versus regular driver's
I believe that's 70,000 people.
How many people have uh have a
real 400,000.
those individuals to harassment
or contact by the federal
government and I am one of those
individuals. I, I do not get the
real ID because I stand in
that would put many individuals
in our state at risk.
Center share
So
Madam President, is, is I think
of these things, I, I am
particularly concerned about the
world, and it is because the
cartels.
It's not because of the people
that are, that are sleeping on
the street. It's not because of,
uh, behavioral health problems,
It's the violent cartels.
And and and as I look at this.
And I appreciate I we talked
Nationality Act, except felony
criminal provisions of that act.
So I guess the question is,
If a cartel member.
How is the FBI or whoever is
going after the cartels.
Supposed to even.
Try to identify that this is a
bad guy.
Absolutely not. There's nothing
in this bill that would do that
and because of the concerns of
Senator Sheer that were
this puts no limitations on
their, um, search for cartel
members.
So Madam President.
goes, uh, government agency or
non-government governmental
entity for the purposes of
enforcing.
The federal immigration and
Nationality Act except federal
Senator Lopez, thank you, Madam
President. We have a list of the
of the provisions of the federal
um.
These are the felonies in the
federal immigration law.
gain or if it results in serious
injury or death penalties up to
10 years or life if death
occurs. Another one is
immigration document fraud using
obtain immigration benefits
penalties up to 5 years in
prison.
Um
Those, the human trafficking,
um, these are just examples.
Like I said, those are examples.
Senator.
And I'm glad that the that the
feds are going after those. I'm
glad that you're allowing it
through this bill. All of that's
very positive.
But I'm
Even get to the point of looking
to see if there was, uh,
immigration document fraud if
they weren't looking.
For somebody who committed
look, so how do you know? Unless
you've already been arrested for
it, how do they know?
Senator Siddi Lopez.
are submitted.
Um, to the immigrate to ICE or
to anyone else. So, so those
document fraud is when you
submit a false document to the
immigration authorities, so.
investigation. So, Madam
President.
What if the documents are
presented to the motor vehicle
department.
The, the, the fraudulent
documents.
Uh, Madam President, I, I would
like to have an expert witness,
but I don't have one. This motor
vehicle department have a
document fraud department. I
don't think so, but.
Do they?
Uh, yes, Madam President, does,
does New Mexico motor vehicle
department have a have a
document fraud department to
actually look to see uh if it's
that proved that I was from
Mars, and it would be difficult
to prove otherwise.
So does the motor vehicle
department have the ability to
even investigate document fraud
fraud.
both the real ID and the regular
driver's license and that is not
affected by this bill at all.
So, Madam President, I think
that's exactly the point.
certificate in, in my wife's
case they want to see a marriage
certificate. Uh, so they're
looking for specific things, but
if I provide them a false birth
legitimacy of an immigration
document either. I don't think
so.
So can they? Do they have a
system to, to verify my birth
certificate?
Uh, so thank you, Madam
President.
Uh, I know this doesn't affect
that. My point is.
That because
Uh, immigration in the felony.
Criminal felony criminal
provisions of the Act.
Um
If you can't even look at the
if it's fraud.
And so I'm, I am concerned that
in, in, in
This way
If a cartel member has not been
Which I believe happens a lot in
Albuquerque.
Uh, in fact, I believe that
Party was founded to eliminate
slavery and so those things
concern me.
That we've
Of law enforcement to find the
human traffickers to find.
The drug dealers.
have attorneys, they have
accountants.
And just the product that they
sell.
Is drugs or humans.
That's what they sell.
look to see if they're selling
drugs or humans because we're
not allowed to even look.
At them because as far as we
know at the moment.
They're only issues that they
wandered across the border.
bother me. What bothers me are
the violent criminals.
And if we can't even look for
them.
Then we can't find them and if
think about canceling people,
you know, we don't protest in
front of their house. We don't
send them nasty emails. We don't
demand that people boycott their
business.
They shoot you.
Um
I saw on the news, I can't
remember when this was, it was
probably several years ago now,
at least 2 years ago.
Uh
And they talked to one guy says,
I'm from China. And I found it
very interesting.
In standing behind this guy that
was speaking English, saying he
was from China.
We at least 100s.
You gotta wonder why were they
there? Cause nobody leaves
communist China, Madam
President, without permission.
Of the communist Chinese
government.
Nobody leaves.
If the Chinese government did
not allow them to be there.
This concerns me a lot.
to fight them then.
Today I am neither physically
fit nor military aid.
I don't remember. 4 years ago.
Or so there was a giant drug
raid in San Juan County.
But inside those 1000 plus
greenhouses were about 100
Chinese slaves.
And they were slaves.
Well, how are we even supposed
to look for them if we can't
look at at least the person that
allowed to look.
For them
So Madam President, I'm, I'm
very.
Um,
I understand.
way?
For the sponsor. Is there a way
to find who brought these 100
Chinese slaves to San Juan
County.
Sir Siddi Lopez, Madam
President, yes, of course they
will law enforcement, whatever
at whatever stage whoever it is
using MBD data in that
circumstance.
So, Madam President, I.
I get it
proofing, uh, New Mexico.
Um,
And I also understand that there
are a lot of people in New
Mexico.
That's
that have grown up here.
they sound New Mexican. I and I
understand that there's gotta be
a better way to deal with that.
I get that.
But to just turn off everything.
So that
And I mean it real risk.
That's why Albuquerque is
violent. That's why New Mexico
is the is the most violent state
uh, with I-40 and I-25. Well,
that's like, that's like, uh,
you know, Amazon, uh.
place there. So it's right in
the middle, you know, you bring
everybody there and then you can
Madam President,
I'm not worried about Grandma.
I am worried about a Chinese
army.
Which will really, really,
really tick me off if I have to
Thank you, Senator. Next we'll
hear from Senator Townsend.
Thank you
Madam President.
Um
Has to really go through it, uh,
Madam President, with the, uh,
senator gentle lady, please you
for a question or two,
that have been um.
Touched by this piece of
legislation. One of them, I
believe is.
Um
Fraudulent receiving state
benefits, um.
The dissemination of information
if they didn't know it
specifically, if they were
looking and trying to discover
something.
including the immigration
office, it, does it not prevent
that from occurring?
Madam President, I'll just
remind you that you have to go
through the chair.
Senator Townsend.
Madam President, I apologize.
I'll try to do better, uh.
I, Madam President, I, I think.
And I think that needs to be.
clear.
Madam President.
Information.
To
A federal entity that was
requesting voting records.
Madam President, the Secretary
of State has confidentiality
laws um that it that the
But recently in an effort to
discover
A, a list of.
Of uh people.
Legal residents of New Mexico
that information was
electronically transferred to an
Um, that has ties to, to
government entities. So my
question that I believe deserves
to be answered. Does that limit
people come in and get a
driver's license. They have a, a
good indication of whether they
are, uh, of legal residence or
not.
Isn't that true?
I completely agree, Madam
President.
My point is not that those.
are changing. They are not
And, and, and they do it through
electronic means and registers.
They put data in the data banks
that other people use.
Take an oath of office that
we're going to protect and
defend those laws.
At that time, and now we're
And I think does, Madam
President, it does safeguard our
residents. This will prevent
President, are caused by illegal
agent.
illegal
Residents and I don't intend to
say that.
My point is we should not.
Handcuff.
particularly like what's going
on.
At the federal level. Our job is
to protect the residents of New
Mexico and this.
Including in this bill are
provisions for penalty.
Madam President, enforcement is
by the Attorney general, a
district attorney in the state's
ethics commission and they may
institute a civil action and
district court.
will be a civil penalty of
$250,000 for $250 I'm sorry,
$250 for each violation but not
they might issue a temporary
injunction to stop that, um, any
of the remedies available to a
court of general jurisdiction,
which district courts are, will
be available to enforce this
Who makes the determination to
send this information to the
Attorney General to start the
process of uh of a penalty.
Senator still Lopez.
ethics commission.
Madam President, that's exactly
my point.
We're letting the fox in the
chicken house.
The recipient of an
investigation can complain to
the Attorney General or through
a
Maybe one of the NGOs.
They can make
whether we intend to or not.
We're protecting criminals.
and we may be.
We have many good employees in
the motor vehicle departments
and throughout many other state
dissemination of information is
not fair to those people. Madam
President, when you look on
down,
In the analysis.
Madam President, we had many
conversations with the
Department of Public Safety
about the way this works, the
Madam Chair, if the gentleman
would yield and explain what is
meant.
Senator Townsend.
Needs every tool at their dis.
At their
That is available to them.
To address
ability to
protect our citizens, Madam
President.
I believe the body would be wise
not to support this if they are
President, would, uh, Senator
Sidil Lopez yield to a question.
You senator.
Yes, Madam President, I yield.
Thank you, Madam President. um,
department.
Uh, the motor vehicle related
records confidential.
Uh, section here, but on.
employee or contractor or for a
former department or bureau
employee or contractor to
disclose to a federal, state, or
local government agency.
contractors, that's strictly for
MVD.
Yes, Madam President, that's the
section that relates to MBD.
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Madam President.
So
Madam President, we didn't ask
for endorsement from any law
enforcement. We spoke with them,
um.
When investigating a crime.
Thank you, Madam President. So
Senator, um, let's talk about
the process here if this becomes
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So, for instance,
um, say a Rio Rancho, um, police
department and having an
investigation.
And they get a license plate
number and they contact MVD.
And they uh they're asking for
regards to enforcing federal
immigration laws.
Senator City Lopez.
data that they're not using it
to enforce motor vehicle, I mean
to enforce federal immigration
law so that.
They would use it, right,
they're using it to investigate
a crime. They would be
for the MVD employee or
contractor
to
Ask the law enforcement agency
that is contracting MVD for an
exactly how it works. What MVD
does is they sell the data to
NMI New Mexico, uh, interactive.
Interactive slices and dices the
data and makes it available to
databases that include law
enforcement agencies law
enforcement agencies.
would have access to that data.
they're not.
Selling the data to someone uh
to an entity that would be using
it.
For solely immigration
enforcement purposes.
I want to make sure I understand
what you just said.
So a law enforcement agency at
the local county state.
be using this for federal
immigration enforcing federal
immigration laws or not.
So there's really no mechanism
acronym that you used and say uh
Rio Rancho Police Department or
Bernco Sheriff's Office buys
this data.
to enforce federal immigration
laws when this data is so wide,
they can't really say that.
I think, yeah, thank you, man,
uh, for the question. Madam
President.
is given to national and local,
uh, databases.
And so for example, a police
officer couldn't check up on um
Um, and so one of the checks is
when there's a search of the
data they have to put in there
what is the reason already.
And so now, if for some reason,
Federal immigration law then MVD
or the the database probably
wouldn't allow that.
Um
But that, that's how it works.
You have to say a reason, you
the reason for getting that
data.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
Madam President. I, I would
agree with that when I sat in uh
a background check very quick on
the individual that is, uh, uh,
being uh interacting with the
police department.
So let me ask it this way, what
departments, bureaus.
Madam President.
Yeah
MVD has to ensure that they're
not giving, you know, specific
names and personal sensitive
information they, they have to
The databases for law
enforcement are different from
like the LexisNexis and the
Tyler Technologies databases,
those are very heavily
to ICE or selling it to for in
inappropriate purposes that's
what this bill does. Law
enforcement is going to continue
to use their database.
Law
Senator Block
done or I'm sorry, I, I don't
know if it went out right now,
um.
Rio Rancho Police Department is
not enforcing federal
immigration law.
chief adamantly opposes it
similar to what Senator Townsend
was talking about in regards to
taking tools out of the toolbox
you get information regarding
Um, criminal activity. One thing
data that they work almost day
to day with um I also have a
call into the, uh, the Burn Coh
Sheriff's Office in the
Albuquerque Police Department as
well.
One thing the chief did say,
Is there is no way.
That the police department is
that, that's a critical part of
the of police investigations. So
This increases the risk of
public safety by cutting off one
So this is a.
Inhibits information back and
forth that is needed for public
you've shoplifted a candy bar,
you've committed a crime. If
you've committed murder, you've
committed a crime, you've
committed sexual assault, you've
committed a crime. Any crime
street. And according to my
police chief in Rio Rancho, this
would hamper Rio Rancho.
Investig investigations in
fighting crime.
Lopez is chief steel wrong.
What he said
Madam President, I would be
If this bill passes.
This will not change that.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator. I would
This bill will only protect the
criminals and will put at risk
New Mexican citizens and
residents who want to walk down
their streets safely who want to
functions in government is to
provide the safeties of our
citizens in this bill.
Does exactly the opposite,
unfortunately, but I want to
Senator Brant.
Thank you Madam President.
Madam President, one of the
sponsor of the bill yield.
you, can you tell us how much.
How many federal dollars we get
for our roads?
No, Madam President, I do not
have that information. I'm not
sure how it's relevant to the
bill.
Madam President, Senator, can
you tell me how much money we
get for law enforcement from the
federal government.
Again, uh, Madam President, I do
not have that information.
Thank you Madam President. Thank
you, Senator.
I don't have any other questions
for you.
This state is almost completely
dependent.
On the federal government.
We get way more money from the
federal government than we pay
into the federal government.
For taxes.
By running this bill, you're
putting every dime of that at
risk.
Every dime.
That we get from the federal
government is being put at risk
You're putting every dime of
that at risk.
Madam President, I, I asked the
entire chamber, how you gonna
replace that money?
What are you gonna do?
attached. We never received a
dime from the federal government
without strings attached.
And the current administration
is saying.
You make yourself a sanctuary
state.
How are we gonna replace that
money?
We don't even have enough money
from the oil and gas industry
who funds pretty much everything
in the state to replace the
money we get from the federal
When they don't have enough
money to pave the roads when
they don't have enough money to
have federal law enforcement
here. We have a RICO statute
We can't even charge anyone
under our RICO statute with
human trafficking.
Is our eureka statute doesn't do
it, you know who has to charge
human trafficking in this state,
the federal government.
Happy trails to you.
Yippee kie.
Thank you, Madam President.
Well, the sponsor yield for a
couple of questions.
The sale of this DMV
information.
Goes out to where?
And Madam President and Senator
Does it go anywhere else?
You slice it,
Reorganize it to to change it,
repackage it, and they sell that
data to various private
contractors and they also
are there any organizations or
agencies that would bypass that
sole source contractor to
acquire that information.
chose to do it a different way,
they could.
Madam President.
And Madam President and Senator,
uh, now we're getting to the
heart.
Of my concern in that
directly to the DMV for this
data.
She
At which point the DMV.
Senator,
You just articulated.
The issue of concern and that is
No or little control over not
just who has access to it, but
the use to which they can put
the data. Would that
they must comply with when they
um provide data.
And so this just adds another,
another confidentiality practice
DMV even with a a confident
confidentiality agreement from
that first source.
I guess the question becomes,
Madam President and Senator,
If, if this law is broken.
Who do you arrest?
intentions.
Thank you, Madam President, uh,
that is a really good question,
because, of course, data once it
stop it, um, and there it's
really an enforcement question
if the director of the motor
vehicle division of, of the Tax
and Revenue department
to data.
So that's the enforcement
provision. Nobody's going to get
arrested. Nobody, this bill does
not go that far. This bill is an
described by the senator, madam
chair.
Madam President, and Senator
might I ask?
Whose privileges.
non-governmental entity, the
company that is inappropriately
using the data and releasing the
data.
Even though Madam President and
With no idea where the original
Data came from.
that it has at its disposal.
Madam President and Senator, I
submit that this will be
completely
Ineffective.
Wants the data gets into the
world.
You have lost control. Thank
you, Madam President, and thank
For a 2nd time, Senator Sheriff.
Um, Madam President,
I move.
All right, and how would you
like us to vote on that?
Madam President, clearly it has
a a significant fiscal.
Bill 36 is twice amended, be
referred to Senate Finance
Committee, and I asked for a
roll call vote is a debatable
motion, Senator Munoz.
Madam President, the FIR did not
see any kind of significant
impact from this bill.
Madam President, so, uh, Senator
President. Uh, yes, Madam
President. OK, so
Uh, Senator Brandt brought up a,
I think a significant point here
when he talked about the loss of
I think that's why it wasn't
listed in the FIR. However,
Madam President and senator.
If we were to lose the 3 to 1
But we get a lot of other money
from the federal government. We
get road money, we get money for
airports. We get
Billions of dollars.
While protecting the cartels at
the same time.
And I think that that's worth
Senate Finance looking into.
What is that risk? Maybe
President.
That hypothetical is based on
fears and it's not based on
anything that
All right. Any other debate on
the motion. Senator Munoz. Madam
President, I, I, I just don't
see the, the fiscal impact. I
don't see a clear path for in
Thank you. Uh, any other debate
on the motion before the
secretary to call the roll on
it, Senator Woods.
Well, that's
that.
Madam President, several
comments about that, uh, even
from the congressional
delegation.
Saying, oh my gosh, we're going
to jerk federal funds and
Senator Woods, she didn't call
me out.
And I appreciate that. Uh, but,
you know, there is concern like
And the guy we're poking in the
chest is very good at
responding.
Madamere.
My comments. Thank you, ma'am.
The entire reason this bill is
being brought.
is because of the comments of
the President of the United
States.
was to stop ICE from deporting
people.
Who had come to this country
illegally.
So to think that the president
going to.
Seriously?
You're gonna take that risk.
share to close on his motion.
Um, thank you, Madam President.
general fund money.
But it will affect billions of
dollars in federal money.
Potentially
Maybe not.
And you know it was mentioned
that.
We have the constitutional
authority to do this. Well, I
Maybe, but we also took an oath.
And so I do think that we have.
I have, anyway, seriously
concerns.
That we're about to pass all the
way through.
We're about to do that.
And all of the other bills.
It's not just behavioral health.
budget for the state and that's
all federal money.
Not all of it. We, we, we
obviously put in billions
ourselves.
But what takes it from 2 billion
To just know if we're risking
that money or not.
This is a big, big deal and for
us to intentionally say we don't
Senate Bill 36 is twice amended,
be referred to Senate Finance
Committee, and I asked for a
roll call vote.
Uh, we're, we're voting on the
bill as secretary, uh, clerk to
call the roll.
Senator Bergman. Senator
Bergman's votes no. Senator
Block.
Center block votes yes.
Center Boone
yes. Santa Campos San Campost
votes no. Cervantes Center
Cervantes votes no. Senator
Charlie.
Center Figuero votes no.
Gallegos.
Center Gallegos votes yes. Santa
Senator Harmer Senator Aria
votes no. Senator Lanier.
Center votes yes. Senator Lopez.
No. Senator Lopez votes no.
No.nava votes no. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes no.
Zenia.
Centro Padilia votes no.
Pope. No. Senator Pope votes no.
Senator Ramos.
Santo Sanchez.
I excused.
Center Scott
Center share votes, yes,
Santoshendo.
Sanando votes no.
Santer Steinborn. Senator
Steinburn votes no. Center
Stewart. No. Senator Stewart
votes no. Senator Thornton.
Senator Thornton votes yes.
Senator Wirth.
Center worth votes no. Center
woods. Woods votes yes.
I vote of 14 in the affirmative,
26 in the negative, the motion
to move the bill to committee
sales. We are back on debated
Thank you, Madam President, as
many of you know, I was the
director of Elan Cumitario, a
center focused on assisting
victims of domestic violence
through their legal battles
accessing therapy and other
sensitive information was not
going to be shared or made
public.
Our clients sometimes did not
access programs available to
them because of this fear.
With every assurance we could
enforcement makes us safer.
I am proposing this bill because
when New Mexicans immigrants and
non-immigrants alike share their
When our state government shares
our sensitive personal
information with outside
entities for profit. We need to
ensure it is handled with care
agencies and to MVD in order to
ensure public safety for
everyone.
Madam President,
I move
those present present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
request for roll call. The clerk
will call the roll.
Senator Bergman. Senator
Bergman's votes yes. Senator
Block.
Brantley. Senator Brantley votes
no. Senator Campos San Campos
votes yes. Santo Cervantes.
Senator Cervantes votes yes.
Center his votes no center
Figueroa.
Centrifu vote San Galleos.
centerharmio
centerio votes yes central
linear Central linear votes no
center Lopez. Yes, Cinter Lopez
Senator O'Malley votes yes.
Senator Padillasenator Paul
Center Paul votes no. Senator
Scott.
Senator Shao votes yes center
souls souls votes yes. Sent
Stephonics.
Senator Stephanic's votes
Senator Thornton votes no.
Center Tobiasin.
Center Tobias in both no center
Townsend.
Center Townsend votes no. Center
Truil.
Woods Center Woods votes no.
Uh, Senator Brandt to explain
his vote.
You know, thank you, Madam Chair
and
selling my information.
Otherwise this this bill would
have banned the sale of my
information.
That's OK.
Just not sharing it.
supported this if we said we
can't sell the information,
period.
Honestly
Why are we letting anyone have
this information.
But let's not give it to the
federal government.
I think that's pretty amazing.
Like I said, I would have
supported this bill if it said
information. I don't want my
personal information sold to
anybody.
But that seems to be OK with the
sponsor of this bill.
Thank you.
has duly passed the Senate.
Sinner de Lopez. Thank you,
Madam President, thank you,
members of the body and next
year that will be the bill, uh,
the Senate, the record show all
action for placing Senate Bill
135 on final passes have been
taken. It's now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
statutes, uh, is some language
that exempts the legislature,
uh, from a provision that bars
travel after a member has lost
Uh, which we've done the last
number of years and just as an
example, Senator Nibert was on
the Energy Council, uh, was not
re-elected, lost a primary, but
That 3-quarter vote provision
out of the statute, it doesn't
mean that we as a legislative
body can't go ahead and
Decide to do that if we'd like
statute, 21-9 that specifically
says out of state travel of
members, officers and employees
of the legislative branch of
government shall be exempt from
approval by any member of the
I stand for questions.
Is there a debate on the bill?
Senator Scott.
Those folks that have not have
chosen not to stand for
re-election cannot travel.
That members who decide not to
run again or, or lose a an
election are allowed to travel
during the remainder of the
the current law says that
doesn't apply to the legislators
provided we go through a
three-quarter vote of the
Legislative council, which we've
been doing.
till the end of the year. And so
if we decide we want to put some
conditions, we should do that as
a branch and, and set those
rules ourselves. This just takes
firmly believe that is the
correct course of action. Those
folks that have chosen not to
run again, nonetheless.
Represent their constituents
through the end of their term.
Uh, seeing none, Senator Worth
to close thank you Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
Scott for clarifying and making
it abundantly clear what this
Senors, we are on a do pass
motion for Senate Bill 135 to
of the Senate.
Senator Wirth for the next order
of business. Uh, thank you,
Madam President, unanimous
consent we go without our
business messages from the
house.
and request the concurrence of
the Senate, respectfully
submitted. Lisa Marti
McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Unanimous assent we got out of
order of business committee
reports.
Seeing no objection, we're on
that order of business committee
reports if everyone will get
ready for committee reports.
Madam President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Cervantes chair Maestas, Madam
President, I move the adoption
of the committee report.
Senators, we are an adoption of
Madam President, your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 38 as
amended, has had it under
Respectfully submitted George
Munoz,
chair,
we have several Madam President,
I asked me consent to the
Senate, the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
reports 48 as amended, do pass
as amended.
Senate Bill 242 as amended, do
pass as amended.
George Munoz, chair.
Senator Munoz adoption of the
committee report.
Sinners were on adoption of a
favorable committee report, all
those.
Madam President, your health and
public affairs Committee to whom
has been referred Senate Bill 53
has had it under consideration,
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
Senate Bill 77 do not pass.
Senate Bill 80 do pass and then
referred to the tax business and
motion to adopt the committee
report.
Sinners were on adoption of a
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
339 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflects that
they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
shall read all the committee
pass but that Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 56 do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary committee,
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
Oppos.
The.
The eyes have at the committee
report is adopted.
See the objection more on
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth. Thank you, Madam
President. Just a reminder to
members, uh, this is it for
introduction of legislation, so
Uh, just before that, uh,
Senator Brant, for what purpose
do you rise? Madam President, I
thought we were going to
announcements miscellaneous. I'm
sorry. Just hang on, we'll get
Uh, no objection. We're on that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Syllable 43 he had read twice by
title sort of printed referred
to.
No, sorry, redo that.
Senator Wirth.
Syllable 43, not printed, but
then sent to judiciary, Madam
President, that is the process
uh Lorraine Montoya v. Hill. All
right, we will follow Lorraine's
edicts. Senate Bill 43 will not
be printed, sent to the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
4444 have been read twice by
order not printed, referred to
the Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee.
Senate Bill 457.
to provide civil legal services
to low income persons. Senate
Bill 4577.
Having been read twice by Talia
Senate Bill 458 introduced by
Senator Trujillo.
An act relating to child
welfare.
Creating the secretary of
Children, Youth and Families
Moving rulemaking authority for
the plan of safe care process
from the Children, Youth and
Families Department to the
Healthcare Authority. Updating
requirements for plans of safe
Requiring the children, youth
and Families Department to
develop and implement a
strategic plan for approval by
the federal administration for
Children and Families.
Requiring provisions of the
Services Act, providing for
children, youth and Families
Department consultation with the
early childhood education and
care department, the health care
authority and the Department of
Health.
department to the administrative
office of the courts.
Defining terms in the citizens
substitute Care Review Act,
providing for staffing in the
access to and requirements for
confidentiality of certain
records and information.
Changing reporting requirements.
Requiring the substitute care
advisory council to provide the
Requiring the substitute care
advisory council staff and the
Children, Youth and Families
Department to meet quarterly
transferring employees property
and contractual obligations,
Send a bill, 458 having been
read twice by titles or printed
and referred to the Senate Rules
Committee, thence to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 458.
Enacting the protection of
women's women's sports Act
providing definitions.
Requiring equal athletic
opportunities for males and
athletic teams, sports, athletic
competitions and athletic
events.
As for either sex separately or
as co-educational.
on teams designated for females
in certain circumstances,
providing private causes of
action, Senate Bill 459.
Judiciary, Senate Bill 459.
Madam President, very quickly,
can you, can you tell me who the
sponsor of that or sponsors?
Senator block and Senator
Tobiasson. OK. Thank you.
Senator Pinto, and actually
relating to public finance,
providing that loans from the
the severance tax.
Permanent fund for film projects
Senate Bill 460 have been read
twice by Titus to order printed
and referred to the Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
to public schools, creating the
legislative equity and
excellence in education task
force to function from July 1st,
2025, to July 1st, 2029,
lawsuit study education systems,
expenditure of state and federal
funding and make
findings and recommendations,
crafting the equity and
excellence in education fund,
Finance, Senate Bill 461.
Senate Bill 462 introduced by
reflect changes in the
off-highway motor vehicle
industry and to improve
registration enforcement and
responsiveness to the needs of
off-highway motor motor vehicle
referred to Senate tax,
business, and transportation
committee thence to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 462.
Senate Bill 463 introduced by
legislative Finance Committee to
access information and data that
are related to payer sources
Senate Bill 463.
Senate Bill 464 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez.
An act relating to the
University of New Mexico School
of Medicine.
Distributing a portion of the
Mexico's School of Medicine to
make deposits to the University
of, to the university School of
Medicine fund.
Senate Bill 464.
Senate Bill 465 introduced by
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to school activities.
Prohibiting schools from
permitting students to
participate in club or outside
sports without penalty
permitting students to
participate in athletic training
camps without penalty.
Allowing private schools to
Senate Bill 46565 had been
advertised by titles or printed
and referred to Senate Education
Committee the to Senate Health
Reducing the renewal fees for a
type B restaurant license
removing the restriction on the
number of drinks allowed per
customer.
period of 12 consecutive months,
providing for local
entertainment zones.
Creating a restaurant C license.
Senate Bill 466 Senate Bill 466
have been read twice by titles
that are printed referred to
Senate tax, business, and
transportation thence to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 466.
for the court to issue an order.
Removing the requirement for
notice to the Department of
Public Safety and law
enforcement agencies in certain
circumstances removing
467 have been read twice by time
or or printed and referred to
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee thence to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 467.
Administration to fund a tribal
liaison program in each county.
Senate Bill 468.
Senate Bill 469 introduced by
Senator Campos an act making an
appropriation to the local
government division of the
Department of Finance
Senate Bill 469
6 have been read twice by title
sort of printed, referred to
Senate conservation, thence to
Senate Finance, Senate Bill 469.
stock owners desiring to impound
any of the surface waters of the
state for watering of livestock
shall apply to the state
Senate Bill 471, introduced by
Senator Woods. An act relating
to the environment, creating a
rainfall enhancement pilot
Senate Bill 4717 had been read
twice by tiles that are printed
and referred to Senate
conservation, thence to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 471.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Munoz.
and others.
Enact relating to motor
vehicles.
entity. Senate Bill 472.
So a 472 having read twice by
time sort of printed and
referred to Senate tax business
Creating the volunteer search
and rescue income tax credit.
Senate Bill 4733 had been read
Senate Bill 474 introduced by
Senator Thornton.
An act relating to adoption,
amending the adoption Act to
streamline the adoption process
twice by tile disorder printed
and referred to Senate Health
and Public Affairs thence to
Senate Judiciary, Senate Bill
474.
districts to develop geographic
information system maps of the
district's boundaries and
collaboration with the Secretary
of State and the University of
New Mexico requiring the
Senate Bill 475 had been read
twice by Tyless or printed and
referred to the rules committee
Exempting first responders from
the requirement to pay premiums
or fees to participate in the
retiree Health Care Act, making
an appropriation Senate bill
thence to Senate Finance, Senate
Bill 476.
Senate Bill 477 introduced by
Senator Hickey.
An act relating to insurance,
477.
Senate Bill 477 had been written
twice by Tyor or printed,
referred to Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, thence to
to aviation, creating the state
aviation commission.
Tasking the commission with
determining matters of policy
for the aviation division.
Senate Bill 478.
Senate Bill 478 have been read
twice by titles that are printed
Senator Souls.
An act making an appropriation
to the Department of
Transportation to study the
feasibility of constructing a
tax, Business and transportation
thence to Senate Finance, Senate
Bill 479
0.
report of all students who are
at school age and have not
graduated from high school
within 4 years from entering 9th
grade and to provide the report
to certain recipients who
Having been read twice by time
order or printed and referred to
Senate Education committee the
to Senate Finance, Senate Bill
480.
Creating the state fairgrounds
district over the land owned by
the state, commonly referred to
as the state fairgrounds and
contiguous land that may be
subsequently acquired.
Providing powers
Creating the state fairgrounds
district fund.
Providing a tax exemption from
bonds and income bonds issued
pursuant to the state
fairgrounds District Act.
appropriation.
Senate Bill 481.
So a bill 481 having been read
twice by child disorder printed
and referred to Senate tax,
An act relating to tax increment
development districts
authorizing the issuance of
bonds not to exceed $1 billion
secured by a state gross er
seats tax increment for a tax
of the city of Albuquerque.
Providing an effective date that
is contingent on the approved
formation of the tax increment
Development District.
Senate Bill 482.
Bill 482.
Senate Bill 483 introduced by
Senator Block and others, and
act relating to elections,
So 483 had been read twice by
title sort of printed and
referred to the Senate Rules
Committee, thence to Senate
Finance Senate Bill 483.
And others, an act relating to
executive organization enacting
the government accountability to
Taxpayer Act.
Creating the government
So 484 have been read twice by
title sort of printed referred
Senators Block and Boone, an act
relating to early voting.
Reducing the time to vote early.
Amending the hours of operation
for early voting polling
and referred to Senate Rules
Committee, thence to judiciary
Senate Bill 485.
Senate Bill 486 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
transferring money property
contracts and statutory
references from the Children,
Youth and Families Department to
the child safety and welfare
Services Authority.
Prescribing penalties.
Senate Bill 4866 had been read
twice by title is sort of
printed, referred to the Senate
Rules Committee, thence to
finance Senate Bill 486.
emergency voting procedures,
providing absentee voter
assistance units. Senate Bill
487.
Senate Bill 487 had been read
Senator Lopez.
An act
Relating to the legislature.
Increasing the number of members
that comprise the legislative
Committees and its
subcommittee's request for
information, establishing the
committees and subcommittee's
power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas.
Making an appropriation.
thence to finance Senate Bill
488.
Senate bill 489 introduced by
Senator Lopez, an act relating
Senate Bill 489. 489 had been
read twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to Senate
Health and Public Affairs
re-engagement programs for youth
in central New Mexico Cen bill
490.
Senate Bill 490, having read
Senate Bill 491, introduced by
Senator Lopez.
An act relating to legal
representation representation.
Adding the office of family
Office of Family Representation
and advocacy to the public
service law advisory Committee
enacting the child and family
welfare worker loan repayment
Act.
proceedings.
Providing waivers, providing for
the representation of children
and of indigent or similarly
Judiciary, the to finance Senate
Bill 491.
Senate Bill 492 introduced by
Senator Munoz.
An act relating to
institutions, making an
appropriation. Senate Bill 492
2 twice by ile sort of printed
An act making an appropriation
to the public education
department for the KANW
Educational radio station.
Senate Bill 494 introduced by
Senator Campos, an act making an
appropriation to the public
education department to provide
and referred to Senate Education
Committee the to finance Senate
Bill 494.
Senate Bill 495 introduced by
Senator Campos, and act relating
Senate Bill 495 have been read
twice by titles sort of printed
and referred to Senate education
thence to finance Senate Bill
495.
legislature.
Requiring the legislative
finance committee to identify
agencies that have failed to
meet performance standards and
to recommend reductions in the
thence to finance Senate Bill
496.
Senate Bill 497 introduced by
senators Ramos, Sanchez Block,
Senate Bill 497 47 have been
read twice by titles sort of
printed and referred to Senate
senators Jaramillo, Maestas, and
Hamlin.
An act relating to state
symbols, declaring low riders
the official state vehicle.
Senate Bill 498.
affairs thence to Senate Health
and Public Affairs Senate Bill
498.
infants Act, providing for safe
haven baby boxes at Safe Haven
sites, providing procedures for
a parent to leave an infant in a
safe haven baby box.
requiring the children, Youth
and Families Department to file
a motion to terminate parental
rights if the parents of an
infant relinquished at a safe
haven site, do not contact the
A amending the abuse and neglect
Act.
Senate Bill 499.
Senate Bill 500.
Introduced by senators Gallegos
and Block.
And others
providing a private right of
action. Senate Bill 500.
So that Bill 500 having been
read twice by title is sort of
Madam President,
I know we're on introduction of
legislation, but I'd like to
make a motion that, uh, the
here but you can, so, uh, yeah.
Madam President, I will withdraw
that until announcements
miscellaneous.
Thank you for that proper motion
withdrawal.
New Mexico registration plate,
allowing for the cessation of
special license plate issuance
under certain conditions, making
an appropriation.
Senate Bill 501.
and Transportation thence to
Senate Finance, Senate Bill 501.
Senate Bill 5002 introduced by
Senator Scott, an act relating
to professional licensure.
sections 61-14B 3.1 and
8 as amended.
Senate Bill 502
02 having been read twice by
title is sort of printed and
referred to Senate Health and
to pharmacies prohibiting
certain pharmacy benefits
manager practices Senate Bill
503.
Senate Bill 504 introduced by
Senator Cervantes, an act making
an appropriation to the
administrative office of the
and referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee thence to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 504.
Senate Bill 505 introduced by
Senator Cervantes, an act
procedures of the use of body
worn cameras.
Amending the definition of law
enforcement enforcement agency
to include police departments of
Senate Rules Committee, thence
to Senate Judiciary, Senate Bill
505.
Senate Bill 506 introduced by
maximum insurable value for
properties insured under the
fair plan.
Senate Bill 506.
Senate Bill 506 having been read
Senate Bill 507 introduced by
Senator Cervantes, an act
relating to firearms, amending
and enacting sections of the
concealed handgun carry Act.
Enhancing a penalty. Senate Bill
507.
So about 507 have been read
twice by titles sort of printed
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam President,
maybe he'll have better luck
getting things scheduled in in
those committees than the rest
Senator.
Senators Bergman's Hamblin.
Charlie O'Malley and Stewart.
And others
require coverage for certain
sexual reproductive and gender
affirming healthcare services to
eliminate cost sharing for
certain sexual reproductive and
services. Senate Bill 508.
Senate Bill 508 have been read
twice by title, this order
printed and referred to Senate
by Senator Munoz, an act
relating to public benefits
enabling the pathway Act to
provide without a guarantee
Providing the benefits shall not
be guaranteed in a property
interest shall not be created by
the Pathway Act.
Exempting money transferred to
Bill 50909 had been read twice
by title or a printed referred
to Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee, thence to
finance Senate Bill 509.
Paul
And others
An act relating to public
safety.
Removing the time limitation for
Providing a penalty for when the
trafficking of certain
controlled substances,
controlled substance analogs or
counterfeit substances results
in the death of a human being.
harm.
Prohibiting certain defenses in
a in a prosecution for human
trafficking.
Creating the crime of operating
evaluation shall include a
qualified professional's opinion
as to whether a defendant is
competent to stand trial and if
assisted outpatient treatment.
Providing for a community-based
competency restoration for non
dangerous defendants.
Expanding the list of crimes for
assisted outpatient treatment
upon dismissal of a criminal
case.
Allowing a court to authorize a
district attorney or the
Department of Health to use the
report of a competency
serious youthful offenders and
youthful offender.
Providing for transport of a
serious youthful offender to a
district court when ordered for
Removing the requirement that a
detention risk assessment be
completed before a child is
placed in detention.
Providing that a detained child
means of electronic
communication, providing that a
serious youthful offender 14
years of age or older may waive
the serious youthful offender's
Removing limitations on the
types of commitment that court
may order.
Providing that a court may not
weigh one amenability factor
Eliminating the children, youth
and families departments
exclusive jurisdiction and
authority to release an
adjudicated delinquent child.
purpose of a hearing regarding
pretrial detention.
Conditions or of release or
sentences.
Adding victims of human
Amending the assisted outpatient
Treatment Act to authorize a
district attorney or the
attorney General to file a
petition for assisted outpatient
treatment and to allow a
Revising and providing
penalties.
Prescribing fines.
appropriation. Senate Bill 510.
Senate Bill 510 having been read
twice by title.
Senate Bill 511 introduced by
Senator Campos.
An act relating to auditing,
amending the Audit Act
restructuring audit
Amending the audit fund.
Senate Bill 511.
So that 511 have been read twice
by titles that are printed and
Senator Lopez an act relating to
insurance, amending the surprise
Building Protection Act to
change the method of
Of
Calculating healthcare provider
and Public Affairs, thence to
tax business and transportation
sent about 512. Senate Bill 513.
Establishing a race meet minimum
length of time.
Sent a bill 513.
Senate Bill 513 had been read
Woods, Munoz.
Share
And Gallegos, an act relating to
the capital projects process.
Limiting gubernatorial projects
to state projects or projects of
statewide or regional
significance.
Senate bill 514.
Senate Bill 514 had been read
Senator Woods, an act relating
to conservancy district
elections, removing the arch
Hurley Conservancy district from
the local Election Act.
That were repealed by the Local
Election Act, amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978. Senate Bill 515.
Yeah.
Committee, thence to Senate
conservation, Senate Bill 5:15.
Senator Bill 516 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez, an act related
financial monitoring data and
publish an annual return on
investment report for public
education, making an
appropriation, Senate Bill 516.
Senate Bill 5017 introduced by
Senator Charlie.
An act making an appropriation
to the Department of Health to
establish a safe sleep and
Senate Bill 51717 been read
twice by title sort of printed
and referred to Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee,
thence to Senate Finance, Senate
Health Sciences Center to
support programs that provide
services to mothers and young
children.
Senate Finance, Senate Bill 518.
Senate Bill 519 introduced by
Senators Townsend and Munoz.
to the fund.
Amending how money in the fund
can be used.
Senate Bill 519.
Senate Bill 519 have been read
Senate Bill 520 introduced by
Senator Hickey, an act relating
to the health insurance premiums
surtax.
Excluding dental and vision only
Business and transportation,
thence to Senate Finance Senate
Bill 520.
Senate Bill 521.
Having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
Senator Wirth.
An act relating to public peace,
health, safety, and welfare.
Senate Bill 522.
Zen Bill 523 introduced by
Senator Stewart.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety and
not printed and sent to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 523. 524
introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
to go to announcements
miscellaneous Senor. Uh, thank
you, Madam President. Just we
need to take a quick break on
the introduction, uh, enate Bill
I'd ask unanimous consent that
we pull back Senate Bill 521 and
we will go ahead and use that
number for a different bill, uh,
is what I'm.
told the process is and then the
So we're on a unanimous consent
to withdraw Senate Bill 521
seeing no opposition with so.
kind of objecting but we're on
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Senate Bill 521, introduced by
read twice by tiless order, not
printed and referred to Senate
Finance Senate Bill 521.
Send a bill 525 introduced by
referred to the judiciary
Committee. So about 525. Senate
Bill 526 introduced by Senator
Padilla, an act relating to
Education, Senate Bill 526.
Senate Bill 527 introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
printed and sent to Senate Tax
Business and Transportation.
Senate Bill 528 have been read
twice by tile disorder, not
printed and referred to the
finance Committee, Senate Bill
528.
twice by tidal disorder, not
printed and referred to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 529.
Zenit Bill 530 introduced by
printed and referred to Senate
tax, business and transportation
center about 5:30.
Senator Woods, an act relating
to the public peace, health,
safety and welfare. Senate Bill
531 531 had been read twice by
title disorder, not printed and
and welfare. Senate Bill 53232
read twice by title is ordered,
not printed and sent to
An act within the public peace,
health, safety, and welfare.
Senate Bill 533 533 have been
read twice by titles ordered.
Senate Bill 534 have been read
twice by Tyor not printed and
referred to the finance
committee sent 534.
Senate Bill 535.
Senate Bill 536, introduced by
Senator Munoz.
An act relating to the public
Senate Bill 537.
Introduced by Senator Cervantes.
not printed and sent to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 537.
welfare. Senate Bill 538538 had
been read twice by Tillior, not
printed, referred to the
judiciary Committee, Senate Bill
Senate Bill 539 introduced by
Senator Cervantes.
read twice by Tile this order
not printed and referred to the
judiciary Committee and about
539.
Relating to the public peace,
health, safety, and welfare.
Senate Bill 540.
So above 540 have been read
Senate Bill 541 introduced by
Senate Bill 541 had been read
twice by titles order not
printed, sent to the education
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare. Senate Bill 54242 have
been read twice by tidal
An Act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare. Senate Bill 543.
So 543 have been read twice by
Senate Bill 544 introduced by
Senator Stephanics.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
Introduced by Senator Stefaniks.
An act relating to the public
printed and sent to conservation
committee Senate Bill 545 Senate
Senate Bill 546 546 have been
read twice by title disorder,
not printed and sent to the
rules committee.
So about 546.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare.
Senate Bill 547
47 have been read twice by
Senate Bill 548 introduced by
Senator Doig.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare.
Rules Committee, Senate Bill
548.
Senate Bill 549 have been read
twice by tidal disorder, not
printed, referred to Senate
Health and Public Affairs
and welfare. Senate Bill 550.
Senate Bill 550 have been read
twice by child disorder, not
printed and sent to the health
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety and
welfare.
Senate bill 551.
peace, health, safety, and
welfare. Senate Bill 552 552
have been read twice by tidal
disorder not printed and sent to
Senator Pinto.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare.
Senate Bill 553.
Senate bill
and Cultural Affairs Committee,
Senate Bill 553.
What
peace, health, safety, and
welfare.
Senate Bill 554 Senate Bill 554
have been read twice by child
disorder, not printed and
Sen a bill 555555 have been read
twice by title disorder, not
printed and sent to Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Committee Senate Bill 555.
An act relating to to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare.
Senate Bill 556 Senate Bill 556
have been read twice by title
The Senate bill 557 introduced
by Senator Hamblin, an act
relating to the public peace,
health, safety, and welfare.
Requiring the healthcare
authority to submit an
application to the federal
senators for Medicare and
Medicaid services to develop a
home-based healthcare Medicaid
appropriation, declaring an
emergency.
Senate bill 558 58 had been read
twice by title.
Senate Bill 558.
A memorial requesting the
legislative finance Committee to
perform a study to identify
options to increase pay for
12.
Senate Memorial 12 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and sent to the Senate
Senate Memorial 13 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez, a
memorial requesting expansion of
the use of citizen science by
state agencies and requesting
It sort of printed and referred
to the Senate Rules Committee,
thence to Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee, Senate
Memorial 13.
memorial affirming the state's
commitment to protecting and
preserving Mount Taylor as a
traditional cultural property
and opposing uranium uranium
mining projects that threatened
sort of printed and referred to
the Senate Rules Committee,
thence to Senate conservation,
Senate Memorial 14.
the governor to declare a
citizen science day
Senate Memorial 15.
That was Char.
Senate Memorial 16 introduced by
senators Woods and Boone.
A memorial expressing opposition
Senate Memorial 16 have been
read twice by titleists or
printed and referred to the
rules committee the to
conservation Senate Memorial 16.
amend Article 2 Section 13 of
the Constitution of New Mexico
to allow conditions for denial
of bail and for pretrial
detention, remove the
requirement that building denial
Risk.
Senate Joint Resolution 14.
Senate Joint Resolution 14 have
been read twice by titles or are
Representatives Andres Romero,
Brian Baca, Joy Garrett, Tanya
Mirabal Moya, Raymundo Lara.
pertaining to New Mexico's
public educational system. House
Bill 193.
Uh, let the record reflect that
the capital outlay requests for
all 42 Senate members have been
received by the chief clerk and
entered into the record.
Singing of objection we'll go to
announcements miscellaneous.
Senator Wirth, you, Madam
President, just before we open
this up for other members. This
Bill
Is it too late?
Yes
that, order business,
introduction of the last piece
of legislation. No more than 3
pages won't accept more than
that.
Madam Chair, President, would
this be a good time to invoke
the Constitution?
Senate bill 559 introduced by
Senator Scherer, an act relating
to taxation.
Amending the tax brackets
pursuant to the income tax and
tax leased vehicle grocer seats
tax and gaming tax on
manufacturer licenses on the
transfer of gaming devices and
increasing the rate of the bingo
Removing authorization for a tax
increment development district
to dedicate an increment to the
state gross of seats tax.
Repealing the estate tax are
Alternative fuel Tax Act.
County and municipal gasoline
Tax Act.
And insurance premium Tax Act.
Technology jobs and research and
development tax Credit Act, high
wage jobs tax credit.
Affordable housing Tax Credit
Act.
corporate income tax and
franchise tax Act and gross the
seats and compensating tax Act.
Providing sunset dates for
certain credits.
Providing a delayed delayed
repeal of the film production
Tax Credit Act.
Reducing the capital gains
deduction pursuant to the Income
Tax Act.
electric and plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles.
Repealing certain gross
receipts, tax distributions to
municipalities repealing certain
Senate Bill 559. I do believe we
found the person for the party.
The last bill party.
Senate Bill 559 having been read
Centerworth
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Unanimous consent. We go to
that, our business announcements
everyone know where we're, what
we're gonna do tomorrow. I just
want to give you and the reader
and our clerk and the whole
staff, let's give them a huge
round of applause for surviving
that.
to remember, you know, 559
bills. I do, I do, I think my
first year in the Senate, I
actually managed to pass Senate
So, Madam President, so tomorrow
we're gonna come on the floor at
11:30. Uh, I just want to give
everyone, uh, a road map. We'll
come in and do announced guests,
and then I think
which is the crime package bill
from the House, and that'll be
the only bill we do on the floor
tomorrow. So 11:30 uh we'll be
Madam Chair, I want to echo all
of the good cooperation on both
sides, but I want to take a
serious moment.
Um, I believe yesterday the New
death threat to me.
The lie on the Republican
website is that Joseph Cervantes
plots a radical overreach to ban
guns.
here, no, that's not my position
on this legislation at all.
That's why it's a lie.
And, and, uh.
That's OK. I'm, I'm a big boy
Uh, GPS coordinates to my home.
And suggestion that I'm
treasonous and that the penalty
for treason is death.
Um, it, it really, I think.
Uh, that type of rhetoric, uh, I
know too many of you too well to
know that you probably are
dismayed to hear me stand up and
say that there's a lie posted on
New Mexico Senate Republicans
distortion, a complete
misrepresentation of my position
on an issue number one.
And do number 2 understand that
the staff in Senate Judiciary
takes all of those phone calls,
hear your bills.
Um, and so I don't mind the
phone calls. I don't mind the
politics. I get it all, but I, I
do want to raise this moment to
say let's try and maintain the
spiral in the wrong direction if
we allow them. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam President.
Sir
So, Madam President.
However, I reject the idea that
it's a lie.
Um
Mostly because the chair of
whatever committee gets to
decide what's going to happen in
deeply do not condone any
violence or even the threat of
violence.
For that, I ask whoever's out
there that's doing that.
Stop
Enjoy each other's company, but
I also think that that what we
were looking at was
transparency. Things are about
to happen.
I accept the responsibility for
posting that.
I strongly condemn anybody that
And that's wrong on all sides.
I'm not saying that his death
threats are any less than what
We should be able to, to act
down here.
But I do reject that it was a
lie. Was it irritating?
Yes
The, the, the, the chair of
judiciary.
For peace between us.
transparency is going to happen
and how we vote on anything
should be really.
It has to be within our value
And, and that's either side.
Then we need to stay with our
values, whatever those are.
I know that I'm getting pushed
on things.
As
As other committees have gone
through.
We have dumped a lot of stuff on
Senate Judiciary.
Because of what we have done by
just dumping stuff on him.
deeply.
So
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
doing announcements is education
does meet tomorrow morning at 9
o'clock in room 311. Uh, we've
got Campos Padilla, Figueroa,
Gonzalez tomorrow morning at 9.
motion. Uh,
Senate rule or Senate Finance
Committee, uh, had a tie vote on
Senate joint resolution one in
the, uh, committee report came
Uh, see no objection, we will
expunge that record on Senate
Joint Resolution One from
finance.
Madam Chair Senate Finance will
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
Senator Duhe, Madam President,
uh, Senate rules will meet
tomorrow morning at 8:30 and
President, thank you. West Side
Day reception for those folks
not in committee at here at 5
o'clock Coyote cafe 132 West
Water Street, uh, Coyote Cafe,
thank you. As most of you know,
I've been a business owner for
27 years. I've started off with
the car wash business.
And I went into the insurance
business and I'm also a home
America's top states for
business.
Which is really sad because we
have some great resources in the
state of New Mexico.
Among the reasons.
Are nothing compared to the
burdens this legis legislature
is considering.
Putting on top of our small
businesses.
generation.
And red tape stemming from
efforts to mandate EV and
renewable energy across all
business sectors.
Let's seek to use our resources
to the best of our ability and
help small business throughout
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you very much.
Madam President.
Madam President, I would like to
go ahead and yield to Senator
Gallegos because I think he's
going to announce a caucus and
my announcement is dependent on
his announcement. All right,
Senator Gallegos.
minute caucus but using
legislative time, uh, Senator
Munoz has gone. I told him that
we'd be out by 6, but we should
will go in at 4:20 today.
Your tax business and transport
we're not hearing any of those
kind of bills, but we do have an
President. Thank you. Uh, any
other committee announcements
Senator Stefaniks, Madam
President, the Senate
Conservation Committee is gonna
Mine is not a committee
announcement, but what, what
Senator Hamlin yield?
Senator Hamlin, do you yield,
Madam President, with much
my head and it's a Bon Jovi song
and if she will guess it, I will
sing a a line of it.
theme song for today, OK.
Which those rumors we don't want
because we're both happily
married to other women.
Oh
There could be bad medicine.
it's just, you know, the part
that that I just keeps playing
in my head is whoa we're halfway
there.
living
P.
OK, sin or worse, we're done
with announcements, nearly as I
can tell sender word. Uh, thank
you, Madam President. Unanimous
consent of the Senate sen in
recess until 11:30 tomorrow
morning.
