Senator Guy Echos Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Minos.
Senator Nova
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Scott.
Sanidia Lopez.
Senator Sheer.
Santoshando.
Senator Stewart. Senator
Thornton.
Yeah
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, please stand for the
invocation to be given this
morning by Reverend Bill
Humphreys.
led by Senator Souls, the pledge
in Spanish to be led by Senator
Pope and the salute to New
Mexico flag by Senator Ill.
from the Northern Presbyterian
churches when I interviewed for
the very part-time position
there. I was their only
candidate and at the interview,
I said something about being
I'm glad to be here. Thank you
for your work.
The prophet Micah, as some of
you know, says it's up to us to
do justice.
Love, kindness.
Jesus asked the lawyer, it's a
story in three Gospels, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, but only in this
case.
Jesus, uh, asked the lawyer what
with all your heart.
Soul, strength, and mind.
And your neighbor as yourself.
And then comes the rather
familiar parable for many of us
familiar. The parable that we
often refer to as the Good
Samaritan.
community as a good Samaritan.
Many of you know the rest of
that story. We can all supply
our own version of the
neighbors.
We love
opportunity to be together.
We give you thanks for the
families, loved ones and friends
that we've left behind in order
And for all the residents and
visitors of this great land with
such great potential for
enchantment.
And help us to make wise
decisions for the heart.
Mind
Soul and strength of all.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Unanimous consent we go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Seeing no objection, were on
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth. Mr. President,
little bit of lawyer, lawyer
joking in there and the lawyer
in me kind of paused, but then I
realized that you're up telling
us and giving us prayers for our
families, which is so important,
constituents and for making good
decisions. It's just, it's good
to have you here and I
appreciate you being here and
I'm glad you were the one and
only candidate up there that got
the short straw.
side.
Synerpia, good morning, Madam
President. You look great up
there and thank you so much for
your kind words. Um, uh, Madam
President, unanimous consent to
allow cameras on the Senate
today so far, but I would like
to be put on your list for
guests.
Senator.
Um, thank you, Madam President.
consent to remove jackets.
Uh, seeing no objection.
Take it off.
Mexico National Guard military
and Veterans Day at the
Legislature. Uh, we again have
some box lunches. Thank you,
Senator Padilla, for sponsoring
reminder.
the deadline for bill
introduction is tomorrow. Uh, so
keep that in mind, uh, Senator
O'Malley has a certificate for
of recognition for Dolores
Huerta, and that'll be Senator
Maestas and we'll yield back
when we get to that point.
Uh, in terms of events, the New
thanks to Senator Campos and
Maura County uh in honor of Mora
County Day.
Uh, and again, we'll, uh, I'll
announce later on, but we also
to do items 1 through 5 on 3rd
reading of legislation, um, and
we'll start and see how we're
doing, but that's, that's where
we'll go today. So with that,
All right, other introductions,
Senator Block.
Thank you Madam President and
members of the Senate and the
introduce, uh, brevet Brigadier
General retired West Point
graduate, uh, Dan McCormick, if
he could just stand and be
recognized and I'll get to my
others if you can hold your
applause.
lieutenant in Dan McCormick is a
brevet general, Vicky outranks
him.
Everybody knows that.
Afghanistan. Mike has 3 tours in
Afghanistan and one in Iraq and
works and continues to this day
to work with veterans and
helping them, uh, come home off
the battlefield.
Heis. Neil was a CB in Vietnam
from 1966 to 1967 and served on
the rivers in Vietnam and came
guests I want to recognize that
are up in the gallery, and I
want to thank all my veterans as
well.
Well, uh, I have a Mr. Paul
Rose, uh, another nuclear guy,
uh, right there. Another one is
Mr. Tom Bretton, another nuclear
That are in the Senate that are
serving with our leader on the
minority side, Bill Scher. He
was an infantry officer. We have
Harold Pope and I are both
retired Air Force officers, and
I want to thank all the veterans
for being here today.
Yeah
good friend Doctor Senator
Anthony Thorn, who is a naval
officer for several years as
well. And, uh, with that, uh,
Madam Chair, I would love to
Thank you, Senator Block. Next,
we'll hear from Senator
and she's double majoring in
political science and media
studies. She's the vice
president of the University of
New Mexico College Democrats and
currently is interning at the
welcoming Brianna to the
chamber.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Next, we'll hear from Senator
Pope.
at mine knowing that I'll never
be able to fit in it again. I
won't be able to.
Pass that tape test, it's not
gonna happen. They, they take
care of me too well here in the
roundhouse with all the carbs,
have Claudia Reisner we have
Tammy Bryant, we have Beverly
Neil Clinton and we have Walt
Borden.
And then I also have my shadow
He's been very active leading
with the College Democrats
bringing civic civic engagement
directly to campus, uh, beyond
efforts on campus, Jonathan has
served as a student board member
have members of the body and
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
President. Uh, I do have some
guests today and then another
announcement, uh, but again, as
you heard from the majority
leader, we do have lunch in the
Senate lounge, very, very
healthy meal for our senators
do have some guests, uh, feeding
bodies and fueling minds has
been the mission of the school
nutrition uh association, Madam
President, and all 89 school
districts, the New Mex
Mexico School Nutrition
um, child nutrition programs,
uh, for the benefit of all of
our New Mexico children, Madam
President, uh, the association
is asking for our continued
support in a couple of areas,
bang up job for all of our
schools. I've seen video and
photos, Madam President, of, of,
of school food service workers
walking around with large bowls
serving salads, which I never
citizens, senior citizen farms
market program, and we know,
Madam President, you and I've
talked about this, uh,
individually ourselves, 49% of
all children being fostered in
as a state a couple of years ago
to ensure that we have free
breakfast, healthy, uh,
universal free breakfast and
lunch and then we also increased
the funding for those meals, and
that's exactly what this
up there. I'd like to ask them
to stand as I introduce them.
Uh, Dean Gallegos is the
president of the Association of
the New Mexico School uhutrition
Association. He's also the food
from Berlin, uh, consolidated
schools, and I went to the
school 10 miles away in Los
Lunas, by the way, rivals, um,
and then we also have Rachel
Rogers. She's the food uh
services director.
And Madam President, uh, my
co-sponsor for that legislation
son of a retired school cook, a
woman who served so many meals
to children at Espanola public
schools and a woman who refuses
to bake that fresh bread she
the highlights of myself here in
the Senate to ensure that
children have a free healthy
breakfast and lunch K through
12.
the state of New Mexico, Madam
Chair, I do have two guests I'd
food service director at Roswell
Independent School District, and
Madam President, if the members
of the Senate could help me in
welcoming my two guests to the
chamber.
Thank you Madam President, I
would like to introduce my guest
for today as well. I have with
3rd of 5 siblings born to
parents Katie and Melissa Viil.
She's also the grandchild of 4th
judicial Judge Matthew Sandoval,
who passed away in 2019 after a
state legislature and law
enforcement as well as the legal
career, his legal career as a
district attorney and district
judge and his community service
please help me walk and out of
the chamber.
Thank you, Senator Nova. Next
we'll hear from Senator Ramos.
His name is Mr. Gonzalo Cano.
Gonzalo Cano is a varsity
quarterback for the Berlin
Eagles.
He, uh, participates in
football, basketball, power
in junior varsity basketball and
uh does a great job there. um,
he's, he's a part of the staters
and staters has a free store uh
well needed and he plans to go
to college or go to.
the Air Force Academy and become
a police officer. So please help
me welcome Mr. Gonzalo Cano.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. Next
we'll hear from Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you Madam President, and I
am delighted to introduce my
shadow today. Her name is Kylie
passionate about which include
LGBTQ plus rights, environmental
protections and all civil
rights. She hopes one day to be
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Next we'll hear from Senator
Campos.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Thank you very much
to the members of the Senate.
may, uh, just go ahead and
indicate, uh, of course today is
New Mexico Hospital Association
Day and, uh, in this there's a
Guadalupe County Hospital in
Santa Rosa and miners Colfax
Medical Center in Ratone, uh,
along with the, uh, the bag,
you'll find, if you will, a
million emergency room visits
and created over 62,000 high
quality job, jobs.
Please join the Hospital
Association and their members at
much for the work that you do
for the continued commitment to
good health here in New Mexico
so members of the Senate, just a
round of applause again for the
members of the New Mexico
Hospital Association. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam President. It
is my honor to introduce my
shadow, who is also my homie,
Dems, and he's in his 4th year
of political science, um, with a
minor in philosophy pre-law
major. Chris loves this work,
this breathes this, it is great
to have so many young people
here in the house with us today,
and this week, um, they're
watching and I hope we do right
Madam President, thank you very
much. Today I'm very honored to
have two shadows with me. First,
senior at Berlin High School. He
plans on after he graduates in
May, he is planning on attending
UNM to pursue a career in
chemical engineering.
that he has in his school. He's
a member of the National Honor
Society with a 3.9 grade point
average. That's pretty awesome.
He is also a member of Starter
He has a good work ethics. He
helps his mom and dad out at
their grocery store and gas
station called Veita Trading
Post that's where he lives. If
And my other shadow this young
lady standing next to me is
Haley Bittigan. She is a senior
at Logan High School. She is a
as well and her grade point
average is a 4.3. She is also
student council vice president.
Another one of her honors is
attending the University of
Southern Maine in Portland.
And uh she's going there on an
academic scholarship and also to
she helps her dad out at his
grain store called the Sunny
State Production, and she likes
to work with her mom playing
volleyball since her mom is the
coach.
Thank you, Cinderel next to
we'll hear from Senator Duheck.
Thank you, Madam President. I
business with a concentration in
marketing and a minor in
communications. Leadership is
his passion, and he has a strong
history of advocacy and
education, uh, in high school,
he served as the New Mexico
uh, 245,000 students and
confirming the next national
officer team, and Madam
President, I was just asking him
if he wanted to go to law
Thank you, Senator Dohek. Next
we'll hear from Senator Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam President, I
would like to introduce my
um she wants to become a lawyer,
and afterwards she becomes a
lawyer, she wants to come up
here and run and to become a
senator, so we have young youth
coming up.
and field and I ask you, Madam
President and the members of the
body today to help introduce my
guest Lea Chavez.
Madam President. um, it gives me
great pleasure to introduce or
or just to mention that you do
have some gift bags on your
desks, uh, senators from the,
uh, American Association of
and it does have um the Z symbol
stamped on it so I think it's a
little more authentic than maybe
we'll have a little competition,
you know, here, um, but I, I
will say, Madam President.
that I walked by Senator Ell's
your desk, the New Mexico uh
certified registered nurse and
nesthetists, Madam President,
say that 10 times fast. They do
provide 80% of anesthesia and
anesthetics in New Mexico and
they're working without
President, and the New Mexico
Association of Nurse
Anesthesiology would like to
again thank the legislature for
all of their support, and they
wanted you to have a cookie,
Madam President, in the shape of
New Mexico with a symbol on it.
Thank you, Mr. Madam President.
So we've had the state police
officers here standing up there
right now, protecting us for the
all of those things. So I wanna
start with uh Sergeants Ramirez
and King, they're here. And then
we have officers Herrera,
close to that, did I? Wow, OK,
uh, ration and Lopez, they were
the daytime, uh, crew, uh, then
in, uh, the afternoon evening,
all night were officers Oliver
and Gallegos and so Madam.
President, I think we
particularly owe this group of
people, a round of applause and
a deep thank you for their
Thank you so much for that,
Senator Cha. Senator Peter
Wirth, uh, thank you, Madam
recognition for Dolores, where
the idea of the center O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Leader Worth, uh,
Madam President, I ask unanimous
legislature, first session,
2025. The New Mexico State
Senate does hereby extend its
recognition and acknowledgement
to February 19, 2025 be
the United States and whereas in
2024, 51 children in New Mexico
were diagnosed with cancer and 9
children.
have been diagnosed with cancer
their families cope with the day
to day emotional and financial
needs of living with and
fighting cancer and whereas the
children's Cancer Fund of New
Mexico is a local agency that
year.
And whereas the Children's
Cancer Fund of New Mexico
benefits and supports children
with cancer and their families
by providing them with financial
parents in feeding their
families during lengthy stays at
clinics and hospitals.
And whereas the state's only
pediatric oncology treatment
children's Cancer Fund of New
Mexico maintains a presence at
the pediatric oncology clinic at
the University of New Mexico
comprehensive Cancer Center in
day living expenses for families
who are facing overwhelming
financial burdens because of
their child's cancer diagnosis.
And whereas the children's
the children's Cancer Fund of
New Mexico's Erin Trujecky
Memorial scholarship provides
educational financial assistance
for students who have been
And whereas during the 2024
academic year, the Child's
Cancer Fund granted 32 Eran
Truhiki Memorial scholarships
and whereas the children's
the Children's Cancer Fund of
New Mexico will assist more than
1000 persons this year,
extending a helping hand to all
New Mexico children.
being treated for cancer and
families facing childhood cancer
and that February 19, 2025 be
recognized as children's cancer
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry Du Duhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator O'Malley.
families and their children and
I, um, but I will yield uh to
any of my colleagues before that
if they wish to speak.
Thank you Madam President, it's
my honor also to stand in
support of the certificate for
all of the wonderful work that
has been done, um, cancer is
it, but to cure, to find, to
find the cure, and the this fund
is just really important in the
work that has been done. I know
the guests will be, I won't
steal, I won't steal the
thunder.
Uh,
uh, Senator O'Malley to
introduce your guests and close
on the certificate.
Thank you so much, Madam
Children's uh Fund cancer fund
I've known her for many years.
She's a dear friend, um, she and
her husband George lost their
son to cancer. Eric, when he was
such now she's the director I
don't know how long you've been
the director, but since the
beginning, um, and, uh, she's
grown the organization she, I
Philip, he's age 11, uh, his
mom, Ioana Villa Toro is also
with us today. OK, if you want.
do that snitch. You don't have
undergone treatment for
childhood cancer. He's a
survivor.
Uh, with him also is Doctor
Shirley Abraham. Uh, she's, uh,
So I appreciate her being with
us as well. We have a number of
families, uh, with us in the
front there and I do wanna thank
you all like, uh, for your.
she's age 9 with her, uh, her
mom, Melissa Cox.
And also uh Timothy Daniels, age
age 10, who could not make it
from espanola, uh, we have, uh,
Crystal Garcia, Juan Garcia, and
I think there's Doris Padilla as
well.
here today and for your work and
um also the staff that work with
Diane Truhecky Sharanda Heist,
O'Malley's guests,
thank you.
certificate. Madam President,
thank you as unanimous consent,
uh, for the reader to read the
certificate regarding uh our
sister Dolores Huerta.
Seeing no objection, the reader
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to the
Recuerdo as Cesar Chavez
committee and the Dolores Huerta
Dolores Huerta Day of Service
learning at the La Placita
Gardens Sanchez Farm open space
in Albuquerque's South Valley.
And whereas this year's
labor advocacy and social
justice while celebrating the
power of community service,
engagement and education in New
Mexico and whereas each year the
history of the migrant farm
workers movement and local food
systems, culture and
sustainability.
And whereas students at the
event about
rights and whereas in the spirit
of Si se puede the Dolores
Huerta day of service learning
empowers future generations to
workers' rights, education, and
equity shaped the nation and
inspired countless individuals
to engage in civic action. Now,
on April 11th, 2025. Signed and
sealed.
at the capital in the city of
Santa Fe, Senator Antonio
members, uh, Dolores Huerta
could not be here today, but she
was with us a couple weeks back
uh when we had a joint session
she was there on the rostrum in
the house. She's gonna be
celebrating her ninety-fifth
birthday, so we're gonna send
the day, uh, Dolores Huerta was
his partner and was a meticulous
organizer behind the scenes in
organizing the National Farm
Workers Association, which then
became the United Farm Workers
just tremendous. 20 years ago
she founded the Dolores Huerta
Foundation.
and is now this wonderful iconic
figure in the civil rights
movement, uh, she is a
tremendous leader on the Mount
her all the work she's done, uh,
she's a quintessential leader,
uh, and a quintessential person,
uh, in the United States of
America. Thank you, Madam
President.
All right, any comments about
this certificate?
Uh, Singaninma to introduce his
representing the committee, uh,
the, uh, Recua de Cesar Chavez
committee and the Dolores Huerta
day of service learning. Please
welcome Mr. Thompson.
gonna do is read in just the
committee reports from the rules
committee on the confirmations,
and then we will yield for the
confirmations to our rules chair
Madam President, your rules
committee has had under
consideration.
Amended Senate executive letter
number 55 dated January 16,
confirmation expiring December
31st, 2030. Your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment,
respectfully submitted, Senator
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to treat all the committee
reports.
Senate executive message number
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring
December 31st, 2026. Your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment.
Elizabeth Olivas as a student
member of the New Mexico State
University Board of Regents for
a term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
Senator Duheck, Madam President,
I move adoption of the committee
reports. We're an adoption of a
favorable committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All
right, people are awake now, uh,
those opposed, nay.
OK, only one committee report is
you, Madam President. Unanimous
consent we go that our business
confirmations, and I would yield
to Senator Jaramillo.
Seeing no objection were on that
order of business confirmation,
consideration as student member
of the New Mexico State
University Board of Regents. I
now yield to Senator Brantley.
Cinder Bran like Madam
President, pursuant to Senate
Olives to the New Mexico State
University Board of Regents.
Madam Chair and senators, it is
my pleasure to introduce you all
to Mary Soul. She's been a
New Mexico. She's a graduate,
uh, student at New Mexico State
University. She is Aggie through
and through, holds a bachelor's
degree in science and
agriculture, business and
a participant of 4H youth
programs, New Mexico cooperative
Extension Service programs and
since the start of her freshman
year, she has been on a mission
to be involved in campus
here before you today to see her
nominated as our New Mexico
State University student regent,
and I ask you to consider.
And please vote for this
appointment.
nomination, and I was listening
to her qualifications and I
learned something this week, and
that is that the regents of the
of NMSU are it's the rulemaking
Thank you, Senator Jarameo.
Madam President, I too stand in
strong support. She's a native
of Berlin and has the traits of
the students of the land who are
her excitement for NMSU this
morning almost made me decide
that I need to apply as a
graduate student at New Mexico
State University, but she's a
mentor, she's somebody who
invests her time and her energy
Uh, Madam President, with the
sponsor yield for a question.
Senator Brantly, do you yield.
Madam Chair, I do.
Madame chair, she is not. She's
a proud Aggie from the Olives
family. She's originally from
Berlin. She has made Las Cruces
her home now of no relation to
the governor. Well thank you
Madam President. Thank you,
Regents. So thank you for that
and I appreciate and will
support the nominee.
So is there other debate uh
center share.
Does Mr. Olivis know the Aggie
fight song and is she willing to
sing it here for us?
I don't think we're gonna be
doing that on the floor as soon
Ms. Levis. I think she'll be a
great, uh, great student region.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. Thank you, Madam
President. Uh, it's easy to
And I reached over to uh
Senator Brantley and I said for
she would be, and we probably
all would be embarrassed. So I,
uh, I think she's a grand, um,
Edition and I think not only
Thank you. Any other debate on
the contrary, a cider woods.
Thank you, Madam President.
Yeah, we don't want to tell too
I, I stand in support. I thank
you for offering yourself up to
serve.
The Board of Regents of New
uh
One of the few in the in the
house that is directly involved
in.
And so,
We've got some, uh, experimental
stations across the, the state
Uh, I think there's maybe up to
7 climate zones in our state.
And so because of that, we have
varying
in these areas because it not
only affects us. It affects
people across.
the world.
Because there's different people
Thank you for agreeing to do
this. Thank you, Senator, for
bringing
Her forward, I appreciate that
so much. Uh,
Uh, sing no Senator Brantly to
close.
Thank you, Madam President, it
is my honor to bring this
nominee forward. I think she is
those present voted in the
affirmative, except for those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Senators, we are voting on the
confirmation of Marisol
State University Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expiring
December 31, 2026 has duly
passed the Senate.
you please stand as the newly
appointed regent for New Mexico
State University and Go Aggies.
President, I ask that the
credentials of Rosemary Jane
Gallegos be presented to the
full South for consideration as
member of the New Mexico School
for the Deaf Puerto Regents. I
letter message number 55 dated
January 16, 2025. I moved the
Senate Dubai here confirmed the
appointment of Rosemary Jane
can't do that yet, senator. I
apologize that's at the end.
OK.
Oh, Mad, Madam President, then I
would like to, um, introduce if
I could, um.
Mexico after completing college,
she and her husband moved to
Santa Fe in 1984 where she began
her work as a preschool teacher
in New Mexico School of the
men President and body I, uh, we
had a really good conversation
before and after our committee
just wanted send for uh further
announcements from dialogue from
the members.
And
too much time and rules bragging
about you, but I do want to echo
a lot of what he said. I am very
impressed, not just with your
resume, but what your school is
doing, and I wish more New
Anyone else?
Seeing no further uh
Senator Gonzalez.
her father was my banker for
life and uh so uh and we also
worked on a nonprofit group
called Taosfeets Taos for many
years, you know, assisting
have been in a much better
choice than this nomination for
this. So again, uh, Madam
President, thank you, thank you
TO and congratulations.
show that all roll has been
called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting negative by
Shohans. We are voting on the
By a vote of 33 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
the appointment of Doctor
Rosemary Chengalleos as a member
of New Mexico School for the
Senor Gallegos.
Thank you Madam President, I
just stand in honor to bring
this country forward just seeing
an incredible display of what
Thank you Madam President.
Johnston be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
student member of the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and
Technology, Board of Regents. I
now yield to Senator Scher.
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Cody Dean Johnson
to the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology Board of
Regents in Stanford Question.
So, Madam President, uh, it is
Veterans Day and our veterans
are upstairs doing veterans
things, but a veteran has to
for that to Cody, but we do know
that there are other people here
that have heard the testimony
and so with that I would like to
yield to.
Starting out with Senator
Brantley.
got to sit with him in rules and
learn about this young
individual and all the
accomplishments that he's doing
in Socorro and all that he's
done with the school.
Um
track and field. He, uh, let me
read you a little stuff here
about it.
Cody Johnson is a dedicated and
accomplished student at New
Mexico.
Institution of mining technology
addition, he is pursuing
currently serves as a Socorro
high school boys swim coach.
At the middle school track coach
What a fine individual. All the
accomplishments are pages and
pages of all the stuff he's
done.
And it was an honor to sit with
him today in rules, madam, uh,
Madam President, it, it's a
Madam President, it, it's uh
greats
just wait until I call you.
I did though. Thank you, Madam
President, I guess I'm just
humble kid and I expect some
great things in the future,
hopefully one of these days
he'll be sitting out here
representing his area and uh he
them into our New Mexico Tech
board. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam President, and
I wanna also thank um
he told me not to say this, so
I'm gonna say it, but he got a
little emotional during this uh
during Senate rules, and it just
shows you how much he really
you and if um you misbehave,
your mom's right behind you,
we'll take care of that pretty
quick. So, uh, best of luck to
you, sir. You're gonna do great
hope it's a unanimous vote. You
got my full support, Cody. Thank
you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Seeing uh singer Caleos.
different in Socorro in uh
allowing people to understand
what the jam it was in the
community and in our state, and
he thought through and uh
I just thought it was incredible
that he'd already, even though a
spur of the moment questioned,
he came up with a really good
answer, uh, really quickly. So,
Uh, thank you. Any other debate
on the country.
Senator Townsend thank you Madam
President. um,
himself very well this morning.
He, uh, was a little embarrassed
that he might have gotten a
little emotional.
But
He might, uh,
emotion. We all have issues that
touch our hearts that we're
passionate about.
Um,
sometimes we're mad in a wet hen
That wants to do what's right.
Uh, I think this body would be
well served to get right behind
him and support him because
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brantley, thank you Madam Chair.
Cody, I want to assure you that
you are well supported. I'm
going to adopt you because my
your Senate sponsors who also
Mexico Tech, and we are very
proud of you. So, thank you,
thank you for your service.
Senator Jaramillo.
Madam President, I stand in full
sent in from one of his high
school teachers from the
director of the physics program
at New Mexico, uh, Institute of
Mining and Technology, and he's
what you're going to be doing as
a student region. Thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you. Seeing no further
debate, Senator share to close.
negative by a show of hands are
on the confirmation of Cody Dean
Johnson to your seats if you
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
The appointment of Cody Dean
Johnson as a student member of
New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology Board of Regions
for term commencing upon
Madam President, please welcome
Cody Dean Johnson as the newest
regent to New Mexico? No, yes,
school of Mining and Technology.
Senator Peter Worth. Thank you,
Madam President. Unanimous
consent we go that business
is to do items 1 through 5, so
just Senate Bill 17, Senator
Jaramillo will be number one.
Senate Bill 82, Senator Souls
Senate Bill 17.
2 is number 5. So Madam
President, unanimous as we go on
our business. 3rd reading of
legislation, and I yield to
Senator Jaramillo for item
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record showed
that all actions for placing
Senate Bill 17 as twice amended
on final passage have been taken
and that it's now subject for
grant, deny, and revoke parole
and set conditions for release.
The board must be equipped to
make fair evidence-based public
safety decisions. This bill,
Madam President, would improve
guidance of the board based on
the knowledge we have learned in
the 40+ years.
since the board's inception, and
it makes it clear that the
members of the board can be
compensated for the services
rendered during closed parole
Is there a debate?
On Senate Bill 17.
excuse Senator Sanchez.
For the rest of the until he
returns to the chamber, except
in case of a cough.
Bill 17. Madam President, I move
that the Senate that Senate Bill
17 is twice amended, do now
pass, and I ask unanimous
consent to the Senate that the
record showed that the role has
twice amended, uh, to your seats
if you wish to vote no, please
raise your hands.
this, if you could just stay in
your seats a few seconds longer.
Thank you.
by a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 17 is twice amended,
has duly passed the Senate.
Siner had a meal.
Uh, moving on to item number 2,
Senator Souls. Thank you, Madam
President, I ask unanimous
consent to the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Thank you, Madam President. Uh,
this bill is endorsed both by
the public school Capital Outlay
oversight task force and the
legislative education Study
that we need for our schools and
rebuilding them, particularly
some of our smaller school
districts. This extends for
another year, the reduction in
the state and local match that
difficult for some of the small
districts to, uh, to qualify for
a waiver for, uh, consideration
our students go.
are up to date and good learning
environments.
Thank you, Senator. Is there a
debate on Senate Bill 882.
that I stumbled on calling you
Madam President. No worries.
Madam President, I ask Senator
the state?
To do this process of, of doing
away with the matches.
school buildings up, uh, the
whole process is a formula
that's set up to make sure that
our buildings are getting
rebuilt, getting maintained,
getting upgraded, um, there is a
There is lots of money in there
that is dedicated for this. It's
not a question of shortage of
money.
Uh, Madam President, according
It has cost the state $227.3
million. And why bring that up,
uh, Madam President.
I
Since I've been on the budget
committee,
a personal judgment, of course,
and
This happens to be one that I
think is, uh, is moving the, the
proper way and, and I like the
this is permanent law. This
means we're moving the sunset
date.
And the balance of the public
school kept outlay right now
shows to be $1.6 billion.
I, I see, I see the, the public
benefit into this. Um,
What my problem is right now
He does. So, so.
We're having escalating cost of
building things.
To lack of contractors or, or
just the cost of building
materials or
I'd like to hear your thoughts
and Senator, uh, there have been
lengthy discussions both in the
public school capital outlayover
sight task force and the LESC as
well as the facilities authority
as to what's causing the large
of it is certainly attributable
to trying to get crews out there
paying per diem for them to be
way out getting materials out
there.
they're also seem to be some
gouging or whether that's just
the new world order as to what
it costs to build things. There
doesn't seem to be a real clear
pattern. We have tried to look
learning in and so regardless of
the price, we still need to do
these and again many of them in
our are in our smallest
districts.
Well, I, I appreciate that
answer. Um,
districts did receive money and
awards this year or last year,
and they went out for bid and
they were very high. And, and
they was making the statement
that
It was in Texas, it'd be
cheaper.
And I just wonder if we've ever
done any
You, you have to realize that my
district runs by 3 states.
So, I'm constantly
Someone's constantly badgering
me about this. So,
If, if
question is,
I have we ever done any studies
to see if our state
The building costs in our state
is, is higher than other states
Tell your salt.
Madam President, uh, I couldn't
tell you about specific studies
over the last two years as we've
high everywhere, um, after the
pandemic, there was lots of
building and money out there and
a shortage of contractors there
did not seem to be any clear
foot and somebody $1000 a square
foot without any clear rhyme or
reason, uh, and sort of the same
as we looked across other states
the questions I have. I, I guess
I just wanted to note that, that
we've had a real run of
inflation here in the short term
thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Is there
further debate on Senate Bill
82.
building, but nowhere near what
they used to be, but having said
that, Madam President, um, I
move that Senate Bill 82 do now
Uh, senators, we are voting on
Senate Bill 82 to your seats if
you wish to vote no, please
raise your hands.
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 82 has duly passed
the Senate.
Center souls, thank you, Madam
President. Our schoolchildren
and our schools and districts
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that all
actions for placing Senate bill
16 is twice amended on final
passage have been taken and that
allows 330,000 unaffiliated
voters in New Mexico to
participate in public primary
elections without jumping
Administrative burden that
currently falls on our county
clerks. Many of you have seen
this bill before. It has passed
join me on the floor, that would
be Lindsay Bachmann from the
Secretary of State's office
andyla Absal, the executive
director from NM Voters first.
And with that, Madam President,
I look forward to the discussion
from his body.
Uh, thank you. Debate on the
bill.
Number one, we already do this.
We created a process in 2019
with an amendment on this Senate
floor uh by one of our former
Really has caused a lot of
challenges with the Secretary of
State trying to administer.
Second thing I would just point
out upfront is that nothing in
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam President, um,
With the senator yell for a
question. Senator Figuero, do
More thought about it and then
hopefully you're ready for it.
Um
Madam President and Senator,
have there been any studies done
Madam President, there have been
no studies on that particular
topic.
voter participation and what we
find is that allowing our
unaffiliated to voters.
Unaffiliated voters to vote in
primaries increases overall
President, um,
Oh
A couple of more questions if I
might, with the gentle lady
yields.
Yes.
of concern, uh, quite frankly,
on both sides of the aisle as to
Um, and any underlying
Um, motives.
But it's not because we want
We don't want none of us in the
room, I believe, want less voter
Uh, many believed that it will
cause political shenanigans.
And one person will be.
Out pulling one ballot, not
Tilting the level playing field.
Do you see that?
Um, do you see that as being.
A risk or or not.
will always remain their own and
what we currently allow in the
state of New Mexico which is
same day registration and voting
in the primary would allow that
Thank you Madam President,
Senator, I, I believe that, um,
the data that I have seen.
Um, the body in, in their
deliberation on this, um,
Because
There are studies out there that
Madam President, I can't support
it, but I appreciate you
bringing it forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Scott.
Yio Cen Figaro. Yes, Madam
President, she yells.
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
would you agree with me?
That the right of association.
For a like-minded cause.
His fundamental.
To our constitution.
Those voters that have declined
to state.
Have specifically disavowed.
Party.
So the question, the very
obvious question would be,
Why should these folks
Their own
Candidate
In a third party situation.
chosen not to affiliate with our
other major party, libertarian,
and any of our minor parties of
which now I believe there are 3
in New Mexico.
to vote without joining a club,
and the answer to the question
is the fact that.
All parties could hold.
Private elections to choose
allowed to vote.
But Madam President,
And senator
These folks have specifically
disavowed.
those parties' candidates.
That seems like.
It seems to me like.
There would be.
to state voters to actually vote
against.
The, uh, most promising
candidates from one of those two
In this piece of legislation.
Madam President, as it stands
right now, a voter who wants to
change their registration and
the senator says they can do so,
but this idea is not new, Madam
President, and across the states
that have already enacted it,
electorate has changed.
We don't see this problem
happening in a measurable way.
What we do see, Madam President,
register in that age group,
Madam President, are
unaffiliated. They are not drawn
to a party or a platform, but
they are drawn to voting and
would it not be accurate to say.
That a person required to change
their registration.
Even on the day of voting.
And the policies that they would
advocate for, Madam President
and Senator, I thank him for
veterans also across the country
are 49% unaffiliated voters they
see their service as nonpartisan
and they want to remain in that
He didn't want to lie. It went
against his integrity. He did
not wish to affiliate with a
party he wished to vote.
And he was frustrated with our
vote and that Madam President,
is what we are trying to
eliminate.
Madam President and Senator, I
find that.
Story disquieting.
doing so with at least some
conviction that they are making
the correct decision and would
Madam President and senator,
that is exactly what this
individual was asking for the
ability to vote to make his
Madam President and Senator,
I believe I heard represented
Uh,
what I call mischief in the
voting process, but rather
merely served to
Increase voter participation.
forth to substantiate that
claim.
That looked for that kind of
evidence, could not find it
showed that it increased
participation, and those are the
results they found.
advantage for one of the
political parties or the other.
And given a corollary to that
would be
registrations have any advantage
accruing.
To that organization.
office she's not aware of any
across any of the states, the
secretary of state Madam
President, talk to each other
about this issue, um, she's not
vote in previous committees has
been bipartisan, which is to say
members of both major parties
have voted both for and against
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
I certainly hope
That that is the case today.
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
for this. I have a question for
the sponsor, she will.
Do yields, Madam President,
Shields. Thank you, Madam
President. Uh, so, Madam
Colorado, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio,
and Rhode Island have some form
nonpartisan voter registration
so they're.
System is completely open.
So,
Madam President, I found out the
Solidly a republican state, but
I, I might have missed one, but
it doesn't matter, uh, because
the concern really is, does this
help one side or the other.
And if you just look at the
me that the rank and file of any
party.
They're out there working, uh,
recruiting candidates, training
candidates, making phone calls,
better than the other party, OK?
And so they're out there doing
all of that, they're building
their party.
And then at election time,
People that had nothing to do
I've been back and forth on
this.
But I always come down to this.
I do not want.
The lobos
Mexico State team.
And, and that's what bugs me
because there really is an
association. If you're a lobo,
uh, uh, with all offense to the
lobos, then you go to that
But, but, but that's why I, I
see this. I chose to go to New
Mexico State.
I could have chosen to go to
UNM, but I didn't.
Irish Catholic. I come from a
long line of Democrats, OK?
Uh
So
There are
Choices that are made.
Uh, it's like the best one ever.
Um
And you cheer for your team.
And then all of a sudden
somebody else gets to pick who
plays on the field.
And and that's where I've come
down even though I understand
the arguments and I get in, and,
You can't root for the other
side and pick their team all of
a sudden at the end of the game.
So
Thank you, Madam President.
When I campaign or even just
walk my dog and I run into
people who are not affiliated
with a major party. They
agree with the plat the entire
platform of either party, the
Democratic Party or the
Republican Party and, and they
um, but they are taxpayers and
they do live in our communities
and they care about what's going
on in their, in their
communities they want to know,
that I have uh come to really
support.
this idea, um.
It's, I, I like, especially when
some of these, and they tend to
it's, it's so, um,
Ingrained to have two parties
and.
And they, they haven't found the
right fit for themselves, but
Sarah Madam President you
Sarah Madam President,
thank you. I don't know if you,
um, reviewed the, the analysis
What the analysis says is
section 3C.
Refers to voters returning a
card by mail or by website
selection and section 3D.
and does not refer to the web's
website, um, request for an
absentee ballot and so my
question is, is do you want to
take care of that technical
Madam President, the Secretary
of State's representative here
is looking at it if the senator
would please clarify the
question. OK, so my question is
Page 7 of the bill or does not
return the card.
Or the request.
Made by the webs made through
the website required by
Seems like we ought to fix it
instead of have that confusion
later.
section you're referring to
refers only to mail-in ballot
districts and that's only about
according to the expert witness,
about it, but I encourage you to
look at that, um, because it
seemed to me there it could
cause confusion if people
requested a mail-in ballot on
to those who requested it by a
card and not those who requested
it by a computer, so it just
seems a potential for confusion.
Um, I totally defer if you don't
and I thank the sponsors for
bringing it um I think it's a a
great bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam President. uh,
First of all, I want to thank
you for talking with me in
committee and after committee on
this particular bill. I want to
allowing voters who have not
designated a major political
party affiliation.
On their certificates of
registration to participate in
the primary election process. Is
that still accurate?
will see item 2 on the amendment
is to strike the word major.
Um, Madam President, um,
Senator Figuro, do you have a
I might need to refer to it.
Could we possibly get the
senator a copy, Madam President,
found it in your book, didn't
you? It was, well, it was hidden
I, I think the list that was
said.
May not have been, may have
missed a few states. I just want
to go through this open primary
Mississippi, Missouri, North
Dakota, Ohio, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Vermont,
Virginia, Wisconsin, those are
in the closed ones, uh, which is
the majority of the list would
be Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Idaho, um, closed but
also allows unaffiliated voters.
Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland,
West Virginia, Wyoming. It's an
interesting list, Senator
Figueroa, because it has um
A fair amount of blue states in
there. I want to say most of
Is Hawaii is an open primary
state.
Anybody can vote in any
election.
In 2016 that went down to 42.2%
and we have seen primary.
Participation
Can anyone change their vote
during the year. Is that
possible?
I'm sorry, not change their
vote, change their party.
before a primary election.
Uh, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, uh, Madam President, so
Madam President, 28 days before
the primary election.
And during the general election
they can change their party at
It seems to be a little mixed in
with truly open primary states
including Hawaii in Hawaii,
voter registration is not by
party so there cannot be closed
primary states are Arizona,
Colorado, Illinois, Indiana.
Thank you, Senator. I, I think
our lists are pretty close, but
one could be updated, one could
not be so uh again, Madam
President, Senator, uh, 28 days.
minor parties can change all the
way up to the day of the
election.
OK, thank you, Madam President,
thank you, Senator. So
essentially we're talking about
No, Madam President, you can
change your party designation
you can change your registration
throughout the year, the 28 days
prior to a primary election are
one of the Secretary of State
staffer shake her head 12 6 when
I was asking the question, so
really, so 28 days you're not
allowed to change your party
Senator, you can do it 24 hours
a day, 365 days.
days a year, any place in the
world that you can do this on
That's a lot of flexibility in
the responsibility should be on
the voter.
One of the things that we've
seen here in New Mexico, which I
actually think would hurt.
voter registration as Democrats,
the Republicans have been
picking them up as well as the
TDS.
This bill and what we saw in the
2024 election with the
Democrat.
Primary races.
That being said, the flexibility
is already there, Madam
President and Senator, for
anybody.
State's website to go change
your party affiliation.
This
It's so simple, I think the
Secretary of State for making it
We want to do it this way. The
voter has the responsibility the
voter has the capability, the
And right now, Madam President,
I yield and um I may have more
comments later and I want to
thank Senator Figueroa and the
staff are being down there to
answer questions.
Madam President, I'm, I'm just
uh wanting to ask what is going
to be the new process and
procedures with the paperwork.
Where it says, um, each
application for a mail-in ballot
will allow folks to mark the
choice that they choose when
you're talking about Madam
explain who they are and we'll
be asked which ballot they would
like to use.
So, Madam President, uh sponsor,
um.
very long and we definitely want
to avoid the long lines.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
That burden is currently laid on
our county clerks, and this bill
would remove that burden, remove
those lines, and remove that
weight for unaffiliated voters
timely problem then um if this
is enacted.
Madam President, no, the
Secretary of State has assured
us during the committee hearings
Is there a further debate,
Senator Thornton.
committee as well.
And it was a question in regards
the um.
The fact that we have, I first
of all agree with you that uh
people who are declining to
in.
Primary elections.
We already have a system in
place that allows them to
participate in primary
elections.
So they have to make the
decision to pick a ballot.
Decide on who they're gonna vote
for and then go back and change
does not participate in the
Actual process of selecting
those candidates in the first
place. However, my question is,
and I think I asked this in
They are, in fact, picking a
particular party of
unaffiliated.
And so my question is why cannot
we.
And required them to have their
own primary.
This would reduce the number of
no I mean the secretary of state
could reduce the number of
nominee, um.
own primary.
Once that person has been
chosen.
That candidate could then be.
Uh, on the general election.
choose.
That way everyone would have a
particular choice and everyone
would be given the same
opportunities. That's my
question, Madam Chair.
Sir Figaro
to state an affiliation is a
status. It is not in and of
itself a party. So it cannot go
through that party process.
they've chosen not to be part of
a party.
So if that is the case, why
would they want to be involved
in the selection of our party's
candidates.
elections are decided in the
primary for folks who choose to
affiliate with the party they
are choosing to join that club
if you would, Madam President,
that.
affiliated status does not
remove their right to vote in
publicly funded elections.
I, I cannot support this bill
primarily because
Of the work and I think some
other senators mentioned that
the work involved.
that process to select your
party candidate.
And then someone comes in at the
last minute.
It's not part of the team.
Decides they want to participate
in selecting who the team leader
Man, I'm sure with the sponsor.
Uh yield for a couple of
questions.
Senor Figaro, do you yield? Yes,
Madam President.
Um, is that still on the bill?
Madam President, the amendments
in rules were struck and
Thank you, Madam President.
Senator, I appreciate that. I, I
liked this bill a lot better
before the amendment.
Um, I.
Being able to vote in the
primary, I'm not sure about the
other parties, the other groups.
A lot of people do decline to
Madam President, I have not had
folks tell me they were afraid
due to their work situation, but
I have heard constituents tell
me they were afraid for a
variety of other reasons.
that one party or the other
won't, uh, decide to boycott me.
Have you ever had anyone tell
you that?
No, Madam President, I have not.
Madam President, it, it, it
happens and it happens actually
you're not gonna get elected. It
also happens in other.
areas where if you're not
registered as a Republican,
you're not going to.
And and so I, I, I can see why
think perhaps we need to clarify
the amendment, um, prior to the
amendment in this bill.
Any voter not affiliated with a
the focus so that only declined
to state voters can go in and
request a ballot on primary
election day. Those who have
chosen to join another club, be
that helps me quite a bit
because, um, so basically if
you're a member of the
Constitutional Party.
I think I saw that one on there
correct except with the caveat
that same day registration still
exists for all voters on primary
day.
Uh, Madam President, Senator, so
decide, I really don't like who
the Republican candidates are
this year, so I'm going to
become a Democrat.
Madam President, that is current
law and this bill does not
And and Senator Duhe is shaking
her head no, so maybe I got that
one wrong.
Madam President, um, and
with information like your
address and such, but you cannot
change party past the 28 day
mark, so 28 days and the same
day major parties cannot change
Can you tell me, um, Madam
President, Senator, uh, if, if I
want to go in and register.
On the, on the same day and vote
right then.
different section. You do have
to bring an ID, but this bill
does not change that or pertain
to it.
Thank you Madam President um in
the ability to change from minor
party to one of the major
parties, um.
But you do have to show your ID
when you do that to make sure
that it's actually the person
and it's not, uh.
You know that's, I, I think
that's actually a really good
thing and that's actually one of
the reasons I voted for the same
day registration it's because
it's the only time in this state
you have to provide an ID to
vote.
uh, Madam President, Senator, I,
I, I, uh, I appreciate the
clarification that helps me
quite a bit, um, you know, I
have for various reasons. I know
a lot of federal employees.
That do not register with a
particular party.
Um
Because they have been told it's
Democrat right now and we're
getting ready to have an
election in 2 years for governor
and, you know, he might have a
Republican get elected and go
down and say, well, you know,
I'm gonna relieve this person of
came in, it's it's just the
natural thing. So the safer
thing to do is just say, I'm
gonna decline to state which
party I belong to or which party
I think more alike.
we'll hear from Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, with the
sponsor yield for a question do
you yield? Yes, she yields.
to vote on the Democrat.
primary ballot. Could I do that?
Madam President,
Under this bill or under current
primary ballot.
Madam President, if you do same
day registration you may.
Thank you, Madam President, and
after this bill, if I'm an
The only difference is you don't
have to stand in line, change
your registration and create a
burden for the county clerk.
Thank you Madam Chair. That's
how I understand this too. It
and I make this point to say
that a lot of New Mexicans,
including myself, are really
sick and tired of a two party
system.
I think most New Mexicans
way at this point. The way I
read this bill is it is going to
make it very difficult for
radicals.
And either party.
To prevail
Because in many races now, New
Mexicans are left on a general
ballot to vote for the lesser of
two evils.
And those who may have arguably
served either party.
adamantly opposed to this, I
would respectfully say, what the
hell do we have to lose?
I mean, in case anyone hasn't
how am I qualified to stand here
and say this, and I feel that I
am because I flipped a seat.
The first Republican to ever
stand here. And it's ironic to
me that those who are supporting
it on this side did the same
And Democrats and independents
and Republicans to stay here.
I'm not scared of this bill, and
I don't think our party should
is to push back on the Democrat
side from radical hijackings in
your party, you're gonna have to
depend on in independent voters
to help you save your party as
well.
say this, I'm not a pure
representing the values of the
Republican Party.
I represent the values of Senate
District 35. Whether they voted
Madam, Madam President and
Senator, this is a cleanup bill.
We are, we are simply trying to
clean up an a clerical step that
in my opinion, fast tracks the
desperately are trying to expand
our board so that we are better
represented and when there are
more of us, we are better
represented. When there is, when
we were all
closer to the middle, New Mexico
you, Senator.
Thank you.
Uh senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Madam President, and
um, really because of young
people is my main issue for a
very long time young people have
chosen overwhelmingly to
register as independences more
has not felt relevant to meeting
the needs of young people and
the challenges of this
generation.
And unfortunately the
demographic breakdown of our
district is such that after a
The fact is, young people, Madam
President, colleagues, have a
lot at stake, whether it's the
climate, gun violence.
We could go through any number
relevant and my experience in
electoral politics is you cannot
control the independent voter as
a homogeneous block. You can
barely get them to pay
attention, you want at a time.
If they choose to vote for
someone or against somebody.
Fair enough, uh, but this is
about increasing electoral
Kind of the most hardcore
primary voting demographic. So I
think this helps our democracy.
And it, and it, and it gives
young people more of a say and
other independents to say, um,
people spent, you know, worry a
lot about protecting electoral
fortunes, but, but anything that
forces us to raise our game and
produce a better democracy. I'm
Thank you, Senator. Next, we'll
hear from Senator Charlie. Thank
you, Madam President, uh, does
the sponsor yield for a
question.
Yes, Madam President.
respective districts regardless
of party affiliation.
Madam President, yes, we do.
Madam President, it seems like
Uh, Madam President, thank you.
Um, if any of us are gonna lose
our seats as a result of more
We'll, uh, my colleague Senator
Figueroa, yield to a question.
Yes, Madam President.
Thank you, Madam President,
Senator, um,
is to have DTS decline the state
voters be involved in the
election process. Is that a fair
assumption, Senator?
Madam President.
process is crucial.
Thank you. That's a great
answer, Senator. Thank you,
Madam President. um, Madam
President, I'd also like to
filed for office, um, did you
have to file, uh, were you
required to get signatures?
Madam President, yes.
the participation here. Were you
allowed to have DTS?
Sign your petition.
Madam President, no.
front of Bernna Leo in front of
18 on this label that is the
answer to that question as I am
choosing to join that club and
you, Senator. That's exactly it.
So what we're doing here is
we're saying, I don't want any
DTS.
I don't want you involved in
election process. We're not
doing that. We're discriminating
and we're leaving them out of
the political process like my
friend Senator Steinborn said,
Madam President, about getting
The political process to DTS.
Why aren't we doing it?
Allowing them to be involved in
the political process to sign a
petition of a candidate that
Madam President, and senator, I
work actively to get declined to
state, especially young voters
active in campaigns and in my
district, I don't care whether
involved in campaigns. I have
DTS volunteers who knock on
doors for me and her extremely
active in the campaign,
beginning to end.
Uh, their rights, whether they
belong to any of the major or
minor parties.
This, this is saying two
different things. We're talking
out of two different sides of
our mouth here. We're saying we
want you involved.
But not during the primary, if
large block of registered New
Mexicans where we're saying stay
out of here.
Don't sign my petition.
Don't sign my opponent's
Senator Figueroa, and, and by
the way, I agree with you. We
all have DTS in our, in our
friends and family working on
our campaigns and, and so forth.
affiliated with, nor can they
help nominate.
That particular person to get
them on the ballot.
That means we're excluding them.
a truly an open primary, we
would have every, any New
Mexican we want when we go
around door to door, knocking on
the door.
it leaves an entire block of
people out of the political
process, which we all admitted
we just wanted to include them.
So with that,
I have some serious
completely open where any
registered voter in New Mexico
can sign any petition for any
party. Thank you, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
Figueroa.
That you can't be looking
around. You got to look up here.
Uh, squirrel, Madam President.
Squirrel
OK, uh.
don't need the good senator to
uh yield. I just want to make a
statement back in 2019, uh, when
I was in the house, I had the
honor of carrying Senate bill
open it up, get those declined
to states to give an opportunity
to come in and vote, and I'm
convinced that it has. I think
it
has helped encourage that, but I
delays their opportunity to vote
and some folks are just running
out from work. They have to vote
they've got just a few minutes
to get that done and then they
community um that not having to
go through the bureaucratic
process of changing your voter
registration and then
potentially going back and
Uh,
Seeing no further debate.
All right. Anyone for you to
excuse, Senator share? Yes,
madam President,
I do need to excuse, uh, Senator
Woods.
I think Senator Woods, who is
until they return to the
chamber.
single objection.
Uh
That's all everyone's been
excused, uh, I don't see any
thoughtful discussion of an
issue that it is at the heart of
our democratic republic voting.
bill 16 as twice amended do now
pass and Madam President, I
asked for a roll call vote.
All right, senators, we're
Senator Bergmans. Yes. Senator
Bergman's votes yes. Senator
Block.
Center block votes? No. Senator
Boone,
Camposent compost votes yes.
Santo Cervantes.
Center Cervantes votes yes.
Senator Charlie. Senator Charlie
Figueroa. Yes. Centra Fierro
votes yes. Center Gallegos.
votes yesentmio mio votes yes.
Central Lanier.
Sintlier votes no Centra Lopez.
Senator Lopez votes yesent
Centra O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes no.
Centra Padilla.
Yes. Center Padilla votes yes.
Center Paul.
Ramos votes yes. Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez votes yes.
Center Scott.
Sendo. Yes. Senator Sendo votes,
yes, center souls souls votes
yes. Center Stephonics.
Tobiasin Center Tobiasson votes
no. Center Townsend. No, Senator
Townsend votes no. Center
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Inter worth.
By a vote of 27 in the
affirmative, 11 in the negative.
Senate Bill 16 as twice amended
has duly passed the Senate.
Senate Bill 163 as amended with
an emergency clause, Senator
Schino.
clause.
On final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. So
that's not 163 if you'll just
Right, Senator Shinto to explain
the bill. uh thank you, Madam
President, uh, this bill.
Is um
schools from banning tribal
regalia or objects of cultural
significance worn by students at
graduation ceremonies or public
school events.
The bill replaces an existing
All right, is there a debate on
the Senate Bill 163 as amended.
Senator Brandt
Thank you Madam President, um,
of the bill, but I do have one
question, um.
You know, ran into a situation
in my district in in Rancho
Public schools where we had one
Amending that in the House side,
uh, talked to uh Representative
Collin about that and, and see
about putting that as part of
your bill. Honestly,
Players were allowed to wear all
of their stuff.
But academic achievements,
those, those were not being
allowed to be worn.
Which, which I think is quite
also understand the, the, uh,
you know, the, the tribal
regalia as well as you know,
the, the other, uh, hairdressers
and things, those should be
allowed to be worn. This is a
Further debate on Senate Bill
163.
Saying none, Senator Tino to
uh, do now pass and I unanimous
extended the Senate.
That the record show that.
The role has been called and
that all those present voted in
the affirmative except for
except those voting in the
negative with a show of hands.
By a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
And you, we will move on to our
last bill on 3rd reading today,
number 5, Senate Bill 72,
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
I ask unanimous consent of the
This bill actually was brought
to me by a lawyer here in Santa
Fe and simply allows condominium
bylaws, uh, per they make a
decision to have that option,
not being able to do that is
causing a lot of challenges with
out of.
owners, with older owners who
an electronic way to communicate
and so for quorums and
participation and for notice,
uh, that's what this bill does,
Madam President.
are, but we, we are on Senate
Bill 72, not on the 163, so
who's a who's a good looking
gentleman over there.
Keep it up there.
Seeing no debate, we're gonna
have to wait a minute till we
get our system up.
Now I've got to get the number
again 72. I do now pass, and I
asking him the Senate the record
show the world's been called and
all those present voted the
voting on Senate Bill 72, uh, so
to your seats if you wish to
We usually have all kinds of
machines helping us keep track
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 72 has duly passed
the Senate. Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
our business messages from the
house,
the reader shall read messages
from the house.
Madam President, I'm directed to
respectfully submitted visa and
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The message will be entered into
the to the journal.
Senator Wirth.
substitute for House Bill 66 and
request concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted
Lisa Martis McCutchen, chief
clerk.
Journal will show the message
from the house has been
received.
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Madam President, I am directed
to inform the Senate that the
House has passed House Bill 160
and request the concurrence of
the Senate, respectfully
Senator Peter Worth.
Thank you, Madam President.
Unanimous consent we go on our
business committee reports.
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 31 has had
it under consideration, reports
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
Senate Bill 31 do pass as
amended and the referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 162 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
the finance committee.
Sen a bill 170 do pass as
amended and the referred to the
Finance Committee.
Committee.
Senate Bill 194 do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 169 has had it under
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
Bill 169 do pass and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
submitted, Senator Carrie
Hamblin, chair. Senator Hamblin.
Madam President, I moved the
adoption of the committee
reports all 12 of them.
Those opposed,
Those oppose.
The eyes have it committee
report is adopted and the
journal will reflect that we
acted upon them individually.
Bill 33 has had it under
consideration, reports saying
with the recommendation that it
do not pass, but that Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill Conservation
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports?
That we vote on them with one
motion that the journal
reflected they were acted upon
individually.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
George Munoz, chair.
Senator Sindo.
Uh, uh, I move adoption of the
committee report. favorable
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
Reader to read.
Madam President, your education
committee, to whom has been
submitted, Senator William Peo's
chair
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
pass and then referred to the
finance committee. Senate Bill
345 do pass and thence referred
to the finance committee,
respectfully submitted Senator
Those opposed nay, the committee
report is adopted and the
journal will reflect they were
acted upon individually, the
reader to read.
Madam Chair, your rules
the youth and families of
southeastern New Mexico directs
the chief irk.
clerk to prepare suitable
documents to express.
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read all the committee
reports Certificate of
Certificate of appreciation
certificate number 7.
Certificate number 39.
Certificate number 40.
Certificate number 44.
Certificate number 45.
Senate Bill 167.
Reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the education
committee.
Senate Bill 417 do pass.
And thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Rules Committee, all those in
favor signify by saying I
opposeate committee report is
adopted and the journal will
reflect their acted upon
Has had it under consideration
and reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and thence referred
Oh, we're on adoption of a
favorable committee report. All
those in favor signified by
saying I.
Opposes the committee report is
adopted.
conservation committee to whom
has been referred Senate Bill
231 has had it under
consideration for same with
recommendation that it do pass
of the committee reports.
Oh, I and oh what is that
language?
Um
Signal opposition, the reader
will read all the committee
reports.
Senate Bill 240 do pass and
thence referred to the tax
Senter Bill 262.
Do not pass, but that Senate
conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 262
So.
Senate Bill 281 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
the judiciary Committee
Or on adoption of favorable
committee reports, all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Post no.
Uh, committee report is adopted
substitute for Senate Joint
Resolution 1 has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, respectfully submitted,
Senator George Munoz, chair.
general reflect that they were
acting upon individually
see no objection, the reader
treat all the reports 13 do
pass.
Senate Bill 112 do pass.
Respectfully submitted Senator
George Munoz, chair.
The eyes have it. The committee
report is adopted in the journal
will reflect their acted upon
individually. Senator Wirth,
thank you, Madam President,
Senate Bill 443 introduced by
Senator Hickey, an act relating
to insurance, amending the
Senate Bill 443 has been read
twice by titles or a printed
referred to the Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee,
thence to tax business and
the medical malpractice Act to
provide for a judge to determine
the amount of punitive damages
awarded to a plaintiff, Senate
Senate Bill 444. Senate Bill
445.
introduced by Senator Gonzalez,
an act relating to taxation,
removing the six-year limitation
Senate Bill 445.
Senate Bill 445 having been read
twice by titles or to printed
and referred to the Senate tax,
An act making an appropriation
to the Board of Regents of the
University of New Mexico for the
political science department to
conduct research, including
collecting and analyzing data
planning hearings or meetings
and city council hearings or
meetings conducted in the cities
of Santa Fe and Albuquerque in
fiscal year 2026. Senate bill.
and Public Affairs Committee,
thence to Senate Finance, Senate
Bill 446.
Senate Bill 447 introduced by
Senate Bill 447 had been read
twice by tires or printed and
referred to Senate Rules
Committee, thence to Senate
An act relating to taxation,
allowing employers with 50 or
fewer employees to elect to not
withhold those employees' wages
referred to the Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee the
to tax business and
transportation Senate Bill 448.
determination, providing
requirements for determining
determining venue in cases
involving medical malpractice,
amending the medical malpractice
damages awarded in medical
malpractice claims to be awarded
to the state.
Limiting attorney fees in
malpractice claims requiring the
superintendent of insurance to
intent of
Bringing the fund to solvency,
creating the patient safety
improvement fund making an
Judiciary, thence to Senate
Finance 449 Senate bill.
Senate Bill 450 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
450 have been read twice by
times or printed and referred to
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee, thence to Senate
Judiciary.
So that well,
450.
What
construction industry's division
of the regulation and licensing
department specifying minimum
building code requirements.
Senate Bill 451.
Business and Transportation
thence to judiciary, Senate Bill
451.
Senate Bill 452 introduced by
Senators Townsend, Lanier.
knowingly soliciting another
person who is not a United
States citizen to register to
vote or to vote in this state, a
4th degree felony providing that
Providing for a fine.
Senate Bill 452
Senate Bill 452 had been read
twice by title sort of printed
and referred to the Senate Rules
Thornton and Gallegos.
An act relating to elections
prohibiting the Secretary of
State or a county clerk from
States Senate Bill 453
An act relating to elections
prohibiting the Secretary of
State or a county clerk from
sending notifications of
eligibility or potential
eligibility to register to vote
in this state to persons who are
not citizens of the United
States Senate Bill 453453
haven't been read twice by
title, the sort of printed and
And Tobiasin.
An act relating to public
employees.
Changing age and service credit
requirements and calculations
been read twice by trial or are
printed referred to Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee the to Senate Finance,
Senate Bill 454.
practitioners to include
co-insurance paid by a patient.
Senate Bill 455 5 twice by
title, it's sort of printed and
Senate Bill 456 introduced by
Senator Cervantes, an act
relating to the legislature,
creating a permanent joint
Senate Bill 456 have married
twice by title, this order
printed referred to Senate Rules
Committee, thence to Senate
Finance Committee.
affirming the state's commitment
to protecting and preserving
Mount Taylor as a traditional
cultural property and oppose
uranium mining projects that
threatened Mount Taylor's
printed and referred to Senate
Rules Committee, thanks to
Senate Indian Rural Cultural
Affairs Committee, Senate
Memorial 11.
An act relating to workers'
compensation, increasing the
amount of money that can be
advanced by employers for
discovery costs, increasing the
How's the judiciary committee
substitute for House Bill 66.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House bill.
House
Judiciary Committee substitute
closed captioning Act requiring
places of public accommodation
that display television
programming to provide closed
captioning, providing a private
right of action.
I referred to Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, thence
to Senate Judiciary. House
Judiciary Committee substitute
amending the minimum wage Act to
prohibit employers from
deducting credit card fees or
costs from employee tips,
Committee thence to Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
House Bill 22.
House Bill 26 introduced by
political subdivisions of the
state or by nonprofit
corporations House Bill 26.
House Bill 26 have I read twice
House Bill 160 introduced by
representatives Lundstrom.
Johnson
Lujan
Lara
drivers to stop, look and listen
for other on track equipment in
addition to trains.
House Bill 160.
to Senate Judiciary, House Bill
160.
Senator Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent we go to our
business announcements and
miscellaneous
of hard work, uh, tomorrow,
Senator Maestas is hosting West
Side Day and because of that,
they're going to use the
chamber. We're gonna start at
11:30. So just for committee
chairs, now is the time to make
Madam President, so as the
leader mentioned tomorrow is
West Side Day. I wanna thank all
the staff and, and everyone uh
for their indulgence and
patience tomorrow there's gonna
chamber, uh, from 10 to 11, so
please join us for the town
hall. We wanna thank the finance
team that'll also be having
lunch in room 322 from 12 to 1
President, tomorrow we are all
Westiders.
Other announcements from
committees. Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam President. The
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We will
be meeting in Senate Judiciary.
I'm gonna say 4 o'clock now.
We'd say 3:30, but we're running
a little bit later on the floor
here, so we'll call it 4
o'clock. We really only have one
Thank you, uh, Senator Trujillo
thank you Madam President, the
Senate Finance Committee will be
meeting at 4 o'clock today. The
chair and the vice chair up
President, Senate Indian Rural
Cultural Affairs Committee will
be meeting at 10:00 a.m. in room
303 tomorrow.
Thank you,
Senator Stefaniks, thank you,
Thank you Madam Chair. I have a
few things. Uh, first, I would
like to move that we table
Senate Bill 410, which is my
mushroom bills out there and uh
we really want to go the legal,
uh, medical direction, not this
way, and so I would like to move
thank you. That was Senate Bill
40.
Thank you, Madam President, and
for, for all you new folks when
a bill is tabled on the Senate
floor, it is dead, dead. It
um, also, uh, tomorrow morning
at 8 o'clock in room 321, the
Friends of Israel caucus will be
meeting, um, I'm gonna grab some
donuts on the way in. So if you
several things, and so, uh, we'd
invite everyone.
Including you, Madam President,
to, to join us tomorrow, um.
we're, we, we passed 500 days
Monday.
That people have been held in
captivity by Hamas, but
yesterday something really got
The Bibus family.
They did that in November of
2023, the mother.
And a 9 month old and a 3 year
Was one of the places that I
visited in Kibbutz Na Oz.
And so really struck me
personally.
Because I had been right there,
The father was released a couple
come home.
He found out yesterday.
That he
Has no children anymore and he
has no wife.
A lot nicer to each other.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Sir Pope.
that serve in this chamber.
Senator Block, Senator Scher,
Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton, Senator
Brandt.
While we have our political
We take a similar oath in the
military that we do when we
enter this chamber.
But our oath is a little
different.
And so that's what this is
about.
People who are New Mexicans that
serve our nation who come home.
Or make New Mexico home.
When they pass, whether they
retired.
Whether they passed away in
service or not.
They deserve that honor.
Our veterans around the state.
That have passed away.
They do not have friends and
family.
No one to collect their remains,
no one to give them a service.
Cremated and given the honors.
At our national cemetery.
I've had the opportunity to
attend this event the last 4
years.
But I want to honor Senator
Pinto because at the last event
she was honored.
With this flag and she was
presented with this in the
rotunda and that's why we had to
step out.
Thank you, Madam President and
Senator Pope.
This event is very
Well, the year before, I think
was the highest amount of
Um, to pay my respects to those
that have served in all
capacities in every branch, men
and women.
It is a very emotional um
For those that have family
members in the military and
come from
I guess in that
Very consequential that we on
our respects to those that are
entering their 90s and 100s that
served in World War II.
younger veterans that went to
the other wars, you know, we
have these generations as they
go through and they're out there
and it's important that we do
what we need for them as much as
Thank you, Senator Pino.
All right. Any other
announcements or miscellaneous
she's been with me last year and
a couple of times now and we've
done a lot of work together and
one of the things that she was
interested in was the
grandfather ties that I wear.
that I be allowed to change my
tie right here on the floor.
Seeing no objection take it off.
So Madam President, now I am
officially Che.
All right.
So or worse.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
on that note, uh, unanimous
