Senator Campos.
Sanel center Figueroa.
Center Gallecos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Nava.
Senator
Santa Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scott
Center Cia Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
You do have a car, Mr.
President.
Thank you. I ask that everyone
please rise for the invocation
to be led today by our very own
to New Mexican flag to be led
today by Senator Katie Duhe.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, and to our staff and to
to help us if you will, through
uh today's Senate chamber
proceedings.
Uh, so as you take that moment
and you take a deep breath and
you relax a little bit.
Then let us think for a moment,
how are we going to reach the
top.
Are we all going to go our
separate ways.
It'll be used by the multitudes
for generations to come.
It's the same in our lives work.
We often seek to be recognized
decide how many trails we would
make to get to the top.
And just combined our efforts.
Enjoying the work we do.
And then together.
We got to the top.
Together.
Amen.
Uroliarbandera de unidos the
America
in the libidos.
You may be seated.
we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection. We are on that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Wirth.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you to our Senate deacon,
much, you know, your reference
to getting to the top and doing
so in a way when hopefully we
are still smiling when we get to
the top, but we're gonna do our
best.
But thank you always for
stepping in, and we appreciate
announcements for today.
Thank you, Senator Michael
Padilla, uh, good morning, Mr.
President, and I agree with the
leader of the Hills is gonna get
a little steeper now. So, um,
with that, Mr. President,
President. So with that, I ask
unanimous consent to excuse
senators Stephanics, Sadi Lopez,
Cervantes, Charlie Hamblin, and
Pope until they returned to the
miscellaneous. Anyone wishing to
introduce any other guests or
make an announcement, Senator
Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
we are going to have a joint
session today for Hispanic
Culture Day at the legislature,
Uh, once the House members come
over, we'll, uh, recess subject
to the call of the chair to go
over for the joint session and
then probably come back, we're,
we're not gonna wait for the
the legislature, also
Presbyterian Health Plan is
doing health screenings in the
mobile unit today until one
o'clock, so blood pressure,
him. It's also a sea day. Uh,
there's a certificate
today from 1 to 4 for
road conditions, and major
projects funding for new
members, also anyone is welcome
to attend.
And finally tomorrow in New
Mexico voters first.
is going to provide lunch to us
day to the right of you and the
left of me is my new good
friend, 11 year old Matteo Luke
Manzanares, who's a 5th grade
student at EJ Martinez
briefcase. He smiled when
saying, if he can't score goals,
he might as well score some
points in the court of law as an
attorney. After all, he loves
the.
Good debate. So we're ready to
was a youth Asea leader in the
youth Asey Leader program and a
proud alum of the class of 2022.
She's applying to various
universities around the country.
the Sanre de Criso Mountains
where she's an heir of the San
Cristobal de la Cerna land
grant. She and her family
benefit from the aseass that
come from the Crysobal uh
Cristo.
introduce the Lowrider Capital
of the World license plate bill
and today also happens to be
Lowrider Day. I was asked by a
reporter what is Lowrider Day
mean to me? And I said, being
the history, art and culture of
low riding and to promote low
riders that vital elements of
New Mexican culture and heritage
and joining me on my desk are
President, if you can help me
welcoming the lieutenant
Governor and Amelia to the
roundhouse.
Thank you, Senator Harami.
start, uh, Mr. President, body
that uh it is Hispanic culture
today, uh, Culture Day, and I
want to start with uh a little
bit of information on a company
company here in New Mexico, um,
the gentleman.
that brought this to us,
Alfredo, uh, was actually from
Mexico and he came to New Mexico
native New Mexican. Uh, she
works for, um, has worked for 18
years with Somner Wellness
products. She's marketing
director and business
uh, facilities, but Mr.
President, uh, we're looking
forward to the basketball game
that's coming up, and I hope
that we would use this before,
Sena is still on the floor.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Haley Finch.
If she would stand, uh, then we
have 4th grader Lincoln
Woolridge.
Zeke Finch
And Carson Joe Krugel.
embody the parent chaperones,
uh, Chelsea Layton.
Valerie Orozco.
Stephen and Joshua Workman.
people are the first time to the
Capitol like uh Senate to make
them welcome as they've come to
their capital, uh, in our next
group of leaders for our state.
Thank you, Mr. President. I have
uh the distinct honor to
introduce one of New Mexico's
another of New Mexico's finest
students, Annali Rivera, if she
could please stand to your left,
2025. Annali Rivera is a, uh, 15
year old sophomore class officer
in the Senate.
At uh La Cueva High School where
she's also a bilingual student
very smart. She's taking many
honors classes. Some of her
hobbies, uh, Mr. President and
fellow members of the Senate
are, she's the founder of the
book, Babes Club.
Vision, the DCVA National
Volleyball team member receiving
silver, gold, and bronze medals.
Awesome job there. She's also
part of Minana de Albuquerque,
but I hope she comes back she
wants to attend Geor.
Georgetown University and our,
our great nation's capital in
Washington and become a lawyer
here today, so I have the honor
to introduce Annelise Rivera,
please help me welcome our
here with me today, uh, we have
3 5th grade classes from
Montessori on the Rio Grande.
Can you guys stand up?
I said up and these are classes
uh they are Miss Savannah, Miss
with us, so members please help
me, uh, greet our uh welcome our
guests.
Senator Campos.
his guests. These people that
have been here before. They
continue to go ahead and
provide, if you will, much
information as we move forward
on a very important issue in
veteran and companion animal
services providing
transportation, food, access,
and veterinary, uh, care, these
individuals continue to be
and every day. So I'm gonna
introduce uh these individuals,
a couple of them have not only
their, their names but the
titles of the other two are just
as important and they're very
much involved.
Doctor Finney Coleman, who is
the New Mexico Veterans for
Pets. Mission to curb the, uh,
veterans suicide, uh, ratios and
LCS number 4722. And then also
with us, a person who, uh, I
feel at this point just really
doesn't need any introduction,
particularly, um.
Estella Hernandez is the
executive director of Emerge New
Mexico and as I introduce her, I
continue to be more involved
because she believes New Mexico
is made better by our
leadership, by her involvement,
and most importantly by us
working together so members of
the Senate, would you please
Thank you Senator Campos.
Seeing no further announcements,
uh, Senator Wirtz, we, we, I'll
paving day and there's a
certificate of recognition that
is going to be read on that,
Senator Galos.
Thank you, Senator War Senator
Caos Mr. President, floor
leader, just wondering if, uh,
Gegos. Senator Wirth, we have
this other one if you'd like to,
but I'll, I'll yield to you. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. We can
definitely do that. I'd yield
instead then to Senator Campos
for Aseia Day and a certificate
and have February 11th, 2025 be
recognized as a seca day in the
New Mexico State Senate, there's
gonna be.
quite a bit of activity
uh and this is the name that I
gave it Labanera de los
travajadores and anyone who has,
uh, ever been working the Asecas
that you just really have to
continue to, to wipe yourself
dry as you move forward. So with
that, uh, Mr. President, if I
may, I would like to ask, uh,
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature first session 2025.
The New Mexico State Senate does
generations aseass have
supported a way of life centered
around local agriculture and
customs of sharing water and
whereas aseques are a centuries
old form of water governance in
Aseka customs and traditions
regarding agriculture, seed
saving, irrigation practices,
and food preservation are
important aspects of the
cultural heritage of New Mexico
economy through local.
food production, and whereas
asea and community ditches
number over 700 in New Mexico
affirmed by laws enacted by the
state recognizing Ase as
political subdivisions and
enabling ase to have important
powers in local water
management.
policies, strengthening AzeA
governance and support funding
programs for Ase infrastructure
and whereas the New Mexico
Aseque Association was
an advisory body in state
government.
And whereas hydrological studies
by the Mexico Water Resources
Research Institute at New Mexico
whereas as water management is
complicated by long-term drought
and increasing demands for
water, Aseques will continue to
February 11, 2025 be recognized
as a second day in the Senate in
honor of the contributions of
Aseques to the history, culture,
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. President, and uh also
but uh whenever we get into
talking about aseca as we're
talking about cultura custombres
we're talking about errecia.
We're talking about,
uh, we'll just say it this way
continue to say that is life and
so as we move forward, whether
it be with our agriculture,
whether it be with everything
that we do with our own
assistance, the bottom line is
that they do. We've gone through
so many horrendous fires and
floods, people continue to get
out there.
Pala with their shovels and they
communities, but for others,
they're there at the forefront
of everything that happens when
it really comes to water. So
again, we applaud the people
this, but again, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, and I'll
have a few people to introduce
in a few minutes we want to
thank you for being there for us
and at this time, Mr. President,
Senator Campos for a secia day
and for the words that you
spoke, Mr. President, uh Sekis
are a significant part of Nestra
Cultura and Nuevo Mexico. It's
part of our heritage. It's part
used for centuries, representing
a deep rooted tradition of
shared water management.
And collaboration among uh
residents deeply entwined with
Bustos in the chamber with me
today who's on the rostrum. He
is with Santa Cruz Farms. He
named his farm after the land
granter said that his family has
been farming on for centuries
because Lalorona is my tia and I
need to make sure that the water
keeps flowing so that one day I
can find my primitos along one
of the aseass in northern New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Jarami.
day for our secus here in New
Mexico. Thank you Senator
Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr.
President, thank you, uh,
Senator Campos, um, as, uh, the
remember, you know, uh, the work
and the dedication that was done
by the late speaker Ben Luhan
and also the late Senator Carlos
Cisneros who dedicated so much
get a more solid footing and
funding, you know, to this
groups to just really assist
them.
And be more proficient, you
know, with their work. And uh
with that um Mr. President,
Campos, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I know, I don't know
if anyone else has anything else
to say. If not, I just have
guests to introduce.
Thank you, seeing no one else on
indicated, uh, beautiful words,
wonderful words on a wonderful
day for the people of our New
Mexico Aseques, as Senator
Jaramillo continues to uh
educate us when it comes to the
So sitting there uh at the uh
rostrum to your right, uh, Mr.
President, we have uh an
eloquent, uh, a legendary, uh,
person who continues to work on
land in Santa Cruz that has been
in his family for over 400
years. He's an officer of the
Concili of the New Mexico Aseque
Aso.
ci ation and president of his
System ditch Association with
over 40 aseass. He is owner of
Santa Cruz farm and greenhouses
and winner of the James Beard
Next we have Luciano Tapia.
Luciana Tapia is president of
the Cow Creek Regional Oseki
Association and member of the
Concili of the New Mexico Ase
Association.
Next we have an individual who
has decades of not only
experience but leadership, and
he continues with that same
forwardness, if you will, to
Trujillo, Mr. Harold Trujillo is
president and co-founder of the
New Mexico Aseque Association.
Which he has served for over 35
years. He is commissioner on
del valle demora with over 60 a
seca. Harold raises hay to
support the agricultural economy
of the Mora Valley and his own
uh of energy conservation.
Next we have Judy Torres, who is
vice chair of the New Mexico
she is actively involved in the
implementation of the Aveta
water rights settlement with
Taos Pueblos, and she is
actively involved in programs
because their backgrounds are
very important and valuable to
the future generations that we
will continue serving.
Darryl Madrid is vice president
Ase Association.
He was part of the team that
negotiated the water rights
settlement of O Wingy claims on
the Rio Chama. He is also
Senate would please join me in a
nice round of applause for these
individuals, and may I say, as
we continue, we're very proud of
the work that you do for the
water, the water that continues
Gallegos has his guests here for
asphalt paving day, so I yielded
to him for the certificate,
which is going to be read. Thank
you Sangos.
As president, can the reader
begin reading.
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature for session 2025.
The New Mexico state Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to February
infrastructure economy and
overall well-being of New Mexico
by constructing and maintaining
the roadways, highways, and
bridges that connect communities
goods and people fostering
economic growth and improving
the quality of life.
And whereas in Mexico's asphalt
contractors, suppliers, and
industry partners exemplify
practices that reduce carbon
emissions, conserve natural
resources and support New
Mexico's long term
infrastructure needs and whereas
the Department of Transportation
and performance and whereas the
hard work and dedication of the
individuals and organizations
within the asphalt industry
provides the foundation for a
February 11, 2025 as asphalt
payment pavement day marks an
opportunity to.
recognize the achievements and
ongoing efforts of the asphalt
economy and enhances the lives
of all New Mexico residents. Now
therefore be resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that recognition be
Mexico by recognizing February
11, 2025 as Asphalt payment day
in the Senate.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
Thank you, uh, San Diegos.
Mr. President, Bo, I just wanted
to stand and just give you a
little detail. This morning I
was at breakfast with the um
I was in the house, Speaker
Egoff always, he did a tour
around New Mexico and he talked
about jobs, jobs, jobs, and I
wanna tell you what these
is actually a 5th generation
construction Naphalt company.
And it's one of those things to
have that kind of heritage that
you go, you go back that far in
time, but to understand that
bridges, curves, gutters to give
us a long lasting value in our
infrastructure, uh, there in, in
New Mexico or in jail where we
Mexico can resolve that. All we
have to do is body is come up
with the funding and the drive
to be able to do that as you
cross the state you can see, uh,
we have contractors and
suppliers here and I wanted to
see if
Dan Lewis would stand, uh, Dan
is the, um,
association, but he gives an
understanding of what their
value is statewide. Uh we also
have, uh, Paul Apple and Paul's
industries all over the state.
They're looking forward to
helping us with some of our uh
infrastructure needs, uh, but
Mr. President, we also have in
Absolutely proceed. Thank you,
Mr. President. I just want to
acknowledge asphalt paving in
New Mexico. I have several
contractors in my district that
employ a lot of folks. They
Mexico as economic development
for us and I was unable to
attend the breakfast this
morning. I did contact Mr.
Lewis. I have a very important
meeting I have every Tuesday
morning that I can't.
cannot miss and that's why I
their work and dropping their
materials off this and that.
They're actually beautifying the
area in the communities where
they live as well so this is
something that's very important
in New Mexico and um it's not
lost on me that, uh, a couple of
for us today.
I yield to Senate Majority
Leader Peter Wortz to take us to
that next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. So
we're getting word the House is
a little behind schedule, so we
Senate Bill 30 that was read in
in Senate Bill 10, so it just
was read in as the wrong number
and just unanimous consent that
the record be corrected, so that
Senate Bill 30 Committee report
Senator, Senate Bill 30. It was
read in incorrectly as Senate
Bill 10, but the record just
needs to reflect that it's sent
30. OK, thank you. There's many
unanimous consent and request.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended, the journals show all
those present in this morning's
session are present in this
judiciary Committee. There's no
objection. It is so ordered.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. It now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m. The Senate will come
this afternoon session. He no
objection, it is so ordered.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
ask consent that the rules be
suspended. The records show that
the journal's been read in full
and approved subject to revision
We're in that order of business
committee reports the reader
will read.
Mr. President, your Judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 47.
Cervantes chair Senator messages
says there's several.
Thank
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflected that they
were acted upon individually.
Do pass
And thence referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes chair
the community report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 75 as
Thank you, Senator Shindo, I
believe there's some, there's
several as well. Oh, I moved out
from a committee report.
Senator, if we can do an
amended, uh, uh, motion on that.
There's several uh committee
reports.
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Thank you. The reader will read.
Senate Bill 135
do pass.
respectfully submitted Senator
George Munoz's chair.
I moved to the committee reports
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
journal reflect they acted upon
individually.
Senate Majority Floor leader
Peter Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go that our business.
Introduction of legislation. no
objection. We're in that order
Introduced by senators Brandt
Lanier Tobiasin and Woods.
An act making appropriations for
Public Affairs Committee then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 346.
Senate Bill 347 introduced by
senators Ramos Gallegos Scott.
Conscience Protection Act,
providing protections for health
care workers who declined to
participate in abortion or
abortion related services,
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 347.
Senate Bill 348 introduced by
Senate Bill 349 introduced by
349 349 having been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee, then Senate Finance
Committee Senate bill 349.
An act making an appropriation
to the healthcare authority to
address housing support needs
and administer a housing
stabilization program, Senate
Senate Bill 351 introduced by
senators Jaramillo Nava Brantley
and Sanchez.
correctional reentry workforce
development program Cen about
351351 haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the Senate tax
An act relating to medical
investigations, providing that
photographic images taken by a
state district or deputy medical
So about 352352 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
relating to search and rescue
emergency response, amending the
search and rescue Act.
Providing response protocols for
federal, state, or local
agencies when New Mexico search
and referred to the Senate
Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Committee then sent a
tax business transportation
committee at Senate Bill 353.
requiring the state to make
payments in lieu of taxes to
political subdivisions when
acquiring real property,
providing an exemption for the
Senate Bill 348348 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 348.
Santa Memorial 5 having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed, not referred to
committee to be placed on the
president's table, Senate
Memorial 5.
miscellaneous Senator Worth,
thank you, Mr. President. So we
are just waiting the house, I
think, is ready for us, but they
haven't sent anyone and I think
we're ready to wind down, so,
3 bills now there might
There might be a couple of
others, but uh we will do 3rd
reading on the floor tomorrow.
So with that I yield to other
committee chairs and members for
any announcements. Thank you.
I'd like to thank all the
2 announcements. Uh, first
Senate Education is meeting
tomorrow morning at 8:30 in room
311. Uh, we've got a fairly
robust agenda and, uh, floor
of those done, uh, through the
start of the floor session
tomorrow. But those bills are
Padilla souls, Maestas,
Stewarts.
Gonzalez and Pope that are on
stickers from the New Mexico,
the Southwest, New Mexico
cannabis industry, which is
sponsored the stickers that you
have here, uh, Headspace is one
of products out of that doing
quite well with good solid
middle class jobs also delivered
to your offices this morning.
were bags that do have cannabis
Cannabis Association for the
goodie bags that were delivered
to your offices today as well as
for the various stickers. Uh,
there was conversations
yesterday about whether cheese
Mr. President, just a question,
uh, Senator Souls was talking
about the cannabis stickers,
just wondering if they're
scratch and sniff.
See no further announcements,
Senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. So there is a joint
session for Hispanic Culture Day
and I think now that we're not
at 2, but I'm sure they'll
coordinate with the remarks of
the joint session, so I just
encourage everyone to head over
for the joint session and with
that, uh, unanimous consensus, I
believe there's.
will meet 30 minutes after the
joint session ends.
Yes, I'm sure.
Thank you, Senator. See no
further announcements, Senator
there, uh, with you, Mr.
President, uh, to preside over
that joint session. So unanimous
consent.
Yeah, we're coming right now,
