Saw this on the Cabinet
secretary at Children, Youth and
Families Department. I've been
in my role about a year
unofficially and about five
months prior to that I served as
the governor's chief operating
officer since the beginning of
her administration. I was born
and raised in Santa Fe. And so,
um, I stayed here and just
really worked to make this a
better community. Um
Let's see. Why Why am I doing
this? Um, well, I'm doing this
because I feel it's super. You
know, we can work together. Um,
I agree with Senator Lopez.
There needs to be that
collaboration and that openness
so that we can find, um, as she
said the department over the
years, but I think really
building a strong foundation so
that regardless of who sits in
my position, or who sits on the
fourth floor of the governor's
office, CYFD has the foundation
that they access really means
and where their next meal is.
From or whether, or, you know,
just kids can be kids in New
Mexico, and that's really what I
wanna see happen at that
department is really gonna be
critical to help move the needle
on where we need things to be
And what I'd like to see. Come
out of this is really an
understanding. Um, that we're
all in the schools. We're all
trying to make a better New
Mexico for kids. I think we all
just have and if we can really
find
One path that we can all
And next time I like actually is
representative Eleanor Chavez,
who was not able to join us
today because of a death in the
family, but she will be serving
on this task force.
And so then I think Barbara you
were after representative
Chavez.
Thank you, everybody. My name is
Barbara Luna Tedrow. And I am
from Farmington, New Mexico,
Originally born and raised in
Belen. That's where my husband
and I are from and our family is
still all down there, But we've
been in the Farmington area
since the year 2000.
Um, I am a licensed childcare
provider I own and operate
nationally accredited childcare
centers. I started in the year
2000 with 60 Children and seven
teachers and I now have over 100
and 25 staff and 700 Children
were just opening up our fifth
site. Um, I have dedicated my
life, Um to helping Children.
Um, it's been in the early
childhood realm. Um, When I
started, I noticed that there
was not a whole lot of advocacy
happening. So in the year 2002 I
forged along with the New Mexico
childcare and education.
Association, um, joined and
we've helped to have a lot we've
helped to pass a lot of great
legislation, including, um, the
early childhood Senate Bill 22,
which formed the department.
Um
Uh, I also served when we formed
through legislation. The early
learning Advisory Council. Um, I
served on that governor
appointed position for 12 years.
I served eight years under
Governor Susana Martinez. And
four years under, Um Governor
Lujan. Grisham and I served as
the chair and our role was to
help guide legislation and
anything and everything that had
to do with prenatal to five
years old, Um, for Children, um,
help helping to deal with
policy. Um, budgets, anything
and everything that was an ex
Role, and I enjoyed my time
doing that, Um, the reason why
I'm here is because, um, I've
spent my life um, wanting to
help Children. Um, my husband is
a district attorney. He's done
it for 16 years. We spent our
life um and our livelihoods,
helping Children and families
and that's what we do so when
this opportunity came up and
representative Rodman Toya
called me and asked me, Of
course, he already knew the
answer. He said, Barbara, I
already know the answer, and I
put your name in, he said. I
just needed to call and tell you
that I did that.
So, um, I'm glad that, um he
sees me that way and that he
sees that I can be a positive
voice. What I hope to see happen
is I hope to bring real life
examples of what is happening to
the boots on the ground. I am
dealing with these families and
we when we have families coming
to my center and they come and I
see the problems and we're
mandated reporters, it's not
just that it's also about
helping the families through all
of the systems, one of the best
things we did in New Mexico was
when we we took early childhood
out of
ID, and we put it into its own
entity because there were so
many silos that we were building
up and we needed to bring it
together so that we could have a
positive voice, and that's what
I
It's Senator Lopez your next
Um again. Good morning. Linda
Lopez State Senator District 11,
which is so southwest Quadrant
of Brunell County, which is part
City and part county.
I've been in the Legislature for
a bit.
And
Uh, Marilyn Beck. I am the
founder and executive director
of New Mexico Child First
Network. We are dedicated to
improving the lives of Children
in foster care and empowering
those who serve them. I am from
Albuquerque. Um, not born, but
moved when I was 10 months old,
So native New Mexican, um,
graduated UN M. Um and I'm a
former foster parent who very
quickly learned that with all my
experience, I worked for a PS,
the governor of the Legislature
With all my experience in 2018.
I realized how broken CYFD was,
um
I've been watching the Kevin
settlement agreement for years.
Um, unfortunately, um, a lot has
changed. And, um, I do think
that the state of child welfare
today is worse off than it was
six years ago. So I'm grateful
for everyone here working in
this field to make it better and
The three things I always say.
Why am I here is that solutions
exist.
They do so just period solutions
exist. Um, our kids are not OK.
Um, we know that this weekend
kids will be sleeping in the
offices and they shouldn't be.
And then, um
At the very end, we can do
better and our Children,
Chavez you next. Thank you.
Judge Emilio Chavez. I'm the
chief judge in the, um I'm
originally from Albuquerque. My
family origins. Um, I handle all
of the abuse and neglect cases.
Um, in Taos County. Uh, I was
that background. Why I'm the
judiciary is representative.
Um, I, I think importantly,
though, kind we see when
You know some of the benefits
some of the the great things of
the system, but also, um, where
there are are let down the, uh
To the court process. I'll tell
you guys being frank there.
They're the most difficult cases
that I hear. I hear a
termination of parental rights
or some of the other things that
can happen within the child
welfare system. Um, so sometimes
there, there's some of the most
rewarding when you see progress
when you see change when you see
help through the system, most
heartbreaking where I may have a
poker face in court, but I'm
crying on the inside on some of
the cases that I hear through
the child welfare system, so I
hope to lend a voice from the
judiciary giving that you guys
are aware.
Collectively in the background.
I'm
Getting all the important to
distill the things that I so I.
I feel a lot of pressure in the
judiciary's representative, but
I'm glad to be here, Rachel.
It's amazing, actually to, uh
some of the background and
reason. Um and Jessie, you may
be up next if you'd be willing
to introduce yourself.
Thank you. My name is Jessie
Clifton. I'm an attorney at
disability rights. New Mexico.
Uh, I represent the community
from New Mexico or from
Albuquerque, I suppose, although
disability rights in Mexico is a
statewide entity.
Um, I'm here in part because the
the Senate Memorial five calls
for representative from the
Kevin
Plaintiffs implementation Team
Disability rights. New Mexico
was a named plaintiff, an
organizational plaintiff in that
lawsuit and the settlement.
And, um, our team. Our
representative here for this
committee.
And I appreciate the opportunity
to work with all of you.
Uh, of course. More importantly,
uh,
The the solutions that we're
working towards to improve the
outcomes for Children, the lives
of Children in Mexico as the
most important reason to be
here, and I again appreciate
that opportunity.
Uh, my hope is that we can have,
uh, some open difficult
conversations that, um
Again, hopefully lead to, uh,
traction that improves
performance towards the
obligations the state has made
under the settlement agreement.
And, um and of course, the
downstream effect.
Hi. Good morning, everyone. My
name is Robert Chavez. I'm the
CEO of YD. I youth development
incorporated, Um, we partner
with families to help them
improve lives and three basic
service areas. Early childhood
home, visiting and a large We
also have a prevention
Intervention Be, um, we have
about 500, a little over 500
employees in the counties that
we serve throughout New Mexico.
Um
Who I am or who I am. I'm also
I'm from Albuquerque, New
Mexico, a small southern
community from East Island still
live there. Family founded that
community H why I'm here and I'm
back up. I also said on the new
Me counseling therapy. Why I'm
here is because, you know being
raised. We study us rich in
community rich in culture. Um,
but there's there was also
growing on a lot of different,
um non so positive things in our
community, however, being able
to work through those dissipated
young as a young teen kept me
away from going
The route. Many of my peers went
and that are probably still
incarcerated. Um, and where I
was able to get my education and
fortunate to have a, um,
experience in private sector,
state government and now running
why I'm here in the hope I have
is because of that foundation of
having work. I do right now. The
work I did before I came here. I
started as with you. I have a
lot of, um, experience that I
hope that will contribute to
input because, uh, as many of
you know such alternate input,
uh
Impact the Children and families
in New Mexico and I think up
next, uh, is Nick I believe
you're joining us remotely,
Nick, if you can hear us, would
you be willing to introduce
yourself?
Sure. Can you hear me, OK?
We can hear you. Great. Hello,
everyone. My name is Nicholas
Nati Bear. I'm a professor in
the Department of Criminal
Justice at New Mexico State
University. So I'm calling in
from Las Cruces where I reside,
Uh, I specialize in, uh, human
rights. And so I, I, uh,
research and and, um, teach in
human rights is including, uh,
international rights of
Children. And I'm also a foster.
Uh, me and my wife are fast
foster family home. And so the
reason why I'm here is, um we
haven't been a foster
For that long. We did experience
some of the positives of working
with CYFD and other agencies.
and a lot of other areas that
need improvement.
And, uh, we learned quickly that
what we saw were the
shortcomings within the system
was not unique to us that other
foster families experience
similar issues. So I'm here to
to lend a voice. Not just, um,
from the human rights
background but also our our
experiences as a foster home.
Also to give voice to southern
New Mexico as well. Uh, the
unique problems in rural areas
in this region are unique and
different. So I want to make
sure that that is, uh vocalized,
Uh, my hope, uh, actually is
that we can approach this, Um
Uh, this task force, uh,
thinking that innovation is
needed across the board, uh,
thinking that we can have that
it is possible to have sweeping
child reform.
A lot of times, people always
talk that child welfare systems
are are near to overhaul
everywhere. Um, but I think, uh,
in New Mexico, I'm hoping that
we can. Actually the third thing
is take risks to to really
improve it for the lives of the
Children. Thank you.
Thank you, Nick. Um, thank ya.
Europe up next, and I know you
and Mia are together. Um, if you
can hear us and are able to
share would you be willing to
introduce yourself?
Um, yeah. So we're not able to
hear you. I don't know if you
might be on mute if you can send
us a note in the chat that might
work, too.
Oh, we are trying
Now
This one. Yeah.
We were able to hear you.
If you wanna
Share a little more.
Um, Mia and Yaz were still
having a little bit of a hard
time.
Hearing you
But I might suggest is let's hop
to the next person and then if
you're able to get yourself
working, just start talking, and
if we can hear you, we will
pause. Whoever is introducing
themselves and come back to you,
Uh, me and ya.
Um So, Nick, I think you would
be next on our list. But let's
pause if we hear their voices
come in.
I born and raised been up there
about 17 years now.
Um, background a little bit
about me. Um, after serving in
the military
And then I went to work for the
state and worked, uh, 29 years.
18 worked with CYFD on juvenile
probation with the last nine
years at CYFD have been the
deputy director for field
services. And what that meant is
I oversaw the juvenile probation
years.
Um, I currently serve as a
governor appointee to the
Juvenile Justice Advisory
Committee.
Um, which is exactly what it
sounds like. It's advisory to
the secretary, um, to the
Legislature to the governor
since I've been there for about
a year and currently chair of
the, uh, legislative
subcomittee, So we're also
always looking at, you know
different things that might
improve conditions for youth in
New Mexico related to juvenile
justice.
I'm also part of the NE Casey
Foundation. Applied Leadership
kind of appears from all around
the country in different roles.
We have judges. We have
prosecutors, public defenders.
Um, we come together a couple
times a year to really just talk
through, Um, juvenile justice
issues that everybody's seen
across the countries is not very
unique in the level of violence
that that we're seeing here.
Many states are dealing with
that same thing and struggling
to find really good answers. I
just got back from Baltimore
last week. Why I'm here. I I'm
very honored to be asked
By the LSC to be a part of this.
I think I came to know, um
director so many years of
working when I was at the doing
the juvenile justice work, Uh,
Trying to trying to improve
conditions for you throughout
New Mexico. Sometimes it's new
policy change. Sometimes it's
through Supreme Court rule, or
sometimes it was through
legislative change, and we just
strove to try to in country
Oftentimes that was JD I, But
that's not the only animal out
there or how you do juvenile
justice. So, um, I just got I
spent my career doing that. Um,
since I've retired, which was in
October of 2021. I've continued
to be interested in the
legislative process here, you
know, trying to work with
different legislators. Uh, I've
just
You know, recommending changes
to existing bills that are out
there. Two years ago, we were
able to raise the minimum age of
detention, which was which is a
huge win. And there's other
things. Of course I'm interested
in so I I'm one of those rare
birds that like spending time up
here at the Legislature, a lot
of my peers when I would see
wife do they like you go ahead
and do that I? I don't I don't
like sitting in front of
comedies, but it is it just what
I'm hoping for is similar to
come up with a really good
solutions for improvements to
the system. I mean, I been there
as long as I was.
Years. See my share of you know,
governors and secretaries and
and directors and and and
different things that seem the
changes that have come and had a
really good opportunity while I
was there working across all
divisions, so I'm pretty
comfortable and you know whether
it's behavioral, health or
protective services or juvenile
justice. You know, I had
opportunities to work through,
Um, situations before the
pandemic. Certainly through the
pandemic. I mean, deputy
secretary of Valerie and I spent
many long nights working
together on different issues.
That that came up and so I think
I bring just kind of a a breadth
of knowledge about it. Like I
said, not just focus on juvenile
justice. I think, Mia and ya I
saw you, uh, come back into the
meeting. Do you wanna try coming
off mute again and introducing
yourself?
Um me. I think we can't hear
you.
You try switching your mic
again?
There was a second day where we
could hear you last time.
Is the
Microphone that worked. Oh, we
got it. Don't change anything
You can Sorry. Hi. My name is
Maria del Carmen. Um, you guys
can call me Mia. I'm the youth
representative. Um,
Unfortunately, Y could not be
here this morning. He's not
feeling very well. But he, of
course has high and he wanted me
to pass along How grateful we
are that we were chosen for this
opportunity to come here and
share our lived experiences with
you guys. Um, both Yaz and I
have had
Different experiences in the
systems to different extents.
But as we both gotten older, um
both of us are dedicated a lot
of time in our personal lives
and professionally in trying to
Use the things that we saw and
things that we experienced
ourselves and things that we
continue to see when we speak to
other young people, Um about
things that we might need
changed or want changed and
I don't know. We were both just
very grateful to have the
opportunity to come and maybe
help you guys with the things
that we've seen and the things
that we've experienced, So thank
you so much.
Yeah. Thank you so much. I
think, Carol, you are rounding
out our introductions.
Good morning, Spider. I live in
outlived a lot of places in this
country. I'm a native Angelino
South.
I'm a career child welfare
professional.
I started at 21 spin.
Uh, but I've had the opportunity
to do direct service. I was the
associate commissioner for the
Children's Bureau and had
oversight of all travels and the
aging out sitting foster care.
So while I'm not local,
historically, what I do bring is
a broad perspective around the
design that I hope will inform
discussions. Uh, I'm delighted
to be invited.
Um, if you ask me why I'm here.
One. I was invited, but two I
cannot, um the final thing that
I would say.
Is that I hope in these
deliberations
We will absolutely should
We can tinker with systems. But
if we don't keep anchored to the
experience and to get it, right
So you know, I believe there are
lots of structural
opportunities, but kids, thank
you so much for the
introduction. I wanna make sure
a few other folks in the room
who are supporting this task
force introduce themselves. Um,
so you know, sort of some of
those that are working in
support of you all. I wondered,
Um, Nathan, John. And then Joe,
if you might just, uh, be
willing to quickly introduce
yourselves.
Uh, hi, everybody. My name is
Nathan Ekberg. Um, I'm back here
kind of monitoring the
technology that function and
everything like that. Um, my
apologies to those on teams of
the audio is still choppy. Um,
I'm pretty sure you can hear.
It's just a little
A little off. Um, I do recommend
you turn on your closed
captioning because that seems to
be picking up.
Uh, everybody's voice is fairly
well.
Um
So I've been a program
evaluator. Well, I was a program
evaluator with LFC for about 10
years A little over 10 years now
I've transferred over to human
services and doing a lot of work
or continuing a lot of the work
that I've done. Um, on
childhood, Uh, topics, So I've,
uh, done a lot of long term.
Uh, reports on, um, child
welfare welfare issue years and
a lot of, uh, policy changes.
I'm excited to be working with
this task force is to try to get
more of those ideas that we've
kind of collected from across
the state from you all as I
think that's it.
Uh, good morning, everybody. Uh,
my name is John Courtney I'm
deputy director at LFC. I just
started my 14th year at LFC. I
worked at, uh, actually a
protective services for three
years. Prior to that.
Uh, originally from Espanola.
Um, And the reason I'm here is
because, you know, I, I believe
we You all can make a
difference, uh, to director
Sallie's point
This task force is pretty
uniquely positioned.
Um, and in a position that I
haven't over the last
20 years in New Mexico.
You know, we've got, um,
fortunate to have Secretary
Casados here, joining us today.
And, um you know all these great
experts. And then, as Charles
mentioned a kind of a direct
line to their subcomittee
Um, so I have a lot of optimism
about the work that'll
It'll happen here and looking
for right, Joe, and if you're
out there and can hear us, would
you be willing to just introduce
yourself? Because you you will
be joining us later in the
meeting, but want to make sure
folks know who you are and how
you're helping us out.
Great. Thanks so much. Rachel.
Hi, everybody. Great to great to
meet folks. Great to hear from
folks and, um, yeah. My name is
Joe Rip some. I'm the director
of child welfare and juvenile
justice policy with the Annie E
Casey Foundation been in this
role for a little less than a
year at this point. Um, Before
this, I've held leadership roles
in a few different state
systems. Um, my immediate past
rolls with the state of New
Hampshire, leading their
division for Children, youth and
families.
Where I was responsible for
overseeing their child welfare
and juvenile justice system for
the past. About six years, Um,
and we also built out a new
Children's system of care for
Children's behavioral health.
uh, where previously we actually
didn't have any Children's
behavioral health care services.
We had kind of an adult system
that would sometimes serve a
child.
And, uh, before that I spent
nearly a decade in the state of
New Jersey, helping leave their
child welfare and Children's
behavioral health care systems.
And, um, uh, yeah, just grateful
to, uh, have the opportunity to
help you all think through this
and have been working with the,
uh, the nonpartisan staff here
to think through kind of the arc
of learning over the next number
of months, and we'll be speaking
a little bit later this morning
about, um
Uh, you know some of the
national trends and some of the
some of what we're seeing
aligned with what? What? I think
you'll be hearing from other
folks over the next number of
months, so hopefully that'll
give people a a nice framework.
Uh, for thinking, going forward,
and thank you all for having me.
Right. Thank you so much, Joe.
Um I'm gonna go back to sharing
my screen. All right. Go for it.
Charles, can we have Secretary
Casados introduce her team that
she's head here too? Absolutely.
Yes. Um, I would like to
introduce, um, your team, we
would appreciate it. Thank you
very much. I appreciate that. I
think they'll be working a lot
with this committee so helpful
for them to know who they are.
So I have Valerie Sandoval, who
is my deputy secretary
overseeing protective services
and
Juvenile justice.
I have. Kathy Phoenix Doyle,
Deputy secretary O.
Next time I have just
Next to him. I have Andrew
Kubinski. Who is my public
behind there is Cindy Montoya,
who is director
And we had disappeared to, But,
um Heather, also there will be
the team that probably you'll
have. You can put a face and a
name together. So thank you.
Anything else, Charles? All
right. Um, so that is our group.
Thank you all before we move
into kind of the next, um, piece
of our agenda. I just wanna
acknowledge the deep expertise
that you every single one of you
brings the perspectives you are
to share and you and thank you
for the willingness to serve in
this way. Um, we're really
grateful for that.
So the way we're gonna spend the
rest of our morning. Um I'm
gonna walk us through. What was
the charge for the task force?
I'm gonna share just a an
overview of the child welfare
system in our state as we get
into that portion for some of
you, Um this is in no way new
information. You all could
probably give this presentation.
Um, but our hope is that we do
enter the conversation with just
an evenness and some shared
information about our system,
both in terms of numbers, um,
and how it's organized.
We'll turn it over to the
secretary, Um, to share some
perspective about what you see
in terms of challenges and
opportunities, Then we'll have
some time for questions and
we'll take a break. So we're
gonna plan to take a break
around 1035 and then at 1045
Joe, who introduced himself is
gonna come on and kind of give
us a picture of some of, uh,
ways that other states have
addressed similar challenges to
kind of lay the groundwork for
our work. Um, I will note that
that may mean this meeting feels
less
Like conversation among the task
force and more information
sharing or hope is that we sort
of just set the stage so people
have some shared information
about, um, our state because you
are coming from different
perspectives. Um, and then we'll
be really focused on kind of
conversation in our next
meetings. Nathan, You sent me a
text, Which makes me think
Something's going wrong. Um,
minimize the little box. OK, let
OK, Got it. All right, so moving
on with our time. So, um, what
you all see, in front of you is
language straight from, um, the
Senate memorial. Um,
specifically, the memorial names
that this task force will focus
on the topics that are in front
of you in the screen. Um, some
of it is related to CYFD. Um,
and the organization of the
agency.
The bill names, um, focused on
implementation of differential
response, which is an
alternative response to in
investigation and removal of
Children. Um, the bill names
focus. I'm sorry. I say, be the
memorial, um, focused on the
needs and gaps when it comes to
services in our system for
Children and families, um, to
talk about workforce related to
our system, how to maximize
federal money? Um, what a
juvenile justice system should
look like an equity
considerations so
What we have done for this task
force is we're going to map
these topics to meetings and do
a deep dive on each of them, Um,
for our meetings, and then the
memorial specifically notes that
you all are to make
recommendations to the
Legislature By November of this
year. I imagine 10 Lopez that is
by design because you know the
calendar and you know that
recommendations by November
position, Um, the Finance
Committee to incorporate
recommendations into budget and
then for the Legislature when
meeting in
Bring to consider potential
changes to the law. Um, anything
you would add tender to Lopez
about the charge for this group.
Um, just a quick mention, as I
hope we have a dialogue an
opportunity for us to all talk,
because it's not just here to to
be thrown information.
But I'm also hoping that we'll
have an opportunity within, uh,
the time frame. Um
Allowed or what we've put
together here for the for the
task force to be able to talk to
each other.
Um, cause I think that's that's
part of the intent.
That is right. Um, I will note
today We may do a little bit
more information sharing. Um,
but hope that as we I've pulled
up our schedule. What we've done
is we have mapped topics to
different meetings. So you all
kind of know when are we gonna
hit on a topic and my hope is
that, um you know one if you are
someone on this task force, who
thinks you have information, you
want to make sure everyone looks
at and sees related to this
topic. If you think there's
someone we should bring into the
conversation, please let me
know. Um as we're planning for
that time and our hope and
structure
All of our future meetings will
be some time for information
sharing and then a good focused
amount of time for you all to
discuss what you see in terms of
perspectives and then also
potential recommendations. So we
will have some time today for a
conversation and our intention
with the future meetings is
there's a lot more of that. Um,
and this after we kind of do our
orienting
Right. So what I'm gonna
transition now to is just giving
you some big picture information
about how the system is
performing, Um, how it works,
how the money flows. Um, and
then I'll turn over Secretary
Quesada. If you want to share
any perspective from what you
see, in part, um, And as I do
this transition into talking
about statistics, when I want to
first acknowledge is when I put
these numbers out on the screen
for you all just an awareness
that those numbers reflect real
people, Children and families.
Um, because they are, they are
sometimes hard number
To see. Um So the first thing I
wanted to share with you all is,
um we're gonna dive right into
data around child maltreatment
in our state. This is a federal
definition.
And measures. Uh, Children who
have experienced, uh, kind of
validated and neglect or abuse
and in New Mexico, our rate is
significantly higher than the
national average and has been
for some time. But when you dive
into those numbers around child
maltreatment, what you'll see is
the biggest chunk of them and
according to the different
federal definitions are actually
Children that have experienced
neglect. And I imagine, um, what
I could have done is layer in a
slide when it comes to aces or
state different, challenging
factor.
That likely contribute to all of
those statistics. Things like
poverty and food, insecurity and
things like that. But these are
kind of our our state's rate of,
uh, Children experiencing
maltreatment.
We also in our state tend to
have a higher rate than the
national average of Children who
experience repeat maltreatment,
So those are Children who have,
um sort of verified maltreatment
and then experience that again
within one year.
So that and you will see again
that this has been a trend that
has persisted over time. It's
not unique to the moment we are
in
And
Also call out another few, uh,
statistics for you all to know,
related to the experiences of
Children in our state. So in
that data that's collected, um
by the federal government. We
know that the state's child
fatality rate is also
significantly higher than the
national average. Um, the most
recent year where we have, um,
sort of a national comparison
data is 2022, and at that time
the child fatality rate in New
Mexico was 4.1 per 100,000 again
in that federal data.
One of the things that we see,
Um and it is collected are risk
factors that those Children
experience in their lives. Um,
and what we know in New Mexico
is there are a large share of
Children who have caregiver risk
factors connected to substance
use, and so we know that also is
a persistent challenge in our
state and contributes to some of
the statistics that I just
mentioned.
Um, so that's kind of some some
key data around, um, really
challenging child experiences.
When it comes to how many
Children are we talking about
that formally enter the child
welfare system. You can see that
trend over time, and there are
about I feel like COFD team. You
could hop in and correct me. Um,
but I think the reason most
recent data we have is it's just
around 2000 Children. Um, that
number had dropped to around
1700 several years ago. It went
down during the pandemic, and
you can see in the chart that it
has ticked up somewhat over
time. So we do have a few
Children in in our system, but
the number is about 2000. I know
Doctor Spider you mentioned to
me that number is not very big.
Um, when it comes to could we
move the needle? Um, and make an
impact for that number.
And also a number for you all to
keep in mind. Um, our resource
families, So we're we're at the
very end of the the system for
Children who actually placed CFD
custody. But there are just
about 1000 resource families or
foster families and in our
state, so those are just some
key when you're when we're
thinking about how many people
are we talking about here? Um,
Those are some key data points
for them, and we will talk a lot
about, um, the child welfare
system workforce and so I wanted
to just share
Just some high level information
about what that looks like This
is, um information about how
many people are working in
protective services
specifically.
Um And I imagine Joe will share
when he, um, gives a
presentation later. Um, but some
trends you all will know when it
comes to, um folks working in
protective services the state
has made increased investments
in personnel. Um, for for that
function over time. You can see
that in the first chart, but we
saw or have seen is that the
number of people filling those
roles actually declined over
time, though it it's ticking up
in the last year, and so, um
You know, we are not alone when
it comes to challenges related
to workforce. Um, but it is a
challenge in our state for you
all to wrestle with.
Um, on the next chart. You can
see. Um this state is a few
months old. Um, but just what
case for caseloads look like
when it comes to protective
services in our state, um and
actually, one of the things
you'll notice in the aggregate.
We're sort of doing OK when it
comes to a case workers who are
working in investigations and
placement that were not yet
meeting key load standards when
it comes to permanency planning,
though, I know um, Secretary you
You may know that that is in the
aggregate, and there are
certainly pockets in the plate
in the state.
Individual case workers or
geographies where those those
caseloads are different. Um and
I know
Um, that really matters when it
comes to the experience of
Children and families that
interact with our system.
Um And then finally, we
experienced challenges when it
comes to turnover, Um, among
people who are working in those
roles again. We are not unique
in New Mexico that is a
challenge nationally. Um, but it
is one that we face and you can
see that trend over time. Um,
where in the most recent year
it's about 32% of all of all of
the protective services workers
in our state turnover within a
year, And so, um, that is a
challenge for you all to kind of
kind of wrestle with, um and
Also just for you all to to keep
in mind. Um you know, CYFD and
New Mexico have really actually
been a leader in juvenile
justice reform over time. A
leader in nationally in
implementing kind of evidence
based practices, um, to improve
outcomes for young people in the
juvenile justice system. I know,
Charles. I think you talk about
when you were doing evaluations
in this area. I'm not gonna say
how long ago because one I don't
know, but you don't wanna date
you. Um I think the number at
one time was we were
incarcerating something like
500.
Young people. Is that right? Um
in our state? Um, I know with
the work of some of you all. In
fact, we implemented some really
good research based reform and
have seen that number decline
significantly over time. Um, but
the number is now around 70 or
80 young people who are
incarcerated and secure
facilities so include this
number to put in context for you
all because we we have, uh,
juvenile justice. That's one of
the charges for this task force.
There's some high level
statistics about kind of how
many people are we talking about
how the system doing?
Now, this next quick overview,
we'll talk about how the system
is organized and again for some
of you all. This is your day to
day job, but we wanna make sure
everyone kind of has an evenness
of information. Um, and so there
are a variety of state agencies
who are involved in preventing
and intervening when it comes to
child maltreatment, and so at
the population level, we've got
a lot of agencies that work
directly with families. Um, I
think maybe maybe the the best
metaphor here is these are like
your primary care doctor. The
the people who are
At the population level. They're
getting the checkup. So our
early childhood care and
education Department that's
charged in responsible with
child care assistance or home
visiting public education
Department that works directly
on education, the healthcare
authority that provides a lot of
system wide services for
families that include things
like healthcare coverage. The
Medicaid program, income support
or food assistance.
As we move kind of down the
continuum of families, Uh,
continuum of services or state
offers. Um, there. There are
agencies that have a kind of a
more targeted approach for
families that may have risk
factors. Some of those programs
live at the health care
authority as well. Um
Uh, CD. Early childhood also
operates some programs that are
more targeted to families. Um,
this might be kind of your
specialist care if we're
following kind of that metaphor
with healthcare. Um And then we
have, um CAFT is really
positioned to intervene when
families are in crisis. Um, And
so that is, um
To some extent where this task
force is focused, but wanted to
make sure and acknowledge that
there are a variety of other
systems that are operating at
different levels to prevent, um,
child abuse, neglect and
maltreatment and support
families that operate in our
state.
Um, And then once a child
maltreatment has actually
occurred, there are still a
variety of agencies that are
involved in that process. And so
I wanna make sure and and and
note that there are interactions
between all of these state
agencies that are working kind
of want A A family is in sort of
the emergency room or crisis
situation. Um, and so we have
the Department of public Safety
that officially has the legal
authority to remove Children.
Yeah, the Children's court and
judges that make ultimate
decision.
Um about abuse and neglect and
whether a child can be safely
placed at home. We have the
healthcare authority. I feel
like, uh, directors Le will
often mention you know, this is
where a lot of the money sits
when it comes to supporting
youth in foster care,
particularly through the
Medicaid program and providing
services, including behavioral
health to to Children and
families. Um, and then we have
the office of Family
representation and advocacy also
known as of R that provides
legal representation for
Children and families engaged in
the CYFD.
Done.
We share and acknowledge that
there are a variety of agencies
that are involved and have to
work together. Um, when it comes
to improving outcomes for kids
and families,
Um And so now, I'm just quickly.
Some of you may I don't know.
Pull, pull up statute regularly
and remind yourself the role of
UFD. Some of you may have never
done that so quickly. I'm gonna
run through. What does the law
say? Um, our child welfare
agency is positioned to do, um,
so in statute, Actually, there
are six divisions within CYFD
and II. I think currently not
all of them kind of have the
same title or organized quite in
this way. But technically in
statute, there are six
divisions.
And, uh, this is what they are.
and the secret is empowered to
organize the department and
divisions and
To improve efficiency and
operations.
Um
I pull up the original
statutory authority of CYFD to
sort of highlight When C was
created, there was a real
emphasis and focus on prevention
and support for families. Um,
that actually is codified in
statute. In addition to some of
the other things that the
And and I'm gonna give you a
quick overview of history to
sort of How has the department
evolved over time? CYFD was
created in 1991, actually, as a
result of a task force, Um
And, um, in in that creation of
the task force, As I mentioned
there was a real interest in
focus from from those leaders
and creating an agency that was
going to be positioned for
prevention and early
intervention when it came to
family crisis.
Um, and also that that original
task force outlined the original
CYFT divisions. Um, and then
they have changed somewhat over
time. In the early nineties, Um,
Adult Protective services and
child protective services were
moved from their previous
position, which was then sort of
the human services Department
into CYFD. Um, in the in the
nineties, there were some
reorganization of the department
and statute and in 2005 Adult
protective services was moved
out of CYFD.
Um and then in 2020 early
childhood programs, um was moved
out into the newly created early
childhood care and education
Department. So you all can see,
Um, our state child Welfare
agency has had some evolution
over time in terms of charge,
focus and organization.
Um, And currently you see where
FD has four primary service
areas are programs and those are
juvenile justice facilities
Protective services, Um, which
has historically housed some
prevention and intervention
work. Um, but Children's
behavioral health and then
program uh, support which is a,
um so just for again basic
background knowledge for your
context, How much we currently
spending
On our state child welfare
system.
Um, I when I walk you through
kind of a series of slides in FY
24. The total operating budget
was around $385 million for, um,
those functions that I
mentioned, Um
Uh,
Just quick overview on uh, for
those who may not be as familiar
in the way that the Legislature
appropriates budgets and when it
comes to our big appropriation,
bill, we have our operating
budget. Essentially, every year
we start with last year and we
add or subtract when it comes to
the operating budget. And so
what you'll see, Um in that
second chart is how that
operating budget has grown over
time. Um in FY 24 about two
thirds of CYFT is operating
It was made up of the state
general fund. So that's the
state, Uh, primary revenue
source that has the most
flexibility.
About a quarter of CFD is
operating budget is made up of
federal funds. Um most of that
is in protective services. Um,
because the federal government
will cover specific costs.
associated with foster care, Uh,
the foster care system. Uh and
then the rest of the budget is
made up of some transfers from
other agencies, Mostly the the
TF program and a variety of
other things. Um, and so in the
second chart, what you can see
is how the state has increased
our investment in
General fund, which is that that
state funding source over time.
Um it was pretty significant
growth between FY 21 and FY 24
when it comes to state, uh,
appropriations, um into CYFD and
one of the trends that we saw
during that period of time was
that as the Legislature was
putting more money in to see
where the spending wasn't really
keeping up, And so during that
period of time, we saw the
department kind of leave money
on the table. And so for that
reason
Not informed. Um the FY 25
operating budget, um, that the
Legislature ultimately adopted
That was relatively flat. Um,
for CYFD, so you can kind of see
that quick growth and then
pretty flat for the upcoming
year within the operating
budget.
And then in that last chart,
What we've done is pulled out
for you, um, kind of where
spending lies, particularly in
protective services. And we like
to show this chart because I
think over time, the LFC has
recommended, um that we move
money from the back end of the
system from faster care and that
kind of thing to the front end
of the system and prevention.
Um, but if you look at that
chart, the green is sort of all
of the other protective services
And then the red and the blue
are kind of what we're currently
spending on that in
Prevention and early
intervention, and you'll see
that it's still a relatively
small amount of money compared
to where most of the money
currently sits.
Um I'll pause there any any high
level questions? Um, we will
definitely have some time at the
end of this quick overview, but
anything one question I've had
is when we start to look at
prevention spending and it looks
really bad Are we starting to in
because we moved E CE CD out.
Are we look Have you has your
team looked at putting that back
in For those? The reasons of the
graph for the prevention
spending? Uh, that's a great
question. Um, so for this graph,
it's not included. Um, if you
look at that, kind of, uh, our
plans meeting top
Um, we have kind of a day
devoted to prevention and early
intervention, and there we can
bring in kind of tho, those
other, um, investments that are
coming into prevention and
intervention that don't sit
within CYFD, so this number is
just within protective services.
What's the breakdown of what
goes to kind of prevention and
early intervention versus kind
of back into the system, The
other functions and protective
services?
When when you were going through
the chart about, uh,
maltreatment and the biggest
categories and the one that was
and maybe it'll be something we
get to later. So that's fine.
Miss Rachel. How is the neglect
part broken down? I mean, are
there
It's a pretty kind of broad
term. I know. We know there's
educational neglect and things
like that. And if it's something
we're gonna talk about later,
I'm fine with waiting on that
sure, And so that is just the
big lump category that goes into
the federal reporting. So I
imagine we could for future
meetings bring you all, uh more
detailed data, but that's just
kind of the way. Um, the data is
grouped together in the federal
anything else as I keep going
Rama down in time.
Um, OK, so I talked you through,
sort of How much money are we
spending on? Um, the child
welfare system overall and and I
mentioned kind of the
Legislature appropriates in two
different ways. One is that
operating budget we start with
last year and we or subtract
second wave the Legislature
appropriate, um, is through
targeted special appropriations.
These tend to be one time
earmarked money for a specific
purpose, but they're not
necessarily included year over
year in the operating budget and
That out because in the upcoming
year I mentioned for FY 25 the
budget year we're about to enter
the Legislature appropriated CFT
operating budget and an
essentially flat level but did
make some specific targeted
investments in certain areas
that were designed, um to kind
of move the system in alignment
with kind of recommendations,
and so I'll call out just a few
of what those are because it
might be an area where the task
force has conversation about how
exactly
You know, is this funding being
used, Um
How can we track and measure
whether these things are making
an impact for kids? Um, because
it's essentially, um, these
things I'm gonna talk through
are essentially three year pilot
funding to test and evaluate. Um
some system improvement, so I
I'll note a couple of them. One
is some money to incentivize,
Um, masters level social work
license. Um, there's $4.2
million over those three years
to expand differential response,
which we will talk about when we
talk about prevention and early
intervention.
There's about $9 Million to
implement evidence based
community based UM, prevention
and intervention programs. We're
gonna do a deep dive on to kind
of what Some of those things
are, but these are, but this is
money that could potentially get
some programs up and running,
um, that we could in the future
leverage federal money to pick
up
Um And then there's some
specific money set aside to
recruit support and retain
resource or foster families or
treatment. Foster care
providers, Um and then in this
year's upcoming budget, there
was also one time money that had
gone unused and was reauthorized
again for two specific purposes.
Um 3 million to support
Workforce development and 20
million to increase behavioral
health provider capacity. Um so
I call up
Kind of know that this is for
the upcoming budget year that is
sort of the resources and that
are available to the agency and
department. Um, and, uh, if any
of you want to go deeper on the
budget, please let me know we
can certainly do that and
provide some additional
resources, but that's sort of a
high level of of, uh, the budget
context.
Um, OK, so I'm gonna quickly
walk through. Um, the LFC has
done a series of program
evaluations over time, Probably
over the last 20 years. And so
what we have done for you all on
the task forces. We created a
shared folder anyone's having
and logistical challenges
getting in there. Let me know,
cause we gave just a quick
summary of what Some of those
recommendations are and for
today's overview, we're not
gonna go deeply into them, but
I'm gonna kind of touch on a
high level. What Some of those
recommendations have been over
the last
Play 15 years.
And so some of those deep dive
studies, um have noted, uh, a
recommendation to promote, um,
evidence based prevention and
early intervention programs
within our child loss care
system. Those are programs
backed in rigorous research that
if um provided to Children and
families early on intervening
before things come to a crisis
state, um can prevent families
from ever coming into contact.
Um, with kind of the more
formal, formal or emergent
system of foster care.
Um
Uh, LFC recommendations have
recommended over time.
significant investments in early
childhood services. Um, And then
there have been a variety of
recommendations around ways to
implement or improve program
implementation. Um, and some
challenges there and so again
today we're not going to go
deeply into those, and but we
can kind of bring up what some
of those might have been over
time as we we dig into our more
specific topics. Um, and we have
just put, uh into your folders.
Just a quick summary of some of
that research.
Recommendation over time. Um and
then I will also note and
acknowledge, uh, to your point,
Senator Lopez. There are other
task forces and groups have done
Study and research have made
some recommendations and as we
move into the task forces, more
deep work, and my hope is that
you know you all sit on some of
those groups and bodies and that
you might bring in those
recommendations. I'm thinking
about, for example, the
Children's code. Um, reform.
Some of the Ke asked pilot
recommendations and things like
that.
Um, So that was my quick system.
Overview? Um, just to orient
everyone to kind of, uh, how the
system operates How it's funded.
Um, I'm gonna invite in
Secretary Casado. So if you want
to share just sort of for the
group your perspective around
What are the key challenges
facing the system? What are the
key opportunities for our group?
Um, and then? And what is your
your team really focused on
Great. Thanks, Rachel. I
appreciate that. Um, so, Yeah,
I'd love to share what some of
the challenges are and what
we're doing. But before we do
that, I really want to say,
because a couple of people have
conversations or hard things to
say. And I really just wanna say
like we welcome that because for
me, it's kind of like an audit.
And if you don't know where to
focus your energies and what's
broken, then you really can't
focus on fixing that. So I'm
hopeful that we can have those
honest conversations, you know,
feelings.
They get hurt will be very
temporary. I promise, um,
because it's like my baby and
I'm very protective of it. And
so, but I really feel like
I'm hopeful that we'll have that
dialogue. I sit on many task
forces. Um you know where we
talk about, Really? A lot of
input on OK, This is what's
broken. But how are we gonna fix
it?
Right and so sitting on those
task forces takes a lot of time
and energy from the department,
and that's one of the challenges
that we have is we spend so much
time really just talking about
what's broken with, you know so
many different entities. Um, but
not really getting that
feedback. So I'm hopeful that
we'll do that here and really
have a strategy to move forward.
So some of the challenges we
have, as Rachel pointed out, and
he did a great job that but you
know is with staffing and it's
not just in recruiting staffing
as she showed that
Has gone up in the last year.
Not significant, but it's it's
increased. We've been able to
hire people.
But the retention is so hard,
you know, we just last week, I
think lost like 11 investigators
and to get them hired and
trained as a you know, first,
you gotta get him hired. And
then it's a six month training
period before they can actually
take a full caseload. And so
you've got that whole time frame
that you really got to meet, and
when we're really just looking
at numbers and saying in the
Kevin litigation, you've got to
get to this standard.
Well have this period and so
really looking at? How do we
continue to retain the staff
that we have and do a better job
of providing them ongoing
training? And so that's
something that we're really
struggling with. We're working
with Department of Workforce
Solutions. You know, we've
created a couple of pipelines.
We've done a pre apprenticeship
program where we're looking at
students who may be interested
in that or may be interested in
early childhood.
In those areas where we can
really get them in the door
early.
And really try to build them and
and have them, you know, and try
to get them to that level. So
our hope is and we've already
started the program in five
individuals, but we can get them
in the door early with that
interest and then work them
towards our stipend program and
then get them into social work
and just continue to kind of
raise them up throughout that
whole level, until we actually
social workers, and by then they
have spent, you know, 56 years
and they don't just graduate and
move on to something else. So
we're really hopeful that that
pipeline we're grateful
DWS at looks like we're also
doing this Children's court
attorneys because we're really
struggling there as I'm sure you
can, um relate to and and speak
to, But we're having a really
hard time and we have an event
coming up. We're doing a meet
and greet, um, on the 12th of
June graduate to really just
kind of what it's about, and
then we can bring so that prior
to them to the bar.
Um, and keep them on a waiver
with SP, where we can then just
transition them into an attorney
position.
Um And so we're really looking
creatively at how can we bring
people in earlier and then
support them so that they build
that community? We're also faced
with the challenges of
nonprofits, the MC OS who can
either pay more money or be more
flexible, right? They can have a
flexible schedule. They could
maybe telework and so that's
something that we recruit social
workers. You know, they have
more. They're not
As much of a case load when they
first come in, so they have more
time to train them and kind of
paddle them through for us, It's
like a warm body. You're in the
door and it's like, OK, we've
got all these cases. You've got
to hit the ground running and go
and so really trying to figure
out how we can be. I'd love to
maybe discuss like retention.
Pay after five years. 10 years
15 like, really reward those who
are sticking with C. We've also
kind of tossed around the idea
of creating a child welfare, our
law enforcement academies. You
get hired and you go and you get
this intensive training because
what we're finding is that
individuals who come out of our
are not prepared to do the job
in child welfare. She's agreeing
with me. And so I mean, so, you
know, really look something
where you know they can go and
get more equipped to hit the
ground running. So staffing is a
huge issue for us, Um
Foster family was in foster care
about
19 almost almost
2000 of them are in placement.
So we struggle we have about
980 we have about 2000 available
beds, you know, Right now we
have 100 and 30 vacant beds in
the state.
That doesn't solve our problem
with office days waiting for us.
I am super excited to announce
that after almost 10 months of
trying to figure out we have a
facility that's now life home.
Um and they're gonna start
taking the first of our office
and above. Um, we did a tour
with their input. Um, you know,
this is 12, which fortunately
was in office days. Um, but you
know, it has an opportunity to
workforce programs again. We
were 480 hours into positions,
you know?
Really start to work with them.
So that's if they age out of our
system. You know, while they're
waiting for us to find finding
those families on that have, you
know just different needs more
severe needs.
Um, is really a challenge. And
so that's one of the issues that
we're facing. We still have. I
think 23 or 24 kids out of
state.
Um So we're working with HSD and
just to figure out how do we
build capacity? I mean, I can go
out and recruit another, but if
they don't have the right
abilities and the right how we
build that juvenile justice, I
think we looked at those
numbers. You know, I think
through JD I they've done a
great job of really figuring out
how do we provide resources for
kids outside of that system?
But you know and again as the
courts can attest to the number
of kids that are
Committing crimes that are more
severe is increasing. I think
we're now up so we have to be
prepared. But once we, you know
we were down in Las Cruces. I
believe, and we did another walk
through of the John Paul Taylor.
The services that we provide for
those individuals is amazing.
You know, there's structure
there's CBCs on site. For them.
There's classroom activities.
You know, they are really
engaged with those kids when
they do exit that facility, and
I think that's what we really
need to do. And you know,
Senator, I know that we don't
want to incarcerate kids, but I
left there feeling like the kids
that have a better opportunity
and better services than those
that we provide in our office.
And somehow we need to fix that.
so that every child that enters
into our system therapy and that
training um I service home and
they want them in an individual
house. But I can say that we've
sure that that will provide them
as classes in neural activities
like
All of those that we need to
make sure that we can house them
and they're not in force.
Um, I think those are really the
the major barrier and you know,
as I've said to the plaintiff is
in that it's the right thing to
do as a system, not because we
have a lawsuit telling us we
need to do that, But so we need
to figure out you know. How do
we get there?
How do we fund what that is? And
you know as some of the costs to
be able to do that, and you
know this year one of her team
is really looking at the
contracts that we are providing
out there because a lot of the
money so we're really looking
this year at you know what is
the return on investment?
Are those still working just
because we've done something for
the last 10 years doesn't
necessarily mean it's effective,
so we're really looking at those
contracts.
And hoping that we can read.
We're getting the most for the
money that we're spending for
those kids and that they're
actually getting to them long
term, So you know, we're really
Very diligent, you know, issues
that we've had with our budget,
which we can, you know, get into
at a later date, and we can
discuss that FC to talk about
some of those challenges, but,
um, I think those are the and we
have our our colleague, Uh Joe,
who planned to at about 1045
share with us some kind of
national perspective about
whether other states have done
Um it's 1030 now so between now
and then we have some space and
time for you all to ask
questions and have conversation.
Um, also just to check in the
room. I imagine you might
appreciate a B a break and we
can We can do that, too. Um, but
Well, now just kind of open. Um,
for you all on the task force.
Both are folks in the room and
those online to ask any
questions of the group, um, or
to bring to the group any
challenges or opportunities you
see in the system that you wanna
make sure this group addresses
um so I see. Uh, I've got two
hands in the room.
I also want to make sure for
those of you online. Um you can
raise your hand. Um, but also,
uh, I know you might not always
be seen. So, uh, I'm gonna call
on Marilyn. I think, Robert, you
had your hands up, and then I'm
gonna go to anyone who's online
Who wants to ask a question? Um
or or bring in a perspective to
the group?
Oh,
you wanna get in the queue? OK,
so our queue right now is gonna
be Marilyn Robert. Anyone who's
virtual and then Carol will go
to you. Perfect. Thank you, Um
Can you put back up the slide
that, um and then Secretary
Quesada, this is it was one of
the questions I had, um, and you
might not know where. Cindy
yesterday. Um, several of the T
LP, which is the transition.
Yes. So what we sent out
internally was a document that
said that we were going to be
reducing the starting contracts
by 25% as we really look at
right sizing the department that
was not an intent to cut
everybody by 25%. It was an
opportunity for us to look at
the services that were being
provided as we reassess. There's
a lot of programs that haven't
expanded their entire budget.
Even this year, And so we wanna
make sure that we're not in a
position next year. Come June,
1st to say OK at this point in
time they haven't spent.
So it was our efforts to look
initially at how we were
spending that money to be able
to pull back some of it that
wasn't being spent and right
size it for where we're seeing
programs that are being more
successful. Um, it was
internally it was specifically
for those contracts that we send
through falling colors because
that one's really hard for us,
because we don't find out till
the end of the fiscal year that
programs didn't spend
everything. And then it doesn't
give us um
Um, And so I think that our
staff was premature in sending
something out to providers to
say you're being cut by 25, per,
um, accurate information. OK? I
because I'd had several several
911 calls that beds are being we
did as well OK. And then the
only other thing is that, um
yeah, the workforce. Um
One of the things and I'm asking
the LSC about this is that, um I
know that we're one of like the
three or four states that hasn't
had our first hearing last week.
That was interesting, and and
it's that program is changing a
lot. But, um, it would be really
interesting to understand.
The pain points that I feel
every day in our advocacy work
are Ka
And so I know you have done a
On that. So Kase doesn't feed in
understanding that, but also
just how we're leveraging those
families. First funds where the
family first, um
That the document is for our
plan is like where how that's
coming along because it hasn't
even been approved. But if we
could learn where that is, and
then, um, really looking at I, I
really just wanna say this out
loud, Grateful to salt call
foster families foster families
because there's a lot of, um
Emotion with that, um there was
a term to call them resource
providers when we send our
family and kids, calling them
foster families is really
important, but also, um, really
looking at the provider rates,
and I think this is a budget
thing for LFC for both foster
families, reimbursement
providers, Um all providers and
then subsidy and adoption
subsidy, really taking a deep
dive into that? Because, um, it
is my understanding that we have
the lowest reimbursement rate.
and as we're looking, we had the
3.7 port and retain, possibly
looking at
Is to just increase and then
also the education funds. The
activity funds, you know, we and
I know that this is what the
facts and all that stuff. I got
a request to help find a kid get
a haircut who was living in the
office because there's not a way
to pay for the kid getting a
haircut.
Um, if they're living in the
office, there's no way to
reimburse. And so, um
I. I see that, But so there's
ways that I also think the kids
living in the office should we
should make sure that they're
leveraging their educated
haircuts or food. Um
Even though they don't have a
placement. We as a state should
be their placement, so
Right. I know that I'm taking
notes cause a lot of these
topics will map to when we do
deep dives on on different
topics. So thank you. Um,
Robert, I think you were next in
terms of having a question or
something to bring to
also you make sure you turn on
your mic so our folks online can
hear things. I'm sorry. I need
to learn to speak louder.
Raise my voice. So SK he talked
about the challenges of staffing
right for a while on different
divisions. The order is not, um
at the rate and spend about 56
years since ive been in those
roles Do you find there's been
definitely needed because, um,
especially now, with the
unemployment employees have a
lot of choices and where they
be, But if they're not, if
you're not able to and get an
offer out, then, um yes, that's
still continues to be a
challenge for the department.
And if my HR director were not
off today, she'd be here and
she'd
Tell you how hard I pushed them
because you know, I came from
the side of it where you work in
an exempt, right? And you can
just do your background check
and get somebody hired. I can
make a hire within one or two
days if I needed to, um, that
still continues to be an issue.
Um and I still continue to not
understand why so I'm not very
patient about it. Um, because I
want people just and we have
lost people because we're not
fast enough in getting that
done. You know, another barrier
that we face in that hiring
process is, you know we're
allowed to offer a certain
And if you're going to go above
that, then you need to get
approval from SP and D FA and
that slows it down considerably
and we have as desperately as we
need Children's court attorneys.
We've lost a couple because
we've been too slow on being
able to try to increase that
salary in response, so it is
something that I'm working with
both the director at state
personnel and, um DF to try to
speed up that process. I call
them constantly to try to shake
stuff loose. Um, and so, um, but
it still continues to be a
problem.
Right? I wanna pause for a
second. Let me go. Um, stop
sharing. Um, Is there anyone,
uh, like me or Nick or anyone
else? Um, on the task force,
who's on our teams that wants to
ask a question or bring a
perspective about things. The
task force should dive into. Um,
we don't wanna miss you. Uh, if
you are remote
Rachel.
Oh, yes. You still have Carol?
Oh, yes. You're after our online
people. Don't worry, Um
Anyone online once asked a
question just pop on. And if
not, um, we can go.
But here
