The Senate will come to order
the clerk.
To call the role
Senator Brandt
Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Center Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Sandra Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin
Hickey
Center Hemio.
Center Lanier.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Yeah
Senator Paul.
Center share centerendo Senator
Souls San Stefaniks.
Center Tobiasin Senator
Townsend Santa Trujillo.
Senator Wirth. Senator Woods,
you have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you. I'd ask
of allegiance to be led today by
Senator Sanchez.
Pledge of allegiance in Spanish
to be led today by Senor Nava
and the salute to New Mexican
flag to be led today by Senator
Source of mercy.
Help us in our work.
To show love to all.
As we would hope it be shown to
Who adjued us to create a world
where we share our food with the
hungry.
Where we provide the poor
wanderer with shelter.
Where we clothe the naked.
But rather one in which we
affirm the dignity of all
people.
May we never be so arrogant as
to demand that others accept our
view.
about a new Mexico filled with
equality and liberty for all.
May what unites us.
Our desire to care for all New
Mexicans.
From people all across our
wonderful state.
So today we pray for strength.
The strength to listen.
We pray for the power to lift up
and protect the most vulnerable
in our society.
We pray for the desire to afford
dignity to everyone in our
state.
Kuro Fidelliad a la bandea de
los Estados Unidos de America
la Republicaquea
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
You may be seated.
without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection. We're in
that order of business announces
miscellaneous senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. Just
before I go through my
announcements, I want to yield
and the Senate gallery. He no
objections. Cameras are allowed
both in the gallery and in the
Senate chamber. Thank you,
Senator Padilla. Senator
Senator.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
from different parts of the
states. We come from different
backgrounds, but I assure you,
you know, at the end of the day,
it's about all New Mexicans and
I think that came through loud
and clear in your invocation,
Uh, Mr. President, today is UNM
Day, and there will be a
certificate, uh, that's gonna be
red, that'll be Senator Doig
when we get to that point. Uh,
reminder, the Secretary of
State's staff will be in the
house lounge tomorrow and Friday
from 10 until 120 and the Senate
lounge from 1 to
let's say Finance Committee will
continue with its workshops, uh,
tomorrow morning, room 307, from
7 to 8, uh, we'll talk about
revenue structure and tax
Uh, we had a preview of this in
the Senate Tax Committee
yesterday afternoon. I just
really encouraged obviously the
new members, but also all, all
the other members who have not
did ask that we try and limit
the number of guests sitting
behind us to 3 if we can.
They're running out of chairs.
If you have more
all of our guests in terms of
events, uh, today, the Grant
County prospectors are having
their reception at La Fonda at
5:30. Feast New Mexico,
7 to 9, the UNM Alumni
Association is having its annual
legislative reception in and
spot Loretto 5:30 to 8:30 by
invitation, uh, PNM is having
prayer breakfast, uh, at the
Santa Fe Community Convention
Center by invitation, and
tomorrow we will have a joint
session to hear from
Congressman, uh, Gabe Vasquez
upfront, uh, then we'll head
over and hear from them, uh,
finally today.
uh, meals on Wheels, we'll be
riding lunches for the senators
on the floor, and we appreciate
he has any excusals.
Senra Padilla
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Cervantes and Stephanics
until they return to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection. Thank you,
Mr. President, thank you so
much. As you can see, I've got
some very special public
servants joining me on the floor
studying to be our providers and
they're working very hard for us
on all days. Just don't get sick
today because they're here. But
otherwise, they go to work every
day and they do incredible work,
And with that, Mr. President, I
will very quickly introduce, uh,
a legend, um, in kind of
naturopathic treatments and
Western medicine is a trained
doctor, uh, that was, of course,
Doctor Bergson Senior, but his
Arthur Bergson. Welcome so much.
And Rebecca, who's sitting up
there.
And then I'm gonna quickly move
through these other names, uh,
Doctor Shiba Tahi Imran.
long. She was a student. I said,
now she's a doctor. Uh, Doctor
Marco Duerte.
OK.
And then um we have a couple
There you go. Thank you so much.
And then uh some students at the
Borough College, uh, Emma KIE.
Yeah, I butchered that a little,
And then finally, we have Kate
Nixon.
Hey, Kate, Alicia Currier, nurse
practitioner.
Anne Sandra Buler, Doctor of
provider issue and trying to
make sure we have a healthy
economic environment, um, and
hospitable environment for
providers. I'm gonna be working
on legislation. I know it's very
bipartis. There's lots of bills
It's a policy decision, but I
just put that out there because
it's a lot of coalescing around
that, and I think it's, it's
very, very affordable. Um, but
anyway, thank you all very much.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
guest today, Doctor Albert Kwan.
Doctor Kwan is uh my personal
physician for the last 30 years.
He practiced in Clovis and
Practicing physicians in New
Mexico.
We've lost 8.1% of the
physicians out in New Mexico the
last 5 years.
state to retire in because we
don't have the healthcare that
we should have.
I, I just wanna.
health.
And keep us alive.
You know, the medical
malpractice insurance today
needs to be reformed.
We
Mr. President
issue.
But this is an important issue.
I hope we tackle.
This year
This session.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
this, clearly something is
wrong, uh, doctors are leaving,
doctors are retiring without
being replaced. My wife's own
doctor moved from Farmington to
Colorado don't have this
problem.
So we've done something
different.
And it's time to undo that
different cause it's, it's
certainly an economic issue
it's also for our own health.
The longer that we go without uh
a, a general practitioner
without going to primary doctor,
the worst things become for us.
Thank you, Senator Scher. We do
have further on the list. We
have.
Senator Ramos.
Mr. President, thank you so
much, uh, I do have some guests
my guests, um, Emma Lynn also
10th grader from Cliff High
School.
Kayle Summers, the 10th grader
from Cliff High School.
Our Carlos Carranza associated
Students Western New Mexico's
Senate floor leader.
And we also have uh.
agriculture. She would like to
be a ranch owner one day.
Also help me welcome RJ Cruz, 11
years old, attending 5th grade.
Jose Barrios Elementary School.
17 years old from Grant County
attends 11th grade Cliff High
School. Brennan enjoys playing
golf and basketball as well as
hunting and fishing. Brandon
State University where he will
graduate with an associate's
degree in general business. He
intends to enroll at Donana
Community College to earn a
certificate of HVAC Electrical
and
of you know it is UNM Day and I
am, as all of you know, a very
proud lobo. Uh, I got my
undergraduate degree at UNM and
I also taught at the University
Anthony, who is the president of
the undergraduate student body
at the University of New Mexico.
He's a senior studying
biochemistry.
and hopes to attend medical
school and.
Demyanova, Deanova, um, she's a
sophomore at the University of
New Mexico and she's getting
degrees in international studies
political science, French and
Spanish. She is the boards and
This is Bree Hawkins. She is the
chief of staff of ASUNM at the
University of New Mexico. She's
a junior studying biology,
psychology, political science,
them. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Celia Lopez.
We have Senator Munoz.
shape and, and so thank God we
have a neighboring hospital
that, that can come help us out
and that's abo General in in
grants. And so I'd like to
introduce today uh my two, my 3
Family Medicine practitioner and
Doctor Stacy Dimmitt at General
who does OB and so they're the
ones that take care of the other
county when we don't have
fixed and more rural doctors,
you're gonna see us coming into
your hospitals at a higher rate
in rural New Mexico than you had
before, and you think it's hard
to get an appointment in a
but with that, with the body
welcome, uh, my guest today.
And, and then, Mr. President,
shadowing us about once a week,
uh, once a month or twice a
month in a session. And so
Isaac, would you stand, he's,
he's the honorary chair of
Senate Finance today.
Alright
a few of guests here, so we
wanna introduce, well, first of
all, I wanna, uh, uh, the
honorary vice chair is a the
honorary chair of Senate Finance
is a junior at Valley High
Isaac, great job.
OK, uh, with, with me here also
as our guest is uh from the
University of New Mexico is
Be converted to lobo, so that,
uh, please, yes, uh, so please
uh welcome, help me welcome Do
to the law school.
returning to Mexico for his
future career, so thank you.
You my hand.
Oh, I don't
from Albuquerque, uh, Doctor
Roybo, so please stand, Doctor
Robo to be recognized.
And then the honorary uh vice
chair center of finance is
Walter Bradford.
PSAT, uh, funding to the Mexico
legislature entering at the
Capitol for the finance
committee as we said, you'll be
the honorary vice chair center
of 4.3. So let's uh help welcome
our guests to the chamber.
Mhm.
I don't know how you do.
know, what it is. Anyway, um,
it, it is my very, very distinct
honor to present to you if you
The the reason I have the
bullhorn and I do want to give a
shout out to my colleague for
his performance last night, but
the reason I have this is she is
fellowship, all at UNM and
amazingly after that she joined
Southwest Gastroenterology and
the rural areas her group has
been literally bombarded from
all over their state, and they
do their damnedest to get people
incredible, providing the
service in an incredible
service. Uh, I, a large
percentage of us will have
difficulty with the colon issue,
And as I'm looking up in the
gallery, I've talked about the
statewide. The other thing is
amazing since I've been here, I
think there's been a doubling
factor of, uh, participants,
matter of fact, this little
button that I have on says, and
this is their motto, your care
is at our core.
great place, and I also just
gonna lay, put a little seed in
the ground for you. Um, there
are a number of issues in New
Mexico and practicing, there's
Competition. Well,
Our ability to compensate in the
state with almost half of it
being in Medicare.
gonna be trying to bring up and
uh finance, just hold your
breath, but, you know, we only
are specialists are laying are
put out ads, they make phone
calls. Not only do they not
hiring anyone, no one calls
back.
It's just not competitive, and
we've got to compete. So we're
that later on. Anyway, um, thank
you again, doctor, for leading
the society. It's a lot of work
during the year and thank you
all doctors, and I'm just so
Thank you Senator Hickey.
Center souls
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
Mexico that is turning out lots
of general practitioners and
others under the osteopathic med
um uh mechanism or uh model.
There we go, model, uh, first,
and she likes New Mexico best so
we're hoping we're gonna be able
to keep her here as she finishes
and does her residency up at UNM
I think is where you're trying
to, to get in to do that. So if
you'll help me welcome Melissa
Johnson, uh, he's interested in
infectious diseases and he's
from Dallas, Texas, um, and
hopefully we're gonna be able to
convince him. They tell me one
of the biggest hurdles we've got
to get more residencies in New
them to do those residencies. So
if you'll help me in, in
welcoming uh C Sloane Johnson.
And then Mr. President, I also
is shadowing me through
committee this morning here on
the floor. Uh, she is a senior
in biology, will be graduating
in May and wants to go to dental
would be a huge economic boon
and also provide more medical
care in a critical area in the
state of New Mexico. I told her
she's president of ASN MSU.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Senators, Mr.
President, thank you very much.
spare time.
As she trains cutting horses.
She competes in cutting events.
She has a medical practice in
And she is also chairman of the
New Mexico Medical Board, would
you help me in recognizing
Thank you, Senator Giselle. We
have Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
going to start off, Mr.
President, with Brie McCash. If
we could please welcome Bree.
She's a UNM student. She's a
senior majoring in political
science and international
Department soon. She wants to
specialize in foreign policy and
Bree has assisted 10 political
campaigns here in the state of
Mr. President, I'd like to
introduce one of my dearest
friends from UNM Alejandro
Mendiaz right here to my right.
He's a senior program manager at
El Centro de la Raza, which is
And in the Ross actually in the
gallery we have the director of
El Centro de la Raza Rosa Ila
Cervantes, big shout out to you
mentors of mine who have been
with me for many years in
distinctive ways and we're also
with me on that trail for the
campaign, but I'd like to
introduce to you, Doctor
you, Dora, for all your wisdom
and your mentorship.
And least but not last we have
Doctor uh Valerie Romero
Center. She's a native of Santa
Fe, but the most important thing
about this woman, Mr. President,
is that she's been a mentor for
but your influence and your
passion has made a difference in
the lives of so many so I wanna
thank you for that.
Additionally, 3 years ago, I had
Mr. President. So I'd like to
just give a round of applause to
Doctor Romero Leggett. Thank you
for your service.
Mr. President, thank you and
thank you, uh, senator.
I just want to echo a little bit
further on uh Doctor Romero
Leggett.
rural students from different
parts of the state to their BAMD
program.
And in working with this
program, you know, the whole
Um, very fortunate that uh uh
one of my sons went through that
program, and at the present
time, after many years of uh the
study and the hard work, um, he
the medical part, you know,
throughout our state, but it's
through individuals like Doctor
Legget has make this happen.
as it was mentioned, I think our
Uh, Mr. President, I yield to
Senator Sadia Lopez for comment.
Mr. President, I stand in strong
support of Doctor Romero
Leggett. I have known her since
changed individual lives one by
one, in making sure that people
from rural communities, people
of color, people who never would
have
thought it wasn't jacket, um,
that people never saw themselves
in a white coat, um, we're able
to see themselves in a white
coat and serve our community so
I am just delighted to see you,
to Senator Hickey, who
apparently was Dr. Amero
Leggett's professor. So if he
would be so kind to comment.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Valerie. I did know her when she
was a medical student. She was
on my rotation on the floor,
those of you who heard me in the
education committee. I made sure
I can tell you when I asked the
question of the student,
sometimes I didn't know the
answer, but, you know, she did.
Just amazing. I'm
She was, and, and the other
brought that medical ethos to
her career, and I know she's
been teaching there. She brought
it to the DEI program just
spoken of and I can't say who,
this work and has done so much
for the university. So, uh,
Valerie, I still get to call you
Valerie, but this doctor, um,
thank, thank you for that time,
some amazing people. Here's an
example. Here's an example.
Thank you.
Sit
work that you've done, Doctor
Romero Leggett, um, but
additionally, I would like to
just give a big shout out for
her work and helping, um, my
actual, my brother's fiance
And it takes individuals and
leaders like Doctor Romero
Leggett to help folks open doors
that may not perhaps been opened
might as well refer to those
coats as capes because that's
exactly what you are. I wanna
extend my appreciation for the
heroic service and providing a,
you know, what you pride in New
In addition to the heroes, we
have Mr. President. We're in the
midst of Western royalty. Miss
Rodeo New Mexico, 2025. Alisa
Sauder, will you please stand? A
opened her own business, Clover
feed and supply and Moriarty
establishing herself as a
successful female business owner
selling locally grown hay to the
competition and was recently
crowned Miss Rodeo New Mexico.
During 2025, Alisa will be
representing the state of New
Mexico's agriculture and rural
the nation and welcome to the
New Mexico State Senate.
Thank you, Senator Brantley. We
Scraw. He's a 3-0 at UNM Law
School. He's a West Sider. He
went to Volcano Vista where he
played football. He's currently
the political director at GPSA
there at UNM and he's gonna take
law school. Please welcome Heath
Straw.
I consider the center Pinto.
OK, Mr. President, with me,
from UNM from our Native
American population and that's
the largest class, I believe
that UNM has graduated all the
way from pre-law to nurses to
that UNM has graduated all the
way from pre-law to nurses to
teachers to doctors. There was a
couple there we got to give them
their stethoscopes and um
honored them so.
Welcome to you to to the
roundhouse our lobos, UNM and we
are growing our own and in time
we will get there.
But with me today I have a
couple of guests.
political science and psychology
and I have Alana Baca also a UNM
graduate undergraduate student
body executive director of
Becenti and Samantha Duis both
from Farmington, their 4th year
medical students at UNM
representing the combined BAMD
program which aims to address
for continuing and seeing our
future and we're excited to see
you come to the roundhouse and
probably work for us one day,
uh, Mr. President, please
welcome my guests yeah.
Thank you Mr. President and uh
you know I just want to welcome
all the doctors, uh, that are
here with us today. Thank you so
much for everything you do for
us. Um, I will warn everyone
all are safe, um, I will not be
doing any practice of medicine
with this, but I just thank you
so much for everything you do
for our state and uh you you
have my commitment to continue
to work.
for you so we can keep you in
of doctors at the VA, um, and,
and I'm so glad to have them,
but we need to make it just as
easy for all of you to practice
in New Mexico and deal with some
of the issues that we have, but
Thank you Mr. President. I don't
believe the emergency doctors
have been, um, introduced yet
Saint Vincent's or at any of the
other ER facilities that we have
around and they're part of a
health front and I would like to
commend them for coming up,
wondering the hallways, but
please remember if you have an
emergency, they're gonna be
there for you. Thank you very
much, Mr. President.
two certificates. We're gonna do
those certificates, then we will
go to committee reports to read
in the rules committee and then
we're gonna do our 1st 3
confirmation, so he might have a
fun little hearing on the floor
when we get to that one. so with
that, uh, Mr. President,
I would yield first to Senator
I am very happy today to be
co-sponsoring UNM Day in the
Senate with uh Senator Tobiasson
health, research, and public
service. And so I'd ask that the
UNMD certificate now be read.
See no objection, the reader to
read.
and acknowledgement to January
29th, 2025 be recognized as UNM
Day in the Senate, whereas the
University of New Mexico was
of New Mexico residents,
including employees of the
University of New Mexico
Hospital and whereas for the
fall 2024 semester, there were
first year registrations and
representing the largest class
since the university opened its
doors in 1889 and whereas in
annually awards over $370
million 170 million dollars in
scholarships and whereas there
students access to nationally
recognized faculty, cutting edge
research, professional and
academic development and student
support and whereas the
rural medicine, family medicine,
nursing, and midwifery and is
the home of the state's only
national councilor institute
designation.
includes a school of medicine,
College of Nursing, a college of
pharmacy, a college of
population health and the
teaching hospital with multiple
Health System providing
approximately 1 million
patients.
visits each year.
And whereas
As an R1 research institution,
knowledge, spawn new
technologies and support
sustained opportunity and
prosperity for New Mexico's
economy.
And whereas the University of
of cultures and whereas
University of Mexico is the
university for New Mexico now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
service and dedication to the
residents of New Mexico signed
and sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator Katie
Thank you to our reader, Senator
Hi.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I would like to
introduce, uh, Dean, Jennifer
Mallet, if you wouldn't mind
standing.
educational programs related to
racial inequity and health.
She's dedicated her leadership
career to increasing diversity
within faculty and college
leadership, fostering
interdisciplinary approaches to
in schools, 26 research and
academic programs and nearly
1000 faculty and staff at the
college.
Doctor Mallett received her
undergraduate degree in
and spent the 1st 20 years of
her career at the University of
Cincinnati. Thank you so much
for joining us, doctor.
that we listen, learn, and care
and I think it's really
interesting timing because we
have so many amazing business
friends, my neighbors, my
constituents and have been
clients of mine throughout the
years.
And these are professionals that
I have helped strategize and,
With that, I would like to
AD Lovo joined the lobo, so it's
lovo is a low bow, um, joined
the Lobo family at the
universities as the university's
14th vice president and director
of athletics in December of
where he served as an executive
senior associate athletics
director for operations, please
welcome athletic director
Fernando Lovo.
desk, they're tokens of
appreciation from UNM. They
contained various items from all
of of the lobos, these bags also
contain UNM's legislative
starting at 53 5:30 p.m. at the
inn and Spa at Loretto and
everyone is welcome to join us.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Tyson.
of New Mexico and the UNM
Letterman as a former coed
cheerleader. I cheered on the
lobos from 1996 to 2000, which
were some of the most exciting
old school I am. And Mr.
President, as a former member of
the UNMOA cheer team. I ask your
permission to do.
one quick cheer in the chamber.
See no objection.
Everyone know.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Victor Reyes, who is a 2nd year
law student at the University of
New Mexico School of Law, and
he's no stranger to any of our
communities or this chamber. He
cut his teeth and said her worse
Rosa Cervantes, director of El
Centro de la Raza and special
adviser to the president.
president of Latino Affairs, Mr.
President, if it wasn't for El
Centro de la Raza or the college
athletics has done to enhance my
life. I'm a senator because they
helped build that foundation.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Jaramiel.
student. She's the graduate and
professional student association
chief of staff.
And she is very passionate about
lobo. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
See no further announcements on
and we are very lucky to have
them. Uh, so happy UNM Day
everyone.
Happy UNM Day. Thank you.
going to be read as well.
Thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent that the
reader read the certificate
certifying January 29th as Grant
County Day.
does hereby extend its
recognition and acknowledgement
to January 29, 2025 as Grant
County Day in the Senate,
360 days of sunshine per year,
vast mountain landscapes and.
Small town atmosphere and
whereas Grant County is the
gateway to the vastillo
wilderness and whereas Grant
charter issued by the
Legislative Assembly of the
territory of New Mexico in 1878
and whereas Grant County is the
richest county for mining in New
the 3rd largest open pit copper
mine in the world, and whereas
Grant County is home to Western
New Mexico University
established in 1893 as New
programs specific to the
evolving needs of a globalized
economy.
And as one of the original
Hispanic serving institutions in
the United States, Western New
students from across the globe.
And whereas the Western New
Mexico University Museum holds
the world's foremost collection
of ancient members pottery, and
including Geronimo and Victorio,
two famous Apache leaders and
iconic wild west figures such as
Billy the Kid, La Man Don Tucker
Infantry Regiment known as the
Buffalo Soldiers was established
at Fort Baird.
And whereas Grant County is
honored as the home of many
Bataan Death March, including
the late representative Thomas
Foy.
And whereas Grant County
straddles the continental
whereas Grant County hosts the
annual tour of the Gila, New
Mexico's premier cycling stage
race which attracts national and
international teams and boost
outdoor recreation areas
including the catwalk recreation
area.
City of Rock State Park, the
trail of the mountain Spirits
National Scenic Byway, Bear
Festival, Clay Festival Tamal
fiestay mas.
Festival of the written word and
the Southwest print fiesta, and
whereas New Mexico's current
recognized.
By the 40 for the 49th annual
Grant County Day in the Senate.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
Senator Ramos. Mr. President,
thank you so much and thank you
reader, for, for reading out the
just by listening to what you
read, you can tell that Grant
Thank you so much, um, we, we
are home of Dublin and of the W
NMU Mustang, Silver High Colts,
the Kobrians, and the Cliff
Cowboys and the charter school,
uh, Aldo Leopold.
So we, we've got some great
now and I think she's, she's a,
a lot more important than we are
right now, so, so, uh, they
could be asking for a lot of
capital outlay from her, so we,
we admire them being up there,
Cars and solar, many other pro
and many other products thank
you Freeport McMorran for
providing our valuable New
Mexico copper. We also would
like to thank the prospectors
here at the state Capitol. We
also I also wanted to mention
that tonight we'll be meeting
at, at the uh La Fonda for a
reception from 5:30 to.
took it upon herself to to start
a warming center in Silver City
for the homeless and I really
wanted to mention that because I
uh wave at us and we thank you
all for coming and we appreciate
everything you do.
great job. She, she, uh, she,
I'm sure most of you senators um
know who she is, she's great at
uh bringing back, uh, uh,
revenue through a bunch of
you all so much for uh for for
today and uh enjoy Grant County
Day. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Ramos.
Senate Majority Floor leader
Mr. President, your rules
committee has had under
consideration amended Senate
executive letter number 58 dated
on January 1st, 2025, expiring
December 31st, 2030. You're
committed committee recommends
that the Senate confirm this
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
Hearing no objection.
The reader will read send it
executive letter number 17 dated
term commencing February 15,
2024 to be served at the
pleasure of the governor
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this
a member of the small business
Investment Corporation for a
term commencing on February 15,
2024 to be served at the
pleasure of the governor
committee recommends that the
there's a motion to adopt the
committee reports. All those in
favor signify by saying a.
Those pose, the eyes have it,
the reports have been adopted in
the journal will show that they
yield to Senator Haril. There
are no objections. We're in that
order of business
confirmationsen had a meal, Mr.
President, I ask that the
credentials of Christina Ali be
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number 17, dated March
15, 2024. I moved to the Senate
Mr. President. I'm very honored
to present, uh, Miss Allie for
this reappointment. Uh, she is a
small business owner here in
corporation, a nonprofit
corporation created in 2001 by
Senator Kidd and basically it
gets a
percentage of the severance tax
committee on this corporation
who have a background in
finances is step number one. I
just want to share with the body
something that a fellow lawyer
depth of financial investment
knowledge and analytical and
curious mind, sound business
judgment and integrity. And so
again, I commend the governor
for this appointment, and I'm
See no debate, Senator Worth to
close. Uh, thank you Mr.
President. Thank you, members. I
ask unanimous consent. The
records show the roll's been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative, except
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
15, 2024 to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico Senate, Senator Worth,
uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and thank you members. Miss
Allie is here with her husband
a huge Senate welcome and
congratulations.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. We are
on that still in that order of
business confirmations and I'll
yelled to send had a meal.
Mr. President, I ask that the
Senator Scott
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Pursuant to Senate executive
letter number 17 dated.
the small business investment
corporation.
Mr. Grasham is a respected
member of banking community in
the, in our small community of
Hobbs.
And
Chamber of commerce.
And with that,
I would stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator Scott. We're
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and I, I would have a, a, a
question of the Senate rules
chair, uh, if, uh, Senator Duhig
We're asking for a, a term to
commit
on February 15th.
Of 2024.
Why we're backdating this.
When someone's already evidently
been serving. So,
So Mr. President, um, first,
many of the the Borden
commission positions that come
for Senate confirmation. Those
one of those exceptions, uh, but
Mr. President, we have on our
list right now, folks who need
to be confirmed, uh, about 170
people.
Um, there are a lot of boards
appointed with the advice of the
Senate, we create more. Um,
usually, now rules is one of
those meetings that can meet an
interim to do confirmation
hearings. And so 2 years ago, we
interim meetings to try to catch
up on that big long list, uh,
because I did not think that
would be, be fair, uh, to the
minority, and so, uh, that is
Thank you Center woods, uh,
thank you for the explanation
and, and, uh,
Madam Chair, let's get her done.
chamber.
Hearing no objection.
Seeing no further debate on this
reappointment, Senator Scott to
close.
And all those present have voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Gresham as a member of the Small
Business Investment Corporation
for term commencing on February
15, 2024 to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico Senate.
To thee.
Small business.
Investment Corporation.
Senator Jami, Mr. President, I
ask that the credentials of
Senator Greg Neibert be
presented to the full Senate for
consideration as member of the
message number 58 dated January
8, 2025.
I move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Greg
morning because of course we all
know representative slash
Senator Greg Kneipper, we mostly
struggled over what to call him.
So I just do believe this is one
of our governor's best
appointments, uh, having known a
Uh, he's an attorney, uh, he's
smart, he's kind, he's
thoughtful. We all agree kind if
he talks too much, uh, that's
We also all agreed that the PRC
really needed an attorney and we
Uh, she told him that what was
missing from the PRC was better
communications with the governor
and the legislature.
he's had 35 years as an
attorney. Uh, we believe he's
gonna be able to look at the
statutes around the PRC and
their regulations and perhaps
confirmation, and I know we'll
all have something more to say
about him.
Thank you. We do have debate on
this confirmation. I'll begin
Uh, a question, so I, I don't
need to yield, uh, Madam Prote.
But I, I would like to.
Let the members know something
And they, they hear two sides of
issues, and they tried to find
the proper answer, and there's
And the consumer.
To, to
Rule somewhere where it's, it's
In the public's best interest.
And I am so happy that you
agreed to do this. Senator
Nibert commissioner Neibert.
And uh
I know that.
Madam Protem, you did a
wonderful job presenting a
wonderful guy. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Munoz.
made a difference. I mean, it
has made a world of difference
and professionalize them, uh.
They're just completely
Now commissioner Neibert.
Oh, slash.
Uh, I mean, you couldn't pick a
better pick, right?
I'm here to help you succeed.
I'm here to help the PRC
succeed. We need the best in New
Mexico. You are one of the best,
uh, I do owe you an apology, but
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
too stand here to support
Senator Nibert since he got a
promotion and, and moved himself
his first task was to stamp out
and abolish redundancy and
saying things again, so, uh, I
hope that he takes that
seriously. I hope that his
sponsor understands that all of
shaking his head, so absolutely
the PRC, the governor could not
have picked a better.
PRC commissioner and so I stand
in full support. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
A guy that I've known for years
has been described as thinking
deeply and thoroughly.
I can't wait to get him around
the coffee shop back home.
Like all of the rest of you, I
stand in strong support. He's
been a friend of mine for many
years.
And
Pinto, Senator Gallegos, and
Senator Cervantes and Senators.
So, Mr. President, sounds like
this is his first confirmation,
which it is, uh, and I
restructure. It wasn't like
everyone agreed that was the way
to go, but I think what's
happened is we have a commission
now that as Senator Woods said,
plays an extraordinarily
important role and it's a
have someone like commissioner
Nibert, uh, there to be able to
work through these super
Judiciary, we don't have any
lawyers. I know that's any
Republican lawyer.
That's a challenge. But again, I
think everything's worked out
and this happens for a reason
Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
stand in really strong support
of.
and kind of getting to
understand we did become very
good friends. I do consider you
a friend, um.
Commissioner Nibert and you're a
conversations, but you also, as
has been said, you're very
detail oriented, and you brought
details to the floor, to the
conversation that many of us
be the one chosen, and here you
are today. I will say that I
hope that you're in my district.
Let's find out where you are
because you could be in my
like, you know, the, um, the
insurance company, but, um, I
will say that one of your
Positive things that will work
well in what you're going into,
Senator Neibert served in the
House on the House government
elections and Indian affairs
Committee.
So I hope you do not lose sight
of what you have advocated for
our even heard in that committee
for our Native American
populations, and I hope we do
forward into that commission.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pinto.
Senator Gaos.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
stand, I don't know if I'd say
I'm strong support.
they don't know. Pro Tem was
talking about he talks a lot in
uh late at night, uh, when we're
in the house, he stopped the
very, very long time. I don't
know if you got that from Sarah
Cher, but I can tell you he can
deep dive into everything.
him to represent New Mexico in
China and have an attorney and
also someone from Roswell over
there in a different country was
very helpful to us. Uh, we won
partner in the PRC and I know
that he's a friend of the
Senate, so we look forward slash
Um, thank you, colleagues. I
rise to join and support the
sponsor and, uh, Senator
Commissioner Neibert, um, many
of you all may not know this.
There's the reason why the
leadership centers of a
back over here, right? And the
reason they put me next to a
Republican over here is to
conspire, right? Um, and, and,
and I had um a couple of
leadership does that very
purposely. Senator Worth has
done that. It happened to me
back in the house days as well
too. They'll, they'll try and
put people like Senator Neibert
who is reasonable and, and
ripples. And, and we had a lot
of really great terrific
conversations back here. And so
I want, I want all of you to
know that, that that is part of
my great respect for, for Greg.
organization that meets every
year.
And just think of judiciary
Committee in your nightmare, uh,
because it's a week long to 10
every eye I dotted and everyt
crossed and, and, you know, it
was uh it was Ivy Soto's dream,
you know, I mean, and, and Greg,
uh, participated in the Uniform
meeting on time paying attention
and, and with stand at the
microphone and command a great
deal of respect and I'll, I'll
miss you there, perhaps. I don't
know you can still do that or
not, uh, but I know you'll do
with uh Philip Laderoy to go see
Carlos Santana.
Um,
and I gotta tell you this guy's
out of place in a Carlos Santana
concert.
Terribly out of place.
tell you that, that he comes to
the PRC from the private sector,
which I respect from a very
esteemed law firm for those of
you that don't know, uh, we're
very privileged to have somebody
who's gonna give up, I'm sure
contribution so I, I wanna share
with my colleagues and and thank
you for your service, Greg.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. We
But Mr. President, there was a,
a bill I had last year that I
And at first, Mr. President, I
had this knee-jerk reaction of,
well, he's just trying to kill
my bill because he disagrees
with me politically, um, and
then the more I listened, the
suggestions
We're fantastic and, and when
addressed, made the bill far,
far better, uh, and serving with
him, I think really helped me to
thank you for that, uh, slash,
and thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Doig. We have
Senator Scott next. Thank you,
Me making the mistake of calling
you Mr. Speaker. And while I
have not yet made that error,
I'm confident that it will occur
Issues that will come before him
in the public regulation
commission.
And if he needs a calculator.
the privilege of er of serving
with Senator Nebert on Spack,
um, last year, and I I came to
really respect his legal
from that perspective and I
really grew to respect his um
his legal analysis.
And his um thoughtfulness and
on, um, so I really think that
what he's gonna do for us in, in
the, in the commission is really
And do a great job for us. So I,
I rise in strong support and
think this was an excellent
nomination by the governor.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Lopeza.
for this position. I appreciate
uh Senator Stewart bringing this
forward, but I do have a problem
with the word slash.
my friend for 35+ years he still
had color in his hair, OK,
whenever I first met him.
He does work to find common
But I know that he will do what
is right for his position and
for what's right for the Mexico,
so thank you very much and I
stand in strong support my
Senator Stewart to close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
wanna thank the body for their
comments, um, with I ask
unanimous consent that the
senators. We're voting all
senators to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
commencement on January January
1st, 2025 and expiring December
31st, 2030 has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate, Senator Stewart, let's
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent. We
go without our business.
Introduction of legislation.
We're in that business
introduction of legislation.
The reader will read.
Committee, an act relating to
public liability, establishing
coverage limits on insurance
coverage offered by the risk
management division of the
General Services Department,
166 section 8 as amended. Senate
Bill 182.
Senate Bill 182, having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
representatives Lord and
Gonzalez, an act relating to
economic development, promoting
economic development in the
Business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance,
and Senate Bill 183.
Senate Bill 184 introduced by
income exemption pursuant to the
income Tax Act, Senate Bill 184
Senate Bill 184 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate Tax
A
Scott
And Gallegos.
An act relating to crime,
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 185.
Senate Bill 186, introduced by
Senator Wirth, an act relating
I haven't been read twice. My
title is Order Princeton
referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 186.
allowing for the death penalty
for murdering a peace officer.
Senate Bill 187 17 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Stephanics
And Hamblin
And representative Zamora.
Justice's website that displays
consumer complaints filed
against rooftop solar panel
installers and includes
directions for consumers to file
referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 188.
Senate Bill 189 introduced by
assistance.
Expanding eligibility for public
assistance programs.
Senate Bill 189 189 haven't been
Then Senate Finance Committee,
that's Senate Bill 189. Senate
Bill 190 introduced by Senator
Pope, an act relating to state
reduction task force and the
homeless reduction advisory
Council, making an
appropriation. Senate Bill 190
190 haven't been read twice by
titles.
Introduced by senators Trujillo.
Stephanics, Charlie.
And Brandt
An act making an appropriation
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
Then Senate Finance, that's
Senate Bill 191.
Senate Bill 192 introduced by
amending certain property tax
exemptions for veterans to
reflect changes made to the
exemptions pursuant to
constitutional amendments
approved by voters at the
transferred in the same tax year
by written requests to the
county assessor, providing that
a limitation on of on increases
in the valuation of residential
requirement that a form
declaring a property as
residential be mailed to the
property owner, amending form
requirements for notices of
and adjusting it for inflation,
clarifying revenue streams of
the county property valuation
fund providing an administrative
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate Bill 192.
Zen a bill 193 introduced by
senators O'Malley, Padilla.
Charlie
drugs. Cenel 193 193 haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business
Transportation Committee, then
An act relating to trade
practices, adding a definition
to the franchise Termination
Act.
Requiring notice of termination
title is order print and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 194.
Senate Bill 194 introduced by
Introduced by senators Brant
Sanchez, Ramos, and Gallegos.
An act relating to human rights
prohibiting anti-Semitic
discrimination.
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Bill 195.
Zenabel 196 introduced by
if released pending trial and
then no release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community.
Confirming the prosecution's
burden of proof in pretrial
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 196.
Authority to make loans to
purchase equipment for emergency
medical services system
improvement projects for which
funding has been granted
pursuant to the emergency
medical Services Fund Act.
Senate Bill 197197 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee,
for a current year's
supplemental appropriation for
the reinstatement of the
provider rate increase in the
family, infant, toddler program
Committee, Senate Bill 198.
Senate Bill 199 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo.
An act relating to alcohol,
Senate Bill 199 Senate Bill 199
having been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Health. I'm sorry to
the Senate tax.
Business Transportation
Committee.
affairs, declaring the first
Tuesday in November as a public
holiday designated as state
holiday to vote. Senate Bill
Senate Joint Resolution 7
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and Pope.
committees to provide lists of
nominees to the governor for
appointment of non-student
members to the boards of regents
of state educational
institutions.
Thenenate Judiciary Committee
that Senate Joint Resolution 7.
You have to Senate Majority
Leader Peter Worz take us to the
that's it for today. Just again,
as I mentioned upfront tomorrow,
we're gonna come in at 11:30, so
a little bit later, but we have
a joint session at noon. So I
session, uh, but now is the time
for committee chairs to announce
committees this afternoon and
tomorrow morning. Thank you,
Senator Wertz. We'll start with
Senator Munoz. Thank you, Mr.
Lanier, so hopefully he's
listening. Uh, the, the other
thing, Mr. President, the, the
president has rescinded his
order today and so
that stopped and so I we'll be
able to move forward with the
Thank you Senator Munoz. Senator
Souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
think I've sort of been handed
all the stuff dealing with the
basketball game that's coming
up. Everyone got their shirt
use their equipment. There are
everything from ellipticals and
treadmills, the basketball game
Tuesdays and Thursdays 6 a.m. to
it's important we take care of
ourselves and that means make
sure you're getting some
exercise and fresh air. Please
take advantage of what Santa Fe
allows us over at Fort Mercy,
and if you're a basketball
player, it doesn't matter how
chambers. So, and, uh, Mr.
President,
We hope to see you there on a
regular basis as well.
Thank you, Senator Souls.
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
CYFD to join us today. We'll
have a hearing at the onset of
our meeting, which will begin at
2 on the history of CYFD from
inception. And so those of you
A new report from an arbitrator
after a prolonged arbitration
hearing from, uh, a report of
what were called co-neutrals to
subject.
Which is when we look
statistically at juvenile crime
in the state of New Mexico,
which I know is a new issue or
an issue important, not new,
those youth very oftentimes were
run through the CYFD process.
It shouldn't come as a surprise
to us.
But the data bears it out, that
shortly after missing that
opportunity at CYFD as they then
become criminals.
In their youth and we shouldn't
be surprised by that, but it'll
be fascinating to see the
Mexico, uh, and when we're
talking about criminal issues
and criminal laws, this is going
to be, I think, an important and
new topic for us to cover. So I
look forward to all of you
joining us at 2 o'clock in
Senate Judiciary.
than we usually do, and it's to
uh go over several bills that we
did not finish yesterday or
finish, yeah, finished
finance so we will get through a
couple of substantial bills and
then we'll get to the finance.
at the end, room 311 at 8:30
room 311 and on the agenda is SB
1 SB 2, and SB3. Um, so please,
uh, members of SPAC, join us
then.
Thank you, Senator C Lopez.
Senator Hamlin.
Josh Sanchez, Senator Sanchez,
and also vice chair, uh, Senator
Bergmans, we will be having our
meeting tomorrow, 30 minutes
after we get back, I believe,
from the house or after we're
gonna do it in my radio voice.
For you, Mr. President. Tax
business and transportation
tomorrow afternoon at 3 in room
321.
Very well done, Senator thank
you very much.
recess until 11:30 tomorrow
morning. There are no objection
to send it to Santarecess to
11:30 a.m. tomorrow.
