Dell.
Center Figueroa.
Senator Harmio.
Senator Lanaire.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Senator share
Senator Shendo.
Senator Souls.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Worth.
Senator Woods.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
rise for the invitation to be
led today by Rabi Rabbi Jack
Schlachter.
From Mahomacombe synagogue,
Santa Fe, New Mexico. Please
remain standing for the Pledge
Lopez. Thank you, Lieutenant
Governor Morales for providing
me with this opportunity to
share some remarks. Many of you
will remember my first rabbi in
time, I'm the rabbi of the
synagogue in Los Alamos, the Los
Alamos Jewish Center. I'm also a
member of the steering committee
cultural, and social service.
organizations was formed in the
wake of the Hamas atrocities of
October 7th, 2023, collectively
explicitly that one of the
purposes of the JCRCNM is to
ensure the security of the
Jewish community in the face of
rising anti-Semitism.
injustice in our community, and
it was through the ILA that I
was fortunate to meet Pastor
Harry, who graciously offered me
a slot on the schedule.
to remind you those are words
that sound the same but means
something different, so they
sound like the word presidents,
but they have a different
that are regarded as examples or
guides to be considered in
subsequent similar
circumstances. So an example of
a sentence with precedence would
that you remind yourselves
during your discussions today
that this is the fifty-seventh
New Mexico legislature, and
there have been significant
challenges that previous
legislation.
navigation of earlier thorny
topics sets the tone for your
own efforts.
The 2nd homophone precedence, P
precedence over doing what is
best for me personally.
I pray that on this precedence
day and on each day of this
ago and closed by chanting some
words in Hebrew from the
biblical book of Numbers, and I
hope you don't mind that my
singing takes precedence over
choir Coro de Cara. So in
English, the words are God bless
you and protect you. God deal.
Kindly and graciously graciously
You've,
they
You've
the
a
pan.
ha ha ha.
You may be seated.
Once again, we'd like to welcome
you to today's session of the
New Mexico Senate and now you
have the Senate Majority floor
leader Peter Worth to take us to
that first order of business.
for President's Day, so I'd like
to all stand and he'll come and
use my mic right here and let's
all hear a
Rising rendition.
Oh, sake, can you see by the
dawn's early life.
What's so proud.
we have
at the twine.
the spa.
Or the
we
You
The bombs bursting in.
gave
Oh,
Or the
of the
And the
of
Senator Wirth, thank you Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection. We're in
And Rabbi, thank you for your
words and your song and
a good day on Friday where there
was really good bipartisan
discussion on a huge behavior
health bill that I think this
chamber certainly put the
interests of the state first and
Senator, Senator Padilla, uh,
thank you. Good morning, Mr.
President, and, and I couldn't
agree with the leader's comments
more and with the rabbi show us
the back of his, uh, yarmulke.
both in the gallery and on the
Senate floor. Senator Padilla,
uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
excuse senators Hickey.
And Senator Souls.
Senator Souls, Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Padilla. Senator
Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and I too want to thank the
rabbi for his great words, uh,
appreciate that very much. And
Mr. President, today, I've got a
few people out, but only one
that needs to be excused, uh,
In case of a call.
Thank you, Mr. President, no
objection. So ordered. Thank
you, Senator Woods. Senator
Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
at 5 o'clock is the last day to
submit drafting requests for
both bills and capital outlay.
So if you've got a final bill,
you want to get drafted, you've
got to open the file by 5
Senators Heinrich, uh, Lujan,
and Congresswoman Ledger
Fernandez, so we'll keep
everyone.
Give a sense of timing on that.
Munoz who I think is still up
presenting a bill in Senate
education.
Um
Tomorrow in terms of events, uh,
the American Heart Association
introduce our guests, we're
gonna go ahead with the
certificate and I want to make
sure we have a chance to do
that, uh, before we get pulled
over the joint session. So, uh,
if members can introduce guests,
Lopez. Senator Padilla, uh,
thank you very much, Mr.
President. I appreciate the
opportunity and unanimous
consent to introduce a.
couple of guests that are seated
to your left up on the rostrum.
He no objection. Thank you so
specific reason, and I wanted to
make sure that I had a chance to
introduce them. I want to first,
uh, mention Jessica Martinez,
who many of us know in in a
couple of different roles. I'm
gonna ask her to stand. She is
What a terrific and kind and
loving New Mexican this person
is. I really, we see a lot of
people that make connections
with their students, but I met
her when she was at a Trisco
would literally say that and
mouth those words because she
bends over backwards in so many
different ways to lift students
up and do a wonderful job that
way. Every role that she's been
in, so I'm not surprised.
And I would also like to ask our
superintendent for Albuquerque
Public Schools, Doctor Gabriela
Duran Blakey to stand. She's
with us today. She's the
English language learner
teacher. She has a doctorate and
a master's in educational
leadership from the University
of New Mexico and a bachelor's
from New Mexico State
University, so she's one of
knows a lot about the ins and
the outs, the inner workings of
the school district there. In
addition to all the other
various roles that she has, um,
she's also, and I did not know
this, and she's a very good
she serves on several national
board.
words and represents New Mexico
very well, including right here
at home, the Explorer Children's
Science Museum, and I do ask the
you, Mr. President. I'm hoping
she'll bring her violin and play
for the Senate at some point. I
like that. Thank you, Senator
Padilla. Uh, we do have Senator
Pinto, follow by Senator Cio
Sports events even was an
athlete and Mr. Jimena's
rendition is probably the most
unique one I have heard my
Thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to introduce
my guest.
Proceed, Senator.
Thank you. Um, I'm really
from CNM, but it was then TBI.
She then obtained her bachelor's
of science degree in nursing at
UNM, the first in her family to
receive a bachelor's degree and
nurse practitioner in 2022, she
received her doctorate in
nursery, nursing, and she has
obtained an advanced
certification in hospice and
geriatric population and an end
of life care and is a nurse
practitioner who now practices
in palliative care for our
veterans.
What Claire loves most about her
work is connecting with her
welcome Claire Iron Ironside.
Thank you Senator Cio Lopez.
Senator Hamlin, thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you,
introduce my guest to the Senate
body. You got to hear him sing,
uh, our beautiful national
anthem, uh, but one thing I
would, uh, there are a couple
things that I would love for the
colonials, uh, that's a very,
very active community in La
Mesa. And, uh, one of my
favorite things about La Mesa is
the community center there uh
that Orlando also was very
Orlando has also been a mariachi
vocalist for over 30 years, uh,
as a member of the LGBTQ
community and somebody who
Gives back to his community, uh,
tenfold and so Senate body and
Thank you, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'd
like to introduce, it's my honor
to introduce.
She's 6 years old and is in the
first grade.
Attending Sunset Mesa Elementary
School in Albuquerque.
During the winter months, she
heads up to Taos each weekend to
ski.
Ski with the shredders.
Her aunt, I believe, is up in
the gallery.
She went away.
There she is.
And Mr. President, I would just
like to.
Thank you, Mr. President, I too
want to welcome Pearl to the
chamber, her aunt has been a
longtime family friends with the
Brantley family, and so I feel
like she's a little bit of
a number of people I've had, uh,
my husband Tom was here. I had
my bonus daughter Brinley. I
want to thank the Senate for
welcoming them on Friday. I also
wanted to tell you that I really
presenting on the importance of
the lieutenant governor and the
role that the Senate plays, and
so Desert Cares Elementary is
getting a big presentation, uh,
from her as a, as an exchange
Ariella was with you, my 4 year
old niece had his head caught in
the folding chair down here and
he saved his life, but there's
one in every family, I guess,
appreciation for the leadership
that we've seen over the weekend
by environment Secretary James
Kinney. On Friday, we got an
emergency call from an
environment.
Terrazas, and myself, um, I
appreciate that he came in and
because we involved him in an
issue that was happening with
the mines early, that he was not
So I want to thank him for his
leadership. He did poke fun at
me a little bit because I had
just gone pretty hard on him on
a bill that he was carrying,
Senator Wirth, you'll get a kick
was, but I just wanna thank him
for, for putting Grant County
first, for making sure that our
environment stays safe and
working for a room full of
Republicans to make sure uh that
we had the best possible
outcome. So thank you for his.
Thank you Mr. President. um, I
would like to introduce my
I, they are all juniors and um
I'll start off with Dominique.
He loves to run track. He does
He says pretty much never really
seeing the sun. I hope that he
gets that a whole lot here now,
Mr. President, um, his mom is
from the Philippines and
And to always be reminded that
there's nothing that he can't
do. He, uh, also grew up, um,
Being a second generation
to 20. Uh, he is a mixed boy
with dreams of going to the Air
Force Academy.
And he is his parents always
I also have with me Angela
Chavez. Angela, uh, was born and
raised New Mexican here
attending New Mexico High uh
Manzano High School. She's also
someone that will help
betterment of the community in
this beautiful land of
enchantment, and she plans to
become a teacher to continue the
education of public Spanish
program.
Manzano High School. She's a
proud Hispanic that comes from
Hispanic parents. Her mom is
from Jalisco and her dad is from
Chihuahua and also her mom is
made it a trend to talk about
the importance of representation
and as the daughter of a woman
who cleans houses in a
construction.
worker, I could not be prouder
than to have these students join
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. And as I
mentioned, we have a very
special certificate for the
family of Senator John Arthur
Smith who are here with us, and
I'd yield to Senator Munoz.
Mr. President, whether the
reader read the certificate, no
objection, the reader to read.
John Arthur Smith does hereby
extend its sincere, heartfelt
condolence and sympathy to the
bereaved family and friends of
the deceased and whereas Senator
biology from the University of
New Mexico in 1966 and where at
Senator Smith worked as a real
estate appraiser and whereas
Bradley and former senators
Marty Chavez, Mary Jane M.
Garcia and Shannon Robinson. And
whereas many of his colleagues
move.
D Aldao and Joseph A. Fidel, and
whereas he became chair of the
Senate Finance Committee in 2008
serving in that role until 2020.
2015 to 2016 and 2019 to 2020.
And where our Senator Smith
and Eric Shani.
And whereas Senator Smith was
known for working cordially and
effectively with legislators
from both sides of the aisle,
co-sponsoring the legis
legislation that led to the
historic establishment of the
early childhood education and
care fund in 2020 with
Heaton saved the city of
Carlsbad from a sinkhole and
working alongside Senator Manny
M. Aragon and others to secure
Eagle Nest Lake State Park.
the legislature for a total of
32 years, and he holds the title
of the 5th longest serving
senator in state history and
in 2003, the government
restructuring task force in
2010.
In the state permanent fund task
thanking him for securing $35
million in total for the new
building and helping the
hospital's parent corporation
redesigned the project to reduce
its cost.
who worked tirelessly to secure
funding for research and public
service projects and whereas
Senator Smith passed away on
October 7th, 2024 at the age of
cherished colleague who served
with distinction and integrity,
a rare leader who commanded and
accomplished bipartisan trust
And whereas Senator Smith is
survived by his Demming high
school sweetheart and wife of 63
years, Jeannette.
grandson Urban and neighbors
John Strand and the Sweeters.
Now therefore be resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
dedicated to serving his
community and the state of New
Mexico.
Signed and sealed that the
capital in the city of Santa Fe,
Senator George K. Munoz.
We'll open it up to the body for
comments. Thank you, Senators. I
do have members on the list. Um,
we've been notified by the House
that we have 20 minutes. I wanna
make sure that we can get all
Thank you, Mr. President, and
again, the family needs to know
we would probably spend hours
doing this and we'd love to have
ours to do that, uh, given our
schedule, but, uh, I want to
and a lot of lobbyists, frankly,
and friends went down to
Palomas, Mexico, uh, for a
celebration of, of John and John
was not the kind of person who
liked to be celebrated.
I attended his beautiful, uh,
funeral service, uh, we're
fortunate to have to be joined
by the governor, by you, uh, I'm
a lieutenant governor in, uh, in
Deming and again just the
outpouring of love for John in
But what I would like to do is
do something that I'm not
supposed to do and against the
rules, which is discuss what
happens in our caucus. We're
supposed to keep all that
private we sacrosanct, but I'm
gonna breach the rule for this
that caucus.
John was respected and always
followed, always.
And so for all the people who in
all the groups who would
criticize John and his politics
rarely see anymore in this
chamber and I'll just tell you
the last thing, uh, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, um, one of my greatest
joys was seeing John every
Sunday morning in Mass with
um, Sunday mornings and see John
Co,
and the fighting and and so
forth it was really wonderful to
see the two of you, Jeanette,
um, Sunday mornings and see John
Com, which is, uh, something
that again maybe not everybody
around here got a chance to see
a peaceful man and certainly in
man in the end, um, Anthony and
and the boys did a wonderful job
with the eulogies and it was
just beautiful service. So thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senators.
on the Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
And first, a huge
to support us when we're up here
and you know, when you're in
these really challenging roles,
and he certainly was in one of
had the opportunity to work
incredibly closely with Senator
Smith as we navigated through
some
had a constitutional crisis, the
governor eliminated our branch
of government, eliminated the
higher ed departments and John
was there to just provide that
guidance as as Senator Cervantes
distinctly and I will always
remember this with the early
childhood care fund in 2020, he
sat in my office. It was $300
million of non-recurring money.
that that little amount of money
is now $9 billion and it's just
an extraordinary legacy. So I
just want to thank each and
every one of you and Jeanette.
Uh, I was very honored as well
Senator, Senator Scott. Thank
you Mr. President, I only had
One occasion to work with the
the state was absolutely broke.
We had a crisis.
Develop in the southern part of
Anywhere.
Until Senator Kernan.
Representative Brown, myself,
and other Southeast legislators
The folks in Carlsbad should be
Eternally grateful for all of
that help because it came at a
time.
Thank you, Mr. President. um.
Probably many of us have a
freshman story about um.
About Senator Smith, John Arthur
the day before it started, so I
wasn't really socialized in how
a Senate is supposed to behave
and what you're supposed to do
and when the budget came up.
the state of New Mexico would
get a living wage, so I make my
motion or whatever and everybody
just looks at me like, what are
you doing? And then Senator
We don't normally do things like
that on the floor because the
budget has all been worked out
and we don't have amendments on
the fly on the floor to such an
done in his very sort of way,
and I was like, oh, OK, and I
sat down and what I'll never
forget is that he sat with me.
afterwards.
he took the time to do that, uh,
with a freshman who obviously
didn't know uh.
How things worked and I I like I
said, I just will never forget
his kindness. Thank you, Mr.
I to rise and support more and
to recognize.
You know, a gentleman who
served, you know, our state for,
for many years. I know there's a
lot that can be said, but you
know, he, he knew the budget
hear and when we chatted a few
times about some of the things.
He would look over and says,
hope springs eternal.
That was one of his, I think,
favorite quotes. I don't know if
speaks to, uh, you know, Senator
Smith. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sendo.
Senator Lopez.
Uh thank you very much, Mr.
about for Senator Smith. We sat
on the back row for many, many
years.
And I will say as senator Sah
Lopez said he he always had an
that he would that we would chat
with on the back row over the
years.
Um, but one thing, uh, Mr.
President, is.
He had a
budget, and we had to do some
cuts.
I know it was not something.
That Senator Smith.
It hurt.
Cervantes said he did it not
with uh.
With good heart.
Knowing that we had to do what
we had to do.
Um, true to what he would say,
um, and that's one thing Mr. Mr.
President, that I learned here
years ago when I first started,
Jeannette, thank you for sharing
him, for you and your family.
It is a sacrifice.
But you're also part of our
family.
To you and each one and uh thank
you, Senator Munoz, for bringing
this forward, um, Senator Smith,
uh, as we say, presente thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President and
members of the chamber.
I guess the the most eloquent
words can be was um.
Uh, what a person, you know,
friend.
And I've known him for quite a
few years as a House member and
being in house appropriation.
You know, and on the LFC, you
passed away that I was appointed
to his position and coming in. I
was very fortunate also by the
prote uh at that time with Prote
and we kept that up, you know,
we uh we, we talked at least
once a month, you know, we, we
saw a lot of things, but um the
And not so much, and at one
time, still being in the house
part and he called me and he
said, uh, I need a favor from
you.
Uh, not agreeable because uh we
were going into cash balances.
And uh can you work with them
and let them know that uh yes,
we are going to use these funds,
enough, you know, that worked
very, very well, and, uh, again,
you know, it was just a very
delight and very pleasant person
President. Thank you, members.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Ramos.
Thank you, Mr. President and uh
and I was walking in there
campaigning and we saw each
other, give each other a hug,
and he invited me to sit with
him and, you know, I had the
privilege to talk with him and
listen to his stories for about
Listen to his advice, um, he was
to me, he had one of the most
brilliant minds I've ever, I'd
ever been around, and he was
always a, a great man when I
and ask him for advice, so thank
you very much for sharing, uh,
Senator John Arthur with us and
uh God bless you all and thank
you very much.
Thank you Senator Ramos.
Senator Townsend.
Tell you I was, I was gonna
mention the Brianwell incident
that John Arthur was absolutely
responsible for it, but probably
invited down there as a
freshman, many years ago.
Paula was uh.
Sitting at a table with
Jeannette.
introduce his wife. Now, let me,
let me do that for him. And so
he embarrassed the heck out of
me. I've never forgot it, and I
think every time I saw him after
When I started in the
legislature, I uh I asked some.
Trusted friends like.
Oh
Uh, Joe Steele.
And, uh, without.
A minute or a second of, of a
thought, he said, well,
He mentioned the lady sitting up
there in red, Mary Kay.
And said, those are the, those
are the ones you ought to kind
on. So I always have respected
the fact that
Even out of the chambers when I
was in district.
When
John Arthur's name came up.
wasn't supporting it, you might
as well go do something else
because you weren't going very
far, so he did a really good
job. Jeanette, family, thank you
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
thank the family for sharing
catch, uh, the senator in a
quiet moment he was very willing
to have a serious conversation,
so if there was something that
was missing in the budget that I
and he was willing to listen, he
was willing to talk, but often
he would say if we don't have
the money, what would you cut in
order to do that and he would
Sergeant at Arms.
Mr. President, we have honored
guests from the House of
Representatives with an
important message for the
Senate we have representative
Mr. President, the, uh, we
invite the Senate to the House
floor for joint session.
Don't really know what else to
say beyond that. Please come.
You did well. Congratulations.
get to every member on the list
so we're gonna have Senator
Padilla followed by Senator
Woods, Senator Campos, and
closing up with Senator Munoz.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I also rise, you
all the wonderful interactions I
had with him, I, I will say he
was just a great, great mentor
and a great teacher on a number
of subjects, but, uh, we were
doing something here on the
floor and we're having a really
later or whatever. And so, uh,
Mr. President, I went over to my
office, which is right outside
the chamber here next to the
leader's office.
And I walk in there and I'm
carrying a bunch of papers and
I'm doing this and that,
whatever, and I walk in there
And so I walk in there and I see
him and I literally dropped all
of my papers. He's sitting on
the couch right there, just, you
know, relaxing a little bit. He
wanted to talk to me about a
couple of things.
bill that I was gonna have in
this committee took the time to
do it with me. He didn't have to
do that at all. I was still a
freshman and, and I felt just so
honored and so I really
I don't know if you remember.
I'm looking right at his honey
right now, and we were gonna go
across the border because we had
a committee hearing on on the US
side and we all walked through
store, and I thought, wow, New
Mexico, we have a really good um
experience, you know, when you
serve with someone like a John
Arthur Smith because he can be.
into my office from now on if if
someone like that's in there.
Thank you. Thank you Senator,
Senator Woods.
Uh, Mr. President, what I
remember about John Arthur was
committee, and we decided that
we would hear about a limiting
Tax credits. I don't know if
anybody remembers that or not.
What would happen if we started
all over, draw the line says
we're gonna start over, get rid
of all the tax credits.
Mr. President,
their tax credit. Why that was
so important, and I guarantee
you my heart bled, but the part
that most people don't know, Mr.
President.
corporation Transportation
Committee sat there and was just
odded at all of those people
that came up and telling us how
That that tax money was the
people's money.
What in the state's money?
The state didn't own that money.
Every bit of that money that
And watch your spending with
both eyes open because it
affects.
Someone out there paying the
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods. Senator, uh, did you have
your hand raisedel.
Mr. President, thank you very
much.
especially coming in as a
rookie.
But you know what?
Every one of us that came in.
Our very first year up here, he
of us. So thank you all very
much for allowing him up here to
be able to do that. And my heart
hurts for y'all. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Campos.
So did Jeanette and of course to
Anthony to John David to pro
tempore paper to our majority uh
leader Jennings to the people
one of us and with Senator
Smith every moment was a
teaching moment so many years
back when.
Of course, they were remodeling
the capital and we were at the
to talk about what he was gonna
get there first thing in the
morning or the earlier one,
basically, uh, would arrange
things so we could have these
meetings.
really uh stuck out because
oftentimes we hear about how
serious and of course how
thoughtful the Senator Smith
was, uh, but this very first
One of the issues was the lost
Pet Act and those who have heard
about that, that basically was
a, uh, uh, a form of initiation
into the legislature.
morning as I opened the office
door where I was, uh, signed.
Uh, there was paper all over the
office. There were dog treats
Act bill that I was carrying.
Why did I have the office
decorated with all these things
and then come to find out later
But a couple of things that
really stuck with me over the
years.
Number one, what Senator Smith
continuously did.
And within that that meant and
he would continuously tell me,
he says, you're here to serve
the people, not yourself.
So there were a lot of great
lessons that were ingrained
words to express ourselves
because we knew each other very
well. And again, I'll continue
with the lessons that Senator
President, and where do you
start, Jeanette, 63 years of
marriage, right? Two great boys,
great grandkids, great family
that he raised, but John would
family. And he kind of led me
that way and, and I remember the
first time I met him, it was in
Senator Sanchez's office after a
primary election in 2009. I
didn't know who he was, right?
in Michael Sanchez's office, um,
but there's so much to say about
John Arthur Smith, but I think
He was treated unfairly when we
were in trouble in this state.
and knew his capabilities.
But when he had to make cuts. He
was labeled by somebody.
One of the most embarrassing
moments in Mr. President, you'll
remember this when we were in an
Smith.
But he was labeled unfairly. He
was doing what he was supposed
to do for the state.
He was doing what he was
supposed to do for the people in
New Mexico.
With the help of David Abbey
and, and learning through LFC, I
mean,
I wanna say Senator Morales, but
it's Mr. President Morales and,
teaching us.
He was teaching us in our
leadership roles and what we're
gonna face in New Mexico and how
we're gonna have to handle the
For 32 years that he served us,
the days, the times you missed
out when he was traveling the
road, almost got killed a couple
of times and would make that 4
or 5 hour trip from Deme. The
gratitude, uh, in 16 and 19 when
we could not, we should have not
been cashing checks.
He made sure that people in the
when there's lots of money, it's
always good to say, well, we got
lots of money, but you know, you
gotta save it you gotta spend
it, you gotta, you gotta put it
in places where it's there for
the future, and that's one of
and lead that vision in a time
when you didn't really have
money.
Really sets a character.
I remember all the evenings at
the bull ring in the corner
going toloma where senator.
want this and all enjoyed a a
reception for him and I flew in
and landed on a dirt runway and
spent a little time with him and
but, you know, we do those
things for the people we care
about and the people we respect
and the people we love and so.
For me
Thank you.
Senator John Arthur Smith
forever. Senator John Upter
Smith.
Please rise and be recognized.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter War to take us to that
next order of business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. So we
are going to go over to the
joint session, just a heads up,
we're not gonna do any 3rd
delegation and we returned 15
minutes after the joint session.
no objection to the Senate to
dissolve itself into committee
hall we can meet I know the
house is waiting for us, so
we'll head over there.
Promptly.
