When we get a little green in
the in the chambers and uh
This organization, the 4H
could I ask the reader to read
the proclamation before I
introduce a guest, please. Yes,
you say unanimous consent to
have the reader to read, the
reader will read.
extend its recognition and
acknowledgement to February 4,
2025 as 4H day in the Senate,
whereas 4H has been a premier
the ages of 5 and
18 participate in 4H youth
development programs statewide
and whereas 4H youth development
problem solving, decision
making, conflict resolution and
communication skills that
directly contribute to the
successful transition of young
people to productive adults and
over events in their lives and a
better ability to make decisions
on their own that they set goals
and take responsibility for
their actions that they can take
of 4H to the.
February 4th, 2025 be recognized
as 4 each day in the Senate
signed and sealed that the
Sherry de Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam President. The
Mexico. They, uh, continually
are working to better their
their themselves and their
communities that they represent,
statewide. And then very quickly
I'll introduce, uh, Wayne.
Chocky, who, uh, is a 4H leader
in Eddy County.
Kate Dion Lamont State 4H
Kayley Shoki, last but not
least, sees the Eddy County 4H
president.
Um,
I I think the.
The um
benefits of coming to.
respective clubs and to
represent themselves as leaders
to their organization. I really
appreciate the
I know candy's gonna get after
me because she wants to
introduce part of these people.
Well, let's help Senator
Townsend welcome the first group
Other announcements, Senator is.
Madam President, thank you very
much.
to put my glasses on so I can
read the names here.
Lacey night.
Lacey is from the apart in New
Mexico.
Halewood?
Kyle is from Broadview, New
She was born in Fort Worth, but
she moved to Roswell, so I'm
glad you're here.
And journey Sheehan, and she
I'm sorry that's not on this
list, but you know what? I'm
tickled to death that each one
of y'all are here. Now, let's do
something for the whole Senate
floor, OK?
President, I do want to point
out, everybody thinks well, 4H
is just for country kids. That
is definitely not the case. Our
projects out there for
The, the possibilities are
endless on what they can get to
do. 4H also has a national.
Convention and that's a lot of
younger members of 4H to mentor
them along.
And then take the advice from
the volunteer leaders and
parents that they have in the
clubs that you can, and they
will be having their state
convention in June, is that
Thank you Madam President, and I
want to thank for each for being
here today. They're developing
so many leaders in Rio Riba Los
Salvos, Santa Fe, and Sandoval
back on announcements one final
time. So, you know, I'm just
gonna say we go that our
business introduction of
legislation.
the objection on that.
Order of business introduction
Introduced by Senator Spencer
Zell, Senator Townsend, Senator
Box, Senator Scott, and Senator
Sanchez.
special schools Senate Bill 280.
Senate Bill 280 having been read
twice by title disorder printed
and referred to the Senate
liability, enacting the rule of
electric cooperative wildfire
Liability Act.
Requiring wildfire mitigation
plans, providing a for a review
Establishing limits on liability
and damage awards.
Establishing a two-year
limitation on the filing of
claims.
Section 7, as amended in Section
and referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee thanks to
Judiciary Senate Bill 281.
Senate Bill 282 introduced by
guardian ad litem and all
structured settlement transfers.
Senate Bill 282282 having been
read twice by titleser printed
and referred to the Senate
senators Ber Bergman's Bradley
Doig, and Tobiasin, an act
relating to children.
Requiring the children, youth
and Families Department to
determine an appropriate
alternative setting forth the
department's obligation
obligations when acting as the
child's representative payee
prohibiting the use of federal
provisions for the release of
federal benefits provided to
children in legal custody of the
state.
Senate Bill 283 28 have been
Senate Bill 284 introduced by
Senators Bergman's Doig, Charlie
Bradley, and Tobiasson.
insurance. Senate Bill 284. 284
have been read twice by tidal
disorder printed, referred to
the Senate tax, Business and
Senate Judiciary, Senate Bill
284, uh, Senator Peter Wirth,
thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous.nouncements.
the time for committee chairs to
announce committees this
afternoon and tomorrow morning.
Sin or souls. Thank you, Madam
President, Education Committee
will be meeting at 9 o'clock. We
Thank you, uh, Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, your
tax, business and transportation
committee will be meeting at
meeting at 2:30 in room 321.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Madam President,
um, Senate Finance will be
tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. in
room 321, we will only be
hearing one bill. It will be
SJR1.
Thank you, Senator Stephannis,
Committee will start at 8:30 on
Thursday morning and we will
start with Senate Bill 23, which
is the oil and gas royalty rate
changes. Some people thought we
Thank you very much, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Jaramillo, thank you, Madam
President. The Senate Democrats
will have a caucus meeting
tomorrow immediately following
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
with that unanimous sent the
Senate stand in recess until 11
o'clock tomorrow morning.
Seeing no objection, we will
