Senator Figueroa.
Senator Harmio, Senator Lopez.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Paul, Senator Pope.
President
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Souls.
San Stefani Steinborn.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Senators in the building, we are
Please stand
For the pledge to be led today
by Senator Charlie, the pledge
in Spanish to be led today by
Senator Figueroa and the salute
to the flag to be led by Senator
Thank you for everything that
you've done for us. Thank you
for allowing us to be here and
to try to figure out how to do
your will as we go through this
session.
that you want.
Fill our heart with that desire
and fill our brain with the
know-how to do that.
Lord, finally forgive us for all
of the things that we've done to
Good afternoon everyone. We'll
begin with Senator Peter Worth.
Thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous. Seeing no
objection on that order of
our afternoon session. We
appreciate that very much.
Uh, Madam President, I would
yield, I don't know that we have
any guests or other
Bill 522 when actually it's
Senate Bill 552, it's been
properly reflected in the, in
the journal and the locator, but
Uh, see no objection, we will
make that in the journal. Thank
you.
And thank you, Madam President,
I'd yield to any other members
if there are any announcements,
otherwise I can give us a sense
Public Schools and her daughter
Milena Archuleta, who's a nurse
practitioner with the University
of New Mexico Hospital working
with children with cancer. Our
families have been in San Pedro
on and on and so.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
Senate, if you can help me in
welcoming my two guests today.
Senator Jaramillo might need to
give us an update on the game
last night that he wanted me to
come with him. I couldn't do it,
but, uh, Senator Harmi, what
happened? Well, Madam President,
sad to report that the Espanola
Valley High School Sun Devils
lost the game by 3 points. Oh,
but we're coming back in the
state championship, but, so
don't worry, Madam President,
you, uh, Senator Harramilo.
Uh, so let me just give, uh,
kind of a roadmap for what we're
gonna do and see how far we get,
Senator Hamblin can get up to
tax and there's a big agenda
there.
So 1 through 7, we'll kind of
see how we do. Item number one
substitute for Senate Bill 137,
item 3 is center Tobiasin, uh,
Senate Bill 299. Item 4, Senator
is Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11,
Senator Brantley, and Madam
President, before we just go
there, I think what I'll do is.
Do the workup on the table just
almost everyone is in finance
what we do is we may jump around
a little bit, uh, as needed. A
lot of these are on the.
Yeah, are up there. So let's
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 238 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate.
inform the Senate that the House
has passed commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11 and request
received.
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go that
our business committee reports
no objection. We're on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
bill 233 has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with the recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee, respectfully
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
will read both committee reports
Those are postna, the I have a
committee report is adopted in
the journal will reflect they
were acted upon individually.
do is start with item number 5,
that's Senator Charlie, as folks
worked their way down and then
one senator Campos is down,
we'll jump back up to number
unanimous consent to excuse
Senators Pinto and Lopez until
they return to the chamber.
Uh seeing no objection, it is so
ordered. Madam President.
excused for the day and then
Senator Woods, Senator Brandt,
Senator Lanier.
And Senator Tobiasin until they
return to the, to the floor.
Thank you, Madam President.
Senator Charlie for item number
5, Senate Bill 41 as amended.
Seeing no objection, we are on
that order of business. 3rd
that all action for placing
Senate Bill 41 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to
debate, amendment, or
41, which mandates the creation
of the turquoise alert dedicated
to the rapid dissemination of
information regarding missing
communities face
disproportionate.
Rates of missing persons cases.
In fact, our state is also home
unsupported.
Senate Bill 41 seeks to address
this crisis by establishing a
turquoise alert system, ensuring
timely and effective
Alert and the silver alert, the
turquoise alert will serve as a
specialized tool facilitating
swift collaboration between law
enforcement agencies, media
Uh, about missing individuals,
we increase the chances of
reuniting them with their loved
ones quickly.
that aims to achieve the same
outcomes and in the first year
they issued 17 of them, 17 of
those individuals were found.
moral imperative. It signifies
our commitment to the safety and
well-being of all New Mexicans,
acknowledging the unique
challenges faced by our
affirming that every community
in our state deserves equal
protection.
And attention.
And Madam Chair, what I want to
When Ashly Mike went missing in
2016.
She was a little girl on the
Navajo Nation.
I attended a vigil in
Albuquerque, New Mexico for
Ashland.
And my
And gave Ashlyn's family
everything she had.
And it was
Her act of generosity.
I started working for the
coalition to stop violence
against Fast forward about a
At the hearing.
To prosecute the person who had
taken their daughter's life.
I testified with her mother in
Congress.
About the disparate treatment.
Of Native Americans when they go
missing by law enforcement and
the media.
early as this week about this
bill and how important. Madam
Chair.
Madam President,
This is a full circle moment for
Who have shared their story.
In the hopes
That something changes.
Thank you, Senor Charlie to
debate the bill Senator Lopez.
does.
Senator
This is a huge problem that
needs to be addressed. Could you
yes, uh, New Mexico, as I
mentioned in my testimony is
home to the highest rates um
with Albuquerque and Gallup
underfunding, we do not have.
Accurate data.
Outside of nonprofit
organizations that have sought.
that
Native American people, American
Indian people in the United
States face the highest rates of
Thank you, Madam President. um,
This the the amber alert has
turned out to be quite
successful, um.
information regarding the Amber
Alert, um, but as I mentioned
earlier, where this alert has
been issued in other states,
Washington, Colorado, and
is a serious problem that we
need to address and, um, the
other alerts have been extremely
successful, um, the turquoise
alert alerts in other states but
is missing, so I strongly
support this bill, and I urge
all my colleagues to.
support this bill. Thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sheer.
senator will yield.
Sir Charlie, do yield. Yes, she
yields, Madam President,
Senator.
The amber alert, depending on
the year, has been 4 or 5.
Uh, Madam President, it is
extremely difficult to forecast.
The amount of alerts that we
active cases in New Mexico of
missing uh American Indian
individuals.
To date.
Center share.
On average come per per year. I
think that's the question I'm
really asking. How many per year
on average per year.
Happen.
for, uh, Secretary Monet from
the Indian Affairs Department.
Uh, see no opposition of the
sergeant of arms will escort.
So Charlie, do you need the, the
question answered asked again.
Yes, madam sheriff, he'll repeat
currently active.
But
Just in the future, are we going
to get one alert, we're gonna
get 1000 alerts what at least
our best estimate.
unknown number, this, uh, in the
issuance of this alert.
Madam President, we estimate
that that number per year will
so there's, there's two parts of
this that I'm trying to figure
out myself. One is if you've
got, so we got 5 children that
are missing per year. If there
are 15.
And hopefully this is the way.
The flip side of that is 20% of
us
Not me, but 20% of New Mexicans
we go to 20, 5 children and, and
15.
Native Americans, how many more
people are going to turn off the
alert.
And if we turn off the alert,
we've, we've
So I, I'm, I'm reconciling that
in my mind. I think I'm over
that, but.
I want to make sure that we're
not overwhelming the system.
So that people just turn it off.
OK, and that's cause he texted
us a lot.
And I really wanted him to text
you.
So, uh, so that's a real, a real
An increase, are we going to
have this problem? We're not
going to know until it happens.
But the fact that there are 3
times more.
Native Americans than children.
jurisdictional issues and so
certainly around Gallup, around
Farmington.
And Cuba and that part of the
world, um, there's a variety of.
of jurisdictions.
city.
This doesn't fix any of those
jurisdictional issues at all.
The state police will send out
Unless you're cross deputized,
you can't really go.
Onto tribal land or go on to
other land.
Uh, so this, this doesn't fix
that. But what it does do,
problems doesn't fix that.
But if all of a sudden, several
1000 people now I say, whoa,
So I think that's a good, a good
plan.
But one other question that I
have, and I don't have this in
front of me right now, but in an
amendment, it's, uh, it talked
about
So then the next question is,
Most of the people that we're
talking about here are not
children. They're
Uh
How would we send out alerts?
How would we know whether
somebody was, was, was kidnapped
President, yes, um, and Senator,
what you are referring to in the
bill is involuntary.
Um
The turquoise alert does not go
beyond.
was modeled after, um, the
Silver Alert, which also refers
to involuntary, but in some of
these cases and talking about
More than 4 out of 5 individuals
will experience violence in
their lifetime.
And part of what that means is,
right, a family member knows,
um, and I do believe that this
would support that and Madam
Chair, uh, Madam President, I
really apologize for that. Um,
um, which is why we're striving
to ensure that the alerts are
used judiciously and
effectively.
Um, but it's important to remind
the body that each alert
continue to experience
jurisdictional.
Complexity
And bureaucracy.
Um, this is a state mandate that
community responsibility, and
we're asking our community
across the state to rise to the
occasion and help us find our
loved ones, Madam President.
consent to allow cameras on the
Senate floor.
And the Senate gallery. Why not?
Seeing no objection, we will
allow cameras on the floor and
in the gallery. I apologize
And I think that's a good thing.
In fact, that's the, that's the
reason for this, and, and that's
why I'm going to support this,
but I did want to bring up a
couple of issues here. It
fatigue, very concerned because
yes, while every alert
Represents a person.
If the rest of the people aren't
looking.
Because
The police
They're doing, they're doing
lots of things. They may be
looking to.
But the people that are finding
looking and so that's why uh I'm
certainly going to support this.
It's the fatigue.
That really, I wanted to just
make sure.
Right now we have 80% that are
and 20% that aren't.
And so, I just bring that up,
Senator Scott. Thank you, Madam
President. Will the
Senator yield for a question or
Process differs from the
existing alert processes and why
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
thank you for that question. How
this process differs is it's
addressing a population of
are building an accountability
for this population, um, of
individuals who are going
missing.
And
Reported anywhere in the
existing alert system is, is
that
What I'm hearing.
So Charlie, uh, Madam President,
American Indian people
throughout the state. Uh, in
fact, the we have information
that
Again, I'm inquiring about
How this process is different
from the existing alert system
and I would presume.
Uh, Madam President and Senator
Scott, I'm gonna thank your
colleague for coming over and
helping me with this answer, um.
This alert will serve the
middle, that gap of individuals
who are, um,
50 who are, um, the most um.
Most overrepresented in the
data.
debates, Senator Shindo.
Uh, uh, thank you, uh, Madam
President, will they sponsor
you?
Yes.
Shes
Uh, Madam President, uh,
alert, Madam President.
It's the public is our, the
state police always the lead
agency.
be
Let's say uh Navajo or one of
the pueblos.
With the lead agency then be the
Pueblo or the Navajo Nation.
thank you for that question. Um,
it would still be the, the state
police, but tribal agencies can
contact the state police to
issue this alert, and also, um,
BIE and our state partners.
Senator Sindo.
Oh, Madam President, uh, no, the
reason I'm asking is that, uh,
I'm, I'm looking at the bill
just asking. I'm trying to
distinguish because it seems to
me that in this bill,
If the other agency is a tribal
or a Navajo nation that they
Charlie.
Uh, Madam President and Senator,
thank you the, the lead agency
would always be the state
gone through one extensive task
force iteration of murdered and
missing indigenous people
through the Indian Affairs
department and one exists
Yeah I appreciate it. Thank,
thank you for that answer. I
just wanted, the point I want to
make is I think, you know, you
have jurisdiction issues here.
Uh, but also sometimes, you
happening on tribal lands or off
reservation and, and certainly
the whole um jurisdiction is as
complicated and, and I hope that
Jurisdiction will say, well,
this is not ours, this is this
jurisdiction, this is that, and
I hope that, uh, that with this,
you know, all of the
in in our in our communities and
certainly stand in support of
this question. Thank you, uh,
Madam President, Senator for
yielding.
Thank you, Senator. Other
debate.
On the bill.
just see happy smiles. I never
see hands waving, so get a
little bit more aggressive.
Senator Nova.
Thank you Madam President, uh, I
like to also just point out and
refer to the bill on page 5,
line one where it specifies that
the turquoise alert means a
notification relating to an
just for awareness for our
colleagues, um, in terms of
those definitions, I think they
are important to note and I
would also like, uh, Senator
Thank you Madam President, um,
Madam President, Senator
Charlie, can you, uh, share with
us what will be the, what will
the consequences be if this bill
Madam President, if this bill is
not enacted.
It is a continuation of the
invisibility.
Of native people.
But further, if this legislation
is not enacted.
We will continue to have
families who will experience the
you, Senator Charlie, thank you
for your consciousness and
Your insight, Senator Charlie,
Madam President, um, because as
we may know to many of the
specifically speaking on
historical and systemic racism,
colonial violence, forced
assimilation, and intergeneral
trauma which have created
conditions of marginalization
of cultural competence, but I
think it demonstrate the it
demonstrates the impact of
representation in this chamber,
uh, Madam President and Senator
Charlie, I believe that this is
a way that has not been done and
I could not be prouder to stand
in full support.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Any other uh debate.
Uh, Senator Charlie to close.
Madam President,
and missing indigenous people.
This bill is more than
legislation. It is a commitment
to action, ensuring
That when a native person goes
turquoise alert system amplifies
urgency of these cases, making
it clear.
No more stolen relatives, no
With my ancestors by my side.
I'd move.
That Senate Bill 41.
That the records show.
That the role has been called.
And all those present voted in
hands.
Senators, we are on passage of
Senate Bill 41 as amended to
My vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senator Wirth, thank you, Madam
President. So we're gonna go
back up to item number one,
much, uh, Madam President, uh,
Senator Wirth, and of course,
uh, to the members of the
Senate, I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the records
show.
Center compost to explain the
bill.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
President, and, uh, this might
be a little bit uh unorthodox
5 is 3 times amended. I'm gonna
go ahead and ask uh for
unanimous consent to allow an
expert, uh, witness, and then
from there if I may defer to
Senator Brantley to go ahead and
the Senate, then go to
explanation of the bill allow
Senator Brantley to go to the
explanation of the bill and also
Senator Wirth to go to the
explanation of the bill, but
much, Madam President, members
of the Senate, I ask unanimous
consent to allow Jesse Duval,
uh, with the New Mexico Wildlife
Federation to be my expert for
Senate Bill 5 is 3 times
amended.
The expert on to the Senator
Brantley.
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent for Judy Cadman of the
Audubon Society to be escorted
in as an expert witness.
Madam President, I'm on, I'm on
my own. OK.
Alright, so first we're going to
I would be uh returning to my
roots through Senate Bill 5 is 3
times amended.
A few things as I've gone along
in life that I'd like to share
with the members of the body and
morning as I was driving in from
Las Vegas thinking a little bit
about.
How did I end up here dealing
with a proposed measure that
continue to grow.
And it's responsibility and it,
and I can go back to these
particular points because now I
know why I'm here with this
particular measure.
that.
The pay was all the goldfish
that I could catch, but I had to
make sure that the ponds, if you
will, for the bass, catfish, and
Rito Creek, I used to spend a
lot of time there, do my
swimming there.
But there were also beaver dams
there and along this creek.
And so I continue through this
and then of course, with the
late Senator Joe Montoya.
I'll never forget as a youth
There were these rains and uh
there would be the constant
flooding and so we had the silt,
but there were young people that
were lost because we used to
play in the river and without
more in terms of uh securing
resources, so there was a dam
built, it was first name Los
Esteros dam and then it was
changed over to Santa Rosa Lake
and State Park.
hatchery, rearing station in an
outdoor wildlife educational
center for people, young people
from across the state, traveled
transported to lakes like
Elephant Butte.
And so many others across New
Mexico.
And, and then along with that, I
and those that have raised
purebred Hereford cattle. No,
it's the number and it's the
ongoing care.
So along with all of these
things, and we're getting ready
things, uh, Madam President and
to the members as I go forward,
how does this bill directly tie
into these things.
It means that in our lives we
New Mexico has a long and proud
history of taking care of our
wildlife.
The Department of Game and Fish
was founded on the need to
provide a sustainable food
Through their license fees to
take care of our game, fish and
wildlife species.
This bill honors those
traditions and ensures we hand
It, but it's also supported, if
you will, by a very broad
coalition.
And hopefully we'll get into, if
you will, the list of that
coalition shortly.
made by the executive and many
stakeholders and those of you
who know me.
I continue to be as transparent
as possible as I move forward
with all these things.
things.
Number one, update the
department's authority to
reflect our modern day wildlife
cha uh challenges.
This bill would give the
game commission to make it a
more functioning independent
body.
And number 3 fund the
department's work to ensure
healthy populations of wildlife.
In the year 2004, so almost on a
decade basis, I have continued
to go ahead and seek, if you
will, on behalf of the
department and of course always
with the help of our
legislators.
Since the last fee increase, uh,
was adopted.
And I also want to note that uh
there is 10.5 million in the
growth fund for the department.
and to support those that are on
the endangered species list.
So what you basically have,
Madam Chair, members of the
Senate.
Three purposes for the bill.
and most importantly with
providing, if you will, a great
environment for all of our
wildlife.
Together this bill will give the
Department of Game and Fish the
wildlife live in where most
recreational activities take
place.
As an example, if I go to
Carrizoso, if I go to Vaughan,
And so along with this, it's
very important that we continue
to enhance our habitat to ensure
that as we move forward, all of
us are going to be a part, if
food supply and a healthy
economy.
I ask my colleague, Senator
Brandtley to to share more of
the bill's specifics and be
Thank you, Madam President, I'd
like to share my backstory for
my interest in this particular
bill.
Between Senator Campos and
myself, we represent near 50% of
the land mass of New Mexico
acres of some of America's best
hunting lands.
In the heart of the Gila unit
16C, my girls the 4th generation
on the Diamond Family ranch at
Beaverhead. It's a working
guided hunts over 50 years ago,
and today is one of the more
popular and recognized
outfitting businesses in the
state.
If I believed that any part of
landowners or hunters, I would
not support this bill.
In fact, I didn't support this
bill.
This bill came together as a
result of months of stakeholder
in your book.
Because I didn't support that
bill, but to follow along with
the draft of amendments in
context.
There are 3 parts to this bill.
legislature last year and was
vetoed by the governor.
2, it includes a fee increase.
We've had many discussions about
sometimes the fee increase that
And 3, the renaming of the New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish, whichever I'm being
honest, I have zero support off
but recognize that this is the
On page 4, we begin to discuss
the commission.
With amendments that have been
adopted in committee, the
commission will now have 9
Because in many times in the
past, this commission has gone
ignored by this administration
and for a long time did not even
any leadership or oversight
because they simply didn't have
a board in place. This 9 man
board would now include
Women as well, it's a 9 women
tribal lands. That was at the
request of Senator Block and
Senator Charlie. Position 4
would be a rancher or a farmer.
The definition provided through
with the definition provided by
the New Mexico Council of Guides
and Outfitters, position 7 would
be the wildlife biologist. These
commissioners would serve
Also 9 members. That begins on
page 9. Those appointments would
be made position one by Speaker
of the House, position 2
University of New Mexico and of
course 7 NMSU's Fisher Wildlife
representative. The governor
would have 2 appointees making
up positions 8 and 9 with one of
the
Charlie. Beginning on page 13,
we, we addressed the mission
change the New Mexico Department
of Game and Fish, but
specifically it's a name change,
and I will tell you that
states that doesn't address
Wildlife in their name and as we
know they do manage wildlife.
Page 14 again a shall comes in
because we want the department,
they must, they shall by must
they shall consider all of those
factors, which was also very
important in the conversations.
manage all wildlife. This is not
new. The game department already
manages wildlife and in fact has
over 400 species on conservation
management practices.
And beginning on page 23, we
discussed the depredation
rollout of that game department
uh name change. What I mean by
of the state. We're happy to
stand for questions. I would
defer now to my co-sponsor,
Senator Wirth.
Send your word, not much left
for you.
Uh, I came home last night and
had a new license plate, uh,
with the cutthroat trout, and I
thought the timing of that was
particularly appropriate, given
that we're going to debate this
Fondest memories as a young boy
were backpacking in the Pecos
wilderness, uh, fishing and just
Appreciate so much Senator
particularly appropriate that I
follow Senator Brantly because
I like a couple pieces of this
bill, and there's one that she
likes the most that I like the
and clearly we made the decision
to have the agency supported by
fees, and once we made that
decision, I understand and
respect the need to increase
increase those fees, but I
wanted to stand up just.
Because again, this is a piece
when this was a separate bill
that I voted against in 2023
when Senator Compos brought it
agency, potentially the
resources from the general fund
in addition to the fees, because
there's a whole bunch of mission
that this agency does, that's
different from those of us that
with this agency, but I thought
I, I needed to get up,
especially after Senator Wood's
bill yesterday talking about
this exact issue, and I think
tell you that the commission
reform, it took me, I think I
started with the Interstate
stream.
commission that passed the first
time in 2015, and it wasn't
to create less of a pendulum
swing. The problem is when you
have changing administrations
and changing philosophies and
appointments that go one way,
way to the left, and then one
work that's gone in and
appreciate also, uh, the
governor and her team for being
willing to sit at the table to
make suggestions, which to a
large extent have been
All right, thank you so, Senator
Campos, are you ready for
debate? thank you very much,
Madam President, members of the
Senate, uh, yes, we're ready.
Thank you very much.
So first, we have an amendment.
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Jeff Steinberg.
Steinborn to first move the
amendment.
Thank you, Madam President. I
Colleagues, I want to encourage
you to pull up Senate Bill 5
because you're gonna need to see
the original text of the bill,
which I'm going to go to on
several amendments, and I'm
to just, uh, table set just a
moment as we head into these
amendments. Colleagues, this is
a historic moment of debate and
I hope you listen. We have not
and trappers.
And we have some incredibly
outdated statutes.
Um
And some downright even
the wildlife department. We're
changing a department whose
mission is to manage hunting and
fishing to a man, a, a, a agency
that is supposed to be and can
Or to unfortunately codify, uh,
a historic missed opportunity
that probably we you won't get
again for a very long time.
And
Currently in law, we have a
declaration of policy that talks
For managing game species, um,
for economic reasons. A lot of
time was spent, and I, I should
also say, Madam President, I've
been introducing
draft, but we had a draft policy
that I think we should put back
into the bill because it's
really a true north for, um,
For this department.
I just want to read it to y'all.
The Declaration of policy that
I'm advising we put back in to
provide again a mission
trust resource with ecological,
economic and intrinsic value, as
well as for the benefit, use,
food supply, and non-consumptive
enjoyment of all.
that we like to remove purpose
statements from law. This was
felt unneeded, but I will say to
you, we are, if we are expanding
the mission and we're creating a
In all future directors,
employees of this division,
that's all this does.
Um, and I, but I don't think
it's unimportant and so with
that, I stand for questions,
Amendment, so
Are you saying you're gonna take
it one at a time. I, I have
several different amendments,
Madam President, and this is
Amendment number one.
We have 2 31480.2,
and the reason there's all that
information there is because
what happened was when they took
out this bill has been amended
actually does is put the
declaration back in and then
renumber things.
Alright, debate on the
amendment. I'll first go to our
3,
Thank you, Senator Campos. Thank
you very much, Madam President,
members of the Senate, and
again, I really compliment and
thank, uh, Senator Steinborn for
will, what it is today, not only
more plausible, but as we deal
with it, more vision building,
but unfortunately with this
particular amendment.
I consider it to be an
unfriendly amendment for a
and uh anyway and tied to
directly to this, uh, what I'm
trying to get across is that as
we deal with this, what we want
do is basically, uh, increase,
if you will, uh, litigation with
some of these issues that would
would be dealing with again,
considered to be an unfriendly
amendment.
the courts, uh, and so we have
for the last number of years,
really in Senate Judiciary
taking the lead on this. We just
take those out, let the bill
speak for itself, and I
appreciate what, what the
trying to define whose mission
you want, you're gonna have a
whole bunch of folks going in
different directions. That's the
compromise that goes into a bill
like this that gets us to this
point on the floor. So I might
This amendment was made to take
out the purpose section for the
same, just for the same reason
we do it on every single bill
and to stay consistent on every
is not policy-based. This is not
about the substance. This is
about being consistent with the
approach we take to to
legislation in this body.
Save us all a lot of time and
trouble for whatever reason, we
still get these purpose clauses
and bills all the time in the
committee, uh, we asked the
legislative counsel, why are you
guys still putting this stuff in
spinning your wheels, um, when
you tell Legislative council
that you wanted it in even when
they advise you against doing it
because we're gonna take it out
and, and if anybody wants to
spend a lot of hours and time
uh steer Steinburn to close. I'm
glad
we're not the only ones who put
your, your title feel free to
put your mind a few times so I
don't feel as bad when I butcher
means we are we all own it for
ecological value. But I'll tell
you what, Madam President, I
have several amendments. It is
not the most important one.
I'm going to withdraw the
amendment so we can get on to
Madam President.
All right, thank you so much.
Do you have another amendment?
The reader to read.
Thank you, Madam President. I, I
move, uh, Senate bill, Senate
floor amendment number 2.
Um, to send 5 is 3 times
amended.
is in the top 5 most biodiverse
states in the country. You may
not know that.
We're in the top 5 most
the most diversity of mammal
species, we are #2 with the most
bird species. We are number 3
with the most reptile species.
century resource and when you
read these bills, and I promise
uh chapter 17, I promise you,
most of you probably haven't,
so.
It's a good learning opportunity
And as we have grappled through
the years with that commissions,
bad, uh, these bad statutes.
There's been a lot of debate in
the commission.
That's why everything you're
hearing is about the commission.
They were so willing to change
the other part of the bill,
which again is the language just
But my feeling about uh what's
needed to reform our wildlife.
It creating this new holistic
wildlife.
The important thing that you
want to do is you want to give
science-based direction to the
staff, to the department, and
And you're gonna see that we
created again with a lot of
collaboration over years, we
created that very scientific
direction to the department.
change.
Conservation actions necessary
to sustain a healthy
environment. Colleagues, this is
the heart of the bill.
This is the heart of creating a
scientific management for how we
manage this. So when we change X
Shao to me,
We basically might as well have
added the words.
Um, may not.
it a wildlife department. We're
actually taking away the science
mandate that was in the original
bill.
And it was done.
To get a few partners on board
If you wanna, uh, colleagues,
this is again, your opportunity.
I respect your decision,
whatever you choose to do. But
if you want to create a wildlife
agency in the, the top 5 most
biodiverse states in the country
Then I would encourage you to
change me back to Xiao.
So that management decisions
irrespective of who's on the
commission will be made thinking
about climate, thinking about
It's your choice, and, and you
know what, Mr. uh, Madam
President, colleagues, it's a
choice we deserve to make as a
body because this is historic
legislation and a historic
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Steinborn. This was
a personal.
Amendment of mine. It was a
tipping point whether or not to
I cannot stress enough the
delicacy and the work that has
gone into this, you know,
rather, rather large and
extensive bill from, from every
an extensive one. We've had a
number of meetings May 23rd,
June 26th, October 16th, in
which numerous groups of
stakeholders have come to the
one word include counsel of
guides and outfitters, the Farm
Bureau was an intended in in
some of these meetings in Mexico
Association of Conservation
District, backcountry Anglers
that has gone into this, I will
tell you that this is an
unfriendly.
Amendment and jeopardizes the um
the intent of this entire bill
and the collaboration.
this. Changing the shell to me,
basically, uh, goes back to one
thing that I believe in, and
that is I trust the game and
fish department to manage our
wildlife, uh, public trust.
#2, anyone else to debate,
Senator Woods.
Did I hear it right that we
don't have any.
could have the amendment sponsor
yield for a question
for question Madam President,
absolutely.
Uh, sooner woods somewhere on
the game and fish staff is what
I heard. Am I hearing wrong,
Madam President and Senator?
Senator Steinborn.
Madam President, yeah, gentle,
management term. We have an
outdated management prescription
in law.
That is not science-based, and
what this is is this is actual
of them generally don't have a
wildlife or wildlife
conservation background at all,
and
That's what I was referring to.
Senator Woods.
somebody who actually has a
degree or or work experience
dealing in ecological
restoration, um, and
preservation. Someone who
actually has a background in
So, but we don't have anybody on
staff like that.
Madam President and Senator.
Well, Madam President, the
of this is because we do not
have any management. We don't
have any, uh,
prescription for managing
wildlife that actually gives
kind of a statutory requirement
game species. Now, because we're
making a change to a wildlife
agency, we're broadening the
mandate, we're broadening the
opportunity for management of
requirement that it be
science-based.
Because right now,
We don't have it and so we get
these political swings depending
upon who the commission is.
Internet to see a scientific
base management.
Uh, philosophy or are you want
to give your philosophy today
on, you know, get down into the
the, the, the language in here,
and so there's a lot of good
language in here, but the
problem is, is that we took Xiao
consider these variables and we
changed it to May, which based
Shall consider or may consider
population size, migration
patterns, available habitat
change in climate conditions.
If you're going to manage a
species, you really need to be
looking at climate science. You
need to understand where is the
habitat for that species in a
it. So I, I don't know,
respectfully, uh, Madam
President, Senator, if you look
at page 12 of the original bill,
you'll see all those variables
and that is a list I want to
say, Madam President, that was
developed with the game and fish
Act. We went through here line
by line, discussed every word,
all the same groups that are
part of this now save the kind
of anti-conservation groups were
a part of that.
the original, this was the bill
as introduced this session. It's
just they changed the word shall
the demand again, as I've said,
Madam President, I think that
So Madam President, Senator,
there's various losses, uh,
development is certainly one of
them, uh, but also, um, climate
change is another, another one
change. We certainly can't
manage an animal to change the
climate, can we, Madam
President?
Um, no, Madam President, it's
not about managing the climate,
a direction to consider as they
really manage the species.
So, Madam President, when we
start talking about managing
species, you know, there were a
lot of different game animals
Uh, climate of our state, the
original, um, animals that were
here, uh, you wouldn't call
So this is a very specific
commitment if in the question
and answer, you remain on the
amendment. Thank you.
Yeah, but Madam President, the,
principles, and I'm trying to
figure out what scientific
principles he's talking about
that they took out of the bill.
So,
Um, maybe, uh, it's not
and you have great questions,
hey, it's probably my fault. All
right, any other, uh, debate on
the amendment.
Senator SL.
the Redheaded caucus.
I think, I think that was a yes.
And Madam Chair, I do have to
remind the senator that he came
changed in our conservation
committee to May, May, and
you're wanting to change it back
to Shell. I do have a question
Um, Madam President, uh,
Senator, I'm not sure what you
say when you say wildlife
management background because
I'm not seeing that in the
language in this section.
expand on that. What do you mean
by wildlife management
background in this particular
area of the bill that we're
talking about where we changed
the word in conservation to May.
that I've said, um, I was
talking about the game.
I was talking about the
deficiencies in the commission
itself not having backgrounds,
but that's not really, I mean,
it's part of the reason for this
say that I, it's in fact we are
game commissioners don't have
many of them a background in
wildlife, that's kind of a
statement. Well,
I don't have a degree in
wildlife management, but I do
have background in it.
Mainly because we have many
back to Shell. I think that does
come into play on all these
different
Entities down here starting on
line 14 through
the commission the ability to
look at the migration patterns,
especially whenever we have wind
turbines going up all over the
The commission may
want to change some of those.
that, I guess the problem I have
when we're talking about
scientific principles. Science
does come into play a little
the ground that may help, that
may help the commission make
these decisions.
And Madam President and Senator
species population. If there is
a change in the migratory
patterns if there is a change of
people that do see these species
every day, so, madam president
and Senator Steinborn, I think
the word may is imperative that
Uh, seeing no sinnerstein burn
to close.
Thank you, Madam President,
colleagues, again, this is our
chance to, to put science more
have to look at these factors.
This is the heart of wildlife
management. It's not in a group
of political appointees, so, uh,
so I hope it's, I hope, uh,
do not pass all those voting in
favor except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators were voting on Senate
floor amendment number 2, to
your seats if you wish to vote
no, please raise your hand.
voting no, Senator Maestas
voting no senator Cervantes
voting no. Senator Thornton
Senator Esel voting no, Senator
Gallegos.
Voting no senator Sanchez voting
no senator Scott.
Senator Brantley, voting no.
Senator Block.
Voting now, Senator Hickey
voting no, Senator Lopez, Madam
Chair.
no, Senator Gonzalez.
Voting no, Senator Trujillo.
Voting no, Senator Wirth.
Voting no, Senator Bergman's
Voting no.
Senator Stewart.
Voting no.
in the negative. Senate Firm
number 2 has failed to pass the
Senate.
Senator Steinborn
you to explain. I apologize,
Uh, and the changes made in um
conservation and I also respect
all of the compromise that went
into it and for that reason, um.
another uh floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor Amendment number 3
to Senate Bill 5 is thrice
amended. Amendment sponsored by
Senator Jeff Steinborn.
Bill 5 is thrice amended,
you to explain the amendment.
Thank you, Madam President, my
good friend Jesse Dubell's back
there is gonna hate me for this
one cause I know this is near
the body to express your will,
and I
respect whatever decision you
have, and I know there's a lot
of pressure to not go against
the deal, but, uh, but
nonetheless, um.
in this bill, we make game
commission terms, uh, 6 years.
Right. And um we also right now,
almost on any board and
things, and I, I, just to give
the advocate's point of view,
they're trying to create
stability. They don't like how
board members have been
politicized, removed, removed
Madam President, colleagues, I
was here when we, our previous
governor.
When we had a terrible game
commissioners who were
bunch of bad anti-science stuff.
The last thing you want, I
think, Madam President, I don't
care which side of the aisle
you're on, we may all agree, is
that person can only be removed
for like malfeasance that they
have to be taken to court.
That is a recipe for getting bad
commissioners, and I want to
tell you, Madam President,
have seen governors use and
though no matter how descriptive
you get it, they will find
somebody who really is not there
for
ecological integrity.
Uh
change them out and, uh, and I
don't want us as a state.
For a new governor to be and I
think.
Yeah, to be stuck with a bad
have a decent commission and
this amendment.
would keep the 4-year term and
allow a new governor to replace
hope she, even if you reject
this and we pass the bill, I
hope she signs the bill, but I
will just say that I think this
is a flaw in the bill.
Um, so I move this. Can you, can
Sorry, 0.231482.1.
So this Amendment 3, but it
seemed like what you were saying
was not what's in here, you'll
I have, because it gets
technical cause of all the
changes we made to this bill. I
have legislative counsel here
who helped draft this. Can I uh
ask for unanimous consent to
bring them here just so we can
Alright, debate on the
amendment.
I'll go first to.
Sinner compost. Thank you very
it to go and be unfriendly.
There's two things here. Number
one, what we really want is
experience credentialed, uh,
continuity and today when we
you will, the, the potential of
uh two governors to where they
would continue to go ahead and
make those changes. What this
does is it creates the
continuity, it creates the
Thank you Madam Chair. I too
agree that this is an unfriendly
amendment. We're trying to
create continuity within this
board. We don't want them
did not bring up, uh, which is
the removal process and it
changes it to the district
court. There was a whole bunch
of legal reasons that had to
happen, and I'm sure Chair of
rules will address that with
just worry that going back to 4
years, just does what I don't
think.
I certainly don't want, which is
creates more ability for change
to go back and forth. So I think
say anything about number one.
Well, Madam President, so this
is why I asked uh Mr. Edwards to
join me, Madam President, is
that we struck the entire
subsection which includes a
shorthand, we removed the whole
cost provision which requires a
court process and the way you
would remove someone through
cost, but it removes that entire
section.
Supreme Court original
jurisdiction, uh, which you
can't do by legislation. You
have to do that by
constitutional amendment. And so
the amendments that are being
to the Supreme Court, um, but
I'll note that if you remove
The entire subsection.
There is nothing in law that
provides for any, any removal
That's it, Madam President.
Further debate on the Senator
Scott.
We'll note that in the journal
Arts and minds, Madam President.
I would like him to yield please
There is a tradeoff.
Between
Political accountability.
lack of political
accountability. It's removed.
Several steps.
From the elector
Would you agree with that.
Those commissioners more
politically accountable. Well,
Madam President, uh, senator, so
yes, I, I agree with you, you
know, when you
extremist as we do get or people
with no background and they're
not editing, adding to wildlife
management in the state. They're
launching a war on predators.
You get a new governor in who
basically delegated wildlife
management to this commission,
largely. So that comes with the
governorship, frankly, and, uh,
and so this amendment, I guess
you could say brings in a little
would these, uh, appointed newly
appointed commissioners be
subject to any other review
OK. Thank you, Madam President,
and thank you, Senator for your
amendment.
colleagues, so again this is
amendment, Madam President, is
being done so that we can make
sure that this commission
actually we have a chance to do
to them. And so with that, Madam
President, I now move Senate
floor amendment number 3 the
Senate Bill 5 is 3 times amended
and all.
voting in the affirmative,
except those voting in the
Start over here this time.
Center Padilla.
folks know.
They're souls.
Bergman's votes now. Senator
Hamblin.
boats now.
Senator Moos votes no, Senator
Shedo.
Vote no, Senator, Senator
Figueroa.
Boats, Senator Hickey.
Pope.
boats, no, Somaestas
thought snow. Senator Cervantes
vote no. Senator Tobiasson.
Boats, no, Senator Paul votes
no, Senator Thornton.
Senator Townsend.
Boats No. Senator Isel.
Senator Gallegos votes no.
Senator Brandt.
Boats no. Senator Stewart.
About no.
affirmative 33 in the negative.
Senate floor Amendment number 3.
has failed to pass the Senate.
Sen Steinburn.
Thank you, Madam President. I
thought I was going to beat my
Senate floor amendment number 4
to Senate Bill 5 is thrice
amended. Amendment sponsored by
Senator Jeff Steinborn
Sir Steinborne to explain the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
President, colleagues, well,
this is a, a lot lighter weight
and hopefully maybe even
friendly. Again, Madam
wildlife department. What I'm
trying to do is add, we are in
this bill for the first time we
created an advisory board to the
commission. We don't currently
have an advisory board of the
commission in statute.
And it's
level, uh, representing
organizations and
non-consumptive preservation of
wildlife, so that we can
actually have people focused on
science and wildlife ecology
Uh, we'll first go to sponsors,
so Senator Wirth, you're first.
Uh, some Madam President, this,
uh, again, I consider unfriendly
amendment. I, I appreciate.
immense amount of work of
compromise, of trade-offs, and
it just to try and change it at
this point. I just don't think
it's fair to the process that
unfriendly. We already have an
advisory board and along with
that we have individuals who
continue.
To not only show their passion
and compassion, but have offered
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brantly for
the same reasons, uh, Madam
President, I'm gonna do one
better than that. Again, this
was another attempt colleagues
we're creating a wildlife
agency. This is a historic day.
I had another opportunity to
inject a little more science in
this amendment, Madam President.
Thank you Senator Steinbach.
We are actually on debate of the
bill now.
Um, a long time ago, Senator
Madam President
Have a
A comment and then, uh, a number
All of the.
Stakeholder meetings and and the
influence and, and I'm not
arguing that point.
membership is responsible for.
Probably
85 or 90% of the surface of New
Mexico either in lease or in fee
Also are opposing this bill, and
when I get into the details and
the questions, I think it
becomes readily apparent why
they do.
Um, Madam President, with
Thank you.
Madam President, um,
I'll just start down through the
list. I mean, we, we have, um,
described, you know, that stands
for itself, but in your bill,
uh, Senator Campos.
Uh, there is the, this.
The statements that
Madam President, how in the
world is a board going to
determine incompetence of a
member.
Thank you very much, Madam
the uh proposed or if you will
aggrieved defenses. And so what
happens from there it goes to
the ethics commission.
The ethics commission again in
district court and then of
course, that would be the due
process through the the legal
system.
And in essence, then that is
going to be the process, so it
provides, if you will, fairness
to the individual who is going
due process and if I wait, if I
may also, uh, uh, Madam
President, also defer if you
will to uh Senator Wirth to
He yielded to Senator Wirth. I
apologize, Senator Wirth thank
you Madam President. No, I think
Senator Campos, you got the, the
process here and the big
The big challenge was figuring
Supreme Court. I think we've
done that before with other
removals. I mean, we were trying
to track what other statutes
have done with this, uh, and
there are some that go to the
Supreme Court, but there is
And we kind of worked through
that and decided district court.
I think Senator Compos, you've,
you've laid it out. There's a,
there's a process and steps
where uh that will be worked
through.
Are they required to, uh, um,
hire their own defense attorneys
in order to defend themselves in
here they are, they're public
servants, they're giving of
their time and uh they're
appointed along with that, uh,
they're, they're actually not
compensated, of course, there's
with that, the whole key would
be um.
That they would not have to go
ahead and appoint or if you will
have their own legal counsel,
uh, because that would be uh.
then, of course, uh, legal
counsel, uh, would be provided,
if you will, uh, by the
commission state of New Mexico.
Thank you very much, Madam
President, and I don't know if,
uh, Senator Wirth would like to
appointments, uh, just like all
of us, uh, risk management.
can be brought in, depending on
what the specifics are. Again, I
don't wanna.
serving in a capacity like that,
uh, there is a process.
Senator Townsend.
I appreciate that and I think
that, uh, Madam President, is an
Malfeasance typically is, and
I'm sure Peter, um, Senator
Wurst will correct me, I'm not
the attorney, but it's, it's
personal harm, uh, purposely or
Madam President and uh Senator
Townsend, first of all, a person
is innocent until proven guilty.
And so within that whole
removed and, uh, found, if you
will, uh, guilty then at that
point there could be possibly
even the approach to where that
individual would have to go
Senator, thank you, Madam
President. I've conducted
consulted with my expert
witness, Senator Doig, who says,
think that's uh an area, a gray
area that we all ought to be
concerned about. If you go on
down, um,
There are provisions, Madam
Uh, their political party
requirements going into the
commission, but there's no
language in this bill that would
with this, uh, part of that has
been addressed and I I think
it's best if we went ahead and
we looked that up real quick in
terms of the uh the page and the
Compos thank you very much,
Madam President. Thank you very
much, uh, members of the Senate.
We're looking through it. I
individual was to go ahead and
change their party, then they
would not be eligible to
continue serving. Thank you very
much, Madam President. Thank you
very much, Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you for that, Madam
intent of the legislation is
also, Madam President, if we go
on down into
Uh, we've talked about the 9
voting members, but there's also
remember to, uh, appoint someone
in their place, are, do they, do
they have a role other than
unfortunate, but, uh, that we
don't have this uh set across
the board with so many of our
organizations, but we often see
that our, uh,
Uh, the problem that we run into
is that the designees then
become those individuals who are
actually offering input, for
example, on behalf of the
be a part of that, uh, uh, we'll
just say in this case as an ex
member to provide the guidance
directly from the department
because oftentimes the designee,
uh, will take the
President, Senator Townsend, uh,
it would be that uh it's that
individual, uh, and or the
designee, and they would go
ahead and provide the
information, and I may not have
fully answered your question,
something that should be
considered as this bill goes
forward, but
Here is the part of this bill
that caused me great heartburn.
Is, is not allowed. Is that not
true?
I, I, I see some head shaking.
Madam President, and to the
senator, that is absolutely not
true. Um, the ability for a
landowner to still manage their
property with predator
have gone into this bill.
Senator Townsend, Madam
President, I don't think it does
that either, but my analysis
shows that it removes the
New Mexico.
Madam President, Senator
Townsend, again, uh, that is not
correct information, and if the
FIR states that, uh, that's
Brantley, to clarify this bill
does not repeal the ginning
Jennings law, which you're
referring to, 17-2-7.2, which
does allow landowners to kill an
to respond to 17-2.7.2 incidents
unless they were required to do
so prior to the passage of the
bill. Again.
my state, there is no change to
this law.
In the Mexico, I believe the
Department of Game and Fish
provides some.
Help
At times to eradicate.
Senator Townsend, uh, in terms
of, uh, that specific
information, uh, right now, the
Department of Game and Fish is
not here, uh, again, they
haven't taken a stance in terms
well.
Saint Brantly, OK.
Sara Townsend, I remember that
well, that Jennings amendment
Are you finished? Do you have
more questions? I have more. I,
I was just thinking that was
gonna be a really uh fun
conversation, Madam President.
Section 12. The repeal of
Section 12.
I want to understand that, Madam
President, it's my analysis
shows that that.
Protected or may be protected
species. And that's a, that's
quite a group of
Animals.
I would like to know if that is
Thank you very much, madam, uh,
President. Thank you very much,
Senator Townsend, in terms of
the mayor as we move forward,
that's uh giving us the option,
if you will, to go ahead and
that they.
do not have to deal with
directly, uh, and through, if
you will, the uh the commission,
I'm sorry, through the, the uh
game and fish uh department.
ahead, Senator Townsend, Madam
President, that's really
important issue, and I think it
needs to be addressed because
that brings coyotes, foxes,
protected species, and I don't
think that's the intent, but
that is the definition that's in
the uh bill, Madam President.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
sounds and in essence as we deal
about, if it seems like that's
one of those significant issues,
the commission then has that
authority, that ability, if you
will, to deal with it, and
that's the purpose of that
Madam President, that nimbleness
that you describe causes me
great heartburn.
Um, I think we need to be more
definitive than what we're going
species list or the rights
within this bill to protect
species is now an option of the
department. Is that correct,
President, uh, Senator Townsend,
um, if I may defer also to my
co-sponsor, Senator Brantley.
Brantley. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. This does not expand
the uh the department's ability
bill, the game department is
already managing over 400
species on a conservation
management plan to be very
clear, this.
Bill does not expand in any way
wildlife department manages, oh,
I'm sorry, the game, I'm getting
ahead of myself. The Department
of Game and Fish manages the
department currently has the
federally list species under the
endangered Species Act that is
often getting thrown around in
this, the endangered species Act
is specific only to federal
agencies and I'll again just say
again, I'm gonna dive into this
a little deeper. Section 5A is
new. It provides a commission
will have the authority to
manage and protect any wildlife
I think I'd argue with you
there, uh, sir, I think, uh, the
ability to protect, but Madam
President, one other thing, is
species list. So, Madam
President, uh, if I may, I'm
gonna go back to reiterate in
terms of the department.
What they deal with specifically
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley, thank you,
Madam President. I'm going to
correct my co-sponsor just
briefly. We do not have a state
that the game department does
today, with or without this
bill, the management of those
wildlife species will not change
with or without this bill.
Thank you, Madam President.
intent of this legislation to
protect any species that's not
on the federal list.
It's our compost. Thank you,
Madam President. Again, I'm
gonna defer to uh Senator
Brantley.
Maybe we'll go over to Senator
Sarah Brantly.
Madam Chair, there is a list on
these conservation species, the
endangered Species Act only um
is only pertinent to federal.
Agencies. And so there is no
action taken today other than
they try to manage, there's not
they could what they could do if
this bill were to pass.
Madam President, Senator
Brantley, Senator Campos.
That section 5A gives authority
to protect that it doesn't
currently have.
And that is the issue.
We are expanding the ability of
Northern ranchers, they're
opposing this because the
expanded enforcement of species
that are not defined. Madam
President, thank you. I yield.
Brandtley.
Yes, Madam President,
Madam President, Senator
Brantly, I've had concerns as
well from cattle growers and
stockmen in northern New Mexico
you by any chance tell me if any
of the amendments in any of the
three amendments took into
consideration anything that the
cattle growers or stockmen
brought into consideration for
your bill.
never proposed any amendments.
It's my understanding they're a
subgroup within New Mexico
Cattle growers Association that
did participate in the, the
stakeholder meetings and didn't
definition to clarify that the
farmer or the rancher position
must now actively work at
growing and selling livestock or
We also supportive of the
important, uh, we had just had
debate over the shell and May of
Senator Steinborn's bill. They
working from some outdated
talking points to their credit,
this bill has changed a lot and
it has changed rapidly through
the process and, and we have
learned that one
their concern, and it's often
one that I share as a community
of, of landowners and
agriculturists is there is a
distrust of government when it
Farmers or ranchers, uh, great
harm, and I would just say that
this particular bill before us,
while that is a concern, we have
in the current draft that is
before you today.
Senator Hao, Madam President, I
feel better in supporting the
bill and knowing that then their
diversification of the board
means something to ensure that
representation matters and in
seeing that the number of people
who would make up the board,
look reflective of who we are as
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
I've
Already had
Some comments made about
Autonomous.
From any significant control by
either the governor or the
legislature.
But I am concerned about the
New material.
In section 6 of the bill.
And I hope I'm reading off the
commission is authorized to
extend management and protection
by rule.
To any species of wildlife.
Madam President,
The habitat.
Of the three-toed sand dune
lizard.
In southeast New Mexico.
To prohibit drilling during the
mating season.
Of these lizards.
been indicated since the very
onset as we deal with this,
dealing with cattle growers as
an example, how we have the
depredation, if you will, as we
move forward and the issues that
troublesome, and it is one of
those.
issues again, the commission
may, but again, think about the
expertise that would be on that
you will, if this does create
one of those issues that uh they
definitely would be able to go
ahead and offer that in
rulemaking.
Thank you very much, Madam
President. Again, I yield to uh
do is to regulate the taking,
not the conservation, the taking
of, of wildlife, and that is in
the same section here. I also
want to say that back to the
your clause that you're
referencing here. But again, the
role of the New Mexico
Department.
and fish in this particular is
not to regulate uh conservation
practices specific but the
hunting process. Madam
President, I have to differ the
plain.
Language reading of that
sentence that I just
Or permits or anything else.
It's any species of wildlife
which I presume.
Madam President, would include
Brantley. Thank you. This could
regulate the taking of animals.
So in the case of this, let's
take for example, even the
Mexican gray wolf. It happened
A squirrel or the taking, um,
of, of a bee, if that was the
case, whatever it may be the
taking, so the the killing of
this, the management through
Madam President, I've tried
several times.
And I can I'm gonna have to give
up. I do not believe the
language of this bill.
Game or no game.
Thank you, Madam President, and
Thank you, senators for your
answers.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
There again, maybe I get to ask
my question this time.
OK
So, Madam President, to, to one
We also have feral animals in
it.
What is a responsibility of the
new
Commission
Jump on one of those. How about,
how about feral hogs? What are
we talking in there?
Madam President, thank you very
much, Madam President. Thank you
established this way with the
people with a background, two
things, of course, first of all,
with a feral animals, as we
know, uh, they can be uh
as we've had animals that have
been imported, uh, for big game
hunts and other things that are
related to that, again, um, that
is going to be part of the
establish those hunts generate,
if you will, those resources and
use that uh with the uh game
and.
uh department, hopefully it'll
become the wildlife Department
summarize my co-sponsor, there
is no change. We're there
without this bill, the
management of all species
remains the same.
Sooner Woods
OK.
Some of these feral animals.
So none of that will change. We
don't have to worry about.
Visiting with the new
department, the new commission
that they are, and I want to go
ahead and just make one
additional comment in terms of
some of the questions that are
being asked. What I'm trying to
do is to also get into, if you
existing commission and the
future commission if that were
to occur, what we
have is the science-based
approach, and again, what we're
trying to do is to improve the,
definition, uh, so much more,
and again, so if I'm convoluting
part of the issue, the intent is
not for that, but it's to also
You know, we're talking about
change, change, change.
What a
Has any of the sponsors been to
the game commission meetings,
Uh, have I attended every single
one of them? No, I haven't. Have
I been there when we haven't had
the full commission to go ahead
and take action on issues that
forward is how those issues that
continuously surface either by
landowners, by ranchers,
farmers, and others that have
been affected by this, uh, it's
to see how.
groups that may be participated
in helping to go ahead and form
this piece of legislation, but
more importantly for future
generations. Thank you very
much, Madam President. Thank
of this bill here is that for a
long time, no one
Attended Game commission
meetings because we didn't have
a quorum of a game commissioner.
And so one of the most important
of the governor so that we can
continue to have those meetings
on a regular basis, having
consistency within the board and
so that our landowners and that
our hunting community does not
have attended and I certainly
think that the current
Functioning or lack of
functioning of the board is
absolutely the, one of the key
the Interstate stream commission
was another one I worked on when
you're dealing with issues that
are so as as important as water
and our game species, it's
really important that there is
So, Madam President, it's my
understanding because we're
going to increase the size of
this board and, and who can
appoint the board members.
These board members get.
Per diem and mileage to come to
the board.
And that will draw them in to be
Uh, we do have, if you will,
highly qualified people that
would be uh screened, uh, be
reviewed, that'd be interviewed,
and along with that, then
uh they'll be dealing with, uh,
they can make those
science-based, and if you will,
common sense, practical
decisions that will definitely
assist us as we move forward in
Well, that, that's just what I'm
asking is, we're not increasing
a pay or anything for them to
show up. Where, where are these
meetings generally held, Madam
been doing this now for 34 years
thanks to the people.
But in that, where does the
heart come. It comes from the
compassion and if you will, the
to submit their applications for
con uh consideration are going
to be credentialed.
They're not going to go ahead
and someone pick up the phone
and indicate, would you like to
that of uh people that are
highly devoted and dedicated to
the process. So within that,
Yes, it's per diem. Yes, it may
be some of the additional
devoted, dedicated, and they
will be attending these meetings
and make good decisions on
behalf of wildlife in the state
of New Mexico.
Madam President,
federal lands council, protect
agriculture now, Northern
Stockmen Association.
Every one of them are opposed to
this bill.
not messing with anything. It's
all this stuff, uh, a bill of
nothing and
It's, it's hard for me to, to
accept that fact.
Stuff that you don't know about.
I've
I've got a, a wrenching.
Family
What this holistic management.
Group would think about
eradicating those 3000 acres
very dope, and I know that
So, you know, even though
everybody in here says, oh, you
know, none of this is going to
matter.
I wonder
And I know that, you know, I
was, I really thought legislator
and I could change a rule that
Uh, you would think the
legislature could take that on
herself and see something that
was unjust, but we just don't
seem to get past.
Some of these rules has a direct
impact upon a guy like me.
So, I can't support the bill
today. Uh, I'm
much for your kindness to allow
you to hear me.
Thank you for your comments.
Next, we'll hear from Senator
Isel.
we'll all yield, so if you will,
please pose your questions and
we'll see how that's going to be
answered by us. Thank you very
much, Madam President. Thank
you, Senator.
So so.
already been asked by Senator
Townsend, Senator Scott, Senator
Woods.
I still have a problem with
It is made up of 3 at-large
members of the commission and
it's very specific there that
they can't to no more than 2
With no more than one member
residing in any one county and
then it goes on. But under at
line 12, it looks like.
It says position 4.
or farm with at least 2 big
species as defined, so Madam
President, I would like the
Madam Chairman, before, um,
yielding to Senator Campos, I
will take that. The position for
definition of the rancher or the
growing and selling livestock or
crops from a ranch or farm where
at least 2 big game species, as
defined by and for which hunting
is licensed by the department
are frequently present. It is.
deer, but an actual uh operation
in which there were multiple
game species that could be
hunted at that location. well
you're just in our compost if he
wants to elaborate. Thank you
with.
That, uh, is there a specific
definition for each one. there
is not, but I would indicate
within the bill, uh, it will go
move forward the intent was that
these are going to be, uh, large
ranches, they're going to be
people that do have a myriad of
of uh experiences and more
importantly, as we deal with it
on page 19 of the bill, that
much. I guess my concern that
goes back more than 15 years ago
whenever I was approached by
several of the northern New
got no permits, no permits. Game
and fish was not working in
conjunction with them, and
whenever I hear big ranches.
impacted the same way as the
small farmers and so therefore I
have a problem. It also goes on
to say, which is by the
department are frequently
there because the wolves have
eaten them all. Would that,
would a wolf now with a Mexican
gray wolf now be considered one
of those that is frequented
along with the elk on these
mentioned, uh, the wolf, of
course, is gonna go ahead and be
considered one of the endangered
species, not a big game species,
so that's part of my answer. I
don't know if Senator Brantley
wishes to further respond to
that.
address the definition of sizes
of ranches, that particular
wording was taken as an
amendment directly from New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association who wanted to make
Madam President, if nobody could
tell I was being facetious
whenever I brought up the
Mexican gray wolf. I do know
that it is endangered. I just
told game and fish.
Madam President, and whichever
Sponsor would like to answer
this.
board or a member of an
established advisory committee
of a nonprofit wildlife or
habitat conservation
I would like to know what the
intent of this new language is
regarding position 5.
So, so, Madam President, Senator
person, uh, regardless of what
it is, but as long as they're an
individual who continues to go
and deal with the conservation.
And Madam President, if I may,
you will, at the same time as we
move forward to have uh places
for our big game. So within
that, it could be any individual
will, uh, a person who is a
hunter or fisher person or
things that are going to be
related, if you will, to the
wildlife uh endeavor in, in the
world, if you will, that we live
in. Thank you, Madam President.
much. I would also like to point
out that the best
conservationists are farmers and
ranchers.
Because we are an endangered
species.
Madam President.
it. It says the commission is
authorized to extend management
and protection by rule or policy
to any species of wildlife.
don't know if one of the
co-sponsors would like to start
this off, and then, uh, I'll
probably go ahead and further
response. I'm not sure, uh.
Madam, Madam President.
whether the species qualifies as
a species of greatest
conservation need.
Two science-based reasons for
protection of species, and 3,
the rules of management programs
that would potentially accompany
different species. And again, I
think this is consistent with
what's been currently done.
compost. Thank you very much
as we deal with it, I would just
go ahead and close that uh very
supportive of what those
comments were just made. But
deeper than that, it's important
for us to kind of look beyond so
Andino.
Go ahead. Thought I heard an
echo. I'm sorry, Madam
found in the Auquita area. I'm
not sure if it wasn't planted
there. That's just a conspiracy
theory I may have on that.
But uh whenever.
The ability to be able to drink
water because of this little
mouse that only comes out one
month out of the year, there is
one snapshot I got a 4 bull out
that were tangled up in the
electric fences that were put up
and they died in excruciating
extend to the point that we are
preventing somebody from being
able to make a living by raising
their livestock, which they have
done for over 100 years, Madam
not required to respond to
wildlife nuisance is incidents
as prescribed to section 1727.2.
But Madam President,
It seems to me like we're
creating, we're giving the
commission.
power goes to lots of people's
head.
Madam President, we have had
lots of species brought into our
And Madam Speaker, whenever
Senator Woods was talking about
the feral animal population. I
understand now why all this has
Chair, whenever I carried that
bill on the feral hogs.
I made sure that it was under
the direction of the New Mexico
livestock port.
and domestic animals with the
329 diseases that they carried.
And the
Rack and ruin they did to many
water systems.
I have big problems with what
we're trying to do here.
Whenever we have one farmer or
the inaction.
Of the New Mexico lives uh game
and fish department, not
responding to the problems that
a certain gentleman was having.
We need to have a balance here.
We need to have more people that
actually have boots on the
ground that has to deal with the
states wildlife.
Game and fish just for instance.
We did have, we have a very
But would
With no discretion at all.
They blatantly said, we are
cutting your permits from 24 to
And we no longer participate in
their pronghorn hunts, which
does include the archery hunt,
Speaker, we have to have balance
there.
With
The people that are actually
taking care of the state's
wildlife population in those
Thank you. Next we'll hear from
Senator.
Thank you Madam President, uh,
with the sponsor, please yield
for a couple of questions.
create if you will, the
edification of some of the
issues that have been discussed,
but again, Madam President,
going back, uh, if I may, uh,
Senator Charlie also yield to
if you might be able to speak
how this bill aims to improve
wildlife management coordination
with tribes, um, and
Hearing senators they'll talk
Senator Brantley.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
and thank you to the sponsor,
um, I think it's clarified in
representation from from uh
tribal lands is now on here. Um,
it is, however, it is current.
Pres current response right now
that we already have one game
Madam President, I appreciate
that and I appreciate the
commitment to representation on
the commission, um.
How does
done this for quite some time,
in fact, uh, it was 2004, I
believe when the last uh fee
increase was uh was implemented
However, uh, we haven't been
successful and so unfortunately
the uh game uh New Mexico game
and fish department have
benefits, uh, for the resources
and equipment that they need for
the ongoing training, which
brings up another issue where
they train their officers and
then from there they're
recruited if you will.
coming in from the license sales
and permits, uh, right around
58% of the budget. We have
others which is about 6.1% and
then federal grants about 35.9%.
talked to anyway have felt very
supportive of this, and they
believe that it's long overdue
and the reason for that because
they want to continue to
improve, if you will, the
don't know if Senator Bradley or
Senator Worth would like.
For the respond.
Senator Charley.
Madam President, I think the
sponsors for bringing this
game meat in our freezer, um,
and so I understand the need to
increase the fee, um, because I
will say he's a good hunter and
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Lanier.
Thank you, Madam President.
Um, I stand before you today,
uh, in support of this bill,
that was not always the case
River
And some of the best hunting,
um, you know, I got on the phone
right away and I started
reaching out to some of the
amendments, those 3 A's up
there, that middle one is mine.
And I'm proud of that because
Um, not, not just through the
And it, it makes us all stop and
think.
But that middle A up there, I
was talking to an angler.
On the San Juan River.
When a license is sold.
So for his business,
He sells a license.
off of this, but we don't want
to lose money either. So if he
takes that $1 and he scans a
credit card.
Now, he loses.
friendly, uh, amendment, and I
think it was a change that that
made a huge difference with
that.
I do want to caution people I
call it the Facebook fraud.
And you know, there's a lot of
terminology in this bill and the
amendments that have been made
to this bill has taken some of
to stop and think of the big
picture of all of New Mexico
instead of just one cattle
ranch.
One river
Or one species.
For example, a beekeeper.
us all the good stuff, the good
honey, uh, for our sopapillas.
But
Right now, if, if we have a
problem.
And I, I don't know why I'm
using bees.
those folks, those beekeepers
are left out there on their own.
And so I'm hoping with this bill
that maybe um they can get some
help.
With that, um.
was very, very lively, to say
the least.
And I'm trying not to look
behind me.
Um
But I think it's good debate and
And this bill is no different
than that, but I do, um.
Encourage this body to please
vote for this bill. Thank you,
madam.
Farmington, Cedar Hill, what
other place do you want to be
from in, in San Juan County,
Chilton Newcom Nachiti,
uh, we move you anywhere you
need to be, San.
They did the quality waters in
in San Juan. Matter of fact,
there's a Minos hole named up
there after him.
On the San Juan, but that era of
gaming fish.
bringing the iBE into New Mexico
to creating quality waters, and
now we're gonna see that era of
gaming fish disappear.
Which is all right. It's a new
era. But what you're going to
And so our commissioners really
gonna risk that. I mean, they
can justify any basis, and then
the court will either approve it
or deny it.
Uh, when you get another group
commissioners and that may be a
little bit of jeopardy.
The governor's appointees, I
agree, they haven't really been
that good. Some of those guys
are my friends, but
watching this change and you're
gonna send the game and fish on
a new
Mission
Whether you like it or not, it's
coming because the biologist
will say we need to protect
this, we need to do that.
mission that wasn't their
mission before and it's gonna
change the direction of the
gaming fish.
Whether people believe it or
not, most, most animals, farmers
Gallop this morning. There's
very few stock ponds left full.
Hardly any snow on Mount Taylor,
just on the north side of the
tree. It's gonna be a very dry
year and some of those farmers
you're changing the mission of
an agency that was just about
hunting.
And now you're gonna change it
to complete mission. We should
have probably just made a new
agency and sent them in that
Um, the fees, uh, on hunters,
uh, are fine, uh, I will say
Senator Diamond mentioned this
the other day on the floor.
tags when we can almost make
4.5.1 million, uh, on 4 tags.
Uh, or does it?
Do us the best deal to align
states. I think Wyoming is $6000
for for a big horn sheep tag.
Those are the biggest treasures
of New Mexico. That's like
getting the golden ticket at
Willy Wonka.
state residents with money.
They'll hire 5 outfitters.
And those 5 outfitters will
screw that district or that
region where they're gonna hunt.
Then they'll fly a helicopter
24/7.
And watch that sheep until that
hunt either starts or that
hunter comes in to kill that
sheep.
So there's a lot of money in
When we talk about one of the
most valuable things that you
have, you're not gonna discount
gold because it's, it's in New
Mexico to an out of state
person.
but their, their mission will be
completely changed and their
mission will say,
We don't have time to serve,
serve the game of New Mexico.
Everybody's game. Their mission
you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam President and
members of the the body.
what a New Mexico residents uh
referring to in the bill.
Uh, Madam President, I'm gonna
go to Senator Bradley and then
quite a few definitions, Madam
President and, uh, senator, but
what is a New Mexico resident,
um, that is gonna be appointed
to this uh commission.
defining an in-state resident
for the game uh.
The commission appointments
today.
And many president and senator
and sponsors. I appreciate also
Madam President, uh, and uh
Senator Pinto no they do not.
This is uh dealing specifically
with the New Mexico commission.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
etc. But yet you have advisory
members. How are you gonna share
that advisory members have this
knowledge.
Some matter president, Senator
Pinto, in terms of that, the
doing is using that expertise to
evaluate, if you will, the
resumes, the curricula vitas, if
you will, and uh the credentials
And Madam President and uh
sponsors so you have the Indian
Affairs department secretary
listed as advisory.
an example with these
individuals, they are usually in
supervisory roles, they have
experience in knowing how to vet
would know the best practices
they would be able to, if you
will, extricate those type of
responses that each of us.
would want to hear when it comes
With the New Mexico resident
knowing that this is a
commission in New Mexico.
Come from some other tribe,
nation or Pueblo throughout the
United States, not from New
Mexico. He pointed to this
New Mexico, what I would deem a
real true New Mexico resident
would have.
And I say this because I've seen
disseminate our wildlife and
even our um habitats, not
considering our cattle ranchers,
uh, within no relationship with
I think that's crucial.
Because when you talk about the
um economic impact and the
amount we're selling these
licenses for someone coming in
Maybe have an advantage for
these licenses and permits.
Not really considering our New
that those are not clearly
defined and we're assuming it's
somewhere else, but
I think those need to be really
clarified, especially when we,
Cause the considerations that
we're gonna conserve to the
point that they're gonna be able
to see.
Wildlife
And even with the wildfire
management, um, I hope that's
something that's strongly
considered when we kind of just
assume and trust that the
Things that need to be that have
devastated our state. Thank you,
Madam President, thank you,
sponsors.
Thank you, Senator Next we'll
hear from Senator Thornton.
sponsors shield for a couple of
questions.
Madam President, um, my question
first of all is regarding to the
commission membership again.
Senator Brantley, Madam Chairman
and and Senator, I would assume
that a lot of the community of
hunters and anglers make up
businessmen in New Mexico.
to understand economic
development in the state of New
Mexico.
And so I'm trying to understand
what would the, what role would
this new wildlife commission.
Brantley, Madam Chair, this is
not a new commission. The game
commission is currently in
existence. It looks very similar
to this makeup. What we're doing
is we're taking the authority
away from the governor, and we
I, what I'm concerned about is
what role with the commission
itself have on economic
development plans.
I, I guess maybe be to be more
specific, um,
Madam Chairman, the commission
does not have any impact on land
use. In fact, the agency as a
whole has no authority over land
in New Mexico, a very great role
because the hunting industry as
we know is a multi-million
dollar investment in New Mexico
point then again is with respect
to protecting endangered
species.
Then they may have some
particular uh impact on land
use, would they not?
So
Wildlife Service. They do not
have any management of
endangered species at all.
Senator Thornton.
is, uh, would this commission
also have impact on some of our
Logging or mining or drilling,
even these, these other things
that we have, we do have
agencies in place to do that,
Madam Chairman, this agency has
no permitting authority at all.
The state agency only has
jurisdiction over wildlife.
Activities that other agencies
are already responsible for.
And yet we have, it seems like
they're broadening their
responsibilities to, to look at
all these different aspects of
here in New Mexico.
And so I'm concerned about.
How much uh power or influence
that we're giving this wildlife
Getting jobs here in New Mexico.
I think that's one of the key
things that will help our people
prosper in addition to
maintaining our environment.
But I think there needs to be a
sponsors were all yield please
for a question.
Thank you, Madam President. I
wanna just
And I think um the majority
leader read this. I just want to
make sure I, I understand. In
addition to species defined as
protected in chapter 17 NMSA.
To any species of wildlife.
Uh,
based on these three things, um.
Whether the species qualifies as
accompany protective status.
So
The, the question is.
Whether the species qualifies as
of Fish and Wildlife Services.
Or yeah, the United States Fish
and Wildlife Services, do we
match up with their definitions.
On how we categorize these um.
Madam, Madam President, to be
clear, no, we do not. The
federal government through the
endangered Species Act has its
own definitions of animals that
they are protecting.
understand this, Madam President
and Senator, the director means
the director of the department
of wildlife.
And when it comes to
The director does not, Madam
President, the director reports
directly to the Game commission.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam
President, thank you, Senator.
So the, the, the definition of
endangered in here.
due to any of the following
factors present or threatened
destruction, modification or
curtailment of its habitat.
And then we get into
a
Species is gonna be threatened
or protected or endangered.
Thank you Madam President, uh,
thank you, Senator.
You know, when you like in
Sandoval County.
Um, I googled.
Madam President, there's one
mammal on here.
I was surprised to read it. It's
called the Townsend.
Pale, big eared bat.
I,
um, there is a different
categorization between the feds
in New Mexico.
For the New Mexico meadow
jumping mouse New Mexico says
it's threatened. The feds say
it's a species of concern.
protection by rule or policy to
any species of wildlife.
That's written in here.
Now, Madam President and
well as I do of how this changes
the role of this new department.
Uh, very quickly.
As well as the
in here, but Madam President, I
want to say
That I appreciate some of the
work that's been done on some of
the amendments that I, I like.
That means any species of fish
or wildlife according to the
definition of the bill whose
prospects of survival or
recruitment within the state are
in jeopardy.
Due to any of the following
factors.
look at all this data here and
the different categorizations of
all these species.
And yet we're talking about.
Now I don't know who's right.
But I'll tell you this gives the
uh the commission, a lot of
power.
The ranchers, have they?
What's the position again the
ranchers have taken on the bill
and why?
Madam, Madam President, the
adopted. There's one entity, the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association there, uh, their
definition of the rancher was
accepted, uh, on the commission
and then other than that, there,
think, and then, uh, I want to
clarify also that New Mexico uh
farm bureau is not opposed to
this. There were a number of
entities that were, however, uh,
the New Mexico houndsmen for.
example, we staunch opposition
and have since come on board
with the amendments that are
taking and supportive of the
concessions that have been made.
only have jurisdiction over
wildlife and not land just like
they do now, so they could never
tell a private landowner, what
to do with their land, uh, only
habitat restoration to prevent
that animal going over on the
endangered Species Act in which
the federal government at that
time would come in and really
brings a whole heap of problems
we've mentioned the Meadow.
jumping mouse, the game
commission has no jurisdiction
over that species.
Thank you Madam President. Thank
It's on page 15 and it's under
section E says investigation
means a process pursuant to
So we already, we already talked
about who the director is
whenever the director believes.
That a species may be threatened
Whether a species is threatened
or endangered.
Land or aquatic habitat
interests, we don't really need
that. But this right here.
And say if they want to go to
Sandoval County and they say the
Pecos River muskrat.
I think I believe.
Different categorization of that
particular species.
This.
Bill gives a lot of authority.
And also the fee increases are
something that really is, we,
This commission
So with that, Madam President,
um, I want to thank the, the
sponsors for the bill. I
appreciate what they're trying
Uh thank you. We do have an
amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate floor Amendment number 5
Madam President, I move
amendment number 5 to Senate
Bill 5 as 3 times amended.
her concern because I had not
gotten into the details of this,
um, one of those amendments up
there is mine too, and Senator
Lanier, I thought mine was the
ensure that, uh, tribal citizen
from New Mexico was, um, going
to have a seat on this
commission, um, after getting
into this.
it's written right now, um, to
Senator Pinto's point, this
means any native person in the
country who lives in New Mexico
can serve on this commission.
That was not the intention
is asking for my original.
Language.
To be inserted and not a
synopsis of my language.
We would agree, Madam President,
it's a friendly amendment.
Thank you.
Uh, so we have a friendly
amendment. Any questions, debate
On the amendment.
Madam Chair, I move that.
amendment to Senate Bill 5 is
thrice amended Senate floor
amendment number 5. All those in
favor of the amendment signified
by saying I.
Thank you, Madam President.
debate on the bill.
Singing none, uh, who's going to
amount of work that's gone in by
so many stakeholders into this
bill to clarify, um, there seems
to still be so much mis
misinformation about that. First
be very clear, we're not
extending their authority
anymore, the difference between
a
in a shell, then they already
have today. They have
jurisdiction over wildlife. They
come so far in this bill that I
think you know it's a good bill
when nobody loves it. Everybody
kind of likes bits and parts of
it, but nobody loves this bill,
than any harm that it would
bring.
Um, I want to be very clear that
I came on board just like the
sun and water districts, the
ranchers who serve on those
does any harms. But to close, I
want to clarify because there's
been so much information on what
this bill does not do. Now what
any changes to 17113, which
allows individuals to trap on
private lands. This bill does
not repeal the Jennings law,
which allows landowners to kill
This bill does not make any
changes to the statutory
framework for the E-plus system
that's so important to our
hunters and our, and our
still be just as mad after this
bill. This bill does not move
the department away from using
any game hunting as primary
method of wildlife management.
to list species as endangered.
That is only something that can
be done by federal agencies as
the ESA is a federal law. We
have some outdated talking
now pass the Senate. I do move
that Senate Bill 5 as 3 times
amended do now 4 times amended,
Madam Chair, and I ask for the
clerk to call the roll.
Sander Bergman's Senator
Bergman's votes yes. Santa
Block.
Brantley.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Cervantes votes yes.
Senator Charlie, yes, Center
Charlie votes yes.
Center Gallegos votes no. Santa
Gonzalez
Gonzalez Senator Hamlin. Yes.
excused.
Senator Maestas,
Maestra Nova.
Senator Paul votes no. Pinto.
Center Pinto votes no. Senator
Senator Scott votes no.
Senator Stefani's votes, yes,
Intersteinborn Center Steinburn
votes yes. Stewart Center
Stewart votes, yes, Senator
Thornton.
Center Tobias and votes no
Towson votes no. Center jail
votes yesentor
Center worth votes, yes, Senator
Woods.
but there are exceptions for
employment relocation, marriage,
and retirement, so we have a 7
member board. I appreciate the
amendment for the um the Mexico
Thank you. By a vote of 28 in
the affirmative, 12 in the
negative. Senate Bill 5 as
amended 4 times has duly passed
the Senate.
the agenda.
Uh
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 137,
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Madam President, and I
Senate Bill 137 as amended on
has been taken on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
Sinner Padia to explain the
bill. Thank you very much, Madam
to make sure that we are all
safe, etc. Uh, we decided to
bring the fee up to $1 which is
if you were to adjust it for
inflation, it would be 129, so
we're 30% or so under what it
My golly, I thought we was gonna
do all these out of the general
fund, Mr. Madam President, uh,
Thank you very much, Madam
President.
I move the bill the Senate bill,
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 137
is amended do now pass, and I
Senators, we are voting on
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Cinable 137 as
amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
By a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative.
Senate Finance Committee
To item number 3.
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
placing Senate bill 299 on final
Thank you, Madam Madam
President, this bill actually
came from a personal situation
resigns, and in true old West
fashion, the official notice of
vacancy is sent by horse and
buggy rattling down dusty roads
ensures that we don't rely on
old West logistics to handle
modern governance, streamlining
the process so they can.
These are filled efficiently and
We do have a floor amendment,
the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
Thank you Madam President. I
move Senate floor amendment one
to Senate Bill 299 is twice
amended
the amendment.
wish to resign or vacate their
seat and gives them 5 days to
notify, gives the Secretary of
State 5 days to notify um the
President, like to acknowledge
and thank the Secretary of State
office that.
Um, really helped and assistance
with this bill and the amendment
and acknowledge the input of
Senator Gonzalez until he
returns to the chamber.
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
All right, debate on the
amendment.
Tobiasson for, for bringing
this.
Um
I, I'm just seeing some some
language on the amendment
subsection C.
On the last page.
Um, I don't think we have to say
that it's subject to IPRA.
I'm not sure why this language
about the integrity of the
Legislative resignation process
is maintained.
motion to strike it, can I,
Madam President, I will yield
and do a written uh amendment.
Senator.
Madam President, I'll yield.
Madam President, I so why why is
subsection C there?
email and this helps um as a
safeguard Madam President, I
don't think this, this language
achieves that purpose.
Alright. Other debate on the
singer Sad Lopez Madam
President, I actually am kind of
concerned about identifying
something that the legislature.
subject to IPRA. I mean, I, I'm,
I'm standing uh because I want
to go back to IPRA to see if
this is a change, um, if it's a
change, it kind of, I think we
subjectivity to um IPRA, so I, I
don't, uh, I don't support the
amendment.
Other debate on the amendment.
hold of me, Senor Cervantes.
Uh, Madam President, yeah, I, I,
um, I'm looking at the amendment
and I don't believe, well,
actually, I would like to
sponsor to yield, if you would
please.
You can't turn around and look
at him. I know it's weird.
Sinners Cervantes. It's it's
really easy for me to talk to
the back of somebody's head, you
I guess I'll start with the last
point made by Senator Cio Lopez.
Um, it's kind of puzzling odd to
have a requirement in any law
that the documents that are at
issue here are subject to IPRA.
reference to IPRA that it would
be subject to inspection, uh,
resignation by a lawmaker as
opposed to any other documents.
Let me start with that. Why, why
is there a necessity for this
added by the drafter, um, so
I'm, I'm just gonna give you
that, that as an answer we, we
were told that this needed to be
Senator, that's a reasonable
thing to do to rely upon, uh,
counsel, although, um, I'm
surprised and I guess we'll have
to visit with counsel to suggest
they would have told you that
sense here. So I think that's
one issue that I have with the
uh with the amendment, Madam
President.
Senator, thank you, Madam
President. I think what we
should do is let's roll this
over, let's get this right. I'm
suggest as you we just roll it
over.
You OK with that servedson?
I am Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator Worth.
request of the sponsor. Uh, so
we'll just do items 5 and uh
we'll do items 6 and 7 and then
call it a night. So I think uh
Yes
a little break for you.
Thank you very much to uh all
the members of the Senate. Thank
you very much to our pro tempore
for a uh.
A great afternoon as we continue
with the debate, the
Senate Bill 199 and I yield to
Senator Jaramillo. Senator
Jaramillo, please Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent to the
Senate that the records show
that all actions for placing
bill receives funding from 45%
of.
The liquor excise tax for fiscal
year 26, the tax and revenue
Department estimates that the
adding an additional 500K for a
total of 1.1 million, which will
result in funding for all 6 FTE
positions at DFA LGD and the
President, was in 2003, and I
stand for questions.
Thank you very much Senator
Jaramillo. We're on debate
discussion of the bill.
Is there any debate or
discussion on the bill. We're
to excuse
senator,
uh, from the floor until she
returns or in case we have a
call.
Thank you, thank you very much,
OK, there we go. Senators of the
Olopeen Cia Lopez please Thank
you Mr. President. This is the
first time I've, I've seen this,
with another bill that um I'm a
prime sponsor on and that's HB
417, um, it's it's just you
can't reconcile them because 417
Administrative costs, but it's
not this, and so I.
Yeah, um.
I guess I should ask the
sponsor. Will the sponsor yield?
Senator Jaramillo, do you yield,
Mr. President, I yield.
Consider
Finance and Administration on
the bill.
Um,
Mr. President, I'm not sure what
happens if two bills are passed
that have that are just not
reconcilable in their in their
process, and I believe it's the
bill that gets signed first in
the order that it goes up. It's
the bill it signs last, OK, I
got it wrong. They're good. I've
got some help there. Bill get
signs last, but yes.
the House members are gonna be
interested in this as well, and
I think that's probably where
this, these issues could
potentially get reconciled.
Thank you very much, Senator
Majority Leader Werth, we're
well.
So I'll ask the senator to yield
again.
had a do you yield, Mr.
President, I.
Thank you very much Senator Dia
Lopez. Next we have Senator
Maestas, and then we're gonna
have Senator Pinto, Senator
Maestas, please. Thank you, Mr.
just make a point, um, this is
the DWI grant program, uh,
heavy, heavy emphasis on, uh,
DWI fatalities in this state,
this body has done tremendous
work the last 20 years, um, and
changed the word DWI to alcohol
abuse or now the magic word is
alcohol misuse it just broadens
the ability of those grants to
go to fighting alcoholism
program and he he needed the
service, he needed, uh, the
detox and was not allowed in
because he wasn't booked on a
DWI.
He was booked on another crime
Mr. President, uh, Senator
Jaramillo, but just give it some
thought.
If it's not too much. Thank you
very much, Senator Maestas. Next
we go to Senator Pinto. Senator
Pinto, please.
But there
Our other issues at hand because
That's where we're at
disadvantage because we've seen
or here uh this has gone down,
this has improved.
They were not very many. There
was, there was no roadblocks.
And once we got out of COVID,
one of the problems too was when
they started implementing some
We saw a big explosion.
In which there was not capacity.
In my district.
So this bill does not address
those.
Funding in a particular manner,
especially when we talk about
the tribes, nations, and pueblos
being able to address the
issues, uh, within their areas
that are culturally responsive.
be done, because just increasing
a fund, and I think many of us
know that.
It does not really address the
systemic issues that.
So with that I find it hard to
support the bill because there
there are
It's
Much of the work that needs to
be done, um, it's, it's
Munoz. Senator Munoz, please.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
well, they sponsor you for
Senator Jaramillo, do you yield
Mr. President,
I proceed Senator. Are these
Thank you, Mr. President. So let
me explain something. I, I live
on the edge of the city of
Gallup and it's really a good
point, place for DWI checkpoint,
tribal police if they choose to
participate, they're coordinated
uh throughout the programs. The
grant program also goes into
schools and teaches about
These are available for everyone
and depending on how hard they
want to participate.
Uh, the Navajo Nation doesn't
participate in DWI programs. Uh,
there's a wreck one time we had
to divert and there's a
roadblock. And so they were on
the, the Aima police or Laguna
police were there on the
roadblock. So there is tribal
communities that participate.
See no further debate going back
to Cinerata be able to close
Cinerara me please, I move that
Senate Bill 199 do now pass, and
Senator Jaramillo. Senators were
voting to your chairs if you
vote no, please raise your
hands.
Senate Bill 199 has duly passed
the Senate.
Senator Jaramillo and then I'm
going to Senator Pinto to
explain her vote Mr. President,
members of the body, thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
programs, new modernization
programs.
That direct direction of funding
really has to be entailed in
order to make an impact, just
mortality and fatalities, uh,
within New Mexico and probably
in the nation. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senator Pinto, we're
moving along. We're going to
item number 7 on today's
calendar, which is Senate
all action for placing Senate
Bill 11 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now open
to debate, amendment, and
substitution. Thank you very
much, Senator, Senator, to
explain the bill.
the nation have identified as
the number one distractor in
classrooms, and that is cell
phone use during instructional
time. Almost all of our students
On bullying and on learning and
so as a mother with teenage
girls, I bring before you this
important piece of legislation,
of magnetic lock pouches.
Like SB 11, most of this
legislation leaves the details
on how they're going to regulate
the policies or the details of
led by Senator Mo Maestas and
myself to merge and come
together on this bill to
encourage districts, we're,
we're going to have PED provide
guidance so that districts
to lock those phones up in some
schools, the state will come in,
we're working the budget to
provide those, um, the expenses
to cover those magnetic pouches
let people know that in terms of
what was on the reader board, it
Senate Bill 11, what we've done
is we've corrected that and it's
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11.
We're talking about transmitting
voice, text or data on a cell
phone, smartphone, smart watch,
tablet computer, laptop computer
anticipation of the new school
year at the end of August every
single school district, every
single charter school have a
policy with regards to cell
phones on how to uh uh on how to
instructional hours unless of
course that device is used as a
part of uh the instruction, um,
you know, gathering information,
translating language.
are doing math or whatnot,
It was recommended by the uh US
Department of Education a couple
of months ago and I'm proud to
corroborate. I really appreciate
the uh Senate Finance Committee
with its committee substitute,
explained. We're now on debate,
discussion, conversation in
terms of this particular
measure.
There we go, Senator Souls,
please.
substitute bill, the two bills
that went through the original
one that went through education.
Had
just did a policy had to be
there, but districts did not
that eliminates cell phones and
other devices, or they just have
to have a policy about it.
Senator Brantley, the school
PED. This is a combination of
the Senate Bill 11 is, is, um,
the Senate Finance Committee
substituted this as a as a
combination of both the original
bill you saw and also the bill
what I'm asking is the original,
the first bill that went
through, uh, just required a
policy about them and provided
funding. The second bill was to
since there's the co-sponsors, I
also
uh, indicate that possibly
Senator Maestas would like to
yield. Would you allow that to
happen, Senator Soles?
uh, primarily the language from
what was then Senate Bill 173.
So this bill does not have an
appropriation. It models the
majority of the language from
Policy,
uh, and then there's department
guidelines.
To that policy primarily
prohibiting a student from using
uh the wireless communication
from from the board and the
parents and folks like that.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
I, I guess I get back to you
Center center center Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator So this does not ban
their use, does not ban their
use at all, but you're correct,
they wouldn't, uh, they wouldn't
statutory guidelines that have
to be in the policy that.
Districts must adopt.
Senator Maestus and then Senator
Brantley, Senator Maestas,
please. Thank you, Mr.
device if it's educational
purposes, obviously, uh, number
3, the device can be used in the
event of an emergency or to
manage the student's health
care.
Number 4.
Process.
Number 5, protections for the
students' privacy and
confidentiality related to uh
permissible use.
not prohibited in 7, provide for
consequences of a violation. So
those, that's the guidelines,
uh, but it's not prescriptive.
Each district will come up with
its own policies based on those
minimal.
standards and so if a district
uh chose to add a stricter cell
phone policies on top of that,
that would be district to
district use. These are just
device, uh, shall not be
prohibited if a student for any
reason, uh, during those
instructional hours needed it
for medical necessary reasons of
believe I'm on page 2,
line 10, uh, and it starts above
that. The department shall issue
guidelines outlining the minimum
requirements, so this is
using a wireless.
communication device during
instructional hours. That is a
ban on all types of things and
as I asked in the committee, I
Mr. President, it does not, and
if you can continue on on that,
it prohibits the use of cell
phones during instruction hours
with the authorization for
for any medical needs or an
emergency needs. It allows use
if necessary for any speech to
text or text to text that may
need it. So there's a lot of
allowances that are allowed to.
The policy indicates that it
shall include and prohibit the
student from using and that
appropriately. It says they
shall be banned during all
instructional time, uh, the
electronics area in this area is
changing rapidly. Uh, we see
position and rather than
trusting the students and
teaching them about appropriate
times and use, it puts a blanket
ban during instructional hours
local autonomy. We talk about it
all the time.
about that we wanna have local
autonomy within our schools
until we don't.
And though I know this is a
classrooms regularly, probably
more so than almost anyone else
here and most of the teachers do
a very good job of regulating
the use of electronic devices in
does not allow local districts
to determine what level of use
is appropriate. It says very
clearly the policy shall
prohibit a student from using a
President. We're the sponsors
for one quick question, do you
yield?
Going going to Senator Brantley
first, Senator Brantley, please.
Yes.
Mr. President, yes.
there's no panic system in the
building. Uh, there's no phones
in the classroom.
Uh, are we gonna be held liable
through the state for banning
phones and saying there's no
I will, I will also do uh uh
yield to my colleague on there,
but that is no, there's an
exceptional, you know, an
exception in here that would
also include emergency use for
These are minimal standards, but
a school district could
implement, let's say a lot, uh,
lock bag device if it was the
most strict uh uh policies that
were implemented, many of those
devices
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Munoz, uh, no, they are
not banned. They are not banned,
uh, they're prohibited from
being used, presumably they
would be turned off in in one's
given that new policy, but these
are all individual, uh, district
policies that will evolve, um,
and, and yes, we, we read the
magic words, you know, prohibit
Munoz, please. Thank you, Mr.
President. I is that one of the
exclusions in case of
emergencies, in case of student
breaks his leg while they're at
PE, they're, they don't have
their phone.
Is articulated uh subsection 3,
page 2.
Lines 15 through 17 permit a
student to use a wireless
Thank you,
there's just a little bit of
flux in there for me. I mean,
we don't ever want those
situations to happen, but when
they do happen, a lot of those
phones are locked in some bag or
whatever Senator Brantly
described in a locker, turned
off, my phone doesn't come on
my.
in an instant, it takes a minute
to boot up, then you gotta log
Hopefully, those incidents don't
happen, but they could and then
I think if the school instituted
that policy and something
happened and you didn't give the
there's a little bit of flux
with this bill. I know you heard
Senate Finance. I didn't get to
dig into the details and and so
those are some.
one of the concerns that I have,
uh, as we move forward to make
talking about bills and they're
doing other things. Everybody's
looking at me now. And so
texting will uh legislating that
maybe we should make that a law
sin or worth it.
them. But a lot of people use
them in, in different scenarios.
I mean, chat GBT writes a lot of
papers for kids, and, and their
them to do math with their cell
phones because they don't have
calculators, they have them on.
their phones and they don't have
to carry a calculator and a
phone. It's like carrying a
watch and a phone. It's
duplication of services.
bring me this to my attention to
make sure that there should be
some flexibility in there for
for students to get to the, to
their phones when there is
Thank you, senators for bringing
the bill forward.
How many school districts don't
have a policy.
Senator Brantley, do you yield?
come out that they do have
policies and I would, I would
venture to guess that probably
most have some sort of policy in
place, whether it's stricter or
more lenient than what we're
public schools, Riidoso High
School, Hobbs Middle School. I
also know that truth or
consequences from elementary to
high school already has policies
in place that would meet these
standards.
PED. It's difficult to tell
without polling every single
district in the state Senator
Pinto.
So, Mr. President and sponsors.
I wouldn't understand what kind
of training a school board would
need after adopting a policy.
This is modeled in a lot of uh
states that have adopted similar
policies like this where they've
depression, anxiety, skyrocket,
uh, because it's true that there
is an addiction to cell phones,
and that is especially true
within our teen population.
And if we could get them to log
have. Their number one
distractors of how we can help
them is to develop some uniform
policy that would make sure that
kids are checked out and off
Send her a pinto please
sponsors, there is no mandatory
training based for cell phone
banning with our local school
addresses cell phone use.
Senor Pinto.
Mr. President and sponsors and
senate um.
So we're going to mandate the
Thank you very much, Senator
Pinto. I'm gonna go to, uh,
Senator Maestas and then back to
Senator Brantley. Senator
Maestas, please. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President, and I yield as
now smartphones and computer
phones, Star Trek phones, we've
had 20 years to grapple with
these issues and the vast
majority of districts have
policies that are consistent
with this with this outline, um,
to are they in their pocket? Are
they in a box at the front of
the room or whatever I would
imagine there are.
already doing it, uh, we just
wanna find out best practices so
that our students are focused on
the same question going back to
Senator Brantley and then going
back to Senator Pinto. Senator
Brantley, please.
I would echo the same comments
of my co-sponsor, Mr. President.
Thank you very much, Senator
Brantley, going back to Senator
a cell phone ban policy required
students to do any kind of
instruction uh during their
instructional time, any kind of
technologies. Brantley please.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
not sure if schools are offering
uh, information on the
we fill that role. I, I'm not
sure if schools are doing that,
but I will tell you that the
legislator certainly would be if
we implemented this policy.
schools through any kind of time
set aside or mandatory, um, any
kind of workshop or anything for
distractions in classroom have
addressed that by implementing
cell phone policies within their
school districts, yes thatestas
also wishes to respoor Maestas,
then if you go by population
have policies that fit this
description, I would.
that those rules are articulated
to the students at the beginning
of the school year and and they
struggled with from time to time
There's
No program that you know of.
In which the students are
mandatorily.
Have to participate.
Like take this program or go
through some kind of workshop if
they're caught using their
cellphone if it's banned.
Senator Brantly
that already do have policies uh
in place and uh the passage of
this bill would ensure that all
school districts and to adopt
similar ones.
Senator Pinto.
Resource money that goes to this
particular issue of.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
And that's still a a acceptable
policy that's been addressed
that wouldn't have a cost. We
have been in constant
communication myself and Senator
perhaps of HB 2 and also of any
existing funds within the PED
budget today that would allow
for the purchase similar to a
grant pro uh program for any
sort of um materials or locked.
and I would yield to my
co-sponsor if you'd like to
comment. Thank you very much,
Senator Brantly, we're going to
send her Maesta, Senor Maestas,
please.
Thank you, Mr. President.
So these districts that have a
cell phone ban policy.
If the cell phone is confiscated
this, um, if the phone is
damaged in some instances, the
phone was lost per se.
Of some of these cell phones,
when you talk about newer
models, they're not cheap.
And in my district um for my
Nothing, no responsible kind of
program for our students to go
through, um, as far as
technology use and
responsibility.
And make these changes and
implement it versus.
Letting our school districts
decide.
Make it better for the students
or have a better school
district.
It's imperative that they should
instruction. But when you say,
well, we'll give an exception to
the teacher.
Well,
Change your classes. Go from
this class to the next class to
or implements, if it is not
consistent and you're not.
Treating everybody fairly. Guess
what comes back.
Somebody's favoring somebody.
schools was that phone was the
only way for the students to
some that prove.
what the teacher was doing that
was immoral.
and unethical.
put policy in place that is in
the best interest of the
students and the parents with
guidance. Um, thank you, Mr.
President and sponsors, Senator
and then Senator Gallegos,
proteore steward, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
don't, I don't need the sponsors
to,
you know, I, I
morning by some of Cine Ramos's
constituents. Students from Cory
High School and Silver High
School.
And they wanted to talk to me
place and what they said to me
is we want to decide this
ourselves. We don't want the
state to tell us how to do this.
Uh, so I think
day of the session.
Uh, so, uh,
Those educators on the floor
were organized and we're
offering an amendment. I'm not
control, not a mandate from the
state. So I'll yield and let the
good senator offer the
amendment.
Thank you very much pro tempore
amendment delivered to you, uh,
that should have been done. So
right now, uh, we do have a
floor amendment, the reader to
read.
Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment 1 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 111. Thank you very
simple one word change on page
2, line 9 replace shall with May
and what that would then do is
that districts will adopt a
policy.
permit a student to use a
wireless communication device in
an emergency may permit a
student to use a wireless
communication device for
accessibility, and so on. This
what it does. Thank you very
much, Senator Souls. We're gonna
be on the amendment. I'm going
to the sponsors for their, uh,
consideration of the amendment
one way or the other. Senator
Brantley, please.
Senator Stewart, yes, that is
friendly, it is friendly, but
keep in mind now now school
districts.
Can be phones during emergency
amendment.
Senator Peter Worth, the
majority leader, Senator Wirth,
please. Thank you, Mr.
President. I just want to make
sure we don't need to also
change the title, Senator
Senator Majority Peter Worth,
uh, leader Peter Worth, you do
have the floor, so in that, uh,
please proceed, and Mr. Chair, I
mean, I'm getting some different
signals, but again, when I look
leaving that in. We're not
changing that shell.
And they shall adopt it, but
then it may they may do later
on. So I think it's fine, Mr.
President. Thank you very much,
Majority Leader. All right, uh,
Now move that Senate floor
amendment to Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 11. This will be by a voice
vote, all those in favor signify
by saying I.
Opposed
The eyes have it.
To bison. I'm sorry, but I'll
tell you, and, and I didn't go
to the uh gathering last night.
I wonder what happened.
Mr. President, it sounds like
you may have, but thank you.
I am happier with uh the floor
amendment, but, um, Mr.
President, Senator Diamond, are
there districts that forbid
teachers from banning cell
phones.
Senator Brantley, please.
that in the in the long
discussions we've had in
creating this, uh, in this bill.
I have not heard that that's the
case in any district.
Senator Tobiasin, please.
PED does not have any
information from schools on this
topic, is that correct? Bradley?
Correct, Mr. President and
Senator, that's what we're
trying to, to establish here is
had to be some sort of policy in
place, and I think that the May
was a good catch here, some sort
of policy in place, and that
could be as simple as keep it in
your back pocket and stay off of
social media during the
please.
Mr. President, Senator, earlier
though, you also said that the
districts that had had problems
with cell phone use and
responding to PED that
information, Mr. President,
comes out in the analysis that
are uh provided to us by
legislative council who works
out perhaps PED in the research
Santa Fe, Las Cruces, Riodoso,
Hobbs. I know as a parent truth
or consequences included on that
list that have adopted some sort
of policy in place, and those
policies would clearly meet the
our schools are struggling with
graduation rates, um, we're
bottom of the pack in reading
proficiency, etc. So if they
already have a policy in place,
specific on that individual
school, the Albuquerque Public
Schools, the student acceptable
use of technology is what they
call their policy allows
students to possess that device,
forward mainly from support of
our teachers' unions and a
number of teachers also in
strong.
supporter or administrators is
that it's hard to implement
these, and they want standard
they're trying to say, you know,
get off your phone, stay off
your phone. It's again and
again, and so, uh, many of these
teachers are coming to us
wanting guidance.
Senator Tobiasson
phone in a pouch by the by the
door of that classroom along
with all the other students, um,
so what I'm curious about the
vast majority of students in the
state of New Mexico are in the
why we need this bill and it
seems like to me that it's
actually targeted to rural, um,
New Mexico. Senator Bradley.
Mr. President, and and senator,
here. Um, I think that across
the nation, we're seeing this
the standardization of of
restricting cell phone use, at
least in the classroom during
instructional hours, and the
standards, especially it was
addressed in as this bill
traveled through uh the uprise
that they've seen in social
media bullying during classroom
hours and if they could just
go back to even the the program
in place with APS um my child
was not on his phone during
school hours. He was not bullied
via social media or his phone
full confidence in our school
districts around the state and
in the school boards that are
elected um to help with, with
such programs, so to Senator
educate children about how to
use their phones, um, about
cyber.
bullying, um, or even educating
the school boards in the school
So I'm not understanding the
argument at this point. Maybe
I'm missing something, but it
sounds again like it's just
maybe the little pocket
districts around the state that
districts and the largest school
districts with the most amount
of students have it going so for
that reason, um, Mr. President,
Senator Brantly, I cannot
support this bill.
responsive to some of these
things that are just more or
less posed as statements, moving
along, then we go to Senator
Gallego, Senator Gallegos,
please.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
boards get training on this and
actually uh here a little while
back we had school board members
throughout the capital, and that
comes because every year they
at, uh, they do make sure that
we get proper training on them,
uh, but I did want to tell you,
Madam Chair.
Oh, sorry, Mr. President, in uh
senators, um.
speaking, Mr. President and
senators as, uh, going through
two iPads.
And an iPhone
And
Babe, give me just a minute. I'm
I was constructive while I was
on the phone, uh, sent a note to
my superintendent and in UNI
schools we have rules, so it's
they can be used at lunch and
before and after school except.
At the direction of the teacher,
what he says is a lot of the
schools already has it, uh,
being implemented by rule. I did
look.
Mr. President, Senator, uh,
where you had your Hobbs Middle
School, and they have it in the
handbook.
through, uh, have you guys
talked to like the uh school
board association or anyone
that, um, governs the school
board statewide.
the teachers unions and
individual teachers.
Mr. President, Senator, I
appreciate that because I also
checked with Stan Ros to see
where he was on this, and he
Rings in my ears and I can turn
it on and you may not hear it,
but I get to indulge in that
too, so I can see children if
they have hearing problems, uh,
this may with that idea. Thank
you very much, Senator Gallego.
Senator Gallegos, I have a
question for you. Uh, were you
referring to the fact that it's
time for me to get a haircut a
while ago.
along, going to Senator Padilla,
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I, I just want to
extend itself into the world of
work later and um I will tell
you, I really wish I could have
policies like this where I could
tell my people in my business,
turn those things off for the
period of time that you're
when they go out into the world
that this is what you do when
you're in a, in a setting where,
you know, you don't need to be
having your cell phone glued to
your, your ear or your face or
whatever. So I just want to make
that mention. That's why I
support it. Thank you. Thank you
President, and I, I just want to
make a statement so I don't, I'm
not asking the sponsor to yield,
but initially I thought this was
enabling leg uh and legislation,
but it really isn't uh
course this particular
legislation was requiring a
policy from the different
schools and um it.
didn't dictate the policy
necessarily though there were
moot, and so I have to agree
with uh Senator Byasson who
spoke earlier, um,
That, you know, now it doesn't
really, it doesn't have any
relevant anymore. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you very much,
Senator O'Malley, and again, uh,
there'll be an opportunity to
respond by the sponsors if there
is a question, then of course
that'll be the time to do that,
I just want to comment on uh
what we're doing here.
I believe this is an issue, but
I believe it's an issue that our
school districts for the most
When local control isn't doing
their job and we have to step
in. We've seen that in history
where sometimes the feds got to
come into schools, even in our
policy when school districts and
school boards are not stepping
up and doing the job. And so for
me, I don't know if there's
really a need for this because I
think for the most part, folks
have stepped up, um, that's no.
See no further debate, Senator
Brantly to close.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think that one important point
implement a wireless
communication, uh, policy. So
not only will they drop this
policy, but an important part is
when this bill reached Senate
Finance, there was an
appropriation in it that is
school districts. And so the
point of this bill is that if a
school jurisdiction is looking
for funding to purchase any sort
support of PED who would look
for a potential funding within
their budget.
Mr. President, I will say that
we know that mental health is
entire generation and even
adults today. This is a small
step in the right direction to
encourage our school districts
to do the right thing, encourage
scores, and the reality is we
desperately need any sort of
step in the right direction in
New Mexico to improve those
bill, uh, by our, our local
school boards by our associate
ations by our superintendents
and their associations. In fact,
do not pass, but I will say this
for the sake of New Mexico
students, my girls and every
other New Mexico student,
whether they like it or not, we
have to step in and try to
we can do. And so with that, Mr.
uh Mr. President, I move that
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 as
shown voting in the affirmative
except those votes shown voting
in the negative by text message,
Sherry or show of hands?
please raise your hand. OK,
let's see, I think I'll start
over here on the right side,
going along, Senator Munoz votes
no.
Senator Pinto.
boats now.
Center Tobiasin votes no.
Senator Townsend.
Boats no
Senator Block.
Boats no
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 as
a once amended has duly passed
the Senate. Senator Brantley,
minutes. Senatorio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Whenever I look at a bill I ask
what is the problem we're trying
to solve or what is the benefit
that we have to have state law
come in and intrude on their on
their autonomy. I just don't see
the evidence of that and so
Out a little bit and give him a
little cheer that someone helped
and voted for him. Thank you
very much, Senator Munoz, so it
looks like uh he's with the
diamond girls. Uh, I don't know
about the mom. Thank you very
the house. See, no objection is
so ordered. We're on that order
of business messages from the
house, the reader to read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
Martis McCutcheon, chief clerk
reflect the message has been
received and entered into the
journal, the reader will read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
message has been received and
it'll be entered into the
journal, the reader will read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
entered into the journal. The
reader will read, I'm directed
to inform the Senate that the
House has passed the House
Judiciary Committee substitute
message has been received and
it's entered into the journal.
Thank you very much to our
reader going back to Senator
Majority Leader Peter Worth for
the next order of business. Uh
thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go to that
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 18 has had
it under consideration and
reports same of the
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the Senate Judiciary
Senator Cervantes, I understand
that you're pointing over to
Senator Thornton. Senator
Thornton, are you, uh, you're
prepared to go ahead and take
this action?
Yes, uh, please proceed.
were acted upon individually.
Well done. See, no objection is
ordered, the reader will read.
Mr.
Senate Bill 54 do not pass, but
pass and thence referred to the
finance Senate Bill 63 do pass.
Senate Bill 70 do not pass, but
Senate Bill 73
Senate Bill 123 do pass.
substitute for Senate Bill 180
to pass. Send Bill 179 do pass.
Senate Bill 504 do pass and
oh, I'm sorry, uh, Senator
Thornton I, there's one more.
Please proceed with 2 more. I'm
sorry, please proceed reader.
Senate Bill 505 as amended do
One more. OK, one more 507 as
amended, do not pass.
But the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507 do pass respectfully
now, going to Senator Thornton
for the action.
Mr. Mr. President, I move the
adoption of the committee
report. Thank you very much,
Senator. There's a motion for
adoption of the committee
think we should have had another
committee report for Senate Bill
18, um, and I didn't hear that
red. Can you all just be on the
lookout for that one and, and I
may be an error there, but be on
the lookout for, we did read 18
earlier.
Was that read out right now?
if not the reader, then we're
gonna go ahead and go to the
staff, if not, we'll go to the
clerk, and if not, I'll give you
the answer. Go ahead, reader.
11
Yeah, Mr. President, I'd like
the reader to start reading
bills moved. We've, we've been
referred, we've actually got 130
bills that have come to the
committee so far. We've acted on
about 70 of them, Mr. President,
but I'm, I'm kind of getting
the, uh, the account to get it a
little exciting, a little bit
and he held up one finger on
each hand and what he's
basically saying is go.
Congratulations, Senator
Cervantes, members of the
Bill 37 as amended, has had it
under consideration. Reports say
the recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz, chair
will read.
Senate Bill 88 do pass as
amended. The Senate Bill 119 as
Senate Bill 236 as amended to
pass.
Senator George Munoz. Senator
Munoz, please adoption.
There's a motion to adopt the
committee reports. All those in
favor signified by say I.
Opposed the eye's habit.
legislation. It is ordered.
We're on that order of business.
Introduction of legislation, the
reader to read.
Mexico and urging state leaders
to collaborate in establishing a
comprehensive statewide dam
rehabilitation program, Senate
Memorial 20.
The reader will read.
House Joint Resolution 2
introduced by Representative
McQueen, a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
and to require veto messages on
all bills vetoed in whole or in
part by the governor.
House Joint Resolution 2. House
reader will read.
How's
Commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 11.
wellness the fund to pay an
eligible applicant a percentage
of the applicants' wages to
allow the applicant to take
family wellness leave.
Creating the welcome Child Fund.
to take leave to bond with a
biological or adopted child.
Limiting the time allowed for
welcome child and family
wellness League.
Accepting certain employees.
creating a temporary advisory
committee.
How's
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 11.
for House Bill 11 had it twice
by title is ordered, referred
then to the Senate Tax and
Business Committee, and then
also to the Senate Finance
Committee. That's House commerce
small little silva Gonzalez and
Martinez, a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
Article 12, Section 13 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
jurisdiction over actions to
remove board members and provide
that the Attorney general or a
majority of the members of a
board of Regents may seek
removal of.
a member
Resolution 12.
House Bill 99 introduced by
representative Ana Nanu.
An act relating to motor
Allowing insurance companies
that pay total loss claims to
vehicle owners to obtain a
salvage certificate or title of
non-repairable vehicle
certificate.
ordered referred to the Senate
tax Business Committee and also
then to the Senate Judiciary
Committee and just for the uh
members' information, if you
be printed with the goldenrod uh
folders.
In essence, it has already been
printed and that's why we're not
indicating that it shall also be
relating to animals requiring
first responders at emergency
situations who are made aware of
a missing qualified service
animal to make a reasonable
effort to search for the
Conservation Committee, thence
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, House Bill 111.
Providing grants for solar
energy systems.
Requiring the New Mexico Finance
Authority to establish rules
making an appropriation.
House Bill 128, the reader will
read.
House Bill 100.
House Judiciary Committee
agreements.
Providing duties for supporters.
Creating reporting requirements.
Creating a supportive decision
making program within the Office
of guardianship in the
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 149
for House Bill 149, the reader
to read. 238 introduced by
representatives Cullen,
Hernandez, and Martinez.
An act relating to public
schools.
House Bill 238 House Bill 238
been read twice by title is
ordered printed, then referred
to the Senate Education
Committee, thence to the Senate
Further legislative legislative
education Study Committee.
And act in the public schools,
addressing allowable responses
to student behavior.
behaviors and techniques.
House Bill 260
having been read twice by title
well done.
Mr. President, Senate Majority
Leader Peter Wirth for the next
order of business. Unanimous
consent, we go about our
business. Messages from the
that the House has passed House
Bill 339 as amended by the House
and requests the concurrence of
the Senate, respectfully
submitted Lisa and Ortiz
McCutchen, chief clerk. Thank
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent. We
go without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
See, no objection so ordered.
We're going back uh to the order
of business, uh, announcements
and miscellaneous business,
the last one we have through the
whole.
So just, just hang on one
second. Uh, so we'll be in at
11:30 on Monday morning, so
going first to Senator Saia
Lopez, and then we'll start
making our way around the room,
center of the opus, please.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
health and public affairs
committee is meeting tomorrow at
Gonzalez Lopez Jaramillo
O'Malley Souls Lopez, Pope
Gallegos Maestas, um, Stefaniks
and Stefaniks.
So, um, we'll see you then.
financial slow down. We, we know
that there's a big request from
the governor on non-recurring
money, about 450 million that we
got to figure out and balance.
we did send some sheets to the
exec, uh, with the listing,
nobody's names, just a list of
projects that came out, uh, to
see if they had any matches.
We're going to try to cross
morning, you and I are kind of
here early. Senator Munoz,
that's a great idea. I'm
usually.
here early and I know you are as
well, so if that's what you
wish, um, I'll be here. We have
of the 41, 42, maybe, uh, we'll,
we'll see, but we'll think about
that. Senator Munoz, please, the
other thing I heard is they had
fire extinguishers at the Hunter
Bill party last night Senator
to that. Are you, are you asking
or are you just making a
mistake?
That was a rumor rumor, OK, so
rumors don't count then, but
anyway, I'm still gonna go ahead
and defer it to Senator Tobias
and Senator Tobiasson, please.
you need lessons, I am offering
free lessons to you.
And you can come and dance for
the Senate, Senator Munoz and
Senator Soul, Senator Hamblin,
and then Senator Jaraillo.
Senator Souls, please. Thank
you, Mr. President. Education
will be meeting at 9 o'clock on
moving along, uh, chairwoman.
Hamlin
Thank you Mr. President, uh,
your tax business and
transportation committee will be
meeting tonight, but we have had
from Senator Paul, 302-303, and
then we have uh Senator Jara
Millos, lowrider capital license
plate at 327. We have Senate
meeting tonight in 311 there is
pizza and salad waiting for us
there, uh, and we will do that
10 minutes as soon as we exit
the floor. Note to folks, 10
you, get your picture taken,
there's food ready to go and boy
they.
move through those bills rather
quickly. Thank you very much,
Chair Hamblin, moving along then
to.
8:30 a.m. in room 321. We'll be
hearing Senate bills from
Padilla, souls, and Pinto. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you
very much, Chair Jaramiljo you
there someone else there that
know, Mr. President, just we can
go back. I just think it's
important though, we mentioned
the 100th bill party and Senator
Tobiasson, thank you for doing
the Hunter's Bill Party. Let's
uh, Senator Tobias and.
What would you like to make just
uh like uh.
30-second report in terms of
what occurred last night.
remember I, I didn't stay very
long because I just, well,
anyway, so the venue was amazing
for those of you who missed it.
Um, it was really beautiful
about the culture here in this
building in.
honor the staff here, um, I
teach culture partly for a
living and from the moment I
and you deserve last night and
then some, so I wanna again
thank each of you that are here
that, that work for us and
really um make our lives very
employees.
Moving right along to the
majority whip.
Senator Padilla, Senator
Padilla, please thank you very
much, Mr. President. Again,
words from Senator Tobiasin, I
just have to say I've thoroughly
enjoyed working with all of our
new colleagues here. So welcome
to all of you as well. And with
that, uh, majority leader asked
me to just do some recognition
legislative building services
including security, the chief
clerk's office, including staff
working in the front, uh,
office, the rostrum, the
hall attendance, uh, day and
night maintenance workers, it's
just thank you so much, uh,
committees, including analysts,
secretaries.
and Zoom operators, and I know
the Zoom operators have had a
heck of a time this time, so
uh, and I just love mine, by the
way, she's so wonderful, uh,
Bill room staff, uh, state
Senator Peter Wirth for the next
order of business.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
final
Unanimous consent is the
