Senator, Senate majority floor
leader Peter Worz to take us to
that first order of business.
mentioned, uh, before the break,
we're not gonna do any 3rd
reading of legislation, uh,
today and may not tomorrow as
well. Our committees are getting
a little backed up, so we really
reports just wanna remind uh uh
chairs or vice chairs to have
your scripts prepared on the
committee reports. The reader
will read.
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
William Pe. So's chairs
The Senate Bill 268 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
the finance committee.
Senate Bill 343 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted Senator William P.
So's chair.
adopted in the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually. The reader to
read.
Mr. President, your conservation
committee to whom has been
submitted, Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stephanic chair. Intersteanics,
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
amended and the referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
submitted senator Elizabeth
Listeanic chair.
Senator Fenix, Mr. President, I
report has been adopted and the
journal reflect or acted upon
individually. The reader will
read.
Mr. President, your Indian rural
and cultural Affairs Committee,
to whom has been referred to
submitted Senator Shannon De
Pinto, chair. Pinto.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion in the
public affairs Committee.
Senator Bill 332 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 353 do pass and
committee reports we have a
motion to adopt the committee
reports. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those oppose the I have it. The
community report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
Resolution 3 has had it under
consideration reports same with
without recommendation and
that's referred to the education
committee.
the journal reflect they acted
upon individually no objection,
the reader will read.
Senate Joint Resolution 6 do
pass and the referred to the
Education Committee.
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted, Senator Katie Doig,
chair. Senator Doig, Mr.
President, move adoption of the
committee report.
Senators, there's a motion to
adopt the community report. All
Senator Peter Wurtz to take us
to that next order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we regard our
business announcements and
miscellaneous. We are in that
order business announces
miscellaneous. We'll start with
correct one. Senator.
Yes, Mr. President, uh, so I
would ask unanimous consent to
uh expend the committee report
for uh Senate Joint Memorial 2,
committee will it be advancing
to?
Uh, Indian cultural affairs.
and cultural affairs, Mr.
President. Thank you. There's
been a request for unanimous
consent.
business, Mr. Panimous consent
we got our business committee
reports see no objection on that
order of business committee
reports the reader will read.
Mr. President, your rules
committee, to whom has been
Committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Katie Doig,
chair.
Senator, adoption of the
committee reports we have.
A motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
business messages from the
house.
Hearing no objection we're in
that order of business messages
from the house, the reader will
read, Mr. President, I am
the Senate, respectfully
submitted Lisa Marti McCutcheon,
chief clerk. The journal will
show that the message in the
house has been received.
Mr. President, I am directed to
from the house has been
received.
Reader to read. Mr. President,
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the House has passed
House taxation and revenue
clause and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The journals show that the
message from the House has been
received.
The reader will read
Senate Bill 412 introduced by
Senate Bill 412 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 412.
New Mexico private equity funds
on New Mexico businesses. Senate
Bill 413413 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senator Gonzalez an act making
an appropriation for a medical
complex in Taos, Senate Bill
414414 having been read twice by
title is order printed and
Senator Boone.
An act making an appropriation
to the Board of Regents of New
Mexico State University for the
New Mexico Department of
Senate Bill 41515. Have you been
read twice by title is order,
print, and referred to the
Senate Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee Senate Bill
415.
math and reading support for our
students in pre-kindergarten
through 3rd grade. Senate Bill
41616 having been read twice by
title is order Prince and
Introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to adoption.
Amending and enacting sections
of the adoption Act and the New
Mexico uniform parentage Act to
to the Senate Rules Committee,
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 417.
Senate Bill 418 introduced by
Senator Padilla an act relating
Send the bill 418. 418, having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Conservation
Committee, then Senate tax
business transportation
Committee Senate Bill 418.
vulnerable adults from financial
exploitation, providing for
additional reasons to delay
disbursements or transactions,
expanding human may initiate a
delay.
Providing for additional
to the Senate tax business
Transportation Committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 419.
The Senate Bill 420 introduced
service providers, prohibiting
certain uses of consumer data
providing rights to consumers.
Establishing limitations on
Providing for rule making.
Senate Bill 420 420 having been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senator Trujillo.
An act relating to educational
retirement.
Clarifying powers of the
educational retirement Board.
Senate Bill 422 introduced by
senators O'Malley and Stewart,
an act making an appropriation
for operational support for
Business Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 422.
Senate Bill 423 introduced by
senators Scott.
Townsend
finance committee to conduct
rural impact analysis of major
rules providing procedures,
amending the administrative
procedures Act.
Defining terms.
Providing procedures for
judicial review of rules,
amending and enacting sections
of the State rules Act.
Providing notice requirements.
Senate Bill 423 423 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 423.
Mr. President
You want me to read the whole
title Senator?
Uh,
Just a short titlelating the
rules requiring the legislative
Finance Committee conduct rural
Rules we need to make
or not make so just for the
body's purpose, uh,
informational purposes at
Centerville 423 and it's going
to Senate Rules Committee the to
Senate Finance Committee.
to taxation, expanding the rural
health care practitioner tax
credit to include licensed
respiratory care practitioners
and polysommographic
Then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 424.
Senate Bill 425, introduced by
Senator Shindo, an act related
changing agencies and
establishing conditions for the
reversion or transfer of
unexpended balances or of
appropriations made by the
legislature in prior years.
and referred to the Senate
Finance Committee Senate Bill
425.
Senate Bill 426 introduced by
Senator Lopez, an act repealing
As an obsolete provision
transferring functions of the
New Mexico school for the
visually handicapped to the
blind administrative unit of the
vocational rehabilitation
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee Senate Bill 426.
The Senate Bill 427 introduced
by
Bill 427 427 having been read
twice by title is order, Prince
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 427.
An act relating to child welfare
enacting the crossover Youth
Act, creating the crossover
youth program requiring
crossover youth training.
appropriation. Senate Bill
428428 having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Then Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 428.
An actla child wel welfare
enacting the reinstatement of
parental Rights Act.
Senate Bill 429 Senate Bill 429
have you been read twice by
Senators Lopez and Cedillo
Lopez.
And actually relating to
children.
Revising the definition of
neglected child.
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, that's Senate Bill
4:30.
An act related to taxation.
Amending the distributions of
the liquor excise tax, amending
the surtax to a new tribal
alcohol harms alleviation fund.
Changing the local DWI grant
program Act to the local alcohol
Excluding the taxes imposed by
the liquor excise tax from the
definition of gross receipts in
the grocery seats and
compensating tax Act.
making an appropriation, making
appropriations.
Senate Bill 431.
Centerville 431 having been read
twice by title is order printed.
How's this
your committee substitute for
House Bill 8.
procedures to provide for
community-based competency
restoration for non-dangerous
defendants to expand the list of
crimes for which a defendant may
dismissal of a criminal case and
to allow a court to authorize a
district attorney or the
Department of Health to use the
report of a competency
evaluation.
petition for assisted outpatient
treatment and to allow a
petition to be filed upon 30
days after a qualified
professional has examined a
defendant or respondent.
penalties, increasing the
penalties for certain automobile
theft, felony offenses,
increasing the penalty for the
crime of making a shooting
threat, providing for the
suspected of operating a motor
vehicle while under the
influence of intoxicating uh
intoxicating liquor or drugs and
allowing certain medical
House Judiciary Committee
That's House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8.
House taxation and revenue.
Committee substitute for House
property tax, amending certain
property tax exemptions for
veterans to reflect changes made
to the exemptions pursuant to
constitutional amendments
approved by voters at the
an emergency house taxation and
revenue committees substitute
for house government election.
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47.
Our House Bill 47 having been
read twice by title is printed
is.
Referred to Senate tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee,
that's.
introduced by Representative
Lente.
An act relating to taxation upon
and deleting outdated provisions
destination sourcing amending
that section of the law that
allows taxation revenue
department to make adjustments
of distributions and transfers
of two political subdivisions.
Taxation and revenue to
Compromise asserted liability in
the case of a denial or a refund
or credit.
Allowing a completed return to
constitute a filing of a claim
for refund.
Removing Attorney General
approval of closing agreements
and of refunds over $20,000.
Providing that electronic filers
file and pay with the same
deadline as all other filers.
Removing contingent rates for
Election or adopted ordinance
unless an emergency or
unforeseen unforeseen occurrence
occurs.
Allowing tax liens to be
recorded without a notary
signature.
Aligning a worker's compensation
fee due date to the withholding
tax due date.
House Bill 218.
I spelled 218.
Having been read twice by title.
House Bill 218.
Senate Majority Floor Leader Pe
awards to take us to that next
order business. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We go out our business
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session. There's
no objection. It is ordered.
judiciary Committee no
objection. It is so.
Senator Peter Worth, thank you,
Mr. President, now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m. The Senate will come
to order.
Mr. President, I ask you to
consent that the rules be
suspended, that the Journal of
the Record, the record show that
the journal has been read in
full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. There's no
floor tomorrow at 11:30, uh,
thinking we probably will not do
3rd reading again. Our
committees need to get up and
with Senator Lopez and Senator
Stephanics. Senator Lopez, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent to make an announcement.
Proceed, Senator. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
don't know if anybody noticed
but Senator Wirth looked at me
when he said the committees need
to get some business done, so,
over from Saturday. Thank you
very much, Mr. President. 9 to
11:30 in room 311. Thank you,
Senator, uh, Stephanics, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, did you wish
Please state your point,
Senator. Thank you, Mr.
President and members um I wanna
share this with you, um.
Jennifer Ed Goose, MD. She's
professor and chair department
of the family and community
medicine at the University of
New Mexico.
be our new maternal child health
clinic service director
effective immediately. Doctor
Gonzalez is a natural leader who
Mr. President and members, um,
one of my reasons is um this is
my son, which is very special.
But also 20 years ago,
he came home one night and he
said, I talked to these people
that were from the University of
New Mexico, and they're talking
about a new program. Well,
was excited and, you know, and
of course we supported him all
the way.
And uh members uh the really
important thing is, uh, here's a
program that we have had for 20
and then, uh, also now in the
position that he's going to be
as a director of this program.
But uh
But uh I would really like to
bringing in our own medical
students and then at the same
time keeping them in New Mexico,
growing your own. But it is time
that we can expand. We can
Uh, there is, um, so many
successes to this program of
what happened to uh the number
of students that have gone
through this program in 20
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to make an
announcement. There are no
announcement. No objection
proceed, senator. Thank you, Mr.
President, members Senate
Judiciary Committee, the Senate
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting this afternoon, probably
just like to remind you that the
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at 1:30 or 30
minutes after the floor session
room 321.
We have a very ambitious agenda
after the forward room 321 also
for the tax committee tonight.
Don't forget the dinner that
URSVP2 starts at 6 o'clock at
Rio Chama. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Hamblin. Senator Lanier.
welcome.
is. I would like to introduce
two of the honorary lieutenant
governors.
That has been sitting with you
today, if you two would like to
Uh, he loves football.
He's an inner linebacker and a
running back, and he enjoys his
brothers and sisters.
Gabriel wants to play football
And his brother Abray uh Abraham
Trujil. He is 13 years old.
And he's in the 7th grade. He is
attending Berlio Spartans
Academy.
He enjoys gaming, football,
leave anybody out. Um, he, he
would like to play professional
football also and be a music
artist. Would you?
Help me welcome these two
honorary lieutenant governors.
further announce we have Senator
Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
know the judiciary said they had
lunch boxes, but I didn't know
we had lunch boxes in the
building.
Oh lunch pails. I mean, I, I
didn't get a lunch pail.
guess we're gonna have to get
bag lunches.
Mr. President, Senate Finance,
we're going to go up and hear
some bills, uh, uh, there is, I
did hear there was an extension
Make sure you're there. Capital
is gonna be coming along pretty
quick within the next week. I
think that bill's being drafted
in, and so remember it's gonna
be a new format. I think Senate
Finance members have sent out
I caught the score, but what a,
what an amazing story and again
continue a good run for them.
Yeah, that, that was a great
game. That was two good match
left, Boise and some other one
like Nevada, I think, left the
plane before they go to the
mountain west. I know we'll be
here and I know that, uh,
Senator Paul is very excited to
I yield. I am ready for the
basketball game. We got practice
tomorrow. I don't know if, uh,
Senator Soul had, uh, made an
day. Thank you. You too, Senator
Munoz. Any further
announcements, senators?
See no further announcements,
Senator Peter Worth. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. And so just
reauthorization request deadline
has been extended through the
end of this week, Friday,
February 21st at 3:00 p.m. So if
you have any riots that didn't
individual, um, by each
district, it's one large bill,
uh, that will be introduced on
Thursday morning, February 20th,
which is the final day for
deadline. So we'll give everyone
as much heads up as possible on
what our date is to.
make sure on funding. So that's
what I know from Capital Outlay
