consent, we go to that on our
business announcements and
miscellaneous, and I yield to
Senator Gonzalez Senator
you very much, um, members, um,
you'd be surprised, so.
The interest that this has
brought and uh also the many
stories that are behind a lot of
were and how, you know, how they
could work something like this.
And we told them it was
completely proprietary
rights and uh we are not selling
also decided today to uh wear a
bow tie which I applaud him for
that.
The most important part is that
books and our blue book, but,
uh, with that, um, you know, I
will go ahead and start with our
information that we gathered and
first I want to have our two
both of our judges.
Yeah
And uh let's give them a big
hand.
With uh
9.5, we had one with an 8.5 we
competitive, quite nice, but,
uh, again, it was a lot of fun
and
The recipient will be getting
one of my bowls from my
collection.
And this is from the, the Gay
brothers from Arizona and I will
just mention that.
Every year, regardless of what
So with that, um,
Our 9.5 winner.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. You,
you know what, this is, this is,
you know, volties are artwork.
a state necklace, uh, so it's
very unique in this artwork
where we celebrate in New Mexico
today, but I'll, I'll tell you
one thing I wanna do. There's a
lot of lobbyists listening.
the minimum bid, the minimum
it's gonna go for is $5000.
And so let's, let's raise some
money for Senator Gonzalez's
charity that he appreciates and
say Senator Brandt was 2nd,
maybe Senator Woods was 3rd.
Uh, Senator Padilla might be
just in the middle of the pack,
but
Well, Senator Sanchez is pretty
good too.
But I, I, if it's not offensive
to, to Senator Gonzalez, let's
raise $5000 for the charity of
his choice that he wants to do
today to the Senate and bringing
some real reality and and what a
fun day to have a bolo tie day
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
They want everybody to assemble
for a picture, I guess, Judges
Senators, we're still on that
order of business.
Announcements of miscellaneous.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
You might notice that our chief
of staff has abandoned us here.
And so we're without any kind of
guide, our rudder is left
former superintendent and our
current rudder is on his way to
the pit to watch Logan win.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
share, we do have further
announcements as updates center
Hobbs Eagles. So Sandia defeated
Hobbs for girls 58 championship
47 to 30. And at halftime of the
Thank you for the update, Senor
Maestas.
I, I just wanna say that uh
congratulations to everyone who
looks so nice in their bolo ties
wonderful to see all of us come
together. Senator Gonzalez,
thank you for your creativity,
uh, and it makes me days like
this make me extremely proud to
be the president of the Senate
and when we come together as a
roll over those 4 House bills.
We'll do them tomorrow. Uh,
we're gonna come in at one
o'clock, uh, tomorrow on the
floor. I know that Senator Lopez
is gonna have her committee come
to get up to committee, but uh
that's the plan. So for
committee chairs now is the time
to make announcements. Thank
you, Senator Senator Lopez.
Mr. President, thank you. I was
gonna make a an announcement
Finance is going to go in 5
minutes after the floor. We got
a few bills we're gonna hear,
and we're gonna come back in
maybe tomorrow I'll let
committee members know once we
get through some bills today,
money for your charity. I see
some lobbyists up there. So
hopefully they're already
writing checks.
If not, we'll, we'll see what
the next time they want to catch
me in the hall, there's no
government cheese unless you
Further announcements, senators.
See of
Senator Cervantes, do you have
your Fifth Amendment rights
there, Senator. Uh, you, you
have the right to remain silent.
Uh, in any event, the Senate
Judiciary Committee will, will
now see no further
announcements.
Senator Worth
Uh, with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to the Senate
stand in recess until 1 o'clock
