Your brown
center brantley
Senator gonzalez present senator
gregs
senator handling
santa hickey
Senator my yes this.
Center mccatch in
senator mckenna.
The.
Senator morris.
central artisana
senator pidea senator oh now.
Center pinto
center pertal.
Center city a lot best.
Center share
senator shandow.
Here enter worth senator words
you do have a choreo mr
president thank you and answer
everyone please rise for them
occasion to be there today by
chair virgin regions in spanish
with it today by senator worth
and the solution risk of flag to
that today by senator to him.
The.
you have given us in this
beautiful land field with
grander
and in which the splendor of
your glory is revealed in its
diversity of people who live
work and form families and
communities in this state.
Help us to flourish and to be
well.
Help us to be faithful in our
duties to them and destribe to
be the best stewards of their
trust we can be
we especially pray for the
But as them and they're loved
ones.
Grant them with them to make
decisions for the well being of
the people of new mexico.
effort of the dancing the causes
of freedom responsibility and
cooperation.
better things for future
generations I ask these things
the name of price to my word
man.
The.
and i'll yell to set a majority
floridate or peter worth to take
us to that first order of
business thank you mister
president and welcome everyone
unanimous consent we go without
our business announcements
appreciate a reverend everything
you're invication this morning
again it's it's good to think
about the world that's outside
of this place and what a special
we've got to work together to
steer this ship through the
final three and a half days and
again I just appreciate you
being here and sharing sharing
those words with us this morning
holding a pop up vaccination
clinic today for legislators and
staff to receive flu and or the
updated covered shots in room
three o three from eight thirty
recognition today uh that
senator campbells will present
for david abbey I who's here
with his family and we are glad
to have him back on a
through the rest of this week we
need to do it a little bit
differently and we I think we've
come up with a good plan and
he'll do that when we get to
that point.
Just one final announcement
schedule a window to fit him in
he'll be here tomorrow and
without a year of the senator
padea and then other members who
want to introduce guess thank
you thank you senator peter
worth a year to send the
today.
Seen no objection center by the
and thanks mister president unis
consent to our cameras and the
senate floor in the senate
call here in no objection thank
you center for there we do have
others under less who would like
to make an instruction i'll
start with center souls
a ph nursing student in the
college of nursing at UNM
also we have heather holter who
is the program manager at the
college of nursing at UNM and
secretary of higher education if
you'll help me oh and I should
point out she is also the wichi
commissioner from new mexico and
his president of the of which
so if you'll help me recognizing
my guests today
thank you center soul center
tomorrow.
that I love to brag about him
but he gets very embarrassed
when I brag about all is the
conscious will for forego that
today thank you mister president
Thank you mister president I
have a very distinguished guest
today i'm so proud to introduce
her a doctor goboriella duran
of alba kirky public schools she
is currently the district chief
operations officer overseeing
everything from transportation
as school meals to aps police
improve academic outcomes for
seventy thousand students she
will also oversee the daily
operations of more than a
hundred and fifty schools twelve
stepping stepping into the
position of super tendent june
thirtieth blake he attended sent
dear base elementary them bureau
and middle school and graduate
science and second period from
new mexico state here is
something you don't know about
her she is an accomplished
violence who plays for the
educator and a professional muse
new session please help me
welcome the new superintendent
Thank you mister president and
send a body i'd like to
introduce my guests today you
know we always talk about how we
need to get younger people
engaged in the political process
senior at oregon mountain high
school was able to vote for the
first time this last year he
wants to go to school to study
political science and he is
crucial's born and bread and so
please welcome all then rivas
synergy mccurgen
mister president thank you very
much we have with us in the
chamber today the artish of
bulldogs and almost every one of
day division and artisan now
holds thirty two of the last
sixty seven years of state
championships so we can
moppen jordan rodriguez and max
rodriguez if you guys have stand
up and then as we as we read
your name going across here if
you players would each stand up
though
hate and harco axel hartley
recard or word the
devon houston
save your jagger cody johnson
Auto school
jacob or take a brice prior
said he
rolled
sotto try tomsick carson trost
devon willowskies j- jane
waldrip and caden zooniga
the chamber the artisable dogs
thank you mister president
Center period thank you mister
president I just wanted to think
senator mercuston for bringing
the bulldogs here today you know
it's a little hard breaking
rightfully one that wasn't
touched down but it wouldn't
have mattered any way as after
all but just congratulations
thanks for coming up glad the
roads were clear that you can
make it safe.
theme is present why do you do
is my guess today who are
related to me two of my boys
james and jacket
they are lego builder
extraordinary
so please welcome them to the
chamber thank you
center
announcing that a state police
officer had been verding the
line of duty in my district and
the final few days of my last
session I received a phone call
on a very busy intersection of
amador and valley last night
when a witness driving by
park their vehicle
children a ten year old and a
two year old and if the chamber
would please stand with me and
acknowledge his service in
I'll be remissed to not give a
shut out to the to the great
artisan bulldogs for balti was
great to get have you guys here
i'm from about current center
season so experienced the the
bulldog ball it's a powerful
wonderful tradition you guys
give it a heck of a run last
year and then just smoked
everybody this year so that the
the lessons you learn and
you all the success in the world
congratulations on a state total
thank you center my estes.
Any severe wanted to make any
further announcements.
worth to take a set next order
of business
thank you mister president well
we're still up front i'd like to
yield to senator compose for a
days and just give a sense of
how you're going to do that and
what it looks like would be
great thank you very much mister
president thank you very much
majority leader worth in a
presented and within that to
have these certificates are
going to be to individuals who
many are steam colleagues but
because of the number of
go ahead and have the
certificate red by the reader to
have the sponsor of the
certificate make a brief comment
than from there go to members of
a brief closure round of applies
and that will basically contain
if you will the presentations
often times here in the senate
spending time on other things
but this is like a home this is
like a family
that means twenty four hours
each day what we're doing is
members in a times even grieving
when there is the last of a
loved one so members of the
senate I hope that each and
every one of you as you continue
from home and this is the way we
represent as a citizen
legislature each and every
member of the state of new
mexico because we love them we
without mr president
we're ready if you will then to
begin this process thank you
very much they thank you center
companies.
Center covers so mister
Fifty sixth legislator second
session twenty twenty four the
new mesco state senate does
hereby extent its recognition
whereas mr abbey is always
wanted to see himself where the
real needs were and then
provided data sets to su-
abbey coordinated visits for the
legislative finance committee
due to our medical so members
could see major factories and
experience new eight new egg
label of any party or on any
person he met or any legislator
that he heard and whereas mr
abbey was the people's voice and
the legislator's companies and
reasonable plausible and prudent
and whereas legislators
lobbyists and legis legislative
finance committee personnel new
mr abbey's heart was in the
strategy with of people's fiscal
roadmap and whereas mister abbey
asked pointed questions
processed the responses and
found solutions to benefit the
underserved and governmental
However he was able to weather
the most contentious sessions
and always came out smiling and
whereas mr abbey's career will
abbey was always a gentleman a
person of humour and filled with
more energy than any energy
and whereas we owe mr abbey a
abbey said a positive example so
others could flourish while
pursuing lifelong careers now
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state of new
capital in the city of south
afraid senator pete campos may
be stewart president protem
sherry delanti clerk new
helping others he pays close
attention to the needs of others
he focuses micro attention to
details regardless of the issue
N confidence this individual
mister president members of the
senate
has dealt for many years in the
area of not only the fiscal
mexico he talks to the grass
routes people there are the
people that are in neighborhoods
the people that are helping to
serve if you will the
legislators as they are ten
meetings regardless he knows the
so without mister president
members of the senate I indicate
that the list of his
accomplishments definitely is
endless
and it continues to make those
return the opportunity back to
you to see if there is anyone
else who wishes to comment on
this certificate center
companies they are other
senators who would like to speak
to the certificate and i'll
through the whole budgeting
process and try to teachers and
say how this peace moves in that
peace moves I know that there's
other people that say and I
could probably talk for thirty
minutes on my own but there's
everyone across the state so I
can just say those two things
quickly and his able to navigate
in quickly move in and adjust in
jump here and figure out how to
Is a probably the biggest loss
to new mexico but to say with a
senior senator in the senior
twenty six years we hadn't hired
an lfc director that that says
so worth thank you mister
president thank you senator
campos for bringing this
certificates
unbelievable ups and downs
actually at his going away party
I had a little wrap that was
written of all the little magic
bottom and I can distinct their
member going to david and say
water we're going to do and he
was like we are out of options I
mean it literally was that
incredible forty years to this
institution and it's it's I
thought of you a lot as we're
here now dealing with something
important moment to recognize
your service so thank you david
thank you vor and it's a family
efforts for sure enter of the
whole family it's just one of
Excuse me as president mister
president we all have these
stack of books on our desk
there's three volumes there and
show he didn't need those books
did need that budget I could say
david what are we going to do
about such and such he said well
that's probably on page two for
whatever
an amazing mind don't want to
senator worth said we've had
some tough times that I
had to set in with with david
and try to sort through with
john arthurs
about year big and I was a
teenager and i'd be over there
wrestling cabs for dad david got
to be taken part of mad he
you senator villa single birth
thank you mister president just
quickly and over on time crunch
but I just want to say
personally thank you to david
for
the budget in the finances of
the state in the mexico
he is an amazing guy he would
always respond to me when I had
a question it will get back with
Ah some of the little slower
than others and so we got a
little special side bar
attention from time to time but
it was also very much
maybe over an adult beverage or
something like that but david
goodbye thank you for all that
you've done for this state and
for me.
Thank you mister president thank
you senator birth said it was.
saw mister president enough to
send their accomplishments so
outstanding that I saw on david
is he was always there to hold
his staff's hand.
answered and he was always there
then I have always been a firm
believer that you're only as
good as your staff then his
quality for acknowledges and in
know best of luck and thank you
for everything thank you mister
president thank you center
consellers senator severe
office.
You mister president.
environmental budget or whether
the environment department
budget or sexual assault he
always knew what the amount was
where to look for it whether
just his kindness he never felt
like I was bothered I never felt
like I was bothering him or
annoying him he just always was
responsive and if you didn't
chapter thank you make us ns we
have said your share followed by
center stewart then sender g and
senator brandly senator sure
thank you mister president if if
david abbey will yield what page
he would tell me and he would
tell me how they don't and their
budget even today
we've talked about the ups and
downs and
that there was limited capacity
to do that and so it just
couldn't happen so
so he was very wonderful the
that he's done for me and we
should all appreciate the things
he's done for the state of new
mexico thank you david
thank you send her share center
stewart
gentleman leaveness that's hard
to find in a money guy but boy
he has that in speeds he was
never disagree believe when you
disagreed with him so i'll tell
that last year I was first and
about the education budget patty
loans from said to me go talk to
david we elect ourselves on a
room for thirty minutes yell
policy it was like a miracle and
I thought it's only I had done
this before now just locked
myself in a room and yelled
david nil yield back so really
Thank you center stewart so just
for information all purposes for
the body where center hickey
we have till twelve ten
senator celebrating thank you
mister president and thank you
david I haven't known you a long
time but i've spent forty years
I am so deeply appreciative and
so appreciated for the
incredibly good staff that you
surrounded yourself with that's
been just amazing thank you sir.
but you were the gem of this new
mexico legislator thank you for
all you have done for new mexico
for your service your sacrifice
and thank you david for all
you've done.
Thank you center diamond brand
new
senator rotheriggers thank you
mister president I too stand in
couldn't have been luckier and
in bless to have david with us
truly you know I I always looked
at hamas having a job that you
know you can't win for losing
to say thank you to david for
just always being so
knowledgeable kind and you know
what very collected not once did
listening to us and still set
their kind as you always have
been and I just want you to know
I appreciate you we miss you we
will miss you forever thank you
here in the legislature has been
truly appreciated you also
eventually had an open door for
every non profit that wanted
money from across the entire
Thank you center to vanixce in
your servant
negative president appreciate
the fact we're on a rocket here
the chamber and he was over in
the house she were wondering on
the capital for the day and um
we had a lot of fine because
david's hair used to be longer
and so we were putting him out
in in the time i've been here in
mock my life i've met very few
people that are true great
leaders and david is truly a
great leader
between the staff and the people
great deal here today and i'll
just add to all of you that one
thing the david help meet always
understand was to have courage
and confidence in myself and
there were many times david
and sometimes they took a lot of
hits for doing it but I
respected you so much david that
I would do what you thought I
needed to do even if it was on
behind the scenes but there was
a lot of it and so thank you for
that even thank you amongst the
senator gregs.
Thank you president thank you
I mexico government and without
without his leadership all of us
would struggle more than then we
have understanding of the
david helping us know what it is
but on that on kind of a
personal side note david
for the whole state but because
of the work that he helped us
accomplish with oteral county
and the court system there were
appreciate you for that and uh I
look forward to the
opportunities to get you down in
the southern part of the state
and may be gone to uh to argos
to get to see you soon thank you
david for all that you've done
first day thank you senator
gregs we have sent her center
but there singer could him pill
in senator schendel center gagas
never had the privilege of being
on house or senate finance but
as a brand new legislator we
made in the halls in he would
answer my questions and.
rock ross and from lost crucials
in there and lee and I are
friends and I got to talk to him
about it and he takes the same
pride of having a relationship
with david abbey as I do
was and david turns me answered
to kyle and I told him we walk
often this friend of mine asked
what's to kylie sort of like
uncle.
line to this I always use this
because I think they got the
tone have some side of it but
the friend of mine steal as of
today doesn't know were not
that privilege now that he's
gone i'm gonna find someone
else's david that I can abuse
but never having horn and claim
thank you for what you guys have
center by the app thanks very
much mister president I do also
rise thank you mister president
senator compost
you know I only met david in the
look like at some point but it
looks great now but you know I
when I arrived everyone kept
saying he david adopted to
mention that today with goc
david if you want to get that
done or whatever I think that
sign of respect and it's also a
sign of delivery and service
delivery and and the quality of
work that david is done for all
of us for many years mister
president and also you are just
doing some back of the envelope
fortunate to have somebody that
understood how to help us steer
the ship and in so many
different ways and in the last
thing mister president I will
say as I i've probably gotten to
know clayton recently better
is who we raise and claim as a
very fine young man hard worker
and he's just like you thank
you.
Thank you center by the end
half of david
abbey
those newer members who came in
in twenty twenty one came in and
a really really challenging time
and I can't tell you how
their staff you were there to
answer questions and help us
learn from your incredible
really resonated was how you
were such a strong voice for
those who are most vulnerable in
new mexico you made it passion
and I will eternally be grateful
for that and it just shows what
I kind compassionate person you
are and working with lauren and
guess I could a hampile wheel
center schene of all of a center
lovers
thank mister president i'm so
glad if it's gone
anything about the budget he
just said trust me
i'm just kidding I thought a
point a little humor to this.
I'm so glad david is gone
clayton travel see the world do
the things that we've always
wanted and that's my point about
us stepping down the long great
distinguished career for we
there's also time that there's a
lot to live in life and i'm glad
you chose to step down when
you're still healthy and he can
draw time with your family and
your friends and do the things
i'll say diro senator shandow is
time for you to enjoy
life to go and enjoy family
but reserve some time for incase
I have seen they were during my
ten year here also it has been
phenomenal of your memory your
guidance and and as my
colleagues have said phone call
lauren for you enough for all of
the family thanks to you because
you shared him with us david
lived here he breathed he was up
with us late at night as late as
we stay here and I mean it's
appreciative and thank you and I
still hope I you know being that
again you'll be turned a phone
call if we make it because
you're still an expert in this
new mexico state budget and
congratulations.
especially valley he lived in
especially north of especially
and was a big help to me when I
first got here and I remember I
wanted to make sure we were
document quickly within five
minutes pulled up the line item
showed me where it was and
committed that it would stay
there and he is helping right
now with the the work he did on
think of you and respect you by
friend and thank you so much
from what you've done for the
state of new mexico thank you
mister president.
here with an honor to begin my
career in santa fe together with
you I can remember being named
to the senate finance committee
and here in all the years with
the great senator ben ultimate
on a how wonderful of the
committee it was but once they
did the announcement of the
committee members who were hold
off upstairs because we had a
huge budget deficit that we had
to make sure that we addressed a
shortfall.
And you let us through that time
when many members may not
realize just how difficult that
Now is the state is were able to
password and do extremely well
what their revenues and ever
forget the lessons that you
taught me but most of all david
what I appreciate that you've
always believed to me.
only do we form relationships
and bonds of friendship in this
place you also develop family
thank you for being my family
david.
Send it a repeat cover thank you
too many things but center city
a low person reminded me of one
thing and terms of the next
chapter david a habit is right
in a book just to let you all
know I don't know when it's
that for a moment and those of
you that know he is a green horn
he would go out brand cattle and
in doing that I understand that
once in a while he'd go and have
the branding iron kind of
schendo if uh you place your
trust in david with the budget
is there anywhere that you place
your trust in me and dealing
with capital outlay so anyway
you don't have to answer that
spouse with that lorry or lauren
and then along with a a great
phone a friend of all of her so
clean he's growing up in this
system and as he continues we
look forward to great things
to the new mexico state senate.
center companies and thank other
members of the senate as well
send a majority of learning to
petword stickers and next door
to business and I thank you
to go send it or decide you know
thank you very much mister
president I ask you know it was
consent to be able to introduce
two family members who are my
department chairman at saint
pios high school and er she's
been there for ten years now
teaching a same piace senator
how to me of course is the same
youngest of mackay land
christians three girls is having
seven correct processor who is a
sophomore it's same post and who
out soon enough with the members
join me and welcoming my guests
for the day mike and saving.
I asked for unanimous consent
that the proposed senate
conservation committee
substitute for emergency senate
bill to ninety four spantered by
sponsored by centers to fantase
center monos and senator share
do you want the title mister
president yesterday please read
the title the title of the
finance to issue severance tax
bonds for the department of
environment into to enter into
contracts to acquire and manage
three six point two and I
believe
it is coming back to me to
deliver to your desk thank you.
Seen no objection so ordered
said a majority of florida peter
worth thank you mister president
start with that senator padia
house bill one ninety three then
we will go to the budget and
that'll be center monos on that
I think what we're gonna do
we'll see where we are at that
bill just sell both sides can
caucus
uh but we'll kind of keep
everyone in touch as we move
forward so just before we do
that i'm going to go ahead and
readable rating
mister president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred house appropriations
and financing substitute for
house bill one ninety six has
sooner as we have emotion to
adopt the committee report all
those in favor signified by
saying I
was a pose need the eyes have it
currently port has been adopted
pass and that's referred to the
education committee respectfully
submitted senator katy do hig
chair.
objection readable read center
memorial seven recommendation
that I do pass and then refer to
Cinema more eleven
same will recommendation that a
dupass and then referred to the
health and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
was opposed name the eyes have
at the committee report has been
adopted and the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually the readable read
pass as amended revents referred
to the judiciary committee
respectfully submitted senator
gerald or these peno chair.
report all those in favor of
significant by
those of those name the eyes
have at the community part has
been adopted
readorried mister president your
pass respectfully submitted
senator william peace sold's
chair
thank you mister president I ask
you an animals consent at the
senate that the reader be
allowed to read both of the
recommendation that it do not
pass but that senate education
committee substitute for senate
bill to ninety seven do pass and
report all those in favor
signified by saying I thought
the supposed
eyes have at the committee port
has been adopted and the journal
were reflect that they were
is senator thank you mister
president before I yield the
center period to one be clear
item number one that we're going
to do today is number seven on
the counter house bill one
then the third item will do
today after a thirty minute
recess is number nine on the
counter that's the tax bill
senator schendo and once we get
done with those I will see where
we are at that point so I would
in no objection thank you center
by the end of senator worth
thank you mister president in ms
consent we go that our business
third reading of legislation and
I yield to senator padea for
item number seven on the
consent out of the senate that
senate bill one ninety three as
twice amended on be put on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
replacing house bill one ninety
three is twice amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution here
in no objection center feel
thousand twenty four just in a
couple of months with the
legislation does it requires all
certified officers to be
employed full time it allows
lateral officers to claim full
credit for total law enforcement
the force and it requires law
enforcement agencies to comply
with the law enforcement
training act and to submit
additional information to
receive retention differential
dispersements it also removes
the evaluation of the program's
mister president.
Thank you.
We are debating and hospital
you said it removes the efficacy
so
so does that mean we'll never
know if this thing works or not
miss president excellent
question so the agency already
and I demonstrated
perfect mister president i'll
even vote for it.
Thank you for the share any
further debate centers
three is twice amended do now
pass and I ask you instance of
the senate that the record show
that the role has been called in
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
The.
members of the body and get
we're gonna go into the next
item on the calendar that's
going to be item number eight
house appropriations the finance
committee substitute for house
bills to and three is twice
to and three as amended twice on
final passage and is now subject
to amendment our substitution.
all the appropriations in the
for all of state government
throughout new mexico so many
good things are going to happen
in house built too as we move
forward this is the lowest
phelps anderson charles john
courty
on the four sea no objection
thank you said him in us thank
you first of all you can't have
good hearings to help us make
good decisions as we move
forward with house bill to
then i'd like to
think may said it finance staff
j justin marie viviana and
catherine who all will help this
instead of finance we got so
many moving pieces in the thirty
day it's really hard to do
food banks we raise the snap
benefit for seniors and
disability disabled from twenty
five to a hundred four times the
amount we increased the dd
we set early child literacy up
along with a governor that we
agreed to so we can move from
the bottom to the middle and as
we make these changes they're
slow and education and they'll
will have happened in new mexico
slow steady changes what needed
to happen with mexico with that
mister president I think uh
let's see them he hits few more
trust we've set up opportunity
and the legislative scholarships
to be funded in perpertuity over
time over twenty two million for
cancer alleged early educators
and nine million to expand
evidence based prevention and
intervention CYFD
fifteen at sixty million for a
four point four three billion
the largest pd recurring budget
they better get to work we got
to change that number in
graduation this quickly as we
can
two hundred million for tribal
education c t structurality and
education fellows
house bill two has more than one
fifteen million for medicaid
professional repayment ten
million for stams scholarships
and sixty million for work force
training ten million for
improvement their children's
maltreatment prevention and
intervention
seventy five million for
childcare assistance.
Twelve point two million for
securities rural health care in
hospitals got fifty million
dollars to save those and while
we're there i'll touch on one
point my hospital and get in the
kind has one point five days
close we've increased the budget
to eminent new mexico and across
the board fundamental critical
staff positions in emnert
fixed that problem of disparity
from last crucial says we need
better judges seven million for
state police vehicles will be
careful now and two million for
crime victim graspirations is
money where it should be so we
now have a true reserve in the
state and new mexico are reserve
as cash not based upon a
thank you mr president center so
this was an interesting budget
I know that the year the
republicans on the center
but the good things that I see
in here is is we tried to save
money in in in a lot of places
and I think that was important.
did is is for higher education
which is a huge part of our
budget we put in nine hundred
and fifty or so million dollars
into a trust fund in the whole
it is invested so it grows that
stable is this out we did the
same thing with tribal education
fifty million dollars we did a
housing trust fund for fifty
the interest of that or at least
use the interest of that too to
stabilize those funds I think
that was a huge move on our part
the fact that our capital outlet
part of our or budget we also
have this huge transportation
package in there and david
abbey's not here so I don't know
dollars into transportation
infrastructure
infrastructure they are huge we
talk about growing our economy
some of the things we need a
roads just got to make that
hospitals because they're
suffering right now and we can't
allow our rural hospitals to go
under uh certainly albuquerque's
you know they're fine but all
the little hospitals all over
the state.
public education
we also tried to put it in there
so that there was more local
decisions made in fewer from the
services can we get more veteran
services officers out there
because we have a lot of
veterans now
that have returned from iraq in
afghanistan and and in in the
pointed out thirty percent in
reserves thirty percent in real
reserves that doesn't count all
these trust funds that we built
so the idea here mister
terrible crashes that we talked
about when we were when we were
honoring uh
david abbey earlier because he
he helped get us out of that it
grumpy absolutely
of the nearly three hundred
pages probably less than a
hundred of them really upset me
round the state listening to
other people
I there are certainly things
that I would have done different
but in this particular case I
Senator woods who's not behind
me at the moment
he went after this thing with a
chain saw and in found ways to
cut things amazed me
senator brandly she's a pusher
and she was bringing up things
and she was making sure that we
all knew about it
in in just having that voice
guy and you know he's
intelligent and all those things
then he would he would be the
one to figure out how to do it
and so I think that the
a better role I think so when I
a good budget mister president
thank you share we do have
others who would like to speak
with center city love as
follower center schools and
center by the tennis deal
offers.
Thank you mister president of
course it's always so much
easier to pass the budget when
as you were recalled last year
we eliminated court fees and I
thought and I believe that that
was a good idea it was a very
good idea but the the issue that
the the streams of income that
the administrative office of the
courts
had were back filled and were
and those streams of in income
after a lot of a lot of research
what we learned is and there
were other programs like this
and we're gonna have to think
about next year that what they
going to have to next year think
about the continuation of the
brain injury fund the brain
injury services fund and some of
is not quite done but again I
want to congratulate the finance
committee on incredible work
also want to mention and he's
not here is senator compos
offered to work with me i'm
mister president thank you since
they look at center cills
thank you mister president.
So we started this session we
were told there was about three
capital this year that came out
of that money we feel buckets of
money for the future
we have billions in savings and
investments
go hungry each day in new
mexico.
How many children do we allow to
be homeless
How many environmental issues do
we allow to go unaddressed.
The.
Think about your local area how
We underfund state agencies
it have real needs to do the
real work for us
to put money away for the future
instead of addressing the needs
today
now I understand having savings
for the future but we have a
responsibility
please check and make sure that
the interim committees that
you're on
are taking care of the needs now
making sure children don't go
members often feel cut out of
the actual monetary decisions to
make those if you're not on
finance that we rarely get a
our needs today and particularly
those of our children who aren't
able to vote on their own behalf
thank you center source with
center party
thank you very much mister
tremendous amount about our
state and i'm very grateful for
the opportunity to serve on that
committee uh thank you madame
president for appointing me
either mister president I just
want to mention a couple of
things that I think should be
provide free universal breakfast
and lunch.
Here new mexico a game changer
for new mexico's future mister
president taking the hunger out
of a child stomach in placing it
work of our chair and many other
folks who help put all this
together we now can announce
that we are fully funded for
free breakfast ah in lunch on a
recurring basis here in the
stated new mexico this is a very
know as I got ah further
edumicated as my son say
education dead
you know organizations can plan
for two or more years in a row
now and that's that's a really
you know my antis and uncles and
cousins and neighbors and and
people that live on the other
side of my district some of them
were driving on roads mister
president that were put in when
president truman was in office
collector streets and then we
have a companion bill here that
has about seven hundred million
dollars for major projects my
district extremely thankful that
we're going to hopefully be able
mister president you know the
new mexico a state police they
should be the highest paid law
enforcement officials in the
state it should be that you work
up to and reach that level of
enforcement but i'm very proud
that we're going to pay our
state police at the highest rate
from and out of any law
enforcement agency.
And then mister president the
thing we always say that we have
all of the shortages of doctors
and this and that and this is
going to encourage a lot of them
to want to come here to to go to
school here but then also to
remain here after they get that
arch or committee chair and
mister sali mister obila and all
the folks that I want to think
all them but now we're taking
this money that we have now
because we will probably not
have this money you know in in a
couple of years so now and we're
them for doing a great job
managing their books ideally
with these moves and these huge
major landmark decisions that
we've made with the budget this
year when hopefully we will
to think the chair of the
committee chairman when yours uh
mister solei and mr obila and
all of their teams they
literally work as hard as us and
more than us and I appreciate
all their work thank you mister
Thank you mister president and
and thank you senator muneus for
for this budget uh I I tend to
agree with uh both senators
share and senator souls which is
kind of unusual for me
is I I fully appreciate the
investing for the for the future
needs in terms of finances but I
before us it's the the the
expands a lot of things that I
think are valuable one issue
that I wanted to raise.
what is the tanner benefit now
and and he couldn't think of it
right off the top of the set
this is the cash you benefited
needy families who who would
now he said don't forget in
addition they also get snap food
stand benefits of seven hundred
and sixty six and if they need
child care that'll be paid for
cause and you can't use child
care benefits to buy clothes or
where any of the other things
that any family of three will
need
for five hundred and fifty
not seven more than seven
thousand families that need help
it means that with benefits that
means
what's the point of going
through the hassle you can get
Because so many landlords won't
accept section aid vouchers so
even though you you can carrying
a voucher around in your pocket
it won't get you any housing
benefits even further than they
were last year which when they
went up somewhat but we could
have used that ten of block
grand money which is a hundred
percent federal money coming to
the state for ten of recipients
have to get by on five hundred
and sixty six dollars of cash
and instead we're putting it
into other valuable things
supersome cfd programs are going
putting the tent of block rent
to toward
but it really is intended for
the families and we can justify
expanded ten of benefits to the
poorest families among us so I
would hope in the future that
the members of the finance
committee would would stop using
tanner for these other purposes
living level of benefit for ten
of families so we would stop
using those moneys for other
things when we have other money
they could pay for that thank
So we only talked about the
budget for what lesson an hour
is it.
Why why these my tap ten reasons
there is a in a new mexican
there was a headline two
headlines above the fall one of
them said that the
legislature wasn't going to
increase the
so in all we have the we have
more death.
And this state related to
alcohol in any other state in
And a dollar in nineteen ninety
three is only worth forty eight
cents today
so we would have to
Never know I know money and the
budget for a construction of a
more tight purpose serena
downtown
public rookie lot of people
probably snicker at that they
say well why the hell that we
need something like that.
and
they would do wonders the
realized downtown this is a once
in a lifetime chance to
construct something like this
when I go get another
and once they get there they
realize
the tremendous opportunities for
recreation.
Phoenix because it is
wifi returned law school in
the
arizona didn't want to come back
services adversely affected by
the pyramiding of g r t now i've
done a lot of daughter door and
number one complaint I got from
capital outlay is your no
senator campus and I have been
working on this he's been
working and this problem for
twenty years i'm working out for
on how we allocate a prioritised
capital out
according to governing magazine
we have the second worst system
the united states
the number of projects we will
be able to complete
with the obviously the more
money is that going to go as far
as we whatever we have to small
most of it would have been spent
by now so it's
our money to start going to go
as far because we did the delay
in their spending.
Particularly a project here too
in face and continues on we just
go year to year it's not a very
professional.
Way to.
rules and regulations governing
oil I guess and yet.
We don't have adequate
enforcement
the ad report put out a year ago
Two and a half years six and a
half years to inspect all air
quality
permits.
So yeah we get robust.
People and the budget we did.
Increase the amount of money for
them this year but.
It certainly they need more
flexibility
The series are too low and he
doesn't have enough.
Fts
in his budget so it's a double
warehee he does never enough
Number five cyfd what money one
percent increase although i've
been told that.
There is the twenty million
dollars.
Is that in the budget but the
twenty million dollars in grow
peanuts it is a fraction of what
they need to department is in
crisis and twenty million
dollars increase is not going to
make much of an impact number
for
going to be have a big reduction
in our revenue from oil and gas
so several years ago the
economic development with
parliament commission to study
uh to
in any discussion where what are
we going to do although i've
been told that there's money in
the budget this year to do
something about that this
morning I asked the question
about.
diversify hurricane which is one
of the most important issues we
should be dealing with at the
moment.
The.
They asked for twenty five
million dollars in only getting
five mexico's and number one.
Ranks never won and food in
We have the shortest things of
time between the legislature
receiving the budget from the
governor and the deadline for
reproval.
There is owner received a budget
in january deadline april.
Never received a budget in
january deadline june
than twenty four hours I don't
really feel
that I can make an intelligent
decision where there is adequate
pronounce.
I've opposed this budget there
is no money in the budget to buy
bill tomorrow you tirement gift.
Thank you center toll
thank you mister president and
them I don't have ten items but
all oh mister president
first of all
this year on february worries
fifteenth at noon
on february sixteen the next day
or another we listen to all
agencies at least three times
and that it's a very year hard
to hear every single part every
single request and you know and
that's our job
one of the part some mister
president is there too
what we were getting that ear I
always looked at what was free
current in and out from
another the later speaker bend
to be very popular this year and
put a lot of money out but then
come so back to
some years you know as we were.
A plot no mr abbey while ago
partial for all the agencies and
one of parts that are I just
want to mention yourself
I really want to thank
the senate finance committee and
basically it's a family this is
the only committee that we only
have one committee assignment in
all other legislators within the
all agree and sometimes we don't
agree and sometimes we have a
little some differences of
opinion but that's fine you know
that's a process the better one
of the things that is very
anyone here that is that
concerned
starting february sixteenth this
is your time bring to us you're
not what you're looking at what
very end of the session to try
to work with a lot of this
sorting of this issues that
specially if they require you
know the maneuvering of the
committee but you know to all
members of this committee
belongs to you you know it's not
ours and the important part is
to be involved.
And i'll bring us up as much as
and comes out as we have senator
birth.
Thank you mister president and
naia appreciate the time to talk
openness and the many many hours
of conversation understanding
the money where it's going worse
coming from how we can best
apply it
the amount of information that
they collect on an annual basis
and disseminate to all of us
which again is available to all
of us
for certain things
I think are.
Chairman of soon and finance
mentioned the other day that uh
I don't think any longer mister
president that worked for state
dealing with a ten plus billion
dollar budget
never be able to cover
everybody's bases completely.
So we do absolutely the best
that we possibly can.
The agencies want to remind
in their budget that they can
drawn in in times of need and
during shortfalls
their money so we wonder why we
keep not putting certain amounts
of money or increases in a
certain agencies because they
may not be able to use their
agency there's a lot that goes
into every decision that we have
made to build this budget m and
there's a lot of good in this
budget it's not a great budget
increases in uh in in help and
health care are safety officers
hospitals we will we have like I
think it was seventy nine
hospitals in the state of new
between what medicaid pays and
what doctors have paid in
hospitals are paid we're trying
to close that gap as well
because as we all know we can't
keep enough doctors in the state
of new mexico
facilities in our medical
industries in the state are
right funded to the best that we
possibly can.
a budget that has a lot of money
for highways and rose will put a
big dent in that which is a
safety issue.
So we're going to be able to do
that with this budget.
I was in lc meeting this summer
sometime and I made the
statement it doesn't matter how
much money we have
will find a way to spend it
enough money to make a recurring
budget in ten years that we
should put money into the
permanent fund we have some
smaller permanent funds we're
the urban and pera that are not
solved
and somewhere down the road
maybe that when all of us are
here but somewhere down the
road.
We're gonna have problems making
the the budgets.
That we will have money for them
for their retirement as they age
out.
So i'm going to caution the body
again I think this is a good
about something is not sexy like
shoring up per a e r b and the
overall prominent fund to look
of new mexico as well the
permanent funds that we set up
for different agencies is great
because they eventually will pay
for themselves or at least a
portion thereof we're hit in the
right direction.
continue continue to look at the
long term future of funding a
budget in the mexico because oil
and gas won't always be there
for us.
incredible amount of work for an
entire year and especially
during this session to put
together the absolute best
budget we possibly can and I
mentioned on this floor we can
get there if we're smart about
how we apply that money thank
you mister president thank you
senator birth we have sendered
greeks followed by senator brant
senator worth then centers
meetings.
about it this time president i'm
not going to get to talk about
it again so I I need to talk
about it a little bit
it's about the twenty fourth
budget that i've had the
opportunity to vote on twelve
with the city of alamori and
twelve here with the the state
of new mexico
and budget smish president or
always good budget you're always
support the on going needs or
you have to be really careful if
you don't do that then you wind
who came in with me that the
twelve twelve years ago we
remember there were times when
It's a whole light better farage
to have the money that we have
now.
Because then we can decide which
committee center domonios sender
share she and the other
membership who have worked hard
to try to put this in in the
there are things I could have or
would have liked to have seen
different friend.
But all in all mispresident I
think what you have is a budget
that that's workable.
But mispresident members of the
body.
You know I worked for an oil and
gashed company for for years.
I know
how all those things happened to
it.
And we had caught every show off
and.
And we we do the best we can I
states was able to produce shail
oil.
That's going to take these
option downs and it smooth
amount differently.
point he saw the price of oil
starting to drop.
Cause we're oversupply the the
demand wouldn't there.
president where we set our new
mexico chech with the
perminbation being the most
prolific oil bation in the
extraordinarily fortunate the
dad's here in new mexico.
The.
As we continue as you continue
to you in this state and having
having you have the ability to
do the things you would like to
do.
When senator shalls and senator
Those things would ever be able
to be done there won't be a
debate about choosing this
wonder that one the debate will
When I was on the the alam gordo
city commission we had to keep a
a twelve percent reserve in the
general fine.
We're keeping a thirty percent
reserve.
With a revenue shy.
And a revenue side is we all
know.
president members of the body
any time soon.
Tonight gonna happen
to miss president members I just
enemy it's too important to you
so gamers president want to say
that I appreciate all the hard
work done by everybody engaged
And the form.
Looks a whole I like their
speakers what it is but if you
There's no way to compare on
this for now there's other ways
to compare.
But it be a whole lot handier
happened in two year cause this
is several hundred pages of
numbers and things that talk
about what you've done but it
the all this is this is the
budget I hope that it should
budget to chark and support i'm
going to vote for I believe it
assured all of you work hard to
do that in the years to come so
thank you mister president
members of the body.
Thank you satellites senator
brand.
Mister president yes in the rent
thank you mister president
center I just had a couple of
questions
the the budget is is based on
And three fifty four natural
gas.
So the rent.
Three fifty financial gas
present yes.
They could send it a rent center
when I was mister president
center the consensus revenue
estimating committee looks
across that in they say what is
long term what is short term
president thanks center best
guest scenario right
mister president if you can
guess the commodity market you
won't be in this building today
you and private your g five in
italy.
you know it's it's a little
concerning because natural gas
just keeps going down and
normally during the summer
months it's let me know when
months it's usually the highest
Mister president you know we
built in like a cent of a rare
road of cushion there's train
turns and tons of contingent
money built up as we move to
mexico in that direction number
one people question why are
can make that move it cost us
less money it costs a taxpayer's
less money.
Bill that phones the college
trust fund.
mile long train of how we set
new mexico up to fight off
recessionary pressures to fight
off if there is a decline in in
those industries
the last couple of years of
really building
that cushion because we know
that in new mexico or income can
go up and down and sometimes
it's a pretty violent up and
screaming but you know really
appreciate that work of the
finance committee I think that
they have put us in a pretty
good position going forward
here really having to cut the
budget way back and and that was
no fun this is a lot funner to
be able to spend spend money and
and be able to try to meet some
that we really need those one
time investments and and I think
that the finance committee is
really tried to do that and so I
commend them on that work I
think it's been very helpful for
lot of years as the times were
then
you know we've got a you know
are rest areas are roads are
tourist economy you know can't
expect tourists to come here far
therefore
you know public properties are
specifically senator for for
working on that I think there's
other areas
now that that I actually agree
figure out exactly what they
need because we keep changing
secretary so often
you know the secretary and the
governor pretty much so we don't
And hopefully next year the
sector income does with a really
good plan that says well we're
going to need this kind of
At least not if they're
legitimate
they're gonna need law changes
and hopefully we as a
legislature will be open to
making those changes
now or way too high
jerry can tell you a lot more
about that than I can because he
used to work there and but as I
share my sister does the same
Some investments it's gonna need
some attention and I appreciate
both sides of the chamber that I
think we're pretty united on the
to fix and so I hope going
forward that we will be able to
figure out and get that
information back from them and
of children being abused in the
way they're being abused in our
state.
I don't know about you but it
breaks my heart every time I see
and and are there some other
areas that you can think of that
we've really put some investment
into mr president center I want
to refer you to page two thirty
five in the budget in investment
language in the bill we're going
to track where they're at how
much when either getting out how
much protector services what
number of families were serving
I agree with you but we're going
are those hard working employees
they got over the limit of time
that they allowed to take off
and built up leave time we back
filled some of that to raise
change she way of the I I think
every secretary needs to have
the chance to achieve their
goals and achieve that but we're
short ten I think ten cabinet
secretaries currently the mallet
that was targeted see why fd to
open doors and my paper and
copiers in staff and twenty
million dollars for behavior
health insurance that never got
Senator brand thank you mister
president and I really
appreciate you point that out to
us senator because that that
actually I bread through some of
that language while you were
continuing to talk and I and you
things that that's great i'm
glad we're doing that right now
and and let's just continue to
work on those issues we know we
have issues around that we know
we have issues in those areas uh
into the budget around education
system al of she does an
extensive review of p b LESC
does a even more extensive
review and just so you know as
we came into the session the ppd
thought would work along with l
c and and that's where we came
out with pd but there is
requirement and tracking and pd.
Our missed president sir and I
education budget
from
what two point five billion when
I came in the office somewhere
in that range.
increased and and I know there's
some people to disagree with me
on there but I will tell you the
material that i'm using and that
is the performance numbers for
reading and math for our
So what are we doing
in the budget that's going to
count for that and then I think
getting that proficiency and I
do appreciate some of the
programs that we've started but
we've got to start seeing some
results
mister president to things i'm
going to do I want to refer you
Sinister deals thank you mister
president so
it's so exciting this year
because we finally do have
professionally state white that
is unheard of state wide with
increased proficiency by four
percent and we have some
of thousands of teachers on out
of tea treating courting the
science they've taken a letter
is training we we've we've had
at least seven thousand teachers
go through that we're not done
thirty years in this legislature
where we can say that and I just
want to appreciate center
manuals and the
uh finance committee for putting
students all over the state and
after school programs next year
we really are on a path upward
for our reading proficiency now
teachers how to teach treating
according to the sigh so for
reading at least we are seeing
significant progress thank you.
appreciate that exciting report
you know i'm look forward to to
getting better results in
reading and and I think it is
one of those things that that we
a couple of years ago center
soles worked on a bill that
would bring them to where they
would have to actually common
and be accountable to less see
they don't have that training
that they're needing to teach
reading properly to our kids and
then we need to put investments
into math I think there are
soles and I will have to start
working on that now that the
all I have with the exception of
universe consent to excuse
certain are not mark senator pat
woods except for the purpose of
a call.
president I don't need a center
most money off to yield I just
want to start by thanking him
and thanking the ranking member
on senate finance all the
support for the budget I think
that's a really important thing
and one of the key reasons
that's happening is something
that
all of this quote unquote new
money is take now money and make
it into future money so use
nondashrecurring money into the
and we have done that in this
budget two things i'll just flag
one that
i'm proud of and center novil
took the lead on this the
that'll spin our five percent a
year which will mean some are in
the range of twenty twenty one
million dollars a year for all
watershed restoration rivers
outdoor
outdoor recreation out or equity
or so in water conservation
districts were getting them a a
would be a tremendous risk down
the road of creating a whole
string of recurring
appropriations that we would
then be back pulling back so
that is just a huge step forward
eight when we were very proud of
ourselves remember january two
thousand and eight uh we had a
ten percent reserve and that was
kind of unheard of and we
thought that that was just a
responsible I share some of the
frustration about night being
able to push more of the these
dollars out but I think we've
come up with something that I
Mister president I am I like to
think madam protemper giving us
that good news on reading and
listening to
her speak on there since sender
called in la casino then is by
edward
and the whole subtitle of that
painting is in the kitchen is
where my father learned to read
and if you have not seen that
and that's that's what I don't
want us to forget about is I
think the way we can best
improve reading in our state is
what happens in the in the home
are passing on that skill to the
next generation a lot of that's
just getting books into the
houses
you know and
so so anyway I we often think
we're going to do much better as
a state.
I also like to think the senate
finance chairman for being so
me
because I did have I would like
to see a little bit of a shift
in some of our agencies and I
just want to point out a couple
of those and have just taken
minute.
continuous treatment with anti
depressant medication.
Okay
fine
but i'd rather see something
that says people with depression
that's possible but just
changing the language to instead
of being medication focused in
my mind to be person focused and
cure focused
start to shift how we how we
look at incentives uhm in in you
know i'm not i'm not criticizing
these as bad I just think we can
still do better in page one
I think it should say something
instead of how many people are
on medication just but
let's just put set a goal for a
change pregnancy rate just put
cessation services
while we're incentivising
accessing the services and I
think we're hoping that people
will then quit or cut back but
one we just say that when we
in the harm reduction program
well I mean
if we get more people overdosing
then we could possibly get more
why don't instead of that that's
fine providing life saving
treatment that's great.
But maybe we could also include
an incentive to say lessons
incentives and so i'm i'm very I
hope this is constructive I just
wanted to bring it up for any
DOH or behavioral health folks
that are listening
finance chair for going over
that with me because i've never
actually I think opened one of
these up until he spent the time
to go over that with me so so I
john here we have charles back
there we have a drama lot of
people put in a lot of time to
build these budgets at the
instruction of of legislators in
the executive to some extent but
thank you toll of those people I
also want to recognize the work
that sent finance committee does
in my opinion what little
influence we have in this budget
I will tell you that the
messaging that you hear in the
is coming out of that one
committee or recent we were
simply saying you cannot spend
more than we bring in and
preparing these heavy **** for
Women down we have a relatively
high percentage of reserves
which is great and if we look
through this the the mike rose
level of the small little peas
that make the budget but as new
mexicans in legislators we need
to start asking ourselves what's
the micro what's the big picture
what are the priorities of new
could have doesn't accomplish
that you know the governor's
list of priorities and we
started this session was public
safety
public safety here we are
dreams of which they are well
deserving of but so are our
local law enforcements we still
have local municipal police
departments who did not see
arrays it just brings a burden
previous administration
dismantled the mental health
industry
our side agrees.
But in the time that this new
legislative **** they were
dressed individual crisis that
were seeing small money given to
suicide awareness of prevention
small money given to some
We didn't give any meaningful
tax deductions none with a
largest state reviders in
history we have given no
chamber on small business.
Last year the senate finance
committee the for republicans
introduced a bill that would cap
From last year by your own
words.
We've made a large investments
of money and were not moving the
needle
we are going to have to get a
glarger grip on what it is that
new mexico prioritizes and start
putting our money where our
mouth is mister president.
Thank.
said today you know it's an
incredible amount of work that
goes into this bluebook that you
see it's like a big book that
negotiations and compromise
comes out together and it all
results in this book and it's
when you think about it it's an
thank our chair munos for an
incredible amount of work I see
that every day there and we meet
morning and many times
chair and I also are members of
the senate finance committee and
are staff adrian and staff I
in all the alacy staff no words
can be adequate to thank them
because truly every moment that
were in finance I think whether
in the committee or in our own
offices are running around like
thank you and thanks to all the
members and the public for being
there and in setting for hours
and the audience waiting for us
to make decisions so that's all
I have to say for now mister
president I just want to rise
then think are leadership and
lfc or staff who spend just
incredibly knowledgeable and
because he has a background and
social work so I feel like he
really understands the need for
investment in behavioral health
half billion dollars invested
this in each b two in different
mental health programs including
one and a half million dollars
is certainly grateful for both
executive and the finance staff
for making that happen it's
going to make a big difference
additionally there was three
hundred and seventy five
thousand dollars provided for
suicide prevention training so
i'm really grate glad that we
were able to make those
help to create a more skilled
work force and diversify our
economy want to think the chair
of the finance committee he's
been just an amazing mentor and
Thank you.
See no further debate sending
them us to close thank you
mister president you know no way
center padea thank you we stay
late center rod rigus is always
by my side people think that we
just leave the floor and we go
there is no better republican to
work with venue.
You may talk a little bit too
much sometimes but we at least
some of your widdy wise remarks
and being the jolly renters
always is always a good thing I
appreciate you senator diamond I
precede your input and how you
did that
a one man show it's not a it's
not a
I don't know what to do but we
all work together there's no
better group of people to work
together than this people in
you really want a way lay
awakening thing can see who did
I miss how can I help them where
can I get them money work worth
the missing pieces of the puzzle
center thomas we can not find
your going away present through
the budget
the former governor had a pizza
poverty we could probably offer
that but we'd have to have to
important part of the budget
people need to hold their heads
high.
When we were poor
in two thousand and ten are two
negative nine point eight
percent that's a billion dollars
eleven percent is one point one
billion dollars in two thousand
thing that happened the floor
fell out of the out of it oil
was in the negative our budget
was in the negative we can not
meet enough times to make enough
the most true reserve the states
ever had
hold your head up high.
You may not like everything
your head high as a person as an
elected official fifty billion
dollars in investments ten
billion dollar budget that
helped everyone if you do not
montreal in our mind
mister president I have two
special guests where with me
today and the reason i'm doing
this and they belong to another
senator because when I started.
The.
They belong to another center
but the reason we do this
my kids are about this age when
I came to this building right
this is our future this is where
they're gonna hold their heads
up high and they're going to say
i'm a proud of new mexican and I
was on the floor when they
pressed momental legislation to
and move that we do now pass and
ask you this consent the senate
i'm sorry we meet and move
mister president I move that we
and three as amended twice and
he asked man's consent of the
senate that the records show the
role has been called in all
those what will be president for
them except those won't in
negative by show hands
amended there's been a request
for a roll call.
The clark to call the role
boat snow senator birth center
bert boat cs center composed a
compos votes yes center savantes
St goes votes no centre gonzales
yes sender gonzalez votes yes
center gregs.
Sent your greg smoke yes center
there center ivy so the votes
yes intermediary armio votes cs
senator low best center lobbies
Senator morris center more votes
no sentence.
Sender minor swords yes senator
nevel central availability s
center neighbor.
tissie pino center tissie pino
votes yes santra pedea.
Centre video board cs center
pinto centre pinto board cs
Sent a radriguez votes yes
center sanchez.
Center sanchez votes now center
smitties.
Yes i'll see a century shandow.
Center shandow boats yes center
souls center sales world cs
thomas week now enter tom
involves no senator worth center
worth boat cs center woods
center words votes yes santa
pinto.
amended has passed the senate
send them in us thank you mister
president I can have done it
with my young help here jamie
and jacob who belong to center
smeds you're gonna have a long
conversations I bride them with
two dollar bills and now they're
going to go to my office for ice
cream in so thank you center
spiders for lending me your kids
in the lc in a couple years
peter wearth thank you mister
president in amazon saying we go
that are business announcements
mislanes where in that order
business you know objection that
order business announcements
mister senator worth thank you
caught us about the tax package
bill which will come back and do
next this item number eight on
today's counter one we do come
do it now or wait till we come
back ideal the center per birdle
thing mispro- president it just
wasn't appropriate before uh had
to wait till those announcements
in miscellaneous but i'm just
in mister president I mean I I
really
didn't stand on the phone books
this time
so I learned the senator I mean
that's kind of a I thought i'd
be more flattering this suit for
suit that is the fourth time
he's warned that suited I hope
in the budget we can buy the
chairman a suit made j c pennies
discount maybe for him in the
retiring perhaps you can allow
cinema to use your codes
can you use it as it takes a
real building you know at that
has deminitive stock stature i'm
republic thank you anymore we do
have others who would like to
make announcements we have
senator gonzalez
this precedent on I know that
thank you mister president we
will be caucasing in the senate
lounge immediately when we
recess once again will be a
caucasing in the senate lounge
thank you senator pop any
further announcement center
things just for everyone to to
take into the the all the tax
material was handed out during
that last debate bill amendment
and lfc rack up in second just
for the sergeant arms please
