Senator Block
Yeah
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Doheck.
Saints
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Hamlin.
Center Hickey.
Armio.
Senator, Senator Maestas.
Santa Minos.
Senator Nava.
Senator O'Malley.
Santa Pinto center Sanchez,
Senator Scott.
Santer Steinborn.
Senator Stewart Thornton.
Santer Tobiasin.
You do not have a quorum, Madam
President.
Uh, senators, please come to the
chamber. We'd like to begin the
Madam President, you do have a
quorum now.
Celebration Baptist Church in
Rio Rancho. Please remain
standing for the pledge to be
led this morning by Senator
Thornton.
led by Senator Sidia Lopez.
Um, if you would join me in
prayer, uh, reading from Psalm
Or we do just pray for wisdom
and guidance or that we know
that you were a God of truth and
direction. And so Lord, I pray
that is they.
for the state of New Mexico, and
Lord I just pray you would be at
work today, your son's name.
I salute the flag of the state
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
good morning to you. Uh,
unanimous consent, we go to that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous
on that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
for wisdom and guidance. So
again, I think.
These are good moments to just
pause and it always helps put
all this in perspective,
certainly for me. So thank you
New Mexico, speech language
hearing association Day,
Caregivers's Day, and Golden
Apple Foundation Day at the
legislature. We have a very
get there and just Senator
Harmio, let's get through the
guests up front and then I'll
yield to Senator Harmio. It's
also, uh, there's a certificate
for the New Mexico.
Just in terms of events, I'll
say briefly what's gonna happen
tonight and then when Senator
Tobiasson gets down, we'll let
her give us all the details.
Tonight is the 100th Bill Party.
little later we'll have Senator
Tobiasin, uh, let us know what
we can expect for tonight's
event. So, uh, we've still got a
number of
Committee, I think there's
till we get closer to 3rd
reading if we've still got
folks, uh, we'll do the
excusals. I would ask, uh, Madam
President, unanimous sent the
cameras be allowed in the
gallery and on the floor of the
Senate.
Guests or announcementsiner
block.
former Army officer, still a
power lifter. It is her birthday
today. She's 27.
And um I would just like to send
Uh, other guests or
announcements, Senator souls.
Thank you Madam President. I
program at UNM. First Eve
Waller, who is a nurse educator.
You'll stand up, please, um, and
then also Cecile Perrales, who
is in nurse education, PhD
PHE nursing program at UNM
Health and then we also have
with us Demi Michelou, who is
the president of the itchy,
which is the Western Interstate
most people are aware.
of our professional program,
which is the PEP program, uh,
where they go off to get their
my guest today.
Thank you, Senator Soul. Senator
district basketball
championships, so I I
congratulations to those teams
that are playing tonight, the
parents, the fans, but also be
Thank you or Pinto, other
announcements or guests, uh,
seeing noneinor
would yield to Senator Jaramilo
for the special certificate,
education and provides numerous
benefits to teachers, students,
and schools. It was designed to
develop, retain, and recognize
established teachers and to
profession with more.
69% remaining in the classroom
after 20 years of teaching.
Research, Madam President, shows
that candidates for national
strengths and areas of
improvement and gives them ideas
for improving their teaching.
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent for the certificate to
be read.
Seeing no objection, the reader
extend its recognition and
acknowledgement to February 28,
2025 be recognized as New Mexico
national board certified teacher
network Day in the Senate,
whereas the New Mexico National
New Mexico and whereas in Mexico
National Board certified Teacher
Network advocates for leadership
opportunities for national board
certified teachers and educates
teachers about the national
Standards certification process
celebrates achievement, offers
opportunities to all constituent
groups and supports and
recognizes all national board
certified teachers in all school
with more than 69% remaining in
the classroom after 20 years of
teaching.
And whereas national board
certification is a rigorous
process that can take 3 to 5
and pedagogical knowledge and
whereas a comprehensive study
conducted by the National
Research Council found that
students of national board
teachers have shown 15 to 18
months growth in one school
year.
And whereas New Mexico has 1,613
national board certified
of Indian Education schools and
charter schools with many
national board certified
teachers and national Board
candidates serving in Title I
schools and whereas New Mexico
And whereas the Albuquerque
Public School District, Santa Fe
Public School District, Las
Cruces Public School District
Rio Rancho Public School
District and Los Alamos Public
New Mexico that February 28,
2025 be recognized as New Mexico
national board certified teacher
recognition Day in the Senate to
acknowledge the achievements of
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator Leo
Jaramillo.
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry Duhan, chief clerk, New
Mexico State Senate.
Sinner had a me.
ranks 10th nationally in new
national board certified
teachers. We're 14th to maintain
their certification 8th in total
New Mexico. And with that, Madam
President, I yield to any
member.
who may want to make comment on
the certificate.
Uh, any other comments about our
great national board certified
board certified teachers, and
they are so impressive and the
with what they have to go
through to get the board
certification is enormous and I
gonna shout out I don't like to
shout out people before I tell
them, so I'm not gonna, I'm not
gonna, and I don't know if she's
here.
But I really think this think uh
Senator Jaramillo for bringing
Thank you, Mr. President. As a
teacher, I really have to stand
up and talk about how important
board certification is, uh,
these teachers have been through
extensive additional
certification and they really
tend to be our best and
brightest and sharpest ones,
they come back, they act as
mentors for others about best
teaching practices, uh, they
things about New Mexico.
Number 10 in the country in the
number of board certified
teachers, that's not as a
percentage of population that's
quality and high quality of
teachers and education that our
children get in the state of New
Mexico and it continues through
the board, this, uh, the board
certification process at the
Uh, seeing none, uh, Senator
Jaramillo to close. Madam
President, we're fortunate to
have a few of those national
board certified teachers with us
today. Joining us on the rostrum
Cathy Lindsay from the Grady
School District, Grady
Elementary literacy, reading,
language arts early and middle
childhood, Casey O'Dwyer from
the Roswell Independent School
School District National Board
certified teacher and vice
president of the New Mexico NMCT
network. Madam President, if you
and the members of the Senate
can help me in joining my guests
and congratu
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, Senator Peter Wirth thank
you Madam President. So next up,
much, Madam President. Thank
you, Majority Leader Werth, uh,
I ask unanimous consent that the
reader be allowed to read a
certificate, uh, for New Mexico
Crusaders for Justice Day here
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to New
Mexico crusaders for Justice
Day.
Mexico crusaders for justice
honors victims of violence and
the families of those victims by
providing a safe space for
family members to come together
Mexico crusaders for justice
currently has chapters located
in Albuquerque, Ruidoso,
Farmington, and Las Vegas to
support families of victims of
communities in the state and
whereas New Mexico crusaders for
justice continues to honor and
support victims of violence and
the families of those victims.
Directors, community community
leadership award, which honors
individuals and organizations
for extraordinary contributions
to the prevention of crime and
Now therefore be it resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that New Mexico crusaders
for justice be recognized as New
Pete Campos, Mimi Stewart,
president pro tem Sherry De
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Madam President, members
of the Senate, as you can tell
continuing to go ahead and bring
people together, uh, to help
number one is the grieve through
these processes, but it's
something that will always be
with them, and then number 2 as
with that uh
Madam President, if there's
anyone else who wishes to speak
on behalf of this certificate,
uh, we're open to do so and then
if not, then I'd like to
Uh, on the certificate, but
seeing nuns in compost to close
and introduce his guests. Thank
you very much, Madam President,
members of the Senate, and
violence and unfortunately, the
injustices at times as we move
forward in our lives, uh, it's
important for us to help and.
guests that are here with us
today and I'm going to read in
brevity just a little bit of
information about each one of
these individuals, and we also
have individuals in the gallery
who are here to support these
To Nick and uh Evila Lopez, she
graduated, uh, from La Mesa High
School in 1983. She married the
love of her life, Ben in 1997
And each one of these has a
story to tell, Madam President,
I'm not gonna share that at this
time, but just to know that each
one of these individuals has
us. Secondly, we have uh Kina
Keslowski, uh, Kena was born uh
to Willie and Martha Cannon. She
attended, uh, Santa Fe High
School in Santa Fe, here in
Santae.
6. She was a stay at home mom
for many years. She drove a
school bus while attending
nursing school and then went
into the dental field as a
receptionist and later
whenever you have a loved one
whose life has been taken.
Next we have Melissa Vijil
Hernandez and Melissa is the
auntie. Melissa graduated from
West Las Vegas High School in
2000 and earn a bachelor's
degree in political science with
a lot of emphasis in a minor in
mariachi group there and
president of the Young Democrats
of San Miguel County. She earned
her master's degree in
educational leadership from New
Senate, Next we have Alicia
Otero. Alicia had been married,
has been married for 27 years
with 4 children.
After losing her eldest son,
Mexico Crusaders for justice, a
support group for victims of
homicide and their family
members who are left behind.
She has been, uh, she has held
many valuable jobs throughout
her career.
Which have given her management
skills and a love for design and
the construction field, but her
proudest job is being a
Again, Madam President, members
of the Senate, if I may, these
individuals and including the
ones that are up in the, in the
uh gallery.
Continue to go ahead and carry
our own stories. It's important
for us to realize that families
whenever they lose a family
member like this,
though always hold that in their
hearts, and it's important for
people who continue the cause to
ensure that there is going to be
justice.
for them, their families, and
for all of us. Thank you, Madam
President.
and miscellaneous, uh, we do
have a confirmation, uh, Emily
Cartenbach is the Secretary of
Aging and Long-term Services,
and we'll go ahead and read in
items sounds like 1 through 6 in
that order.
Uh, the idea is, I think we'll.
We'll see how those go, but
trying to
Introductions, I better yield to
Senator Tobias and to tell us
what, what can we look forward
to, Senator.
Sinner Tobias
Jaramil might help us with that
and we will also have a DJ and I
cannot remember for the life of
me his name, but he's actually
have to come to the party and
find out what's gonna happen,
but it should be fun for all.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
announcements?
Uh, seeing none.
I, I, we would not want to move
forward with the agenda without
yielding Senator Padilla, who's
got some very special guests
that were happy to have here.
And Padilla.
promise.
I think I was selected, Madam
President, because over the
years, as you know, I have eaten
a lot of Girl Scout cookies, and
these hardworking, kind and
loving New Mexicans for you, uh,
Girl Scouts of New Mexico Trail
serves approximately 6000 girls
and adults throughout
Juan, San Miguel, Sandoval,
Santa Fe, Socorro, Taos Torrent
Union, I'm sorry, yeah, union
and Valencia Counties, Girl
Scouts of New Mexico Trails is
chartered by Girl Scouts of the
United States.
of America, Girl Scouts of, uh,
New Mexico trails builds girls
of, uh, courage, confidence, and
do some really big things and
I'm sure being senators and
governors along the way, uh,
today, um, our junior Brownie
and Daisy members from Troop
10,460, and they're dressed to
work um at studying and earning,
they work hard at studying and
earning their Girl Scout badges
for the subject of democracy,
Madam President, yes, which I
like to speak, so if you could
just hang on to that. Thank you,
Madam President. So Senator
Tobiasson.
Thank you, Madam President. um,
put up? Should I keep talking?
I'll keep talking. I'm so glad
that our Girl Scouts and
brownies are here today, um, I
was a brownie. I was also a girl
over to a specific tree and we'd
had a have to hug it and that
was really embarrassing, um, but
I loved my experience and had I
known you gals were gonna be
belt that also had badges on it,
um, so I wish I had that here to
show you girls, but um, I'm so
thrilled that you're here and
spending some time with us, and
you're a part of. Have I spoken
long enough for you to get that
toothless picture up.
We'll keep what's coming, OK,
President and girls, it's really
great to see you today. I wasn't
a Girl Scout, but I was a
campfire girl, which was very
similar to Girl Scouts. I sold
in here that are willing to buy
some boxes of cookies today.
Nonetheless, I was.
a Girl Scout leader when my
I'm dating myself, so do the
math. I was a campfire girl
camp, and I was watching the TV
Thank you, Madam President, and
it's great to see you all,
brownies and Girl Scouts, um, I
started with the campfire Girls,
Girl Scout and that started me
on my way. I worked for a Girl
Scout council, directed Girl
Scout camps, but I really thank
you for being in the Girl Scouts
because I'm sure you do a lot of
very happy to see them, um, I
was a brownie, but I couldn't
get past the crochet section,
um, so, so I didn't, I didn't
end up following the brownies,
a couple of Saturdays ago, you
know, time is in our little
chamber, um, the Girl Scouts
came on a Saturday.
and I had Girl Scouts from my
district visit me and I was so
about uh a career in politics
and I advise him what I always
what I always tell young people,
prepare yourself to pursue your
passion, and things will work
out well and so I wanna share
so happy to see all of your
faces now by a show of hands,
how many of you have a bunch of
patches on your vests.
That's what I love to see. Now,
working with the Girl Scouts
because in 2015, working with
the Girl Scouts of the desert
Southwest, we created one of the
first of its kind in the
country, Oregon Mountain Desert
in Maine for the Katahdin Woods
and Waters Monument and what
happens is when Girl Scouts are
going for for patches, they can
create every council can create
learn about bills and get a
really cool patch that is the
seal of New Mexico. Does that
sound like a good idea? All
right, I'm gonna work on it, but
when Girl Scouts get patches,
Madam President, they have to
work with your Girl Scout
council to see if we can get a
New Mexico legislature Girl
Scout patch.
So that we can bring you back up
here and help you get those
Thank you Madam President and
thank you Girl Scouts and
brownies.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
a Girl Scout too, and I remem I
don't remember the pledge, but
maybe you can do it for us
before you leave.
Maybe,
your outfits have changed.
I do not yield, Madam President.
President up there.
And this.
Well, we'll have Senator Padilla
uh arrange for that pledge to
happen.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
President. I was hoping to hear
fun. So if the, uh, Girl Scouts
would come up to my desk.
Thank you very much, ladies.
I think uh senator Sino, I don't
think he was a Girl Scout.
time the Girl Scouts had to
come, but it was a it was a
pleasure. I know my, my dad
spent many times, uh, taking the
Girl Scouts in his pickup truck
fun time and uh certainly my mom
enjoyed it with her, uh,
friends, and they had, uh, and
we had all I remember was the
brownies, but there were other
groups, uh, and so forth, so
mountains to camp out for a
week.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you. Any other comments?
Uh, sing noniner Paia.
will continue to do that. I
think I'm on the 10 or 15 box
plan every year, but uh with
that, Madam President, we have
some distinguished guests here
today. I want to recognize, and
I'll ask you to stand when I say
Taya Johnson, thank you, Tasha.
Abby McDade.
Alejandra Abas.
Caroline Garcia.
today.
confirmation. I wanted to just
point out in today's Pasa Tiapo,
one of our former members, uh,
Senator Bill O'Neill is featured
works at 4:30, uh, with Hakeem
Bellamy. And so I just wanted to
uh let all the members know and
if anyone wants to go by, I'm
order of business Committee
reports. Reader to read.
Madam President, your rules
Emily Kaltenbach as secretary of
the aging and Long Term Services
Department for a term commencing
on November 2, 2024 to be served
Madam President, I move adoption
of the committee report.
adoption committee report, all
those in favor signified by
saying Ii.
Nay,
Seeing no objection on that
order of business confirmations,
Senator Jaramio, Madam
President, I ask that the
credentials of Emily Eltenbach
be presented to the full Senate
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number 42, uh, dated
October 21st, 2024, I moved the
Senate to hereby confirm the
appointment of Emily Colton Bach
You know, I'm Madam President, I
did it again. My apologies. 3
times? I need to get Senator uh
Ill's little card going the
other direction. I need your
lot about individuals and having
done these the full time I've
been in the Senate.
The hearing this morning was
really extraordinary, uh,
because I think we have an
comments that were made about uh
this candidate uh for this
position. First, she is a native
New Mexican, a 1993 graduate of
Santa Fe High School, uh, who
at the aging and long-term
Services Department in an
earlier stance, and she's now
come back uh to be there as the
cabinet secretary. Just some of
You know, that's just a sign of
leadership, uh, that, that
certainly resonated with me.
She's interested in serving
out this morning that, boy, I
think made all of us pause,
270,000 New Mexicans are
currently serving as informal
caregivers.
taking care of others and doing
so without a whole range of
support, and so I just think
that came through as, as a super
important uh mission of this
We're very lucky to have her. So
I'm happy to yield for any
questions. Thank you, Senator
Wirth. Debate on the contrary,
Senator Padilla.
this nominee has been absolutely
wonderful, Madam President, and
I, uh, one of the issues that
we've discussed in the past,
which I know she is very, very
keenly aware of and that we've
discussed actually multiple
with others and with this
conferee and how important it is
to help those families and to
help them get those resources
that they need. They're not as
apt to be online, and so I know
the department is working on
again, I, I'm very supportive
and I want to thank her for the
work that she's doing. Thank
you, Madam President.
Thank you. Any other debate on
Senator Hatamio, Madam
President, I stand in full
dynamics of grandparents raising
grandchildren and the amount of
support that population needs.
Now she's quick at action. I
talked to her about an issue
we're having in Ri Riba County
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator, uh Senor
Charlie, Madam President, I also
rise in support of this
confirmation.
new windows. Well, they didn't
get it in right. So we made
contact, um, with Emily, and she
committed to we're gonna get out
more lucky than to have you
serving in this role. Thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Trujillo.
Long-term Services. We go back
quite a few years and I had the
pleasure of working with Emily
very, very close, so this is the
2nd person to sit up there for
this without the help of Emily.
She is dedicated, she's detail
oriented, and she really has a
heart for the community and so
Uh, sing non senator worth to
close.
I appreciate the debate. Just
one final thing, New Mexico is
currently 12th, uh, in the
we have a fantastic candidate
here. So with that, Madam
President, I ask unanimous
consent. The records show the
role's been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the.
negative by a show of hands.
please go to your seats if you
the appointment of Emily Columba
to the Secretary to be secretary
of the Aging and Long-term
Services Department for term
commencing on November 2, 2024
if you could stand up, let's
give her a huge welcome and
appreciation from the New Mexico
State Senate.
Senator Wirth, thank you, Madam
President. Unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
I stand up today because we've
been here on the floor and we've
been.
Able to confirm so many border
regions throughout the state of
And have witnessed this school
become.
A beau beautiful school.
And get ourselves a new board of
Regents as soon as possible.
Currently we have one board of
Regent which is a student.
Which is a great young man.
That we need to point.
And get
A new board of Regents confirmed
as soon as possible.
regions.
Appointments and I am asking
that we.
That move forward.
And get past this ugly hump that
we've been on.
Which it's so important. I mean,
it, it'd be like us trying to
run the state of New Mexico
without a governor.
We can't run the, the, the, uh
And our future students.
We got to move forward and move
WNMU forward. Thank you very
much, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
lieutenant governor who has also
listened to our cries for help.
The people of Silver City and
the students of Western
University are being punished,
and it's not like they're
operating like a state without
the board of regents. One single
student regent is writing the
checks for an entire
university and a single
professor appointed himself as
president.
chairman of rules who had said,
bring, bring appointees before
me, I recognize the value of
that and we will hear those
confirmations. I much appreciate
Doheck.
Thank you, Madam President and
Senator Brantly touched on this,
but I just wanted, I want this
body to know that as soon as I
I do think this is a long
standing.
Issue in New Mexico we need to
fix, and I'll just mention of
the body before we get a new
governor, we have a
constitutional amendment
appointees. So I hope we avail
ourselves this opportunity once
and for all before we get our
next governor. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator,
for bringing this issue up.
New Mexico University and, uh,
I'm outraged about this. This
is, this is not fair. What,
what?
The governor's making it look
like as we do not care about
She will find some somebody to
put in those spots so that we
can get that university up and
running like it should be. Thank
you, Madam President.
Thank you. Anyone else?
President, I didn't want to
interrupt with the, uh, Western
conversation cause mine is
separate, so that's why I was
holding off Madam chair.
So
This us.
I knew it wasn't the state
party.
There is a pack out there that
people believe.
associated with that pack. And
it says right on the text, paid
for by.
So it wasn't paid for by us. It
wasn't paid for by the state
party. It wasn't paid for by
came from.
Because the last time we had
this little.
Issue
I did do it.
And I apologized.
Sort of, for doing it.
But what made this one even
worse was personal cell phone
numbers.
And so I'm asking everybody out
there in the world.
But don't make it look like the
Republican Party or the
Republican caucus did it.
Because we didn't.
We're doing things.
We're working things in this
room.
I think that we're, we're we're
moving in a good direction.
And if I want them to interfere,
by golly, I'll talk to him and
say, interfere.
And then I will tell you I
interfered.
This was not it though.
response. He, he did track this
down promptly and responded to
it, uh, 15,000 apparently text
messages were sent in my
district and the, the concern I
have is, is that the person that
bill because I make my living as
a criminal.
defense lawyer.
Now I'm looking at my colleagues
over. I've been practicing law
35 years. I've never done a
criminal defense case in my
said it before, I've got a thick
skin. I know how the game gets
played, but if you're gonna
attack me, please attack me by
representing me accurately. So
when Miss Tennant lied in her
a lie too. So I, I, I am gonna
push back on those, uh, attacked
me for my positions, sure.
Attack me for my boat, sure,
lie, and that just means that
they're not.
at bills. They're not, uh,
getting things scheduled.
They're not able to do the job
that I wish they were doing that
I'd like for them to be doing. I
are false and um I've asked her
to apologize. I'm not going to
hold my breath, and she's, and
she is pretty tired to
Republican, uh, operatives and
PACs and so forth, but, but I'm
assured by the leader that this
Madam Chair, thank you. I'm
gonna comment on this because
I'm embarrassed and I've
expressed this to my caucus, and
I hope that I've expressed this
Has gone out and has jeopardized
good relationships in this
building. I want to apologize
for the text that that PAC sent
against Carrie Hamlin that I
jail for cyber attacks before.
Her friend wasn't so lucky.
And I, I apologize to Senator
Cervantes. This is happening,
and I think that it is an entire
caucus we need to denounce this
Thank you for that Senator
Brantley. Anyone else wanting to
comment?
Senator Wirth
thank you Madam President,
Senator Campos for item number
one, Senator Munoz for item
number 2, Senator Sendo, item
number 3, Senator Doig, item
that, but we will hold off on
that. So, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go without
our business. Third reading of
legislation, and I yield to
Senator Campos for item number
one, Senate Bill 31 has twice
Madam President, members of the
Senate, thank you very much,
Majority Leader Werth. I ask and
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
placing
Thank you very much Madam
President, members of the
Senate, and I also ask unanimous
consent that I be allowed an
expert witness, and that person
through a tough time right now
with the loss of a family
member, but she made sure she
was going to be here today and I
want to ensure that she's here
with us as we uh describe and to
discuss this particular measure.
the expert on the floor. Thank
you very much Madam President,
members of the Senate, in
essence, Senate Bill 31 is twice
state and uh uh electric co ops
that have been approved for
federal emergency management,
uh, agency public.
assistance funding following a
with the Department of Homeland
Security and emergency
management and requires loan
recipients to enter into
reimbursement contracts to repay
Thank you, uh, seeing debate on
the bill will go first to
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Madam President. You
know, for the last 2 or 3 years,
we've been reactive to fires in
during the special session this
summer, where we reactive to the
fire season. And so now we're
gonna go into proactive mode,
uh, I don't really think this is
a governor's bill because it was
This is a reactive response. So
if something happens and you're
gonna see, we did a couple of
these other bills, uh, that
they're able to get the money.
The money moves the way it
mountain, no rain. So this is
really a proactive response to
how we set ourselves up for the
future of floods, fire.
debate on the bill.
Singan compost clothes. Thank
you very much Madam President,
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Senators we're voting on Senate
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
of the Senate, that means a lot
to all of us here in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. We'll go on
to item number 2 on our
calendar, Senator Munoz.
I asked unanimous consent for
placing, wait, let me get to the
right.
Madam President, I asked consent
of the Senator the record show
Senator Mnoz to explain the
bill. Thank you, Madam
President. Over the last couple
of years in Senator Worth and,
uh, a former senator set up the
and faith in it now. They made
some moves and, and now we need
to support them on their journey
as they, they do that. We,
they're in a building, we moved
into a different building. We're
setting them up for success and
the mill assessments by
utilities and it's at its
current rate, the PRC collects
about 14.
16 million annually each year.
Legislature comes back and
re-approach that reappropriates
It also allows them to increase
the mail assessment of both the
utility and telecom assessments
employment with the sunset of
2031.
The bill also gives the PRC
authority to set administrative
hearing fees in the amounts that
because we already talked about
the amendment last year, the PRC
processed about 4000 cases, 400
cases, many of which required
President, we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator Marnos. We do
have debate. Senator Woods,
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
ordered. Any debate on the bill.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Will the
Seeing no objection, the
sergeant of arms can escort.
be is
Is this intended, is this
Intended to completely fund the
Madam President and Senator, uh,
we're trying to get them on
track. We always subsidize the
PRC in in past years, uh,
because they had such a wide
variety and then we've
so that they know what their
actual operating costs are, but
when they did adjudicated those
400 cases.
They may have overspent, they
may have to hire contract
adjudication on those utilities.
Snare Scott.
And Madam President, why not
just do that from through the
And so when we see fluctuations
in the general fund in the past,
we've had to cut everybody, uh,
the PRC was a victim of those
uh, to do the adjudication, to
do all the background work, and
so the costs are higher, and now
we're saying, OK, well, let's
level out the percent that we're
charging everybody equal.
Going up and down and trying to
make a guess for how many cases
they're gonna have annually.
Create the fund.
Let them put the right amount in
the fund for their costs and
And Madam President and Senator,
Is there no
Estimate at the beginning of the
budget year with respect to how
year, or is that a surprise as
the budget year goes along. So,
Madam President, Senator, over
the past 5 years, we've seen uh
uptick injudication, uh, maybe
in the prior year it was around
So, um, as the case has
increased, the costs increase,
and now we can right size that
for the best guests that we can
have. We don't know, maybe next
year they could drop down, but
and just say the fund is reached
16 million, but their operating
costs on on adjudication were
maybe 18 million. We know we'll
have to subsidize that with
general fund.
Because they can't raise the CPI
And Madam President and Senator.
Will these fees be passed along
assessed from the utilities and
telecom and electric utilities.
So they're currently passed
through to the customer already.
Yeah, Madam President.
need to increase burdens on our
constituents that
While we
Or enjoying.
Thank you, Madam President. Will
the senator please yield for
some questions.
Madam President, yes.
Thank you Madam President. Will
summer as we looked at
legislation, some that you're
carrying and electrification in
New Mexico, uh, over the past
year, 2 years, the PRC has
The vision and the change that
they've done over the last
couple of years, uh, has made
the PRC more efficient, uh,
cases, more cases are getting
heard. Uh, so this was in
good senator to my left over
here has a few for the PRC that
they've endorsed, that they're
looking to fix issues in the PRC
and so the bill really came from
conversations with.
in the PRC.
additional revenue so they could
do their job, um, were there any
utilities who advocated for this
bill, or they've been kind of
opposed to this bill.
Um, Madam President, Senator,
of this, that way they can get
their cases adjudicated. Another
one of these bills, Madam
President, would be really
helpful if we could see all the
people that, you know, were
involved and lobbied each
President, Senator, about is
this a fee that's going to be
passed on to ratepayers. I was
struck by the FIR that said the
amended bill would actually
decrease.
because the current fee goes to
the general fund and now it's
going to stay within the agency.
Can you explain that, Madam
Chair President? Madam
President, uh, currently, that
is correct. We take general fund
can appropriate out of the fund
and there won't be a general
fund hit.
It's really
You know how OK. Thank you,
thank you.
Thank you, Senator Stephanics.
Thank you Madam President. Will
this sponsor yield
Um, will these funds be
reverting or will the PRC be
able to retain these fees.
Madam President and Senator, the
fees currently are collected and
But under this piece of
legislation, they would go into
a fund.
They would stand there in the
fund until the legislature comes
into session, we appropriate
those funds out of there.
they, I'm sorry, if they
corrected, if they collect uh
requested more than what was in
the fund. We would have to
backfill the general fund, but
if they requested less, then
fund would now fund them with
legislative appropriation. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator. So
in other words, the PRC really
never gets to get ahead.
state government, but the PRC
really is being given more and
more responsibilities, so I just
wanted to point that out and
clarify that.
Uh, finance amendment. Thank
Thank you gentleman yield for a
question.
Madam President, uh, Senator,
are there any utilities are,
What is the increase from, I
mean, in dollars, what's the
increase that we're increasing
the, uh,
Uh, fee structure too, um.
Percentage
Madam President, Senator, in
dollars, it would be about a
Thank you, sir. Uh, thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator. Next, we'll
hear from Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam President.
So, uh,
way this is?
Senator, um, yes, that, that is
correct.
Madam President, Senator, yes,
that's, that's passed straight
through to the ratepayer.
And Madam President and, and
Just give me an
A wild guess.
On what it will add to a
than a nickel. It's pennies,
according to my expert witness
that the ratepayer would see
looks good, you know. So thank
you, Madam President.
Any other debate?
On Senate Bill 143.
Madam President, I move that
Senate bill of 143 is twice
amended. Do now pass and I ask
for NEM's consent of the Senate
to the record show that role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
By a vote of 40 in the
affirmative, none in the
negative. Senate Bill 143 is
twice amended, has duly passed
the Senate.
thank you, Madam President.
I guess 90% of the Senate, the
record showed that all actions
for placing.
bill
this is an LFC bill, uh, Senate
Bill 58.
All he does is, uh, colifies in
statute the reporting
requirements on our.
Uh, to strengthen LFC's
evaluation of economic
development programs including
Uh, the 350,000 non-recurring uh
appropriation to the LLC for
economic analysis software and
By practice, the department
shares this information with the
legislature and the public.
what Senate bill does is just
formalizes that practice and
statutes to ensure that current
Thank you, Madam President. We
the sponsor yield?
Uh, Madam Preston, yes, to
sponsor with you.
Um
I have a bill, um, regarding
And I'm just wondering if this
report.
Addresses.
That issue, that is the impact
Projects that are funded.
From the leader, not, I mean,
post funding, not prefunding.
that be something that is
reported on, Madam President.
Uh, Madam President, uh, I'd
like to request an expert
witness.
sergeant of arms, police escort
the expert in. Uh, Madam
President, can, uh, Senator, uh,
please ask the question again.
development incentives for the
effectiveness and efficiency or
to make recommendations
regarding the continuance of
such expenditures. My
understanding is some of these
isn't a plan for how to address
the housing issues, so my
question is will the report
after the funding, uh, have
anything about the impact on
Um
Programs as well as uh job
opportunities that may and that
whether those investments are
making a return or or or or.
So this is just about the
investment opportunities and not
about the impact of the LIDA
funds themselves, is that
correct?
Uh, Madam President, yes, this
Thank you, Madam President, um,
I think that this, um, this is
important and I support the
bill, but I think that we
continue to need the bill that I
am sponsoring, which is what is
pursue that bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam President.
Uh, thank you. Next to debate
the bill is Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Madam President. This
and says we need $40 million for
infrastructure to create 200
jobs in New Mexico. That's what
LEA was designed for, but Lita
has kind of changed over the
never come to fruition. And so
what we really want to know and
I'll give you an example in my
district we had a glove
manufacturer that came in to do
latex gloves. We gave them Lita
and then 3 years later, they're
it be forgiven. The counties now
has to come back and pay that
lead dollars back to the state
because they agreed to make sure
that they met these metrics. So
you get
these predicaments and, and we
just want to know.
their operations. Now they're
buying cattle and they bought a
ranch and now they're going to
grow their own cattle and, and
they're meeting their metrics in
growth and lead, and that's what
we really want. Maybe small
and
then in December and January,
they showed $30 million awarded
$50 million in leadtago.
We don't know, but we want to
don't see that large growth, uh,
that we thoughtEA would, would
do that with JTip.
Jay tips a little bit different
because that pays salaries at a
different rate. And so how many
intended for. And that's what
this bill does. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you. There's further
debate, Senator Cervantes.
reporting done. Does your bill
do anything with regard to
actually, um, helping citizens
claw back the incentives that
it's a good important step, but
I think we need to recognize
that we, we really, if we're
being responsible to the
taxpayers and we're not being
responsible to taxpayers. We've
got to find ways to claw back
your pocket, pay yourself some
salaries, pay some of your
friends, hire your family, uh,
spend the money, buy a new car,
get some property and so forth.
And then, and then go bankrupt
to try and claw this back. We,
uh, Senator, do you know, do you
know of anything that we've done
as a state to try and claw back
ever
economic development incentives
that have been paid to somebody
and years well we do have
clawback provisions now.
And uh president, Senator, I, I
know we have clawback
provisions. The issue is, do we
ever do anything to claw back.
In other words, we can have
one of our committees just the
other day that said one of the
clawbacks would be that, um, the
economic incentive would be the
first priority paid back if the
creditors and all the security
agreements they've got and
everything else, they got
themselves tied up and to be
nice to do that, be nice to say
that the state of New Mexico and
the taxpayers get their money
gonna do the next step, which is
maybe, Senator, uh, just one.
A bit more question. When you do
reporting, are you gonna go
back? Is this reporting gonna go
back, say that last 4 years, 6
and then they can make off with
it. And, and are we gonna go
back and how far how far back
are we gonna look?
Senator Sindo.
years. I'm, I'm not sure exactly
how much, but um.
witnesses we do come uh.
Collect all the information
right now that could be used for
clawbacks, but I'm not sure how
support what you're doing here,
but we've got to do more if
we're being responsible to
taxpayers and, uh, again, this
is the easiest way to make money
off the taxpayers of the state
of Mexico is come up, promised a
money on top of that.
based on the state's money. So
we're putting a bunch of
taxpayer money into this and
then these folks can disappear
on us and I, I can give you
the, the good example was there
was another, I look at my Senate
colleagues from Las Cruces, we
went to a big ribbon cutting for
what was going to be a big, uh,
marijuana dispensary, I'm I'm
420 on Valley Drive in Las
Cruces because that's the inside
code I guess for the hipsters to
mean something. So we went down
big press conference, gave him a
never, never touched.
Never a penny spent to open the
business, never a penny spent
to, to improve the property at
all, but I was there for the
sponsors trying to do here, but
we've got to be responsible to
the citizens showing them where
this money is going and, and
not uh be incentivizing
unscrupulous people taking
advantage of our good efforts.
Senator
My, my question and my comment
is along the same lines. I have
analysis that I have ever seen
that comes back to the
legislature, year over year and
says we invested this kind of
money in these locations, we
Legislative world with
industrial revenue bonds.
Same process we have huge
corporate citizens out of state
That create temporary
construction jobs.
And all of their product.
Goes out of state, none of it
we desperately need to know that
our dollars, in this case, Lita
and Jia.
We need to know how well it
Madam President, to the senator
if he yield.
yield Senator Madam President,
uh, Senator Townsend, yes I do.
Senator Townsend, I'll remind
you to go through the chair.
There is some new language about
Written requests for information
and that information meant much
Agencies within state
government.
Senator Shindo
Uh, Madam President, uh, Senator
Townsend, no, this is just with
the, the agency there'll be no.
sharing between uh sister
agencies.
Senator Townsend.
Uh thank you very much, Madam
President. I, I don't really
have a question for the sponsor.
I need him to yield. I just want
to comment on a couple of things
I heard today, which are very, I
believe, supportive of, of what
the senator Sindo is trying to
of other things. And I know that
when these projects are approved
for these economic development
incentives, our state now
collects all the information
that we need short of
woods, if you will. I won't say
the name of the company. I think
you may remember, Madam
President, because it's not far
from your district also.
Uh, we had this company come
into New Mexico and we showered
Unfortunately for that period in
in New Mexico's history, they
owed us about $7 million and we
were only able to pull back
about 2.5 or so million of that
Thank you, Senator, Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, uh, Madam President,
and I didn't really have a
question either, so I'm not
funding for projects that come
from the state. I think that's
really tough. It's been, it's
tough, uh, on that level and,
um, while the, while the county
down and they're, you know,
everybody's excited about it and
if you don't support them,
you're against economic
development.
So I just want to say for my
colleagues on that level, you
know, I just want to say, you
have these provisions in place
that we, we use them and do what
we can to protect taxpayers'
dollars. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Thank you, uh, Senator. Senator,
part of your district is in
Sandoval County, is that
correct? Uh, correct.
Uh, Senator,
Thank you, sir. I, I support
this bill, Senator, and I was
just curious if, if you know or
your expert knows, um, when
Uh, I was just curious, do you,
do you know when they're writing
their reports, compiling the
data if they coordinate with uh
the local economic development
say, um, it's disheartening to
hear, Madam President and, uh,
Senator Shindo, one of the
senators talking about millions
of dollars that we don't know
where it went.
or something like that, um,
that's one of the reasons why,
uh, we have built clawbacks in
Sandoval County. Are you aware
of those by chance?
Uh, Madam President, Senator,
yes.
clauses with the, uh,
significant number of businesses
that Sandoval County has, has,
with any specific numbers or how
many clawbacks have been made.
Madam President, Senator, the
answer is 0.
The answer is 0 is because
they're very, very successful
and then that's why we have
partnered with the state on
with the.
Uh, significant amount of
investment the state and the
county uh has done there,
correct?
Uh, Madam President, yes.
There's nothing specific in here
where it does talk about one of
the senators.
Concerns which I share regarding
uh clawbacks or maybe lessons
asking about but may not have
received because the business
when declared bankruptcy.
Madam President.
Madam President and Senator, uh,
we don't have it, uh, in, in
this reporting requirements, but
you know, I, I'm I'm sure, you
know, it's just the move where I
think there's something might be
important because this is
that something that you would,
um, accept to amend the bill to
um come up with the language to
talk about clawbacks.
President, Senator, it would be
Sandoval County and they're
Bonda to do the clawbacks.
Within that.
economic development agencies
whether it's the
Chambers, municipalities of the
counties, why, why wouldn't the
state want to take that data of
informed decisions regarding
economic development incentives.
Madam President and Senator, uh,
This is just strictly reporting
requirement and like I said in
my comments, I think there's
something that we may include,
would look like, but I think
it's something that, something
that we would certainly look at.
Madam President, Senator, well,
I think, uh, specifically what
And you put that data in here
saying the state.
Requested this amount of money
in clawbacks and never got it.
invested but didn't get back or
maybe they did get back in a
clawback. Do you, do you think
that transparency piece is
important.
return on investment explanation
was determined economic impact.
I mean that could be included in
that uh section of the report.
let me just read it so I
understand it, the actual
economic impact.
Of the project, including the
return on investment of the
project support.
Uh, at all that talks about your
return on investment. That
doesn't talk about money, the
state, or a uh local and
economic development.
Madam President, Senator, I, I
understand that, but what I'm
saying is.
It should be identified.
For the public to see that.
there, but I think we have
enough uh understanding of
what's happening that, you know,
I know it's specifically not in
there, but the clawback
provisions are already in the
statute, and I think those
things will be covered.
Um, Senator, let me just ask you
one other question on, on page 4
regarding online 12 proprietary
you tell me how long the state
Uh, does record keeping on
proprietary technical
information. Do they do it, um,
for the entire.
Uh, Madam President, yes.
OK, thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam President, and is that
information destroyed once the
Madam President, Senator, why,
why is that not destroyed after
uh the business in the state
have completed their agreement,
their arrangement.
long is that information kept
for evaluation purposes?
Uh, Madam President, Senator,
10+ years.
the public seeing how much money
that the state has lost on an
investment.
Uh, I appreciate the information
on the proprietary.
debate on Senate Bill 158.
Sing, Senator Sindo to close.
Madam President, I move that
show of hands.
Senators, we are voting on
Senate Bill 158 to your seats if
affirmative, 2 in the negative
158 has duly passed the Senate.
Senator Chindo.
Thank you, members of the body.
Thank you, we will move on to
action for placing
Senate
128 on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator Duhig to explain the
we see around New Mexico, um,
and before last session, I
posted a couple and then during
the last session, people started
sending them to me and over the
last year, they kept sending
sent to me this week that, that
were posted. And they're really
entertaining, but there are some
folks out there who want to get
personalized license plates,
And right now our uh TRD.
Has a policy that that allows
them to, to reject those
statute, we are in a better
position to resist those
challenges if they come here to
New Mexico. So what this bill
does is it says that.
sexually explicit or profane or
promotes drugs, alcohol, or
other intoxicating substances or
promotes violence or gang
affiliation.
And it also can't be something
that can't be easily
with an O, and that is hard for
law enforcement to
differentiate. So that is what
this bill does. It is the, the
policy that is currently in
place is just codifying it.
I'm one of the senators that has
sent uh copies of photos that I
take, Madam President, on the
road and send those to Senator
Duhig and we chuckle quite a bit
on some of them, uh, but, uh, so
I'm very supportive of the
ordered. Other debate on Scott.
Well, don't say it like that,
Madam President.
Uh, some concerns that this
could run aground on
First Amendment issues and uh
with that as a preface.
Just remember to go through the,
Madam President,
Uh, item number one of the bill
is is.
can be interpreted.
Pretty significantly in a number
of ways.
Are we going to maintain, Madam
President, a
A
list.
Of terms.
That are not.
So Madam President, um, and I'm
gonna answer that, but I also
want to address the, the
concern, the First Amendment
concern.
I don't think you can compel the
state to create.
Vulgarity for you as part of our
licensing scheme. So, so I
suspect that that if that First
Amendment issue there.
But as for who decides, uh, what
is offensive. Um, so they would
use the same process they use
those out in committees. I am
not that brave. I, I think I
said one in tax and, and then
quickly realized that I was not
going to read all those things,
but
That list that I got, Madam
President.
in urban dictionary, which is a
bad idea. I don't recommend
that, but that is exactly what
TRD does. The person who is
responsible for approving these
requests. One of the first thing
today's parlance, it
Um, so I assume they would use
the same procedure that they use
now under this because this is
the same as the policy that's in
Sn Scott
So
Madam President,
Senator
Who published.
To use those terms in New
Mexico, if the dictionary was
published, for example, in
Chicago.
They're doing
Um, where people essentially, it
explains what slang, different
slang words mean and different
people submit that to it. Now,
there's also the independent
judgment of the human being who
dictionary is not the defining,
uh,
The last word on any of those
things, but it certainly can
Senator Scott.
Madam President, let me
Let me offer an example of
Hotel Papa November Sierra was
on that license plate, was that
something that would not be
acceptable.
redo that question.
Madam President, the
Phonetic alphabet is Sierra
Hotel Tango.
Yes, H.
T.
Rejected under the current
policy, it might not, I, I will
say, Madam President.
I'm a little conflicted about
bringing this because it's
really going to reduce my level
Saying, using a curse word, I
think that is probably something
that already gets rejected and
would continue to under this.
the floor.
All right. Any other debate on
this amusing bill, Senator Pope.
Thank you Madam President, uh,
But one of the concerns and
questions I have you brought up,
Urban Dictionary, and I'm just
worried about situations where
There might be a term or slang
Training to understand what's
going on in our state.
So do
So Madam President, um, the same
way we do now, so again, there
decision will be, um, but there
is a, a New Mexican making those
judgments based on the
information before them now and
would continue to be under this.
yields she yields. Thank you.
um.
How would, is there a process
for appealing a decision that is
made on this.
there is a process in place now,
and this bill would not create a
process. Uh, Madam President,
they actually causes me some
concern, um, and, and, and it's
interesting because I think it's
Uh, see, yeah, people now, is
that, is that offensive? It's
offensive to my mother, but some
other people might take.
out, but um,
So,
I would be more comfortable if
the, uh, with this bill, if
there was some kind of appeal
process from what exists now,
first judgment who may not be
culturally competent who may not
be um.
Who may have their own um.
Saying none, senor do Hilo.
Madam President, I move that
Senate Bill 128 do now pass ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
voting on Senate Bill 128 if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
Senator Thornton votes no.
votes no.
Senator Pope.
votes no.
Senator Sidia Lopez votes no.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Townsend.
Boats now.
Siner Gallegos, folks know.
Senator. Thank you, Madam
President, thank you. All right,
we'll go on to our next item.
Number 5 on our agenda.
Senator Figuero.
show that all actions for
placing Senate Bill 345 on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
practice since 2022, which is
allowing the use of subject
testing or portfolio to
demonstrate subject competency
instructional support providers
who might be coming in from
another state.
And with that, Madame Cha I'll
stand for questions.
Is there a debate on the bill?
Madam President, I moved the
Senate bill 345 do now pass, and
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that the world has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
number 6.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam President.
As for unanimous consent of the
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Senator Woods, to explain the
bill.
The New Mexico Livestock Board
And what this particular bill
does is increase those fees.
They hadn't been increased for,
I think it's since
It's a pretty small step at a
time, those fees will be
increased by the livestock board
itself, uh, they, they're, they
have a, a board that governs
I, uh, here in uh
Analyst, if you want to look at
that, well, I'd be happy to
answer any questions on that,
Madam President, thank you very
much. Well, the senator yield?
Madam President, thank you very
much. Well, the senator yield?
Yes sir, I will yields.
incremental and it's up to the
livestock board to make the
decision whether to go ahead and
raise him up or hold them at
their current level, is that
correct?
You know, up to a maximum of 16
cents at a time. So
It will, it's a per head charge,
want people to be aware it's not
going to hit them all at once.
It will be at the discretion of
the livestock board, whether a
nickel more a head or 10 years
Thank you Madam Chair or Madam
President and Senator Witz for
bringing the bill forward.
Uh, in my area when we go to so.
Uh, there's usually only one.
one time a week.
And the lights do get long and
The critters do get restless, so
thank you, Senator Woods.
So, Madam President, uh, my
question is currently,
Uh
This particular agency is funded
through a combination of fees
and general fund. Is that
do, the one thing I'm trying to
do is to, to
Believe it or not, wean them off
of general funds and, and have
a very important agency for
them. It takes care of the
Looking out for disease in
animals, it also takes care of
Center, Madam President, thank
you, Senator. No, I agree
completely. I think this is a
super important function of
Government, I guess my question
and these fees again, why not
with all this resource that we
have, why not do this through
the general fund, I guess, if
the sponsor would answer that
question. I just, we've got the
money to do this through the
Senator Woods
Uh, well, that's my intent. My
intent is to lower the impact on
Uh, legislature, every time you
need a pickup.
Uh, as you know,
These agencies are constantly
But every so often you have to
change a pickup fleet out. You
have to do different things and,
and sometimes you have to ask
a time to, uh, you know, I can
see the point in that.
But as you know,
If the federal government
If we did away with the waivers.
If the federal government did
away with their waivers on
Medicaid.
you can see, it wouldn't take
long to dig into our reserves. I
think Chairman Munoz made the
statement, if the federal money
was swept out in a hurry, uh,
this money coming in, it is
coming in, but there's a huge
amount comes in from the federal
government and, you know, the
governor's already saying, you
know, we're probably gonna come
And some men present center no I
I appreciate that.
Appreciate that.
We just, uh,
We had another bill in front of
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
last session. So now there's
room to raise the fines.
And I just think that, and
again, the federal issue is
separate. I'm, I'm thinking
about Senator Smith sitting
that. I, I just philosophically
have a real problem.
Using fees.
You know, for something like
this and asking.
but I, I'm not gonna be able to
vote for the bill. And, and
again, it's just a philosophical
difference, and I'm trying to be
consistent and I voted against
It's a discussion we need to
keep having, and I've really
been carrying legislation to get
us away from this, and it feels
like we start slipping back into
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
Matt President with the sponsor
just yielded a couple of
questions.
You, Madam President, I will
yield. y.
Senator, I'm looking at the
actually raising the fees
themselves, is that right?
Let me, madam Chair, I've got an
expert witness outside all of a
sudden, I believe I need him.
consent to allow my expert into
the chamber.
see no objection, he can take
his seat,
Madam President, the issue is
reads that the uh fees have not
been increased in almost 20
years, more than 20 years since
20004, is that right?
to figure out if, if uh they've
been able to exist for now
better than 20 years, um, with
that cap in place, what's
point earlier, which is, I, I, I
really hesitant to do this to be
operating outside the general
fund and not have agencies.
to the appropriating committee
process during the interim and
and bypass the senator, you
know, we get to stay home. We
shouldn't have raised this point
with Senator Munoz several
times. We're doing more of this
autopilot, uh, budgeting, which
so I, I guess back to my
question directly for you is
what's what's happening now that
hasn't happened for the last 20
plus years where this one
go outside the general fund
budgeting process.
To be approved before they can
spend any money, whether they
raise it yourself or not. So to
say, well, they're just going to
going to them is how they have
been able to survive for the
last few years.
So the, uh, and there may be a
over the last 22 years, the
livestock board has been relying
upon the appropriation process
and coming to the finance
committees and having general
fund, then why was that not now
working, uh, and why?
We need to change this and have
them raise fees as opposed to
just going through the general
fund, I don't know Senator, I
at the finance committee
process, they're unsatisfied
with the finance committee
process and budgeting, so they
decided to become an enterprise
fund and start raising their
is that, is that what's going on
here?
They, uh, they actually had a
cap on the fees that they have
moved up to, Madam Chairman.
So
have increased fees, yes, they
have gone to the, through the
appropriation process to get
money to
Uh, supplement.
argument that we don't want to,
we want
The general taxpayer to pay for
this service instead of the
inspection fees instead of the
livestock producer, Madam
President, uh, I'm, I assume
that's what I'm hearing.
Senor Cervantes, Madam
President, that's one way to
agencies as part of our
budgeting and uh if we do it
this way, then you're right,
the, the fees they charge on the
producers is a more direct
relationship to their, to their
as opposed to what may be in the
budget coming over from the
house. In other words, are they,
are they not getting the
attention they need from us in
The budget that's.
N HB 2 for them for this year,
as it sets today.
It is $11 million.
So for employees, salaries and
whatever.
You know, cause of.
Business goes up.
Pickups goes up, everything goes
up. So,
Am I doing this because I don't
think they're going to get to
1.8 million and
is now about 11 million, and
they feel like they're being
short. You said 1.8, so close to
getting close to 2 million,
they're, they're talking about
20%, uh, of their budget that
could turn this into a very bad
precedent if we do too much of
this and we're doing more and
more of it that I'm seeing,
where we're, we're kind of
giving authorization to all the
agencies, uh, if you don't like
we're taking ourselves out of
the process. We are diminishing
our authority as legislators to,
to have control over the budget
and decide where agency.
some more, go get it by charging
people in, in your own ways. I,
I think that's a, a concerning
precedent. I, I think, Senator,
you probably wouldn't have the
same concern, uh, if we were to
apply this in any number of
fines and fees and so forth,
water issues and so forth. This
could be, this could be a, a
pretty, uh, draconian result and
we take this, uh, to, to any,
legislature and paying the
legislature and coming in more
days and more time. We seem to
be delegating and advocating
more and more of our duties
every day.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam President, I voted for
this bill in conservation, and I
support, I really support this
because we are a weak
legislature. We don't meet
enough so that if the livestock
and uh in the interim, um, when
we're not able to do that.
For them. And the other issue is
the livestock Board serves
That we consider that because
people who have livestock relies
on the board, not all of the
taxpayers of New Mexico, so it
seems appropriate that the
think that the the livestock
board and many others, uh, any,
and many other um agencies,
unfortunately cannot rely on us
to timely get the money.
obviously we've had inflation
over time so I think it's time
we raise the cap. Thank, thank
you, Madam President. I, I
support this bill.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
It's gonna be really hard for
you not to look at each other,
but remember you have to go to
the chair.
I noted in the, uh, in the
analysis that the cattle growers
Association was in fact in favor
of this.
livestock owners paying a fee.
What are they, what are they
getting for their feet?
Madam President,
Well, like I said when I
is to look at the health of
those animals before they are
moved from where they're at.
And the other one is the term
ownership of those animals.
And so,
agritarism right now, and I
carried a bill.
That kind of stopped somewhere.
That talked about economics and
and things like the bird flu and
from leaving Sunland Park one
year because of a contagious
disease in horses.
And that was a livestock board
that did that. That wasn't the
And to determine ownership of
animals. Those are the two
things, services they provide
in my.
You know, one of the criticism I
got in committee was some
ranchers in northern New Mexico
that was saying that they were
district lines, you should have
them inspected.
So
The problem is what happens if
one of your pastors is on one
side of that line.
say that you only pay half the
fee when you're moving in that
generally those are seasonal
moves. Usually you have a winter
pasture and a summer pasture.
food safety, and again it is for
ownership in our state we have
a, a great system for
traceability for livestock.
President, and, and we scrambled
across the United States.
And you may not have known this,
Madam President, but the
livestock market fell.
and we stopped that right there
in its tracks. Uh,
We have the USDA has a heck of a
tracing system. New Mexico has
and just to tell you the truth,
Madam President, I've seen
Livestock inspectors walked
between two very mad people
claim in the same animal.
And be some be a authority over
everybody in the room. So that's
exactly the service these guys
give.
request.
Of the rancher.
To move livestock across certain
district lines or to sail.
And the fact that the inspection
has verified.
The animals to be safe to move,
Senor Woods. Yeah, yeah.
It, it, it may not.
It is known that the person
selling that animal is the
current owner.
So there's no doubt that you're
buying, you're not buying stolen
property. So in that way, yes,
fee.
On for the inspection of, for
example, uh cow going to the
sale barn, and, uh, if you would
a, a cow.
Uh, is 50 cents.
And ahead.
And
857 pound steer brought $2.60 a
pound.
On the hoof.
A 300 pounder.
together.
Uh, up in, up in, up north in
the fat cattle market.
Uh, a fat we.
$303.
Live
Our $11,50015.
Hanging in the meat market.
And Madam President, just to
clarify, that's not 50 cents a
pound, it's 50 cents per animal.
And Madam President, Senator,
could you describe the proposed
increase in that fee per animal.
increase.
Senator Scott.
I send 101 as amended.
Senator Thornton.
Madam President, I was looking
at the.
FIR on this particular issue and
it says that the um
According to the fiscal impact
Am I correct in did I read that
correctly?
Yes, you did, Madam President.
So my understanding then is if
eliminated, you would not be
able to perform these functions
without an increase in the
general funding budget, is that
correct?
Agencies to increase their
funds.
It seems like we either need to
Sponsor them by increasing their
That we need to either.
Help these agencies achieve the
funding that they need to
perform their functions that
they're ascribed to be to be
given or.
Well, not quite the issue before
us because
The issue is to increase fees.
Um
If we do nothing.
through fees or do we increase
general fund revenues to them,
Madam President.
Madam President, I, I understand
that. I, I think when I'm.
Hearing those, there's a
And so the question before us
really is from a principal point
of view, do we as the state
government.
Supporter agencies to the point
it's a much larger issue than
just this particular issue here,
but that's what I'm hearing.
So I, so I understand the need,
um.
the line for other agencies to
do the same.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. Other debate.
The, the LFC, the
A house appropriation, the
In New Mexico by an agency. They
allocate that out of those
funds. Yeah, they may put them
in a fund.
But if you'll look
It'll say
maybe an agency doesn't give all
of its money out of general
fund. It'll say GF general fund.
Another line item will be other
state funds, and many of those
There's several funds being
trying to set up this year.
And those funds will be, money
will go into those funds and
then those funds will be divvied
raising their own money and they
can, they can fund their agency
through the raises is not quite
right, Madam Chair, Madam
President. It is appropriated,
analysis says, well, we're going
to raise this much money and
we're going to increase money in
the general fund, uh, this bill
is going to increase money.
And so with that, Madam
President, I'll quit preaching
and I'll get on with it.
Madam President, I move that
Senate Bill 101.
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
your seats if you wish to vote
no, please raise your hand.
Senator Cervantes votes no.
Senator Nova.
Vos no
folks know
Senator Pavia.
Folks, no.
Senator Stewart.
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Woods. Uh thank you,
Madam President. Do you remember
the time that, that I actually
passed a bill on the Senate
floor by voting against it.
when you and I were the only
ones who voted against the bill.
About 4 years ago and I have the
picture of you and I.
Senator Cervantes Madam
President, I had asked to
explain my boat just briefly. It
always troubles me, troubles me
a great deal, doesn't happen
often, but it happens when uh my
uh, 5 times. It's there's an old
curse that says may you live in
interesting times. I, I watch
what's happening in Washington
DC where we have, uh, tax cuts
that are gonna explode the
deficit, and we have a
I'm, I'm just sitting here
going, man, we are living in
interesting times, Madam
President.
Thank you. Um, all right.
Senator Peter Worth to take us
that order of Business Committee
reports the reader to read.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Joint
Your education committee, to
whom has been referred Senate.
Bill 148.
Has had it under consideration,
reports in with a recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
of the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports we vote on
them with one motion in the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
the reader shall read all the
I movedoption of the committee
report
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those post, the eyes have it
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
conservation committee,
respectfully submitted Senator
Madam President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion
that the journal reflect they
acted upon individually.
reports.
Senate Memorial 14 do pass as
pass as amended and the referred
to the Conservation committee.
Senate Bill 274 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig, chair.
Madam President, I move adoption
of the committee reports
Reader to continue Madam
President, your health and
public affairs Committee, to
whom has been referred Senate
Bill 84 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
recommendation that it do not
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair.
Senator Lopez motion to adopt
the committee report.
Madam President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred?
Senate Bill 5 as amended, has
had it under consideration,
reports the same with
Uh, it's 90% that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports. We vote on
them with one motion and then
the journal reflected they were
acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection, the reader
signify by saying aye.
Postna, the eyes have it
committee report is adopted.
Madam President, your Indian
do pass and then referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
submitted to Senator Shannon De
Pinto move adoption of the
committee report of the
Madam President, your tax
business and transportation
committee to him as been
referred. Senate Bill 41 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
Senate Bill 287, do not pass,
but that Senate tax, Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 287
Senate Bill 357 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
the Conservation Committee.
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
senator Carrie Hamblin, chair.
Madam President, I move the
adoption of the committee report
we go out our business messages
from the house.
no objection on messages from
the house.
Madam President, I'm directed to
A message from the house will be
entered into the journal.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 260 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa
has passed House Bill 104, House
Bill 220. House Bill 252.
As amended by the House with
emergency clause.
message from the house has been
received. Senator Wirth.
Thank you, Madam President.
Unanimous consent, we go to
that, our business introduction
of legislation.
House Bill 104 introduced by
Representative Reeb.
An act relating to crime,
revising the definition of
criminal offense for the purpose
title is ordered referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee,
thence to Senate Finance
Committee House Bill 104.
House Bill 2020 introduced by
interests and limiting
conditions that pose fire
hazards, allowing ignition
resistant construction and
homeowner association bylaws and
Judiciary House Bill 220.
House Bill 252 introduced by
representatives Herrera Aveta.
Martinez
create the kinship caregiver
support pilot program providing
pilot program participation
requirements, providing duties,
making an appropriation
sorter printed is ordered
referred to the Senate Judiciary
thence to Senate Finance, House
Bill 252.
How's Joint Resolution one.
Mexico to provide that each
regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed 45
days, remove the restrictions on
bills that may be considered in
even numbered years and provide
House Joint resolution 1.
A joint resolution one had been
read twice by child disorder
referred to Senate Rules
Committee that to judiciary,
A memorial requesting the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
and the public education
department to convene a work
group to develop a plan in which
Memorial 19.
Senate Memorial 19 he read twice
by tidal disorder printed and
referred to the Senate Rules
Committee, thanks to Senate
or announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth.
I've got a unanimous consent and
then Senator Hamlin afterwards,
unanimous consent to remove
Senate Bill 522 from Senate
Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Committee.
that it be referred to the
Senate Education Committee and
substitute be posted for public
viewing once the changes I just
referenced have been made. Uh,
the title of the proposed
substitute is relating to the
Judiciary, the proposed
committee substitutes 202 number
is 0.231097.1. So that is the
unanimous.
Senator. Thank you, Madam
President. I'm asking unanimous
consent that Senate Bill 357,
which was heard and passed out
of Senate taxation last night,
after conversations with the
chair of Senate Conservation,
chair of Senate Judiciary as
well as the minority.
floor leader.
come in on the floor at one
o'clock. Uh, we are gonna hear
Senate Bill 5, which is the game
and fish bill that got read in
today, and I just want to make
sure the public has noticed, the
committees meeting before that
one o'clock session, and then I
think Senator Hamlin is going to
bring in the tax committee
probably at 4 o'clock, so we're
gonna try and work in that
window. So I would yield to
there's a big game happening
tonight, the Espanola Valley
High School Sun Devils are
challenging the Taos Tigers. I
was going to tell I have three
words for him, start the bus
Madam President and Senate, your
tax, business and Transportation
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow, uh, 30 minutes after
the floor session. I believe
we'll be in 311, but I will
Um, Madam President, your Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee will be meeting 30
minutes after we finish the
floor today. And it's
anticipated, of course, because
Senator Brent. Madam President,
and I, I didn't get to do this
earlier because I got down here
a little bit late today, but,
The Golden Apple Foundation for
excellence in teaching and the
New Mexico Golden Apple Scholars
program, Golden Apple Scholars
are preparing for a teaching
there's an actual golden apple
in your bag. I will tell you
it's really good, really sweet,
um, and, and that was my idea.
I'm like, well, if we're gonna
put golden apples, we got to put
want to publicly thank my um
intern this week. She's been
extraordinarily helpful and I
think she's enjoyed the week.
Thank you all for the courtesies
that you have provided to her
thanking her for, for her
service. Thank you, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam President. Uh,
That's at violet Crown Theater
starting at 1 o'clock, followed
by a discussion with
Representative Rubio, leader
Armstrong, rep Wanda Johnson,
private screening of First We
Bob New Mexico. Thank you, Madam
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. Thank you very much,
Madam President, members of the
Senate, just uh quickly to go
because as he's continued to
work, uh, diligently to ensure
that uh the people of Riodoso
are uh very well represented.
Um, he continues to go ahead and
Senator Cervantes, Madam
President, a couple of
announcements. One is the Senate
Judiciary Committee will meet
this afternoon. We'll start at
3. Will be done at 6. So we'll
notify the members who will have
beers, bills, beers.
Uh, I am, you're right. I'm
we'll have a, a revised agenda
depending on how far we get
today, but Senator Woods, uh,
Senator E, Senator Brandt will
be adding probably bills for you
tomorrow. And if you have
Senator Brantley. Nope. It was
just kidding. uh.
Uh, so I think just be watching
out for a revised agenda to come
in late a little bit for
conference yesterday and the
signing for all of the
significant work that we've done
here on behavioral health and
competency, and she did
something she picked up a nice
tradition that former governors
had done, she had some very
Although, Madam President, I
will tell you that when I, I
took the pen back to my office
and tried to use it. There was
no ink cartridge in the pen at
all.
And I, I know the governor has a
She gave me a, a signing pen,
but with no ink, and I think
that was uh pretty clever and
I'm guessing intentional and I
want to give her credit for
having a good sense of humor on
that, Madam President.
tomorrow.
Any other announcements work
unanimous consent. We go back to
the owner Business Committee
it under consideration, reports
same with the recommendation
that it do not pass, but the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz's chair.
that we vote on them with one
motion and then the general
reflected they were acted upon
individually
no objection, the reader will
read all the committee reports.
Senate Tax Businesses and
amended.
Senate Bill 113 as amended DuPA.
Senate Tax Business and
Senate Bill 227 do pass Senate
bill.
Senate Education Committee
Uh thank you. I moved without
from the committee report
reports, all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Opposesna, I just have a
committee report is adopted.
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
uh, with that unanimous consent,
the Senate stand in recess until
one o'clock tomorrow afternoon.
