Who is uh Caton Elliot Ruiz, an
8th grader at Highland Middle
School in Hobbs, and I would
like the body to welcome him to
the Senate.
Thank you, um, it's not Mr.
Speaker. Mr. President, thank
you. I'm learning, um, I, I am
really honored today, um, body
everyone, but, um, first of all,
I would just like my sister
Kathy to stand up, um, she has
been a school bus driver. I'm
gonna try really hard not to
cry. This is the first time my
family's been able to come on
the on the.
She dresses up for Christmas.
She wears jingle bells. She has
holiday outfits for nearly every
like to introduce my uh
brother-in-law Clarence
Mitchell. He has been a truck
driver for 25 years and delivers
produce so that you have produce
welcome them, um, with a great
New Mexico.
Welcome.
Welcome. Thank you, Senator
Trujillo.
And then last but not least, I
unfortunately, he campaigned
himself out of a job this year,
and so you will be seeing him
around, but I honestly couldn't
do the work that I do without
him, so thank you, Fabian and
thank you for being here.
From the great state of Florida?
My security team, I mean my
immediate family, my husband
Mark.
My oldest blue
Senator Ramos, Mr. President,
thank you so much. I really do
appreciate this time and it is
great to be back and I'm looking
forward to working with each and
every one of you, you know,
the, the person that's the rock
of our family that does so much,
my wife Patricia.
And I
product from Double NMU with a
bachelor's in uh in uh social
work and a master's in social
work and then a bachelor's in in
nursing, so I'm so proud of her.
But I did want to introduce him
because he served 47 years as a
municipal judge and I believe
that's the longest standing
judge in the state of New
Mexico, you know, I also had uh
do have one more announcement
and I'll, and I'll finish here,
but I just became a grandfather
in January 10th. So with Caius
James Ramos, and I'm.
Jaramilo.
Thank you, Mr. President. I have
the honor of coaching cheer
across the state of New Mexico
for 15 years and sitting right
behind me is one of my former
recently she's decided to come
on board as my legislative
district aid. So if you can
please help me in welcoming
Brianna Salazar to the Senate.
be a quite a ride for me to come
over here to the Senate side,
but thank you all for welcoming
me with open arms. I do
appreciate that very much.
Uh, I was going to introduce my
regular basis, but he has
persevered and uh we will be
celebrating our 30th wedding
anniversary in February. So
anyway, this is just a shout out
Senator.
We have further announcements.
We have Senator Boone followed
by Senator Block, then Senator,
uh, Lanier. Senator Boone.
She's been the wind beneath my
wings for 45 plus years of
public service and, and has
promised me that she's gonna
continue to be that, so, uh, I'm
My grandson Teal, they came here
from Wimberley, Texas to be with
us and, uh, my son couldn't be
here. He's a college basketball
coach and they, uh,
very proud to be here
representing District 27, the
state of New Mexico, and, uh,
thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you. Welcome to the Mexico
Senate.
We have Senator Block.
family that are here to support
them, very much appreciated. Um,
during, uh, the first round that
we had of introductions, I just
good friend, um, Tiffany
Hoffman, former Army captain,
combat veteran here.
As well as my friend Jamie and I
also had a few people up, uh,
Joe is, uh, Neil and Ty Heis who
lived down in Bole who own Semco
for, uh, many, many decades.
Neil's also a Vietnam veteran
Navy CB, uh, very much
had, I, I had Jane Pedrell here
who is a uh wonderful state rep
for 20 years representing mostly
Corrales, Rio Rancho, and a
little bit of, uh, Albuquerque
Herner, her husband, Army, uh,
honor that you could have being
a state senator here. And I'm
very honored. Uh, my
My background is a retired Air
Force Lieutenant colonel, combat
veteran, and a county
commissioner in, uh, the
fellow Air Force veteran as
well. Thank you, sir, for your
service in our great Air Force.
I want to thank, um, Gabe Ramos,
who is a veteran as well, and,
officer in the army, Senator
Brandt, and, um, I just want to
tell you, it has been a great
honor, uh, to be here and to get
to know some of you and get to
great state of New Mexico. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you Senator Black.
Sit there.
Mr. President, thank you. Um,
rankings. Obviously, we're not.
I do want to take just 11 2nd
to, um, I'm one of those 3rd of
the newbies that's rolling in
him. I'm very, very surprised
and very, very pleased. Thank
you. Welcome to the New Mexico
Senate.
Glad to have you.
Senator Brantley,
impact that our service in the
Senate has on our family. This
is something we signed up for.
This is service on our part, but
the sacrifice comes on our, our
everyone's family here.
Because it's a reminder that the
best work we will ever do are
really within the walls of our
own home and how we're, how
we're serving those, our family
much of an impact we have on
each other. When I started here,
I came into the Senate family as
a diamond, a single mother of
two. I have learned since then
that there is something stronger
youngest just getting their
driver's license. So it is a
very important time back home.
Tom has raised his girls all on
his own, and so with 5 girls
back at home, uh, I'm leaving a
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
do want to say too that I'm very
honored to have been elected to
represent District 13 in
this will be my 3rd um office. I
served as a city councilors
county commissioner, and now the
Senate. So, um, I don't know,
I've got a crazy gene, I guess,
because they keep doing this,
daughters, um, uh, they took off
work, so they had to go back
home, um, my husband has been a
stalwart supporter, Mike
grandchildren, the youngest one
was gonna come, O'Malley, but um
he got sick, um, so, um for very
fortunate that my family lives
in North Valley very close to
legislature, and it took him,
um, 3 days to come up by horse
and every time I go up a
Lavajara Hill, I'm, I'm reminded
of my grandfather. So, um, I,
been so welcoming and I
appreciate that and thank you
for the leadership. Um, of the,
of the, uh, senate, and I look
forward as well to working with
all of you. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you and welcome Senator
behalf of our chief clerk, uh,
Sherry Luhan. Her mother is
visiting today and she was up on
the DS with you. Her name is
in here, so we know where she is
and we know we can hear her. So
can we please give a round of
applause.
For Sherry's mom, Carolyn
Fulford.
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent. We
go without our business
committee reports.
No objection, we are in that
order of business committee
reports.
the following list be assignment
of the senators to the standing
committees of the Senate.
Conservation be meeting Tuesday
and Thursday at 9:00 a.m., room
Charlie Hamblin, Pope, Scott,
and Townsend.
Education committee meeting
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at
9 a.m., room 311.
senators Boone, Ezel Figueroa,
Hickey, Nava, and Thornton.
Finance committee will be
meeting Monday through Friday,
1:30 p.m., room 322.
Members, Senator Campos.
Gonzalez Lani
Wednesday, and Friday at 1:30
p.m. in room 311. Chair, Senator
Lopez, vice chair Senator
Hickey.
Cedillo.
Seddio Lopez.
Indian rural and cultural
Affairs Committee meeting
Members, senators Maestas and
Sanchez.
Judiciary be Monday, Wednesday,
Ranking member Senator Brantley,
members, senators Doig O'Malley.
Paul Stewart, Thornton, and
Worth.
Senator Jaramillo ranking member
Senator Townsend, members.
Ber Bergmann's.
Block
p.m., room 321
chair, Senator Hamblin, vice
chair Senator Bergman's ranking
member Senator Sanchez.
Committee's committee at the
call of the chair, room 326,
chair, Senator Stewart, vice
chair Senator Wirth.
Stephanics and Woods
respectfully submitted, Mimier
Stewart chair. Senator Stewart,
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee reports
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter will take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We go that our business
introduction of legislation.
Hearing no objection, we are in
that order of business
An act relating to public funds.
Creating the behavioral health
trust fund.
And the behavioral health
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee, that's Senate
Bill 1.
Senate Bill 2 introduced by
To Senate Bill 2 having been
read twice by title.
I ordered printed and referred.
To the Senate Health and Public
An act relating to health and
acting the behavioral health
reform and investment Act
declaring an emergency, Senate
Senator Stewart, an act relating
to the environment, establishing
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions limits requiring
the environmental improvement
Board, making an appropriation.
Senate Bill 4 Senate Bill 4
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the.
representative McQueen.
An act relating to the state
game commission reforming the
state game commission
appointment process setting term
at the depart as the Department
of Wildlife.
Renaming the state game
commission as the state wildlife
commission.
Amending statutory policy
adjustments to account for
inflation, providing discounts
for residents who receive
supplemental nutrition
assistance program benefits
Being laws 1937 chapter 23,
section 1. Senate Bill 5. Senate
Bill 5 having been read twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the Senate Rules
An act relating to.
Children, expanding eligibility
for the fostering connections
program. Senate Bill 6.
that's Senate Bill 6.
Senate Bill 7 introduced by
Senator Scher.
An act relating to
water service in charge a fee or
advance payment for the storm
water service, adding stormwater
facilities to the definition of
municipality utility in the
Transportation Committee.
That's send a bill 7.
Senate Bill 8 introduced by
Senator Woods, an act relating
providing for contacts between
recipients and the higher
education department.
Providing for release from
contract or recoupment creating
a fund.
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee, the
Senate Judiciary Committee, the
Senate Finance Committee.
That Cenel 8.
Act to conform to federal
guidelines. Senate Bill 9 Senate
Bill 9 having been read twice my
title is ordered printed and
referred to the set of text,
business, transportation
Senator Pope.
An act relating to hazing,
enacting the anti-hazing Act
requiring a code of conduct and
the hazing Prevention Committee
prevention education providing
penalties. Senate Bill 10 Senate
Bill 10 having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee, then Senate
An act relating to public
education, defining anti
distraction policy requiring the
public education department to
encourage school districts and
reimbursement for the
acquisition of specialized
equipment necessary to implement
and adopted anti-distraction
policy making an appropriation.
Senate Bill 12 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez, an act
relating to telehealth, allowing
patients in New Mexico, allowing
more types of health care of
health care providers to provide
telehealth services, Senate Bill
12.
Senate Bill 13 introduced by
Senator Schendo, an act related
to public education enacting the
application process of becoming
a state tribal education compact
school providing rulemaking
authority, providing
requirements for the operation
of state tribal education
compact schools exempting state
tribal education compact schools
to receive state and federal
funding, allowing for employment
preferences and admissions
printed.
And referred to the Senate
Education Committee.
The Senate Judiciary Committee.
That's Senate Finance Committee
that sent a bill 13.
enacting the healthcare
consolidation and transparency
Act, providing oversight of
acquisitions, mergers,
affiliations, and other
transactions that involve direct
preliminary and comprehensive
reviews of proposed
transactions, providing for
approval.
Approval with conditions or
disapproval of proposed
transactions, limiting
Senate Bill 15 introduced by
Senator Stefani's representative
Doring Gallegos representative
Harlan Vincent, Senator Woods,
to the Senate tax Business
Transportation Committee.
The Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 15.
Senate Bill 16 introduced by
political party affiliation on
their certificate of
registration to participate in
the primary election process by
choosing to affiliate with a
major political party
Senate Bill 1616 haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee the
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 16.
parole of an inmate, sentenced
to life imprisonment.
Amending the process to remove a
member of the parole board,
providing for the conscientious
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 17.
Senate Bill 18 introduced by
Senator Brandt.
An act relating to crimes
against the public peace,
a 4th degree felony defining
public safety agency.
Making conforming amendments.
Senate Bill 18.
Senate Bill 18, having been read
twice by title is ordered,
Senate Bill 19 introduced by
Senator Steinborn, an act
hours of training requiring the
higher education department to
develop and provide the
training. Senate Bill 19.
Senate Bill 19, having been read
twice by title is ordered,
Senator Hickey for the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
Committee.
An act relating to taxation,
increasing the rate of the
cigarette tax and
Regardless of source in the
definition of tobacco product in
the tobacco products Tax Act.
Distributing the revenue from
the increases in the taxes to a
printed and referred to the
Senate Tax visits Transportation
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 2.
Requiring permits for discharges
into waters of the United States
requiring the water quality
control commission to adopt
rules to implement the discharge
water quality control commission
and the Court of Appeals,
creating a private right of
action, providing for publicly
accessible records. Senate Bill
21.
At Centerville 21.
Senate Bill 22, introduced by
Senator Wirth.
relating to the regulation of
water pollution.
Creating the neglected and
contaminated sites fund
providing for general permit
coverage for multiple
water contaminant levels in
excess of downstream state or
tribal water quality standards,
amending notice requirements for
the Water Quality Act permits.
water discharges, making an
appropriation declaring an
emergency. Senate Bill 22.
Senate Bill 22 having been read
twice by title is ordered
Senate Bill 23 introduced by
Senator Munoz, an act relating
to public lands, setting the
royalty rate of future oil and
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Conservation Committee
the Senate Finance Committee
Senate Bill 23.
contributions to apprentice and
training programs or to the
public works apprentice and
training fund for all public
works construction projects.
Senate Bill 25, introduced by
Senator Bradley, an act relating
to criminal sentencing,
providing for an alteration to
is ordered, printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 25.
Senate Bill 26, introduced by
Clarifying definitions
specifying the standard to be
implemented for certain orders
of protection, amending and
repealing sections of the NMSA
Senate Judiciary Committee, that
Senate bill 26.
Senate Bill 27, introduced by
Senator Woods.
An act relating to taxation.
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered, printed and referred
to the Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 27.
28, haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
Committee the Senate Finance
Committee, that Senate bill 28.
Senate Bill 29 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Conservation Committee the
Senate Finance Committee Senate
Bill 29.
public employee's retirement,
restoring a 2% cost of living
adjustment for certain retired
members making an appropriation.
Senate floor majority.
We still are that business order
Senate Joint Resolution 1.
Introduced by
Senators Doig and Figueroa.
Worse and Representative
Garrett.
civil a citizen commission on
legislative salaries to
establish adjust, and limit the
salaries of members of the
legislature and to amend section
you been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred.
To the Senate Rules Committee,
that's Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Joint Resolution
One.
joint resolution proposing to
amend Article 20 of the
Constitution of New Mexico by
adding a section, a new section
to prohibit the expenditure or
beneficiaries.
providing for the administration
of the trust funds affirming
certain property rights, Senate
I'd like to thank our reader.
And I yelled to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter wants to take
us to that next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
announcements about events
tonight, the governor's
legislative reception is at 5:30
p.m. at the governor's mansion
by invitation only and you need
training, uh, and it's gonna
begin on January 23rd.
and run through Thursday,
February 13th, uh, January 3rd,
this is a, uh, it's gonna be
to go learn about a whole range
of issues and I'll make sure to
announce these on the floor so
you have a heads up on this. I
can remember years ago when I
first came in the house, going
encourage that. Uh, one thing
for members on the bills as they
come up. Well, the Senate bills
are in the Senate, you can go
over to the chief clerk and sign
on as a co-sponsor on those
bills. I just wanted to flag
that. Uh, just a little roadmap
so committee chairs can make
their announcements.
Uh, we'll be in tomorrow and
Thursday at 11 a.m. to finish up
the system so we won't have a
floor session on Friday, but
certainly members can make
announcements and have
committees that meet on Friday
if they'd like to do that. So
we're very friendly on this
side, Senator Candyazel has
brought candy in her prize bowls
candy dish, so you're certainly
welcome to come over here and
see her price Bull's candy dish,
be meeting on Friday, uh, there
is, uh, 350 students from around
the state who are in the career
are in town, please come by and
meet your students. They're
coming from around the state.
We'll make sure you get a chance
to talk during that 9 to
11 time frame, but it welcomed
if you're able to please plan on
Friday being here from 9 to 11
at least to meet with those 350
students from your districts.
They are from all over the state
Senator So. Senator Stephonics,
did you have your hand up? So
there's Stephonics.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senate Conservation Committee
will not be meeting this week.
9:00 a.m. Thank you very much,
Mr. President, Senator Stefani.
We have Senator.
Hamlin.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senate body. The uh your tax
to our committee also, uh, the
economic, the Secretary of
Economic Development and also
the Secretary of Transportation
that will be coming up in the
next couple of weeks. Um, so we
will not be meeting on Thursday.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
Senate Rules Committee will be
meeting tomorrow for a very
short organizational meeting at
10:00 a.m. in room 321.
Business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
that's it for today. I just
really want to thank, uh,
thank you, Mr. President. So
that's it for today. I just
really want to thank everyone
for
having a fantastic opening day.
O'Malley both mentioned the
staff. And so what we do at the
end of every week is, is thank
all the different staff agencies
and we'll certainly do that. But
I do think it's appropriate
to get this train kind of to the
station. We've launched it
today, but just getting it takes
an immense amount of work
putting it together. So let's
all give them a big round of
applause for all the work
they've done.
consent, the Senate stand in
recess until 11 o'clock tomorrow
morning. See, no objection to
send it to send a recess till
11:00 a.m. tomorrow.
