Is this, okay?
OK, um
I'm gonna go ahead and get us
started and also walk us through
our technology. We always have a
lot going on with folks on teams
Webcast microphones, so I'll go
ahead and get us kicked off and
then also just make sure
everyone can hear from wherever
they're participating. So, um,
welcome this is our Senate
Memorial Five Task Force
meeting. Um, if you are in
person, um, please, uh, turn off
your microphone. If you're not
speaking.
Um and turn on your microphone.
If you are speaking and that
allows anyone joining teams to
hear what's happening in the
room.
And
For those of you on teams. Um,
we have kind of a lot of
technology pieces running, and
so we don't always catch if you
raise your hand, and so if you
have a question, or you are one
of our guests, um on teams just
go ahead and come off
microphone. Um, if you have
something to share
I see on teams. Um, some
comments in the chat, but would
you just let us know if you can
hear us in the room?
Alright, I gotta I got a thumbs
up. So a T least Some of you on
teams can hear us, OK, What I'm
gonna do is just kind of walk us
through our agenda, How we're
going to be spending our time
today, um and or and orient you
to what we'll be doing. So, um
I sent out agenda ahead of time
and also it's posted online. We
may have folks who are, uh,
joining the Webcast. Um, but
this meeting is focused on kind
of the elements of the memorial
that talked about prevention and
differential response. Um and so
before we get into that
conversation, we'll walk through
a little bit of the demographic
data. Um, Doctor Speer, you
referenced because I think it's
very relevant to the
conversation around prevention
and differential response. Um
then Claire Anderson.
I'm from Shapen Hall, A Seattle
will be joining us and talking
about kind of what other states
are doing and thinking about
when it comes to prevention.
Um And then we have Amy and
Lisa, who are joining her are
already on teams but are from
the Kemp center and will talk to
us about how other states are
kind of thinking about or
research and best practice
around implementing differential
response.
Um, and then we have about an
hour for conversation for you
all. Um so, secretary, we asked,
Would you be willing to kind of
share with this group? Kind of
how CYFD is thinking about
prevention and intervention? Um,
and we've got about an hour set
aside for that as well as just
task force conversation. Um, and
then we have about 15 minutes at
the end for any public comment.
Um, we reached out to a couple
of groups who we thought might
have wanted to do public
comment, but haven't heard back
and I think we don't have anyone
currently signed up to share
anything. But if
Do you W will make that
accommodation. Um And then, at
the very end of our meeting, we
also just have a way for you
all. In addition to
conversations to start capturing
notes and thoughts about
recommendations you all wanna
make, so that's sort of how
we're going to spend our time
this morning.
Uh, that's kind of where we are
in our cadence. Um and then for
those of you on Webcast, and
this is also in the link if you
do want to provide public
comment, um, this is how you let
us know.
Um, OK, so I'm gonna just walk
us through a little bit of the
key data in New Mexico that make
ground dust for this
conversation before. Um C
attention. Um, so this is the
race and ethnic breakdown of
youth in foster care right now,
Um, this data comes from the
federal acars report. Um
As well as the federal AC F and
some of what you'll see in terms
of the representation. Um, of
youth in cares that we do see an
overrepresentation,
particularly, although it's
small, uh, of black and Hispanic
young people, um, both entering
foster care and in foster care.
Um, the data again comes from
the Federal Afar data, which
doesn't include, um data related
to poverty. And so we don't have
a way of disagreed as a
variable, but we do see some
statistically significant
differences. Um, in the
demographic. Oh,
I'm sorry, Nathan.
Did I not do it? Sorry, y'all.
All right. You see it now on
teams.
Perfect. So this is some of the
data and we also put this in
your task Force folder, the the
report. I know that I'm gonna
kind of walk through this
quickly just because Claire is
coming, But we can talk more
deeply about some of this, and
when we get into the
And the second key piece of data
that could be help. New Mexico
actually has a relatively lower
rate.
Of placement in foster care
compared to other states. Um,
this map was created by Casey
family programs, but it comes
again from the AC F data and
what you'll see is we have a
relatively lower rate of
placement in foster care, Um,
compared to some other states
and that generally is viewed as
positive. Where somewhere around
3.9
for every 1000 kids in the
state. Um, but again, the state
is from about 2022, which is the
most recent federal reporting
available.
Um, if that's helpful, grounding
context.
Um
And then we also pulled again
for you all, Um, the the data
that comes from the Acars report
related to the reasons um, why
Children were removed and this
is the breakdown again for 2022.
And we saw some of this data.
Uh, last time, um
But about a a
68% and is neglect in our state.
and then you can see the
breakdown of the other.
And then sort of the the last
sort of grounding. Um,
information for this group that
we kind of talked through last
time as well. Um, is the note
around. There are a variety of
state agencies that are involved
in kind of prevention efforts in
our state. Um and so as we get
into the conversation today, and
and, um
Our our guests kind of talk us
through what other states are
doing. This is just to kind of
identify for you all who is
doing what currently
In our state, and so when it
comes to broad population level
prevention programs that are
sort of, um, either targeted to
the entire population, um, or
for families with some risk
factors, but are really designed
to ever to prevent involvement
with child protective services
from ever happening. Those tend
to be in either the healthcare
authority or the early childhood
department. Things like income
support snap WIC home visiting
is located within
D CD. Um, whereas Cyd kind of
has the more intensive programs
and services, um, targeted for
families where multiple risk
factors have occurred, where
families have been elevated to
CFD, and we also put in your
folder, um, some a brief around
kind of evidence based programs.
um, that are really targeted to
places where maltreatment has
occurred, and again, that's kind
of at that very tertiary level,
So this is just a reminder of
sort of who does what in our
system. Um
As I know, our guests may talk
through different programs in
other states.
Um
And then kind of the last kind
of grounding reminder. Um, and I
actually think everyone's
sitting here is pretty familiar
with Title four E, but that, um,
there's a new opportunity within
title 40, the family's First
prevention services Act, um, to
do evidence based prevention
programming we as a state, um or
one of the few states that now
don't yet have an approved plan.
But I know CFD has been working
on a plan. Um, for submittal.
Uh, these programs are targeted
to specific populations who are
at pretty
Risk, um, for engagement with
the child welfare system, and we
as a state could use this as an
opportunity to expand prevention
programs that I know Claire when
she joins will likely talk
pretty extensively about, um
Different opportunities there.
Um, and then the last, um, area
kind of as a grounding context
As we enter our meeting today is
the current status of
differential response in our
state. So this was named in the
memorial as an area for this
task force to explore the bill
and the statute that allows for
differential, or I think we call
it multilevel response, um, in
the bill was enacted in 2019 in
our state, So we have enabling
legislation, but we really
haven't implemented. Um, the
program.
Uh, statewide and sort of not in
a way that, um, is really
aligned with evidence based
practice. I know CYFT is working
in that.
Direction. Um And so, Amy, Um
and Lisa will talk us to us a
little bit about what should
implementation. Really, Uh, look
like based in research.
So that's sort of what we're
gonna talk through today and let
me pause and see. Um Nathan, Do
you see if Claire is online yet?
She with us?
Someone texted me so it could be
Oh, she just texted me and said
she's having a, uh, trouble
getting on the teams.
Not yet, OK?
Oh, here we go.
Good morning, Claire. Can you
hear us?
Good morning. All right, we can
hear you. On our end. We're
running a bunch of different
technology. We've got some
people who are in person, Some
people who are on teams. Um and
we are so glad to have you with
us. Um, I wonder if you might
start um by just kind of
introducing yourself. Um, We're
so glad to have you here while
we on our end will work to get
your your presentation up if
that'll work.
Terrific. Good morning,
everyone. Um I apologize for my
technical difficulties this
morning and a couple of minutes
late. My name is Claire
Anderson, a senior policy fellow
at Chapin Hall. Uh, where a
research and policy nonprofit
focused for the last 40 years on
relevant then actionable and
evidence based policy making and
research. It's a delight to be
here with you today.
All right, Claire. I'm gonna try
to share a screen and hopefully
we'll be able to see um so give
me just a second.
Um,
make sure everyone can see your
brief.
Terrific and we will go quite
swiftly. Um, I have about 40 45
minutes of content. Uh, we will
make sure that you have the
slides available, Uh, along with
a host of other, uh, the you
know the reference list and, uh,
additional research as well.
Um uh, so so don't feel as if
you must digest everything. I
What I hope to leave you with is
a clear overview of the last 40
years of science. So, uh, I can
see my slides. Um and I'm happy
to jump in at any moment. If you
wanna make those
Full screen so that they are
visible to everyone. I will do
that And when I do, I won't be
able to see kind of comments,
um, in teams, so anyone who's on
teams just come off mute and
interrupt, Um, cause I won't be
able to see. Um but go ahead. Go
ahead. OK, terrific. And Rachel,
we'll we'll go. We'll go quite
swiftly. So, um, don't worry
about, um uh, me keeping up with
you. Um, So, uh, it's not in
full
Yeah. So I'll wait until we are
there.
So I'm really gonna try and
focus my comments today on the
intersection of, um our, uh,
economic and social policy
choices, uh, relative to the
evidence of economic
instability, cumulative
material, hardship and family
involvement with child welfare
or child protection system. Um,
and I'll do that, uh, in really
a wide range.
Of, uh, policy areas.
And we'll also, uh then sort of
at near the end of the
presentation, um, tack back to
more child welfare
specific, Uh, policy choices,
Programmatic. Uh um, design and
and family first, specifically
given that it is the current
most transformative policy that
we have in child welfare.
So I'm gonna start here and I. I
don't think that we're still in
full screen. But I'm gonna press
ahead just in the, uh uh, Just
for time's sake. Um we really
are are looking here today at a
very high level overview,
although it's a lot of content.
Of about 40 years or more of
science That helps us to
understand that when economic
and concrete supports in a
variety of forms, um from cash
assistance to employment and
everything in between, I'm gonna
have you walk back. One slide.
um, is decreased in the lives of
families, um, their risk for
involvement in the child welfare
system is increased. And
conversely, when economic and
concrete supports are expanded
in one way
Or another in the lives of
families, their risk for
involvement. Uh in child
welfare. So goes down as well as
we see reductions in
And, um really, uh, specific
kinds of, um, abuse and neglect,
particularly abusive head trauma
for young Children Gonna have
you advance to the next slide?
Um, I mean, I keep speaking to
this one overview slide as it is
kind of the hot the the big
takeaway. Um
Um, we we see this evidence
pretty consistently across
mechanisms. So whether we're
looking at, um, housing, health
care, um, childcare, um, cash
assistance, employment. We We
see this effect of reductions in
higher risk, um, and increased
access with lower risk. So I'm
gonna have you go two slides
now, um, to to, um I'm gonna
have you forward two slides.
Hold on, Claire. I'm sorry.
Somehow, when I forward, it's
not doing it. Give me just a
second to stop
And if we need to do it, uh, not
in full screen. We can do it
that way. Yep. Let's just stick
here. Um, for a moment. Uh, uh,
just so that we we keep going.
So, um, I I gave you sort of the
big top line that that that big
top line big takeaway. Um and we
know that from from the
literature from 40 years of, um,
research data, analytic work. Um
OK, that's uh, sort of at the
end of the slide deck.
Claire. I'm so sorry. We have a
very It's. It's OK up on our
end, and it has stopped working.
Give us just a second.
Yeah, it's
OK, Terrific. This is the big
takeaway. We know this from the
literature and, uh, data. Uh,
Analytics, um and really from
sort of an empirical standpoint,
and the next slide helps us to
understand this from the
perspective of parents more from
a qualitative standpoint.
Yeah, I. I know there's a lot of
content here. Um, but when we
ask families
What do you need families who
have been involved with child
welfare? What would have helped
you to remain stable to avoid
involvement with the child
welfare system or to reduce the
amount of time that the child
welfare system is involved in
your lives? What families say is
highly consistent, Um, I if not
the exact same thing that we
have been poking around in the
literature for for some time,
they say we need a set of
policies that the
And state level that redress
poverty, meet families basic
needs, um and create context in
which it is possible for them to
be well and to thrive and the
second column uh, lays out uh,
strategies food.
Shelter, clothing, health care,
transportation, employment as
the core set of things that
would be most helpful from their
perspectives. Um, next slide.
But when child welfare becomes
involved, um in fact, we screen
out most, uh, not about half of
all families, um, are screened
out. Uh, when someone out in the
community identifies, or some
concern has been triggered that
there is a need in a family. We
are screening out about half a
family's. There's this system
gap. Um, that has been opened in
between our, um our our our
benefit.
Form and our strategies to
support families and the system
that is designed to investigate
and intervene in the lives of
families. Something is happening
in between these this these two
spaces where families needs are
moving from a challenge to a
crisis and we think that there
are new and better ways, um, to
address family need, um, that
might be effective to prevent
and avert the
Activation and deployment of
child welfare, so next slide.
Um this just really helps us
understand what's happening in
this system gap. We have
economic hardship, a fragmented
human service system deficit and
piecemeal policies that created
administrative burden, both for
systems that are expensive and
for families to access. The
available services and support
billions of dollars across well,
hundreds of millions of dollars
Get left on the table every
year. Um, uh, families don't
access the services or
Stick with them that we support
that, Um and we create this, um,
context in which, as I said
earlier, we are seeing, um, the
triggering of concern where we
mandated reporters are
Um, calling our child protection
system to meet families needs.
Um, while families are churning
and their challenges are
becoming crises, what we end up
with a more overloaded and
destabilized families, unmet
service needs and support needs
high rates than of reported
neglect in particular.
Then the deployment of the
government's authority to
investigate and remove Children
from their home. I might argue
among the most intrusive and
punitive actions our government
has available to it, Um, the
erosion of human and community
capital and truly high cost to
society. We think that there's a
potential policy and fiscal
framework that will sort of
outline here today that
involves, uh orienting our Mac.
Economic policies.
So that families have access to
resources. Um and, um are are
tapping those that we make
available pretty consistently
across sectors shared
responsibility and
accountability framework for
preventing the activation and
deployment of child protective
services in the use of foster
care and mandated, supporting
and reduced the soal reliance on
CPS We saw in that, Uh uh uh, T
decision.
Making tree just in the priors,
Almost a little over 7 million
Children come to the attention
of child welfare every year. We
really have this societal over
reliance on activating top
protective services to meet
family needs, Um, next slide.
Um So let's uh, talk about that
activation and deployment of
child welfare and in context,
Um, what we have learned, Um,
next slide. Um uh, in looking at
data is that the relationship
between child poverty rates at
the county level and CPS
reporting rates has intensified
by about 40%.
Between 2009 and 2018. So
something is happening here.
That's that's new, So our our
mental models about families, Uh
about, uh, economic shocks and
poverty. Um, it needs needs to
evolve. Um, because what is
happening in our environment is
changing. We see this
intensification of this
relationship and the researchers
here Brett and Drake
Uh or Drake and Kim. I
apologize, Um, really, sort of,
uh, suggest this reorientation
of our policy framework so that
we have policies and practices
that reduce the level of
economic hardship for families
and reorient our human service
sector.
And that poverty amelioration
efforts in the provision of
material family supports could
be a new or novel strategy that
reduce involvement with child
welfare in ways that we've not
thought about before. Um, uh and
and this really sort of speaks
to at the at the county more
macro or more macro level
because we our mental models
really do orient around parents
making choices often, we we
contextualize those as
Choices.
Or unwise choices that put their
Children at risk without us
really thinking about our own
policy choices that are
contributing to the context in
which, um, child maltreatment
and child welfare system
involvement occurs so next
slide.
Because what we are what we
understand now is that, um, when
we are controlling for poverty
when the effects of poverty are
accounted for the individual
factors, parenting behaviors. Um
uh, substance use mental health.
um, tend to lose their potency
as the primary drivers.
Certainly when we look at
families that
Are being investigated by child
welfare. We certainly do. See,
um, predominantly substance
abuse, mental health, domestic
violence, but when we are
accounting for controlling for
many of these, um environmental
factors, we think that that it
is more complicated and nuanced
than we just need to have a
substance abuse treatment
program or a mental health
intervention that we have to be
nuanced. And, um, uh, in in our
thinking and our
Strategies next slide.
We also have. We also have to
understand that we are pointing
this this child welfare child
protection system predominantly
at families who are quite poor
about 83% of families
investigated by CPS have incomes
below 200% of the federal
poverty line and let's look at
what happens when families who
are low income experience, um,
material hardship. Um
Let's go to the next slide.
When, when low income families.
These are families actually that
are receiving 10 of our income
support program. Um, and they
experience one material
hardship. They're likelihood of
a neglect investigation and a
physical abuse investigation
goes up. Uh, and if they
experience multiple types of
material hardships after
experiencing no hardships of
something, you know something is
throwing the family off kilter.
Their likelihood of AC PS
investigation increases by four
times and there is a seven about
a seven times higher likelihood
of a physical abuse
investigation.
So that's a
Exponential bump in risk and
what I want you to take away
from this slide or this study
from Yang in 2015 is that we're
talking about not just neglect
but abuse as well. So while some
say that we're we're kind of
conflating poverty with neglect,
we we've really got to be more
nuanced in our thinking and
understanding of what's
happening here. We're seeing
this across both neglect and
abuse.
And we're seeing this as as
families are being. Um uh,
pulled off kilter. Uh, next
slide, which gives us actually
new strategies for for when and
how to intervene because we can
begin to understand what the
predictors are upstream and we
see this from these two
different studies on the right
hand side.
We see the strongest predictors
of investigated neglect reports
Food insecurity, housing
insecurity, utility shut offs.
Inability to receive medical
care for a sick family member.
Um, I I'm really interested in
this one for a number of
reasons. You know again,
Something has happened in a
family, uh, less discretionary
funds to because families are
having to pay for a larger bill.
Um, Public benefit receipt.
Actually. Here, you're gonna see
this be quite protective. Uh,
later in the slide deck. We
think what's happening here is
sort of a spotlight effect.
Potentially as families are, um,
coming into contact with, um
more mandated reporters as my
hypothesis on the left hand
side.
We see the most reliable
economic predictors of child
welfare involvement, income
loss, cumulative material,
hardship and housing hardship.
So we are beginning to see some
consistency about what we can be
looking for upstream of child
welfare so that we can address
it early so that those
challenges are less likely to
become crises. Next slide.
So this is just the same
studies and those same boxes
reoriented on a metaphor. That's
easy for all of us to
understand. Families are
becoming overloaded.
Um, with with, um, uh, housing,
food insecurity. Uh, inability
to pay for sick family members,
Uh, medical bills, um and and
from a From a metaphor
standpoint, everyone that you go
talk to can understand.
That if you put £10,000 on a
truck that's designed to carry
£8000 as a payload. It does not
operate as intended, or as
designed. It's true for all of
us. At some point, we reach our
breaking point. Our the wheels
fall off of our truck.
In fact, I'm experiencing that
right now with a husband who has
been laid off and moving in, Uh,
from one house to another. It's
just too much I've shared with
my friends. Our system is
overloaded. We are not
functioning as designed. Um And
so we all can understand that.
Um, there's a breaking point for
everyone. Um, and that trying to
figure out how to get
Upstream of this overload is
part of our challenge as
policymakers, um as
administrators and as
communities next slide, because
when we're not doing that, um
and we're seeing, um, something
very interesting, um, across
time for kids, Um and and I
think you'll be surprised to
learn
Then nearly 40% about 37% of all
US Children, um, are likely to
experience AC PS investigation
by the time they turn 18. That
is a lot of Children. Um, I
guess when you you think about
it, 7 million Children a year
coming to the attention of child
welfare over the course of a 18
year time frame. That's a lot of
kids and when
Look at this from a lifetime
incidents. Um, perspective, uh,
the lifetime of a childhood 18
years. Um, about 40%. If you
look at black Children,
particularly a little over half
of all black Children, um, are
estimated to experience AC PS
investigation. By the time they
turn 18 I will share with you.
You know, I'm I'm taught. I'll
toggle back and forth here
between, uh, quant.
Data and qualitative, I heard a
parent say recently on a panel
You never forget the knock on
the door when CPS arrives at
your home.
And so that that I think if we
walked out on the street um uh,
you know, Main Street USA, um
people would be sort of shocked
to realize that half of a group
of Children in the US are
experiencing AC PS investigation
by the time they turn 18, I
guess I'm emphasizing this
because in many ways, we this is
a policy choice. We are
choosing.
Uh, in many ways to activate, uh
and then deploy CP activate our
hotline through our mandated
reporting system. And then um,
uh, deploy our top protective
services workforce at this level
when I believe that we have, uh,
other policy choices that we can
make so that this this, um this
intervention, um, becomes, uh
much
More focused when Children are
in true danger. Um or when we we
need to use it in a way that
keeps Children safe from being
harmed. Um, 11 thinks that we
perhaps are over reliant on
this, um, strategy next slide.
Um
So what might those other
policies look like? Um, back in
2019, the National Academy of
Sciences. Um, uh, pulled
together a consensus committee
and created a roadmap for
reducing child poverty. And they
put together um four pop, uh,
poverty, anti poverty packages
to try and see which of those
packages, which combination of
policies could reduce child
poverty by
Percent over a time span. Um
And last year Jessica Pack and
her colleagues took three of
those four packages and modeled
them with Child Protective
Services investigations data to
see what kind of an effect those
policies might have. And
depending on which package you
chose there, Um, package 23 and
four in the blue box. Um uh,
CPS investigations, um, were
estimated to be reduced between
11 and 20.
Percent.
Annually. Um, and that's a
reduction of up to 669,000 fewer
Children being investigated per
year.
And when modeling those packages
by race, Um the team found that,
um, that 11 to 20% across all
Children for black Children
could be estimated at a
reduction of 19 to almost 30%
reduction. So, um, these policy
packages might have a
differential effect, uh, in the
lives of black families,
particularly and might be a
strategy to reduce
Disparity and
disproportionality next slide.
So that really is a lot of
background. And, um oh,
actually, one more slide, and
then we'll go to, um uh uh, the
rest of the the evidence, um, so
reducing investigations is
important. Um, let's also just
talk about, uh, substantiations.
So we've been spending most of
our time talking about sort of
this activation and deployment
of child protection. But once we
get into the lives of families,
and we've completed that
We look at Substantiations
substantiated or not, as you all
well know.
And in the US about 60% of
investigated CPS responses, uh,
involve neglect Only, um and we
know that, uh, in this box, big
box of neglect because neglect
is a sort of a catch all or
umbrella term for many, many,
many things, and we know that
And as I said earlier, substance
abuse, mental health challenges,
uh, intimate partner. Violence
are all included here. It
To me from the evidence that
economic and concrete supports
are having an effect, regardless
of what is in the box. And as we
also learn from Yang Uh, uh,
earlier. Um, uh, that we see
this effect across both neglect
and physical abuse. And I want
you to keep this in mind and
look for these. Um as we go
through the evidence, so let's
go to the next slide.
Um And we're gonna look at
first. What happens when
families have decreased access
to economic and concrete
supports and their risk is going
up and then we'll look at what
happens when we increase. Our
families have increased access,
uh to economic and concrete
supports, and their risk is
reduced next slide. I also just
want to give you a disclaimer
and encourage you to go and read
any or all of the studies that
I'm talking about. There's
really a range of evidence
levels.
Um, from randomized control
trials. A very small handful of,
um, a very few number of
randomized control trials here
that help us to understand
causal effects. Um, and are
really the gold standard of our
evidence. Um, we also have
natural experiments where one
state picks a policy choice and
and different state picks a
different policy choice in the
same uh, you know, we're gonna
implement this one. But we're
Not, uh and we see what happens.
Natural experiments also help us
understand causality.
We also have a number of studies
that help us understand
Associative or correlational
relationships. Um, but all of
this combined is really a
preponderance of evidence. It
helps us understand the big
picture and helps us inform and
use evidence in our policy
making, OK, next slide.
So, as I said, we're first gonna
look at decreased access to
economic and concrete supports
that Inc and the increased risk
that we see and we see this
across reduced TANF benefits,
lack of access to child care,
lack of stable housing, reduced
income and negative earning
shocks, which I think are
actually really interesting. We
see a lot of that, uh, in the
literature, reduced employment,
and we even have a little
modeling study. I don't think
that we're gonna look at it.
That shows us when gas prices go
up. Um, we have increased
involvement with child welfare.
So we're just gonna look at a
few of these. I think we're
gonna look at 10 of childcare
and housing before we transition
to increased access to child
wealth to economic and concrete
support. So let's look first at
TANF.
Um, which is, uh, as you all
know, temporary assistance for
needy families. Um, and states
that, uh,
Uh, I have more restrictive
policies, um, and seem to have
in a relationship with
increased, uh, involvement with
child welfare, and this looked
at one particular policy, which
is the loss of all benefits as
the most severe sanction when
families don't make work
requirements. Um, this, uh,
research team of Gunther and
Johnson Motoyama found, uh, an
increase in substantiated.
Reports and an increase in
foster care entries due to both
neglect and, uh, generally
across neglect and abuse. And I
wanna just remind you or help
you to, uh, make a connection
that perhaps you have not
previously.
Because I had not. And it was
like a big light bulb went off
The first statutory purpose of
TANF is to provide assistance to
needy families so that Children
can be cared for in their own
homes or with relatives. And so
as we see decision making in
TANF that increases the
separation of families we are
not acting in accordance with
that first STA.
Tory purpose. Um, uh, some
states. Uh uh, additionally.
Um, are holding an obligated or
emergency funds? Uh, there's
about $6.2 billion. I think it's
actually gone up to $6.5 billion
in the last analysis. Um uh of
dollars that are being held, uh,
with without an obligation
without a a decision on where
and how to spin them, Uh, in in
some states, Not all states have
this unlit or emergency fund
balance but relative to the
Ways in which we now understand
decision making in TAF having a
relationship to involvement with
child welfare in this first
statutory purpose. It's quite
interesting next slide. So
what's the state policy option?
I'm gonna toggle back and forth.
as I said between the evidence
and state policy options
States have lots of flexibility
in, uh, tenant decision making,
uh, including whether or not to
implement the most severe
sanction of
Uh uh, um, loss of full family
benefits when, uh, families do
not meet work requirements next
slide.
Let's look now at lack of access
to child care. It's actually one
of my favorite, um, slides, uh,
because it helps us understand.
Uh, many of the things in ways
that perhaps we have that that I
did not, um, previously, um, uh,
for every childcare concern
reported by families receiving
TANF the risk of supervisory to
neglect increases by 20%. So
this helps us understand a
little bit of a
Mechanistic pathway by which
families come to the attention
of child welfare when they don't
have adequate, um, childcare
place for their child to be when
they need to be at jobs looking
for jobs. Um
Uh uh, when they need to do all
the things that we do when we
have, um our Children being
cared for by others, Um, the
risk of supervisory neglect, Uh,
goes up so the mechanistic
pathway by which families find
themselves involved with child
welfare? Um, this this the
second study here, cash from
2003. I believe, um, is really,
really interesting. This is a
survey. So this is a
Qualitative information. Um, but
this is this is a self report by
mothers who are entering
substance abuse treatment.
And those mothers who report
difficulty securing child care
are 82%.
More likely to self report
neglecting their Children.
Compared to moms who are
entering the same treatment.
Um, for substance use challenges
who do not report
Challenges finding child care.
And difficulty finding child
care is a stronger predictor of
maternal neglect than almost any
other factor measured in this
study, including mental health
and severity of drug use.
So when we hear, um, that the
that the you know, uh, that it's
it's substance abuse, and we had
and and there the the only
strategy that we have
Is a substance abuse treatment
program, which I believe is an
important
Evidence based practice to have
and critical for families to be
able to access. But there is
there is something complex and
nuanced to your happening and
because certainly there are many
families with, uh, with means,
uh, who have substance abuse
problems who do not come to the
attention of child welfare? So
so there is something happening
here? That is interesting that
is worthy of our inquiry.
Um, and our nuanced, uh,
thinking and strategy next
slide.
So let's talk a little bit
about, um, housing insecurity.
Um, because, uh, th this is also
another really interesting study
increases in mortgage
delinquency and foreclosure
rates are associated with
increased hospital admissions
for physical abuse of Children
under the age of six and
traumatic brain injury for
infants under the age of one.
Why do I find this so
interesting?
One. I think we have a mental
model about who comes to the
attention of child welfare, and
I think it doesn't often include
families who, uh, have the means
to purchase a home. It's not
always true, but it it runs
somewhere in the back of our
head, even if it's teeny, tiny.
And I don't think that, um, we
understand a very well um how,
uh, a shock like a, uh, a a
foreclosure. Um, can create the
context in which abusive head
trauma in young Children happen.
Um And so, uh, this is this, You
know, families are pushed off
kilter in a in a way that we've
not fully understand, and we see
this downstream effect. We're
gonna see it in
In a different way. Uh, in a in
a minute or two.
Um OK, next slide.
So let's talk about the converse
What we see when economic and
concrete supports are increased
in the lives of families. We're
going to look at macroeconomic
supports, um like, uh,
unconditional cash transfers,
tax credits, like the earned
income Child, uh, earned income
tax credit the child tax, credit
and employment, um like minimum
wage paid family leave
unemployment benefits. Concrete
supports health care housing.
Here, um and home visiting with
economic and concrete supports
our public benefit platform
tennis snap wig and overall
state spending. Um, and child
welfare interventions with
economic and concrete supports.
I'll tell you I've been, um
In the child welfare system
field for over 30 years at this
point and up until about five
years ago.
Um, I would have never said that
macroeconomic policies were part
of the set of solutions that
were related to child welfare. I
paid no attention to health care
or ha or, um child care as a
strategy or tennis or food, Um,
security programs. Um, I, I will
admit that
It was, um uh, myopic and my
thinking
Um and not attuned to the
evidence. When we look at the
minimum wage study, I'll I'll
talk a little bit more. About
how this uh how the kaleidoscope
turned for me and kind of
everything changed. Um, I I
bring with me everything I knew
before about practice and
evidence based strategies, which
are critical families, Uh,
benefit. Uh, tremendously from
those. Um, but this evidence is
Interesting and let's take a
look at what? Uh what it what it
says, so let's look at
unconditional cash transfers.
This is a working paper. Um, I'm
I'm flagging that because, uh,
it's one of the only working
papers not peer reviewed.
Um, journal articles? Uh, in the
deck. Um, but this is, uh from
one of, uh, the nation's top
researchers. Uh, who, uh,
understands. Uh uh, this, um,
body of science and generating
much knowledge for us, Lindsey
Bollinger.
Uh, this looks at the Alaska
dividend fund. Um, which is, uh,
available to residents in the
state of Alaska?
Uh, and it was estimated, uh,
that an additional $1000 in an
unconditional cash payment to
families in the early months of
a child's life is estimated to
reduce the likelihood of AC PS
referral for neglect by 10% by
age three. Reduce the likelihood
of AC PS referral for physical
abuse by 30% by age three.
Reduce the likelihood of a
substantiation, um by 15% and
reduce the likelihood of child
mortality and child death by
30%. So this was three fewer
deaths, um, in nine deaths for
the state by age five. Next
slide. So what's the state
policy option? Um, uh, over the
course of my career. I've seen
the US, at least by my count,
Get somewhere in the
neighborhood of three windfalls.
Tobacco settlement the co covid
relief funds, Uh and now the
opioid relief funds or opioid
settlement funds. I'm sorry.
Spoke. Um, uh, we saw the state
of Washington earmark a number
of that, uh, of those dollars,
um, to support families at risk
of child welfare system
involvement and created a $250
cash grant per child, uh,
provided directly to families.
Um and, um uh
The evidence. Uh, you know, all
of us are really interested in
how every state is thinking
about its opioid settlement
dollars next slide.
Um, this is, uh, one of the
randomized control trial. Um,
studies that helps us
understand? Um, the causal
effects. Um mothers who
participated in TANF and were
eligible to receive a full child
support payment. Uh, it were in
the treatment group and, uh,
Pa moms who received the child
support payment, but the state
continued to take its business
as usual administrative cut of
those dollars.
Um, the moms who were in the
treatment group that got, um uh,
a modest amount of additional
cash or child support payment or
10% less likely to have a child.
Subject to a screened in
Maltreatment report and even a
modest amount of child support
payment averaging about $100 per
year resulted in a decrease in
screened and maltreatment
reports. I'll also point out
between this randomized control
trial and the Alaska dividend
Fund that we just looked at a
minute ago.
Suggest something more, Um
perennial about all of this
evidence to me, Uh, which is
that additional income in the
lives of families seems to have
this interesting effect and we
we see that it's coming through
a number of different
mechanisms. We're gonna look at
the tax credit we see here
through child support. We saw
the the dividend payment. Um
we'll see child you know, like,
I I'm not really sure that it
The mechanism. It's I think it's
more about like when and how
much. Um, that seems to me the
earlier the better, um and, uh
across multiple mechanisms. Um,
so I just wanted to make that
point. As we look at, uh Maria
Canon's, uh, randomized control
trial here. So let's look at tax
credits for a second.
States with state level
refundable EITC compared to
states without or associated
with about 11% decrease in
foster care entries, so thus
far, you might have been
thinking predominantly, this was
just about investigations,
mostly, although we did look at
the Tenet decision making being
associated with increased in
foster care entries. We also see
that here with the earned income
tax credit next slide
We also see Um, uh, earned
income tax credit having an
effect on abusive head trauma.
Uh, again here refundable state
level. EITC Averaging about $400
a year is associated with a 13%
decrease in hospital admission
for abusive head trauma for
Children under the age of two.
So what's the state policy
option? States had the option.
Next slide, Uh, to implement,
uh, an a state earned income.
Tax credit. So again, we see a
lot of variability, uh, in these
state policy options, um, which
helps us understand, Um, that
the context in which families
live matters, our policy choices
matter. Um and that
interrogating our policy choices
relative to this evidence
Similarly, as we interrogate the
po, the the choices
Is important. OK, let's look at
that minimum wage study that I
previewed a minute ago. I saw
this not long after it came out
and actually did not believe
this study.
Um and it sort of sent me on.
Uh, I need to go to school on
this study because it can't be
right. Um, only to have it
obviously changed my entire life
and change everything that I do
on a day to day basis. Um, and
so, you know, uh, I guess I
offer that to say that, uh,
evidence is funny, and, um, it
it can help us to, um uh, re
rethink our, um, understanding.
Of what's happening and what our
set of solutions are.
States that increase the minimum
wage beyond $7.25 per hour
experienced a decline in child
maltreatment, reports and $1
increase in minimum wage was
associated with about a 10%
decline in neglect reports next
slide. So what's the state
policy option? States can
increase the minimum wage? Um,
for families, uh or actually for
for everyone in the state, and
we see it having this effect
next slide paid family leave.
Um, uh, So again. This is, uh
uh, interesting. You know, these
are, uh, this is the California
2004 paid family Leave policy,
which provided up to 12 weeks of
partial paid family leave, and
it was associated with a
decrease in hospital admissions
for young for abusive head
trauma for young Children as
well. So what's the state policy
option? Obviously, Um, Next
slide is to, uh, implement a
paid family leave.
OK, we're gonna transition now
out of kind of this
macroeconomic, um, policy
decision making land and look at
some of our concrete supports.
So let's pick it pick up the
pace here a little bit. Yep. So,
um, uh, first, let's look at
home visiting
Um, uh, Many states Uh uh,
including New Mexico.
Um, implement. Uh, a robust, uh,
home visiting strategy. Uh, and
we see in, uh, many of our
evidence based models, uh, the
effect of reduced child abuse
and neglect and involvement with
child welfare. And here, this
study looks, particularly at
family connects, uh, which is a
short term like 1 to 3. Home
visits. Um, that's focused on,
you know, educating, uh,
neonatal.
Uh, and connecting families to
resources Family connects
connect families to resources.
And this is a randomized
controlled trials showing that,
um there was more positive
maternal mental health at age
six months a 44% lower rate of
CPS investigations through H two
and almost 40% fewer
investigations, uh through age
five. But we also know that, um
We have a hard time getting
families, too, and sticking with
home visiting, um, we invest
deeply in home visiting as as we
should. It is a really powerful,
wonderful set of interventions.
Um, but one sort of asked the
question if we build it, and
they don't come. Um what does
that mean? Um And where And how
might we blend and braid the
things that families
They need. You'll remember the
3rd 2nd slide. I showed you was
what families who are involved
with child welfare say they need
a set of state and federal
policies that
Me basic needs and help us be
stable food, clothing, shelter,
childcare, transportation,
employment.
So that we can keep our
households, um, working and
functioning as designed so that
we don't become overloaded. And
in fact, as I understand
evidence based practices, um
they actually work better when
there is some base of stability
upon which the evidence based
practice sits so thinking
through how we stack or scaffold
our evidence based practices and
our economic
Concrete supports, I think is
the next frontier Next slide.
Um, just a point that the state
of New Jersey has made, um as
part of its integrated agency
that has early childhood and
child welfare to make about a
$45 million investment in family
connects. Um and they are
thinking through ways in which
to blend and braid and scaffold
a variety of supports, um,
alongside their home visiting
program. OK, let's look at
childcare. Remember, we were
talking about all those
mechanistic pathways. Um
I think child care is actually a
potentially pretty potent, um,
strategy for reducing child
welfare system involvement, and
we see that states that have
more flexible childcare and
development fund policies. Um,
uh, and make that more
accessible to
child welfare, supervised
families and that we see lower
child placement into foster
care. Next slide.
Um high quality childcare. We
see across a number of studies
reduce prevents child
maltreatment reduces the
likelihood of child welfare
system involvement and reduces
the likelihood of foster care
entry Kids age 0 to 5 who
participate in head starts and
are referred to child welfare
for suspected maltreatment were
93% 93% less likely to enter
foster care.
Compared to kids who are
receiving. No, um early, uh,
care and education services.
Next slide. Um, certainly, New
Mexico is at the forefront of,
um, increasing access to
childcare for families. And it
is, um uh, quite, uh, an
investment that we talk about,
Um, all over the country, So
congratulations to you all next
slide, So let's talk about
health. Uh, a bit. Um, we're
gonna look at
OK expansion.
Um, the rate of screened and
neglect reports for kids under
the age of six decreased in
states that expanded Medicaid
but increased in states that did
not expand Medicaid. We see this
like natural experiment and we
see it going in in exactly the
direction that you probably
would anticipate given all this
evidence that I have now thrown
at you at at a very quick pace.
I also and I've talked with you
about being nuanced in our
thinking this next slide.
Um, um, He helped me recently.
Think about this in a really
interest in a in a bit, uh, more
nuanced way than I even had
been. Um, this looked at states
that, um, expanded Medicaid and
when they did it
Um, they saw evictions for
sharply. So, I. I think that
there is this, um, synergistic
way in which our policies are
working for families. Um, I, I
would imagine that we You know,
we also just saw in the prior
slide that we we see risk for
involvement in child welfare go
down at at the same time so you
could overlay another line here?
Um, if
These two studies and put them
together We would see Medicaid
expansion reduction in in
evictions and reduction in child
welfare system involvement it it
just really, um, is quite, uh,
powerful next slide.
So what's a state policy option?
We see a number of states in the
Medicaid space. Um
Pursuing and receiving a waiver
in Medicaid at the 1115 waiver
in particular, Um, that is that
are focused on the social
determinants of health. Um, we
see North Carolina their healthy
opportunities the fee schedule
of this, um, plan that is
negotiated with Medicaid. Uh, is
quite impressive. Um, monthly
funds per person available for
housing, food transportation.
Um, rent. Uh uh, in a way that
really tries to stabilize, uh,
populations that in Medicaid are
particularly expensive, And we
know that kids who do enter
foster care, um are among our
most expensive Medicaid
populations. And so preventing
that, Uh uh, as an outcome, Uh,
it can, uh, would be a really
interesting
1115 waiver to pursue next
slide.
Uh, we also see states. Um, uh,
pursuing, uh, the integration of
early care. And, uh, housing.
Uh, just I'm gonna have you go
back. One more slide. Let's see
where we were.
All right now we were on the
jump too far. Um, I think you
were moving to this one. The
housing support.
Yep. Yep. There we go. OK, so
Let's let's look at housing. Uh,
a couple of randomized control
trials.
Um, uh, This is from, uh Ann
Farrell, A colleague of mine at
Chapin Hall. Uh, this supportive
housing, which is the housing
voucher and a case management
services and found that the
families in the treatment group
Uh uh, in the randomized control
trial had fewer removals. A
lower prevalence of
substantiations and increased
reunification. Um, I actually
did not include today the cor
set of studies. We see that
It's not just, uh uh uh, a
hotline calls investigations
substantiations and foster care
entry. We also see, um increased
reunifications and reduced time
to reunification with expansion
of economic and concrete
supports as well. Um so we we
see that effect here in this
study. Uh, we see it in the next
study as well. I believe no
Uh, no, not in the study. But
this is a randomized control
trial, looking at just the
housing voucher, so no add
additional service delivery.
Um beyond the vouchers, the
families that receive the
subsidies, self reported 50%
fewer foster care placements
lower rates of psychological
distress, less intimate partner
violence, fewer child behavior
problems, greater housing,
stability and food security. I'm
gonna pause here and home in on
the less intimate partner
violence
and go back to, um, the what's
in the neglect box or what do we
See when we investigate
families. We see substance abuse
mental health and intimate
partner violence. Um, and that,
uh, we we we, we can deploy
multiple kinds of strategies.
Um, I think, um, that target
those challenges before they
become the crisis. Um, in in
ways that, uh, bring
a scaffold set of, um strate.
To bear next slide. We see
Connecticut doing that with
pairing housing and early
childhood supports that head
Start on housing program is
across agency collaboration that
provides the vouchers to
families with young Children
participating in head Start
programs. Next slide in
Wisconsin.
We see that for families who are
involved with child welfare. Um,
the family Keys pilot program is
providing short term housing
funds, um to families with
Children at risk of removal due
to housing insecurity, and there
are multiple kinds of things
like short term rentals, hotels
and expenses. Next slide public
benefits.
Um, let's start out by looking
at TANF. So this is the Johnson
Mo. Uh Mori and Donna G research
team again. Um, so we've looked
at. Um uh uh, a 2017 study from
them. This is a reanalysis of
that same data looking at four
policy choices within tan F, and
those are in the blue box. Um,
and as states ease
One or more of those policies,
Um, we see fewer Children with
substantiations and fewer
Children being placed into
foster care and an estimated
29,000 fewer Children would have
entered foster care nationally
between 2004 and 2016. If states
had eased tan of restrictions
and increased access for
families next slide
So what's the state policy
option? We see California using,
uh, tan of dollars to, um
increase from $500 to $1000, a
one time payment for the
purchase of concrete supports
material goods to families that
are participating in the TANF
home. Visiting program Next
slide. Food security. We see
that states with more generous
snap policies experience.
We experienced large reductions
in CPS reports.
Fewer substantiations,
particularly for neglect and
fewer foster care placements.
Next slide. So what's the state
policy option using? Um tan F?
Uh, policies? Uh, and there are
four particular policies, uh,
within the study that they
reviewed next slide, so we're
gonna transition, uh, now to
child welfare, uh, programs So
we've looked at macroeconomic
supports and policies we've
looked at concrete.
Courts.
Uh, policies we've looked at
public benefits, and now we're
gonna look at that blue box
That's child welfare programs
that include economic and
concrete supports, and we see
next slide.
That families with open child
welfare cases, mostly in neglect
to received a home based
services program with concrete
supports, where 17% less likely
to experience a subsequent child
maltreatment report during that
first year of the service next
slide.
And this slide. Um uh, tried to
isolate the effect of the
concrete supports inside of an
evidence based program
homebuilders we could spend
another hour talking about that.
I won't today. Um
Let me just suffice it to say
that I think that the I I
actually I will. That the the,
um
Often we see or at least in four
of the well supported
interventions in family first.
Home builders multisystem
therapy intercept and one more
That is not gonna come to me off
the top of my head, um, include
flexible funds as part of the
bundled evidence based practice,
so as you're thinking about your
family first plan and the
evidence based practices that
you chose or given your, um
continued negotiation.
With the Children's Bureau to
get your family first plan
approved. Some of those EVPS
have flexible funds built in, I
might argue that those flexible
funds are part of the active
ingredient.
Of the evidence based practice
in a way that we've not
Isolated empirically, but that
is my hypothesis. We see that a
well we actually do have it
empirically here in this one
study. We always want to know
more. Um, the evaluation of
homebuilder found that for
families who reported difficulty
paying bills prior to receiving
homebuilder, which does have
this cash assistance and
concrete supports, Um, the
increase in the provision of
housing assistance or clothing,
furniture and supplies.
Was associated with reduced
likelihood of subsequent
maltreatment. So if anyone ever
asked the question, how does
betting
Prevent child welfare
involvement or maltreatment or
substance abuse or any other of
the things along the pathway
that get families involved with
child welfare. I think we
actually have a window into that
through this study.
Uh, and the increases of
provision of cash assistance or
clothing furniture supplies was
associated with a reduced
likelihood of entry into foster
care. Next slide.
We see Kentucky making, really,
um, specific policy choices. Um,
uh, And there's a little bit of
an overlay here with their
family first strategy as well
And I'll try and dissect that
quickly for you here.
Kentucky is making two policies
available that include either
$1000 or $4000, available to a
family to meet their needs to
reduce involvement with child
child welfare and families that
are receiving family
preservation services. Both of
those policies are available to
them so up to $5000 are
available. These are state
dollars or they're using TANF
dollars, Um, to do that, and it
overlays with family first
because their family
Preservation program and their
family First program are are the
same. So this is the scaffolding
or braiding of strategies? Um,
to reduce involvement, and
they've been tracking their
their their cost ratio. They're
trying to flip the ratio.
Um, by Reduc. Uh, because we
spend most of our child welfare
dollars on out of home placement
and not on prevention. And we
see Kentucky trying to be really
intentional about that. They've
reduced their spending and out
of home placement by almost $80
million between 2019 and 2023 by
reducing entries and reducing
institutional congregate care
settings, and they have
increased their investment
during the same time frame.
By a little over $11 million
next slide. So what are other
state policy options in your
family first plan, um, to create
a community pathway to get
upstream, Um, to get in this
space where families have
challenges, and they are not yet
crises or they're at the point
of, um uh, something happening
or family being, Um, uh, pushed
off kilter or or something?
Happening in their lives, and we
see a number of states.
That are conceptualizing,
readying and implementing a
community pathway to get as far
upstream as possible. Your
neighbor Arizona, Um, uh, just
an email with them today. Um, a
report to CPS will not be
required. Um as a, uh, for
eligibility for family First
services in your neighboring
state Next slide.
That's
just, uh I also wanna just kind
of pull out themes from the
recent hearing in the Senate
Finance Committee, Uh, in on May
22nd relative to economic and
concrete supports and
eligibility. Sort of this
upstream, Uh, community pathway.
Um, we saw a number of the
testimonies provided that day.
Um, uh, asking for expansion of,
uh,
Eligible categories of services
to include economic and concrete
supports. Uh uh, engagement
navigation Case management
services and services for in
intimate, Uh, interpersonal
violence services, So to add
those, um to mental health,
substance abuse and parenting,
um, we heard from the testimony.
We also heard, uh, a request to
clarify and reorient
eligibility, uh, for the target
population.
Of family First services.
To clarify. Um, uh, eligibility,
uh, that families who are at
risk of child welfare
involvement is part of, um
reducing the likelihood of a
foster care entry, allowing a
community or population based
eligibility or reorienting
eligibility to be consistent
with the eligibility of the EVPS
that are in the clearinghouse
and to remove the requirement
that at least 50% of state
spending be
Supported Epps. So this just
sort of gives a preview of. Um
what, uh, folks were talking
about, um and requesting of
Congress. Um, we hope that
Congress um and we are certain
you know, Congress invited
testimony and we are glad to
have heard these, um, pretty
consistent themes next slide,
and I know that we are starting
to run out of time. We got a
little bit of a late start, so
I'll go. And, um uh
Kind of wrap up here.
By making two points. Um, the
first is, uh, text back to sort
of that, Uh, what's happening?
Mechanistically. There's not a
shared responsibility and
accountability framework for
preventing the activation and
deployment of child protective
services and certainly the
evidence here today shows us
that other systems, um, have a
role to play tennis actually
does have a statutory
requirement.
That requirement is not the
right word statutory purpose its
first statutory purpose, provide
assistance to needy families so
that Children can be cared for
at home or with relatives and
thinking about all of our human
service. Uh, and health platform
In that way, New Jersey tries to
accomplish that, and we see them
sort of visually depicting how
their systems interplay, and
they have reduced the number of
Children in foster care by over.
60% next slide.
Um, we see that states spending,
uh, at a high level. Um, uh uh,
at at at at an aggregate level.
That's really the word I wanted,
Um, helps us to understand the
relationship with child welfare
involvement. Um, so again, this
sort of shared responsibility.
Um, if states had increased
their investment in the public
benefit programs by a little
over 13%, there would have been
an estimated reduction in
reports sub
Foster care placements and about
100 and 30. Fewer cha fatalities
due to to maltreatment but have
been costly. Uh, at the national
level, about $46 billion as an
initial investment, but a return
on investment around 100 and $53
billion over time. Um, now we're
gonna skip. Well, actually, you
can see next slide.
Where? Where and how states
spend? Um uh, a a across its
public benefit platform. Um, uh,
I'll go back and highlight where
New Mexico sits here. Um, but
again, this variability we we
make a lot of choices and how
much to spend. And in what ways
what categories we span, meaning
that I we, We can make a
different choice tomorrow than
we made six months ago or 16
years ago, based on
Evidence next slide. We've
created a tool that helps states
walk through their policy
choices that they've made thus
far relative to this evidence to
kind of interrogate, um, where
there might be options for
changes.
Um, when we don't do the Yeah,
I'm gonna skip that slide. Let's
go to this annual and lifetime
cost when we don't do that. It's
really expensive. Um, annual and
lifetime costs of child
maltreatment are enormous. Um,
we see the economic burden
associated with child
maltreatment for cohort of, um
Children who were investigated
in this one year. It is
estimated that their lifetime
Comic burden costs would be
about $563 billion
for Substantiations. I'm sorry.
Let's get to investigations.
It's even higher because it's a
much broader group of Children.
It's estimated at about $3
Trillion for their for the one
year cohort over their lifetime.
Um so really, there's a there's
a fiscal argument to be made
here as well as a human capital.
Um, return on investment
strategy. Um, The last slide
just really helps us put this
all together, uh, and gives us
an evidence based
Road map for, um, helping
families to not be overloaded or
to reduce the load on that truck
and help it to operate as
designed by using macroeconomic
policies. Uh, concrete support
strategies, our public benefit
platform and then our child
welfare system related
strategies by having like a and
I know Lisa is about to talk to
us about.
Differential response, having
some sort of economic firewall
or an economic differential
response.
To families who are having those
shocks and cumulative material
hardships that are elevating
their risk so that child
protective services and foster
care become a very narrowly used
intervention for keeping
Children safe when it is needed
most and that we have reduced
our over reliance societally on
that response to meat, basic
needs and address, um families
that are in crisis, So thank
you.
Very much for your time, and we
will make sure that you get all
of this evidence and the
research list and references so
that you can pursue any of this
data on your own.
Thank you so much, Claire.
Um
We are a little bit.
Oh, sorry.
Getting in.
We're a little bit over time.
Um, but Claire, I did wanna just
create any opportunity for, um
this task force to ask you any
questions. Um, Claire primarily
kind of talked at that high
level of the pyramid that I
mentioned we actually can share
with this task force. Some
research our team has done on
stacking income supports. In New
Mexico, the expansion of benefit
programs that have already
happened and kind of uptake in
our state.
And if that would be helpful to
you all? Um, but I would just
offer. Are there any questions
for Claire? Um, as she kind of
talked at that higher, uh, side
of the I'll just say, go ahead
and go off mute and ask
questions. Um, and I'll mute
myself.
OK, Um, Claire, this is Senator
Linda Lopez. And I wanted to say
thank you very much for sharing
the information.
A lot of good information. Um
and I think it it will behoove
us to maybe go back and review a
few of these points that you've
brought to our attention.
But I would like to, um
You point out of on some of your
slides, of course, emphasize the
issue on on looking at maybe a
redefinition for us of what? How
we looked at neglect in the
state.
Which we are working on. Just so
you know, there's a a Children's
code task force that is looking
and revisiting the statute that
we have in the Children's Code.
New Mexico Children's code on
how we define neglect.
But along with that also comes a
support systems which your
presentation to be emphasized.
And of course that goes back to
basic needs, and many of us have
talked about that over years,
and I know that there are, um
Programs as well as you know,
state programs and others.
Who are I think are looking
To see how we can, uh, shore up
services for families.
And, uh, I mean, I. I have a
full list as such, but, um, I
think this definitely, uh gives
us um
Much for us to, uh
To think on and hopefully
converse as this task force
continues. But I I appreciate
thank you. Yes, thank you. I
appreciate understanding where
you are in your thought. Process
around the neglect. Um, statue.
Many states are narrowing their
definition to, um ensure that,
uh, there is not, uh uh,
Children. The Children are not
being removed for their homes
dot tops. Poverty. Um, I hope
the sides and these studies
today help to provide a nuanced
understanding of what the that
intersection looks like. Um,
some states are going a bit
further, uh, and Kentucky
statute is very interesting.
Um it it says, uh, if families
are not able to provide or
provided the fiscal means and
still do not provide, so you
know they have. They've got
that.
Policy with up to $5000
available so there they're
thinking about this.
In a way that, um, uh, anchors
some responsibility on the state
as well, Um, for Ameliorating,
uh and mitigating the lack of
fiscal resources. Um so I, uh
you you you make the point quite
well, that if we just narrow our
definition of neglect, and don't
think about where and how to
support families, Um uh, we we
might have unintended
consequences for
So, II. I appreciate very much,
uh, understanding your, um your
thinking there.
Oh, thank you. Um, this is, um,
Eleanor Chavez. I'm uh,
representative for House
District 26, and I just have one
question in terms of the
studies. Um, that you talked
about. I'm wondering if and I
know these are national studies.
Is there any way to pull out New
Mexico specific data.
In any of those studies.
Um, uh, some, but not many.
Uh uh.
Uh, certainly, the Hank Pole
study can help you look at, um
Uh, state spending the one of
the last studies. I showed you,
um the, uh, the the cost study?
Uh uh, BT clitic at all, uh,
looks at a cost by state. Uh um
So there is a very small handful
that have new Mexico specific
data in them. Most of them are
national data.
Thank you.
But but certainly, um, I, I will
say this. Um many of the studies
could be, uh,
Replicated, or, uh uh, some of
the studies that have a data
analytic, um, at its core could
likely be, um, conducted, uh, in
the state.
Clear. This is Carol Spinner.
It's wonderful to see you,
my daughter, just like I wanted
to make a comment about the
purposes of 10 F.
Because when you started your
presentation, you identified the
language that talked about
stupid.
Enabling families to keep
Children at home.
That language.
Was the original Social Security
language.
For a F DC.
When we moved to Tanni
We created a time limited
program.
You know, families live longer
than five years. Children are at
home longer than five years, and
the focus was on the
employability of the parents,
not the stability of the family
And and so, I. I see this
discussion having two threads
trying to build up economic
supports in the context of a
policy.
That actually shifted the focus
from Children.
To care to employability. Does
that make sense to you guys? And
so there's this tension.
Within 10, if that's in the
structure of it, that does not
really allow it to provide long
term support. So I I just wanted
to flag that because I think
that reflects the struggle that
we have in this country about
our attitude toward poor
families and Children. Should we
be supporting them long term,
assuring their economic
stability or is this a way to
get them to be economically self
sufficient?
And we struggle with that.
The major value. Well, said Hi,
Kirk. Good morning, Robert
Chavez. Thank you for the
information. I wanted to ask you
when you were talking about
unconditional payments of $1000
for a period of time. What was
the time length? And do you have
any data to what? What The
results were at the end of those
unconditional payments when they
were when they expired.
So in Alaska. It's a I think
that's an annual dividend to the
entire populace.
Um, but that study, uh,
isolated when that that $1000
came into the lives of families
with new Children, so that first
three months did the did that
payment land in the first three
months? Um so it it is not
looking. Um, uh at, uh, how that
money flowed over time in that
particular study? Um, certainly
the
Uh, the guaranteed income,
although, um, uh or the direct
cash transfer, um pilots that we
see happening all over the
country right now, Um, I think
that we are going to learn a
great deal from them, Um over
time about, uh, how much? How
long? Which families? Um, but I,
I would I would caution us.
We know in enormous amount now
to take action. Um, I, I think
that we, um will we will learn
more and it will continue to
evolve our understanding of how
much when for whom, Under what
circumstances? Um and I'm very
much looking forward to, um,
gaining an even more nuanced
understanding. But I think, I, I
think we know a lot now.
Uh, given the evidence that we
have, um and, uh um I like like
you. I want more and we have a
lot.
If I may ask on that, too. Um,
Claire, this is, uh Senator
Lopez again from the question
that, uh, Robert was just
asking. Is there any data that
shows
Um, because during covid, um we
did have some payments that were
given to families.
And I know that, um it
The the news, Um, was saying
that that actually lifted X
number percentage points of
families out of poverty because
there was a a certain amount of
income that families were
receiving.
And I think that, um
If there is some way that we
could find some of that data, I
think would also help to
validate. Um what these cash
payments may be, even though
it's $1000, but the monies were
spread out over six months. I
think, um during covid.
And I know for persons in my own
district and some of the single
parent moms that I've spoken
with that had spoken with, Um it
did make a big difference
because that helped to make ends
meet for rent or for whatever
else they needed. So I'm just
wondering if there's any place
that you know of that we could
go.
To look for data.
Um, that maybe could support
these issues. Thank you.
Yeah. Yes, I'm I'm happy to
share those studies. Um, uh,
they they are. They are, um
They are nuanced. Um, we saw
Initially a fear if everyone
will remember that we would see
a tsunami of child abuse and
neglect.
Um 11 could argue from the
evidence that we did not, um,
over the course of the pandemic,
Uh, in entries into foster care,
uh, have declined, uh, and have
continued to decline. Um, we we
did. See, um You know, some
reductions in, uh, abusive head
trauma for some Children. We saw
reductions in emergency room
visits for some Children.
We also saw, uh, some mixed
results as well. Um, we saw
toffee tallies for black
Children go up.
So we we, We have a number of
confounders. I think in the
pandemic that are unlike many
unlike anything any of us alive
have ever experienced.
So, I. I think we we do see some
very encouraging data, and we
also see some mixed data as
well.
John Courtney. I'm deputy
director of LLC. I just wanted
to chime in there. Where? Um,
we, Lou
Recently published a study at
the the UM National Bureau of
Economic Research on that very
issue, uh, impacts of, um child
tax credits and pandemic
stimulus checks.
Um
Looking specifically at at
infant health and and finding
finding no impact.
So could you speak to kind of
what?
What the evidence suggests works
in the face of some of these
studies that they have haven't
been finding impact of of, um
ubi and and and I think you you
mentioned it yourself. Some of
the results are mixed. Some of
them are nuanced.
I'm just wondering if there are
any kind of themes where
Research shows things work
versus the Like The study I
mentioned out of the University
of Chicago showing that that
there was no impact.
Um and, uh, there was no impact
for Ubi.
No. No impact for from, um, the
expanded child tax credit where
pandemic stimulus checks.
Uh, I. I think I need to go back
and look at that study. Um, And
when you say no
Yeah. Yeah. Um So, uh, you know,
as as I said a moment ago, um,
during the pandemic, I think we
have a number of variables.
That, um are are are at play
here in a way that are not
typically um so, I. I think that
can also help explain. Oh, I
think I actually know the story
you're talking about, you know?
Families also had a reduced
access to prenatal care during
that time period. Um and, uh,
reduced, uh, access to social
support.
So II. I would I would, you
know, Want us to look at the
entire body of that study.
And understand, Um, given that
you know, A number of things
were, um at at play. Uh, I. I
don't think that just the
payment can be isolated. As I
said earlier, before you asked
the question during the
pandemic.
Oh, for the group R team did
look at, um, that period of
time, essentially FY 19 to FY 23
and some of the impacts in New
Mexico. Of those expanded
benefit programs. Um, it's our
stacking income supports and we
can send it out. We we saw some
things like low uptake and
things like that, so we can also
share some of that, Um, data.
Our team is already compiled
about what happened in New
Mexico kind of during
Are there any other kind of key
questions with the group for
Claire? As we kind of move down
that intervention, period, Uh,
pyramid and kind of calling Amy
Well, then, Claire, I just
wanted to thank you for joining
us. I know you were navigating a
variety of things personally as
you joined our call. Um, I had
some technology challenges. Um,
and we're just grateful for you
navigating amidst those things,
um, and sharing kind of research
with this group, So thank you so
much. Thank you.
Right, so we had kind of next on
our agenda to hear a little bit
from Amy and Lisa from the Chem
center about differential
response. We plan to do a break
after that. Does that work for
the group? Or do you? Would you
like to take a short break now?
Keep going. OK, then, Um, Amy
and Lisa, I will try to get your
kind of slides pulled up. Um,
you'll see, I have some problems
when I try to full screen. It
freezes. Uh, a A, um
It freezes the screen that's
live in the room, so it may also
be sort of a the not the
slideshare view. Well, I get
that pulled up. Would you be
willing to introduce yourselves?
Um, to the group here, um, share
a little bit about who you are,
Um and and what you do.
Yes. Happy to and Rachel. Do you
want me to just share my screen
with the slides?
If you are willing to do that, I
mean, that would be great and
might cause fewer problems on my
end.
No worries. Uh, let's see if I
can do it.
Teams have always fun. You all
disappear when I do it, But
there we go.
All right.
So can you all see that, OK?
Yeah. Great. Thank you for the
head, nodding.
Um I'm Amy Ho from the Kemp
center here with my colleague,
Lisa.
Um, the Kemp center. Uh, we're
happy to be here to talk to you
a little bit about differential
response we've been working
with, um, a number of states
over many years together, um,
helping with their design,
implementation and evaluation of
different response. Um, the KM
center is, uh, a nice little
organization out of the
University of Colorado. Um
Lisa, you want to say a little
bit more about
See you and how the CM center
fits into things, and then we
can dive right in. Sure. Uh,
thank you, Amy. And thank you,
Uh, for, um, creating space for
us to come and share some
information about differential
response. Uh, with your group,
Um
So we are a section in the
Department of Pediatrics and the
University of Colorado School of
Medicine. Um
We really We have a bit of an
origin story because it was the,
uh
See Henry Kemp, who wrote the
battered Child Syndrome paper in
1962, which really put child
maltreatment. Mainly, um
Child abuse on, uh onto the kind
of public stage so to speak. Um
and so we've been around since,
UH official Henry's work started
in 19 late 19 fifties paper was
published in 1962. Our center
was officially um, started in
1972. So we have a 50 year.
history of sorts, um, working in
the area of child abuse.
neglect. Uh, both true.
The word they use treatment, Um,
prevention, and we do a lot of
research and education and
advocacy as well. Um, in the
last 12 years or so, uh, the A
group of us from the American
Humane Association migrated over
to the camp center, Um, back in
about 2006. We started a
national initiative on
differential response. Uh, where
we have supported
10 to 15 states in different,
um, and jurisdictions around the
design, implementation and
evaluation, a differential
response. And in addition, we
were we operated the National
Quality Improvement Center on
Differential response, which was
funded by the Children's Bureau
between 2008 and 2014. We have a
website. Um, you can certainly
check that out for more
information about not only the
Camp center, but, um, you can
get to some other resources and
differential response on that
page.
So today. What we wanna do
pretty quickly, um, is just give
you a quick, brief history of
CPS that led to differential
response. Um, talk about the
core elements of a different of
AC PS system that influenced DR.
Um, we'll talk a little bit
about the evaluation findings.
Not as in depth as what Claire
has just done. Um, but we can
certainly point you to, um, all
the literature as well in that
area. We'll do a little bit of
comparison about
How does an alternate How does a
differential response approach
or family assessment response?
How does that compare to a
traditional investigation? I
think we heard a lot about, um,
from Claire about the impacts of
the investigations. How many
people are how many Children are
investigated? Um, in the united,
uh, in the United States, and so
we'll talk a little bit about
what if you do alternative
response or differential
response? What's different, and
then we'll talk a little bit
about implementation planning.
I'll turn it over to Amy.
Thanks, Please,
though, So, um, very briefly
touching on on our history in
child protection here. Um, I
like to bring this up because I
think it helps set the context
for why states started doing
differential response back in
the late nineties. So, um, you
know, 1962 enter Capta. Um, we
are. Excuse me. Enter Henry
Kemp's child. Mal, Better child,
Um, Syndrome report, which, as
Lisa said, got people talking
about child abuse in different
ways.
Sort of moved away from what
happens in the family's home is
the family's business and
started recognizing what was
going on, Uh, with Children. Um
and so, uh, lots of advocacy was
going on by people like Dr Kemp
and Vincent DeFrancis, Um,
started talking to the federal
legislators about we need to do
something about this as a
system. Uh, as a federal
government, we we should create
some kind of system that we can,
um when we have these kinds of
suspicions about Children, where
We send those police are telling
us they're not equipped to
handle this. So what should we
be doing?
Local jurisdictions had their
own kind of way of handling
things. It varied wildly from
place to place. Um, but the feds
came up with, uh, Capta.
Which, uh, you know, it was a
first federal reporting law, um
around child maltreatment. Um,
and at the time, it was really
geared toward, uh, physical
abuse, a pretty severe physical
abuse the kinds of things that
Dr Henry Kemp was seeing as a
physician and his office. Um,
And so that was the original
design. Uh, let's create a
system but we didn't really have
any examples.
Uh, of other places that were
doing this. Uh so we looked to
our closest neighbors, law
enforcement and kind of set up a
child welfare law enforcement
system. Um, we said OK, we'll
create a hotline or, you know, a
kind of like a 911 phone call,
you can call and say there's
something going on, Um, and then
we'll determine whether we
should respond or not, And how
we should respond. Um, and what
we'll do when we respond is
we'll investigate whatever is
reported, just like a law
enforcement officer would
Well, come on, we'll find out
what are the facts. What
happened in the home? Um, give
me all the details about the
incident. Um, again, really
Thinking about very incidents.
Uh, specific child abuse here,
Um, made a lot of sense. Uh then
we can go ahead and make a
finding on Did this occur? Did
it not occur? Um, and then we'll
create some record keeping
around When these things occur.
We've got it on record that this
person physically maltreated
their child, right?
So that was the original design
of child welfare, and it's
largely stayed the same since
then, Uh, since its creation, um
the mechanics of it are
Very similar, um, to how they
were back in the seventies, lots
of initiatives and efforts have
come and gone. Um, but the basic
mechanics of child welfare are
still there. We get a call. We
investigate the call. We
determine if it was true or not
true, um and we may offer
services.
So, um, what happened, though,
after the seventies is quite a
big shift in in what we saw
coming to the child protection
system. So, um, in the late
seventies and eighties, we
started hearing a lot more
about, um, sexual abuse started
getting a lot more attention
started getting a lot more. Um,
worry about that happening with
homes. Um, and we needed a place
to send those kinds of reports.
So we saw a big influx of those
kinds of reports coming to
Child protection systems again,
you know, looking to law
enforcement for how to respond
with those again. A similar
process felt like it worked
pretty well, um
We had other laws, federal laws
that came into play in the
eighties. The adoption and
assistance Act. Uh, it was a big
one. Really, uh, provided money
to think about, um, policing
Children outside the presence of
their caregivers. Um, as a
safety mechanism, um, so that
really had a big impact, but
what we also saw happening
nationally is a pretty big
influx in, um, neglect kinds of
reports coming to child welfare,
So really, in the nineties, we
saw this huge influx.
A huge system change happened,
Um, where the front doors to the
child welfare system really
opened wide. So instead of us,
just working with a very small
percentage of reports that were
about physical abuse, Um we said
OK, start sending any concern
that you have about a child's
safety to us, and we will
investigate that. Um, And so now
we're at a place here in 2022
where you know our original
design. If you look in the
yellow that
So that's what the system was
originally designed to handle
and manage a very small
percentage of reports. Um, a
very targeted kind of incident
based maltreatment. Um and then
what we saw is over the last 30
years. This huge influx in
What kinds of reports were being
accepted into state child
protection systems. So now we
know we have the majority of our
reports are neglect. Uh, which
again? Is Claire was saying, you
know, there's lots of different
definitions of neglect and, um,
and a lot of efforts across
states to try to, uh,
differentiate between neglect
and poverty. However, we
continue to see a hard, uh, a
very large number of the reports
coming our way. Um around
neglect Well,
In the late nineties. Um, when
this was really exploding in
states and states were feeling
very overwhelmed by this
neglect, um, you know, push that
was happening in their their
reporting systems. Um, the
states like Missouri and
Minnesota started to wonder if
there could be a different way
of looking at the foundational
framework that we had originally
created that you make a call
Someone goes out and
investigates makes a finding
services. Yes or no.
Um, that may have made a lot of
sense for certain kinds of
reports, but it wasn't as
effective with a lot of these
reports they were experiencing
that were neglect related. Um
often these families were living
in poverty and struggling with
basic needs and what they really
needed was access to services.
But an investigation is a pretty
intensive invasive.
Experience.
To go through. Sorry. I'm just
checking in. Was that you,
Rachel? Or is there
No, we may have someone if
you're online, Um and you're not
a manly So would you please mute
and I can do that, too. On my
end.
Just checking, making sure there
wasn't a question there. OK, um
so you know, we they started
saying, Well, what if instead of
investigating, we thought we
took away those mechanisms,
those requirements that we prove
the incident occurred or didn't
occur. So you think of something
like, um you know, housing
conditions, A family is living
in poor housing conditions well,
going in and taking pictures of
those housing conditions and
talking to collaterals about the
housing conditions being in, you
know, unsafe.
Kids, um, going in, and, um
You know, spending a lot of
energy investigating that and
proving that that's true. It's
sort of a waste of time. That
doesn't help the family actually
address the housing conditions
the Children are living in. It
doesn't fix the holes in the
floor or address the plumbing.
Um and we actually don't need to
prove it's true or untrue or put
it in a record keeping sign of
mechanism in order to offer
services to that family to help
those Children live in a more,
um, you know, a
Home environment, So that's what
states like Minnesota and
Missouri started playing around
with. What if we changed up the
way we approached these kinds of
reports?
Um, could we still keep kids
safe and address those basic
concerns that they're dealing
with often very poverty?
related? Um and could we do that
without having to use all of our
investigatory tactics and
mechanisms?
Um And so Lisa is gonna talk to
you a little bit more about
that, But, um, we'll we'll point
to some of the research. Uh,
about what they were able to
find. Thankfully, they evaluated
this, but they were really the
the two states to spearhead this
in the United States. I'll pass
it back to you, Lisa.
All right. Thanks, Amy. So let's
just do a quick high level
overview.
Did you?
Yeah, about as Amy kind of
indicated the first kind of the
first two states that got us
going down the journey it
some just overarching questions.
Can can we be more responsive to
the needs of families? Um
Is there a different way that we
can that we can address poverty
related, um, issues that might
be chronic. And is it possible
to design AC PS system that
families would perceive to be
more helpful rather than
invasive, intrusive and
sometimes traumatic.
I've been doing a lot of work in
states and and thinking about
this and and listening to
parents who experience child
abuse investigations. Um and I
think the the is Claire said,
you know, um, she was struck by
a parent who said you never get
over that. The knock at the
door Um and
What? What That really
translates to is that when the
when the next knock on the door
comes and it's the roofer, or
it's the next door neighbor,
it's actually a fear that it's
CPS, um, with that has very
large, um
Levels of of of, uh, has a
mandate and also a lot of power
and influence to, um, impact
your family's way of life. And
so, um, these are
investigations. They're not
innocuous.
Um, they they can be very trauma
inducing, very fear inducing,
And there's additional research
out that now shows that
Invest this investigate
investigation tactic. Um,
results in people being less
willing to, um seek help.
Um, when they need it.
Let's go to the next slide.
So what is differential
response? So you may have heard
of, um in other states. They
call it other things. Um, it's
called the alternative response.
Uh, family assessment response
and also multi multiple system
response. I think that was the
term that North Carolina coined
and so basically think about
your hotline and think about a
funnel All the you know.
Number of calls that come into
the hotline, and you have
screeners that decide whether or
not those, um, um, referrals or
calls that come in meet the
Standard definition for your
state around child visa neglect,
and so they're gonna
Right. You have this percentage.
Claire talked about the national
percentage of what that is
nationally and for the for the
calls that meet criteria. Um,
you're gonna respond to them in
some way. So when you have a
differential response organized
CPS system, you now have two
pathways. You have a
differential response.
Pathway. Um, also, what again is
called Some people call like the
assessment pathway or family
assessment pathway, And then you
continue to have your
traditional investigations.
There are some systems that I
will say, um, which Claire also
kind of referenced early on in
her presentation that have a a
third pathway for those calls
that
Come into the hotline and are
screened out. It just means they
don't meet the statutory
definition for child abuse
neglect in your state. They get
screened out, and then they they
can be served by a a community
response. Pathway as well.
Amy.
Next slide.
So we're gonna get into more
details. Um, as we go, but I
want you to think about
alternative, like, think of this
as an alternative way of
responding to certain kinds of
reports. Um, we in a R we set
aside. Um, fault finding and
that substantiation decision we
focus less on proving as Amy
noted whether the allegation is
true or not, um
And also I want you to keep in
mind that a R is not focused on
severe physical abuse or sexual
abuse or anything that requires
an immediate response. Whether
it be one hour or 24 hours. Um,
those types of, um, reports are
still served through an
investigation and likely, um,
have multiple community partners
and law enforcement in CER in
certain instances, um
And then we work through
different response to seek
safety through really engaging
with family and and through
collaborative partnerships in
the community and also with
family and we'll talk a little
bit about, um, what that looks
like on the ground and what this
also really allows. Um we just
really wanna focus in on. We
know that there are
Um academics who have really
criticized alternative response
and have suggested that it is
not focused on the safety of
Children. Um
The differential response
Pathway is squarely focused on
the safety of Children and their
families. That has not changed.
It's how we get to, um, it's how
we focus on safety looks a
little bit different. Um, and so
we also encourage. Um and we do
that through services and
supports to to address the
concerns that, um Children and
families have
All right, So let's just I we've
talked about this, but this is a
bit of a summary slide. These
were the eight core elements
that we designed, Um, in
partnership with our colleagues,
um, at the Child Welfare League
of America, as well as from the
state of Minnesota, when more
states were getting interested,
and I was like, what is
differential response? Um
And those of us at the American,
Maine and CW a came together
with them and tried to
understand from
A number of states experiences.
What are the core elements of a
differential response system?
And so this is summary because I
think we've talked about a lot
of this already. But first is
that again there have to be two
discrete responses for screened
in and accepted reports. The
criteria to determine
Whether a family gets
Differential response.
For an investigation. It's
determined by a rate an array of
factors, and every state has
their own criteria for for
making a decision as to which
families or which reports will
get which, um, kind of pathway,
so to speak. It could be
everything from the type of
maltreatment the age of the
child, whether there have been
Um many rep prior reports, et
cetera, et cetera. Um, we know
that DR has to be codified in
statute policy and protocols. Um
We, uh, move away from the
language of victim and
perpetrator. Perpetrators. Um,
number five is there are no
findings or entry into the
central Registry for families
that receive and the
differential response. Why is
that important? I think that's
that's highly important because
when you look at some of
The states and I don't know New
Mexico's laws or or they kind of
their policies around central
Registry. Uh, a central registry
system. But when you look
nationally, um
Many advocates and others have
Classified the central registry
as really the economic death
penalty in this country. Um, you
can if you
Are
Investigated.
And the case is substantiated,
meaning that it it it happened.
Whatever the report is, was what
was deemed to be true. And you
find yourself on a central
registry. In many states, That
means that you are, uh,
precluded from a range of
different employment options.
Um, uh, impacts how people can
visit one another within a
family system, et cetera. And
And in some states, those those
getting onto a registry means
Would mean that you will be in
your economic kind of trajectory
could be impacted for for
decades and the other thing
around central registries is
that they oftentimes are very
opaque Families. Don't parents
don't always know that they're
on a registry. Um, the the
strategy to get off a registry.
Um, can be a little challenging
as well. So there are no
findings or entering into
Central Registry. The sixth is
that if you are assigned to a
differential response
Um, that can be changed, Um,
meaning, so let's say, uh uh, a
call comes in, and it's for a
dirty house. The decision is to
go out and, um
Uh,
Meet with the family.
Through, uh, through
differential response through
that pathway, and you get out
there And actually, you find you
find that there are Children who
are
Um, you know, being I don't know
what we could go even the most
like egregious, horrible case.
uh, Children who are locked in
closets, um, in a basement that
has been flooded. Actually, this
kind of did happen, uh, in in a
in one situation, So right, So
the caller thinks Oh, there's a
really dirty house has no idea.
The the worker. The family
assessment worker. Was that
realizes, Oh, actually, it's a
little bit more significant.
This actually does require an
investigation, so
Is that possibility? It doesn't
happen very often. It's like a
very small percentage of cases
that where this happens, Um, but
it is a possibility, so that's
number six if if a family is
assigned to differential
response, they can shoot they
could choose to have an
investigation again. It doesn't
happen very regularly, but the
purpose here is
Or kind of the importance here
is that family have choice and
voice as to how they want to
interact. Um, with the CPSCPS
system. We see some families
actually choose to have an
investigation, but those are
typically when there's um child
custody disputes. Um and
happening. And then lastly, um,
number eight NAMI will go over
this A little bit More, too, is
that after the assessment in a
different
Response. Pathway is not
optional. That happens, we
safety and risk assessments
occur. Um, but then what happens
after the assessment? Um, is
where we try to position
parents, Children and their
extended family systems to have
more choice around the types of
services, whether they, um,
receive services, et cetera.
So those are the eight core
elements. We'll go over quickly
around the map around the United
States, so you'll see the dark
blue are states that, um, we
we've been doing a survey of
states for quite quite some
time. This is our, um, best kind
of calculated gas based on um,
our original surveys, um, as
well as looking at NCS Data
where states report. Um, and
this was, uh, updated in 2023,
And we recognize that some
Might not be correctly labeled,
Um, Actually, our team is
undertaking a national survey
right now of differential
response, hoping to interview
all the states around the
country to get a better
understanding and portrait as to
how this um
System reform has taken hold and
changed, Um O over the last two
decades, but Navy blue are
statewide. Light blue, um are
regional or county
And then we've got a few in the
dark gray like Oregon,
Wisconsin, Illinois.
Alaska and West Virginia that
have started DR and then
discontinued it for a range of
different reasons.
OK, What does the research say?
All right, so there has been
Um, a lot of research done on
differential response, which is,
I think kind of interesting just
in and of itself because it's
one system or form, but it
really does have the potential
to have a significant impact on
the imprint of a child
protection system. And, um in
community. Um, So when you think
about
There isn't a lot of research
done on the impact of
investigations, but there has
been at least over 50 studies.
Um, since
2000 ish, um, that have been
done on differential response.
And so all the studies are
available online. Um and, uh, we
can certainly make sure that any
study that if you're interested
in digging in a little bit more,
um, we can, uh, get you the
those references and we know
that, um, the studies that are
on the left hand side of our
slide, Um
Those are all available online.
So while all the studies that
we're listing here are slightly
different, they do share a
number of similarities. Um, the
biggest is that all but one of
them were done using randomized
control trial. Right. So that
gold standard um and kind of the
most rigorous type of
evaluation, um, methodology.
Um, so we know that that's also
pretty rare. Um, in that type of
evaluation is is pretty rare in
child protection systems. Um
So what did these studies
basically show us? So if you
look kind of at our our bubbles
in the tree, um the first is
that child safety for families
that received
Differential response or that
receive services through that
pathway. We know that child
safety was not diminished, and
so, in fact, in some studies, we
know that there is evidence that
safety actually improved in
Missouri, Um
The alternative response
caseworkers were able to engage
Children and families early in
the process in a nonthreatening
manner and found that they were
more willing to tell them about
things that were going on in
their home. Um
So as an example. Maybe there
was like a report of unsanitary
living conditions, but after a
couple of visits, um the mother
disclosed drug use. Or maybe the
report was about a child being
unsupervised and then the child
disclosed sexual abuse, So we
know that happens in TR as well.
But there was that one study.
Um, that found that it actually
happened more in alternative
response in almost all the
studies. Um, we see that family
engagement increased, Um
families and caseworkers.
That they that the families were
actually more engaged, and Amy
will talk a little bit about why
we think that is, what are the
values that are underpinning?
Um, and the kind of the
practices that are underpinning
an alternative or a differential
response system that that makes
that happen? Um, we also think
that this is an important
finding, because we know that,
um
We have workforce crisis. Uh uh,
a workforce crisis in child
welfare across the nation, and
so one of the other kind of
major findings is that are the
child protection services staff
really react positively to this,
Um, lots of different reports
that have with workers saying I
actually get to do social work
again. Um, I I'm put in a
position through this
differential response. You're
doing differential response to
meet families where they're at
to meet their needs. And so we
see.
Response. Um, while there
haven't been Mr Laney studies
that of correlated retention as
a strategy that really does
bolster the workforce. Um
Especially given the high rates
of turnover. We also know that
there are short term um, costs
are greater, but long term costs
are reduced. Um, there is
definitely, um some clarity
around reduce new reports and
later, um, placements and
services to families and
Children, um, increased and
changed. So, um
What does that mean? Um so
services to families.
It's just that they reflect what
families say they need and want.
Um, So, for example, there's
probably like a
Not a lot of parents ask for
parenting classes. Certainly
some parents do need them. Um,
but but when you ask parents
what they really need, it's not
something that they necessarily
say they need right so they
might say they need help paying
paying bills or seeking
employment or getting their car
fixed or child care. It's kind
of I feel like I'm um,
bolstering a lot of what Claire
said around what the other um
all the various studies have
shown. Um, so it's really much
More about meeting people's
basic needs. Um, we know that
for sure.
And so studies really found a
little bit of a significantly,
uh, less reliance on
professional services and
probably even evidence based
practices. Um, as well, although
for some families, um, evidence
based practices might be, um,
might be a helpful strategy. Um,
and then, Lastly, just I know I
just kind of
Bumped over like the short term
cost being greater and long term
cost being reduced. Um
Anytime you start something new,
right? You have all those start
up costs. Um, training. Uh,
Oh, your data systems, uh, might
be
Figuring out your staffing
patterns, etcetera, So we know
that we saw from the the few
studies that actually tracked
costs. Um, the costs were higher
initially, but the but across
many of the studies, um
especially those that did follow
up. We know that the costs
actually to serve families
actually reduced.
So I'll poke in here too. Just I
guess again to echo what Claire
was sharing that many of these
studies had a cash component.
Um, that went along for the
families that receive
differential response. There was
sort of this available fund of
$500 of flexible funding that
they could use so that the
worker when they went to the
home and the family who's living
in a very unsafe living
condition, and they need help
with plumbing. The worker has
access to this.
To be able to say great. Let's
call up the plumber and get them
here. We'll write the check to
pay for the plumbing. Um, that's
not an EVP. That's not a A. You
know, that's not a service that
was just sitting there available
back in the late nineties, you
know in 2000. So, um, the fact
that many of these EVPS now have
that cash component. I think
many studies that predate that,
um, show the benefit of having
access to these concrete
dollars. Um, but we do know that
that played a role, too. In this
Like shorter term costs are a
little bit greater, so
Thanks, Amy.
I think you're gonna you're
gonna talk about the values and
eligibility right?
Yeah. So, um
I'll say a little bit about, uh,
Lisa mentioned this. Like as
you're imagining these two
buckets. You have the accepted
reports that are coming to your
system. So your screeners are
saying Yes, this is, um you
know, concerning enough that we
have a statutory res. Uh, uh,
authority to respond to do
something so states are
choosing Well, what shall we do?
Shall we investigate? Or shall
we do this differential Response
thing? Um, so our investigations
typically this varies from state
to state that's utilizing.
To response, but typically, the
investigations are for things
like sexual abuse. It just makes
sense. The investigatory tactics
are useful and needed there, and
we really do need to take care
when interviewing Children, um
and understanding all the facts
right. It's a different level of
of threat and lethality. Um,
severe physical abuse typically
is not something. Uh, it is
something that we see going to
an investigation again. You
know, severe head trauma. We
want to understand what happened
there.
A shaken baby. These kinds of
things. This is why we have
investigations set up. Um, you
know, it's a very intensive
invasive, um, government
intervention and we want to
utilize it when it makes the
most sense for what is being
reported.
So any child fatalities or high
risk reports. These are often
those ones that have a very
urgent response time. Um police
is on the scene. You know, uh,
that kind of thing. That's a
that is where an investigation
makes a ton of sense. Um, what
we're seeing in states and what
they're considering usually, um
Addressing through different
response are much more of these
low to moderate risk reports.
Uh, that majority that big
bucket we saw on the pie chart
of neglect reports is a great
fit, whether it's clothing and
hygiene, whether it's lack of
supervision, uh, whether it's
the the housing conditions or,
um, lack of housing. Even, um,
you know, food hygiene right?
All these things are a A great
fit, uh, for that, that model
that says
We don't have to prove this is
true or untrue. We don't have to
spend our time. Um, talking to
collaterals and getting all the
details and taking pictures and
making sure we interview
Children separately and parents
over here and make sure all
their stories add up and are
completely straight when we're
talking about, um, you know,
meeting basic needs like food.
Um, you know, Well, let's just
connect that family up to what
is going to help address the
food concerns. Um, let's make
sure they're connected to their
their community.
Their resources.
And nowhere to go next time that
becomes an issue. Um, you know,
we've seen really good success
in some states too around things
like, um, excessive discipline,
where it's just, uh, being able
to engage a family in a
conversation that's not in
judgment of this is right and
wrong. Um, you know, and being
able to just talk about
parenting practices and cultural
norms and understanding this
family and how they were raised
and how they're choosing or not
choosing to do what their
parents did, Um
Coming up. Uh, that conversation
in a different way rather than
an investigatory way. Um, we're
able to have a lot of success
with those families and having
them think about, um What's that
line that they're not willing to
cross? Right around? Discipline?
Um, domestic violence.
This is Marilyn. This, um, I
have a question. I don't have
your email. But I did just send
one of to our task force
members. Um, so I everyone has
it in their email. But I did
just sent, um, because we've
already started to roll this
out, or we're trying in multiple
different territories and what
is concerning to me and and
maybe you could answer. This is
that, um, in that in that
presentation, and in our, um
In our force. What we're calling
force. It shows that if a family
has been screened out, and it
goes through the what they
screen out, but one of the
things that would qualify a
family for being screened out
originally, but being screened
into this multilevel response is
a prior death of a child as an
abuse or neglect, And I'm
curious how we could even be
screening out a child or a
family who has a prior death of
a child as abuse and neglect and
I think that's my real concern
with multi Thai response.
Is that if a if call comes in,
and there has already been a
known prior death of a child as
a result of abuse or neglect,
why on earth are we screening
them out? And how does it get to
multi system They should never
have been screened out in the
first place? I think that I have
some real hesitations there.
Thanks.
Uh, thanks for the question,
Marilyn. Um III. I am kind of
curious how New Mexico has, um,
implemented and I don't know
much that I'm I'm curious to
learn a lot more from you all
about what This implementation
is looking like, I think, um,
the fact that we're talking
about screened out reports right
there tells me we're talking
about something different than
what we would classify as a
differential response. Um, where
we're really only working with
accepted reports of
maltreatment. I can't
To the screening criteria in New
Mexico, and I'm not sure Rachel
if we want to hold that question
until the end. Uh if there is
anyone that could speak to it
You're gonna hold it to the end.
OK, we'll go ahead and hold on
again because I think our hope
was that you could walk us
through kind of what does
differential response
implementation look like in
other places. Um, I noted, we
have in statute a multilevel
response. It was passed in 2019.
We haven't really implemented
at, uh, at scale in our seat.
And so, yeah, if you could sort
of focus in on what are the key
conditions and then we can shift
to what is New Mexico? Yeah. Um
and Mari.
Your question. Really, Um, kind
of elevates why I bring up these
examples of eligibility and that
there are differences from state
to state. Um we see, uh, a range
of like, you know, states like
Kentucky have about 30% of their
screened and reports are going
to what they claim. Alternative
response, Whereas in Minnesota,
it's more like 70% are going to
alternative response so it
really varies from place to
place.
And those decisions about what
should be eligible. And what
shouldn't be eligible are
attentive, Take a lot of time
and effort and community buy in
to think through and talk about
what are the reports we're
getting and screening in.
And what's gonna be a be best
fit. And a lot of that depends
on how you set up your model.
Um, So what is it you're
actually going to do with a
family in a differential
response?
So we start. Um, any work we do
with, uh, a state We start from
a place of what is this thing
you're trying to implement?
What is you? What do you want
your model to look like? And we
really come at that from a place
of values. What are the values
your system is trying to uphold.
So here's some examples from
Kentucky that you know that
really guided us in thinking
through. How would we create a
system that does this? We wanna
work with families. We want
families to be the experts of
their own lives. Um, we want
kids to stay with their
families. Um, we want services
and supports early
Um, we think families can
actually assist in solving their
own challenges. We don't have to
tell them what to do. Um, and we
think responsibility for safety
is a shared thing with our
communities, Um, and families so
that safety is not just
something that sits on the CPS
shoulders when we're not in
homes with families. How do we
create a community? Um it where
they shared responsibility for
child safety. Um, so those were
sort of the under, um,
underlying values that led us to
think about a set.
Of a system like this, So we
spent a lot of hours thinking
about the eligibility and what
should get an investigation and
what should go to differential
response. Um and what would we
do? So right now? In an
investigation? Um, this is an
example from Kentucky. They they
have shorter response times.
They're coming out much more
quickly. Um, it is a standard
operating procedure to do an
unannounced home visit on every
accepted report of maltreatment.
Um, so they're doing that on all
their investigations.
Was whether it was a dirty house
or a sexual abuse report they
were showing up unannounced. Um,
they were interviewing kids at
school before they were talking
to parents.
Often, um, you know, or and if
they weren't at school, they
were, uh, interview pulling
people apart to interview them
separately in an investigation
They were calling multiple
collaterals to confirm and get
more evidence about what was
reported. Um, one of the
collaterals was someone who was
referred by the family.
All the rest were professionals,
Um, who may have involvement
with this family's life.
Um, and they're making findings
in those investigations. Well, a
lot of those techniques and
tactics. Um, are not a great fit
when we're talking about some of
these kinds of reports, Uh, so
they wanted to create this this
alternative path. Um, they're
differential response model gave
workers a little bit longer time
to make initial contact with
families because they really
wanted them to call the family
up and set up an appointment to
meet with the family. They
wanted to meet with the family
as a whole, so they weren't
interviewing the Children
separately.
As they had just cause to do so
they're doing the same safety
assessment in both pathways. Um
they're just approached. They're
first. Few interactions with the
family are very different, You
know, sort of imagining as a
parent, you get a call that your
kid was interviewed at school.
Um and, uh and then at CPS is
knocking on your door. You feel
very differently than CPS
calling you up as the parent and
saying I would like to come and
meet with you. And whoever is a
support in your family, please
invite them If you
To have this conversation in
front of them, Um, that feels
very different to families.
Again. We we give we lean into
some of those core elements.
Lisa mentioned like the family
could request an investigation.
Um
And services and supports are
really driven by the family. So
remember we're not making that
finding, but we are asking the
question.
What you know. Are there things
you're worried about in your
family? Are there challenges or
struggles that you're
experiencing right now? It may
have nothing to do with the
report. The report may have been
about educational neglect. But
with the families really
struggling with is, um you know
clothing. They've got nine year
old who's just can't stop
growing. Um, you know, and the
the cost of getting clothing all
the time. And you know, the
school was a resource for a
while, but now they they see
them as the enemy. You know, as
bad parents, um so they
Haven't been able to access free
clothing, so helping them
connect with something like
that. So, um, we see, this is
just one example. Right. Uh,
every state has a little bit
different setup. So Colorado
would have some, um, minor
differences here. You would see
something different in, uh,
Ohio or Washington or Texas. Um
they all have slightly different
elements to their model. But
they all have those eight that
we talked about earlier. Um
Sort of like a core core
elements that that exist here
within this model. Um, but we
really start from a place of
like, what is it you're trying
to achieve with families?
And then let's create a system
that matches up with that.
And that's the part that um uh,
feels really important. Um,
services is another place that's
really kind of fascinating. Um,
you know, Lisa and I mentioned
that there was like a cash
component to some of these
implementations where extra
flexible funds were available to
the worker to address. Uh,
concrete needs. Um, you know,
not not men, not a counseling
service, not a not a parenting
class, but
$500 that they could access to
buy a washing machine. Um or,
uh, help with plumbing repairs
or car repair or something like
that, Right? Um, we really found
that, um, having that
conversation with states early
on, and they're talking about
different response is important.
because, remember, think about
how many of those families are
reported for things of neglect,
which we know are often related
to poverty. Um, so we need to be
able to address
We say to families, you tell me
what a worry for you. We have to
be able to access funds. Um, and
resources and services in our
communities to be able to
address those things or else
families are gonna just say it's
all lip service. Um and we'll
still not be addressing the
basic needs and we'll just see
these families keep coming back
to our system. With more
reports. Um, and so that's
really you know, when we talk
about services, we think about
it from not a professionalized.
Um
You know, service array, but
really from it when you ask
families what they need. What do
they say? That's the list of
services We want you thinking
about in differential response.
Um, you know, government
benefits ends up being a really
big one of just connecting.
reconnecting, Um, helping
parents, uh, overcome barriers
they've had to accessing
government benefits. Um, you
know, getting the license that
the ID paid for that they lost
or
Whatever it is, the need is, um,
because there's so many
barriers, little things that get
in the way. Um, And when you're
thinking about that truck that
Clare showed, that's just
overwhelmed with all the weight
That little thing can just be.
You know, it goes to the
wayside. Um, we've also seen
peer support come in as a really
interesting thing that parents
talk about needing, um
I want to talk to somebody else
who's been through this system
and can help me now navigate it.
I want to talk to somebody else.
Who knows what I'm going
through? Um, yeah. You seem like
you're an OK social worker, but
I wanna talk to a parent. Um,
and so you know, access to
something like a peer support
network makes a big difference.
Um, we also talk about the
caseworker as being of service
to the family. This is where I
think a lot of that feedback we
get from CPS staff saying like
it feels like I get to be a
social worker again or this was
the work I really wanted to do.
Um, rather than just being
Broker and referring out to
everything you know. Workers are
sitting down and getting to know
families. Um, when they're
talking about how the school
has, uh it feels like the school
is bullying them. Uh, the worker
talks through what? How could we
advocate for you? What would it
look like if we sat down with
the principal and the teacher?
What you know, would you want me
to be a part of that
conversation? We could
straighten some of this out. Um,
because I hear you saying you
have a lot of needs. But you
care about your kids and you
care about their educational
Success. Um, you know, so that
would be the caseworker being of
service or even like sitting
down in brainstorming.
All right. Well, I can't pay for
this thing that you need right
now. But I could pay for this
thing that you have going on
right now. And that might free
up your funds to be able to pay
for that thing You're saying you
need, um so getting very
creative about service provision
when resources are low, um, so
that that's like the social work
savvy, uh, skills that we want
to lean into, Um, where we get
to see a case worker being being
of service.
Um, So this is, you know, we
also really lean into what does
the family already have access
to, and it's like a normal part
of their routine because we also
hear from families when we talk
to them that, um they recognize
your well intentioned when you
refer to a service. But when
child protection held you
they're referring you to a
voluntary service who doesn't
feel very voluntary. It feels
like there is still this
undergirding judgment as a
parent if I say no to this
service.
It means I don't care about my
kids, and I'm not willing to do
what I need to do to take care
of them.
So, uh, because we know that
about families, um, and services
and how CPS power can feel, Um
we really lean into the worker
to
Think about what does this
family already access who's
already in their lives? That's a
resource. Um, rather than
thinking about such and such
professional community provider.
Um, which a lot of our
professional services end up
being reporting sources a
mandated reporters, right And so
there's some distrust there with
families. But what's a natural
existing community support that
they've got? You know there,
aunt who lives down the road
who's willing to help out once a
week? Well,
We could talk to her about
helping out childcare twice a
week. What could you do in
exchange to barter for her extra
help? So you're not having to
leave your kids unsupervised at
home?
Um, so again, it's really
thinking about those natural
supports. We talk a lot about,
um
You know, Lisa mentioned the
cost. Um and and what? What are
we what I often say to
communities rural eastern
Kentucky. Uh, they don't have
transportation. They don't have
a lot of services, but there are
successfully implementing, um,
because they're really lifting
up this value of how do we
access what this family is
already got going on their
strengths. Their natural
supports, Um
You know, so I think that's uh,
an important consideration in a
state like New Mexico with a lot
of rural communities, Um and and
not a lot of access to services
all over the state. Right. So,
um, it can be very successful.
Um, so those are just some of
our I wanted to throw out some
different like very concrete.
Here's what it can look like, Um
and I'll just mention a couple
of things on implementation so
that we can turn to you all with
questions, but, um
You know, we believe very
strongly that, uh uh, in this
quote that, uh, our systems are
designed intentionally or
unwittingly to achieve precisely
the results that they get. Um so
when we come from that place we
really want to think about
design in a smart way. Um, so we
take the best of what we know
about implementation, Science
and what works as we think about
this with states, um, so you
know, in New Mexico, um, we know
very little about
Um, you know, it's very exciting
that your legislation got
passed. And, um we're always
very punt when we see that
happening.
But there's a process that then
takes place after something like
that to really, um, that helps a
state be very suc successful and
not end up being one of those
dark gray states that we had on
the map earlier that
discontinues differential
response. Um we learned a lot of
lessons from those states. About
what not to do. Um, One of the
biggest is having a really clear
model that fits in with these
components. The research we've
mentioned and talked about has
those eight core criteria.
That's what they're doing with
families, so you can be backed
up. Um by a lot of research.
That's come before you if you're
following those eight core
components, But then there's a
lot of wiggle room about how you
want this model to look for you
Questions like Marilynn's about
like, is this kind of report a
fit? Why or why not? Right?
Those are a lot of, um, those
conversations about what is our
model going to be in New Mexico?
Uh, we also recognize that
implementation happens in
stages.
Um and we try to follow very
clearly on those stages and be
realistic about where we're at,
Um from pre implementation, you
know, to sustainability. Um, we
look at the drivers of
implementation, so thinking
about things like staff
selection who's gonna do this
work? Do we need new staff? Most
places don't get new staff to do
new things.
Um, So how do we look at our
existing staff and potentially
categorize them differently? Or
get the right people who want to
do work in this kind of way with
families?
Um, you look at other, um
drivers like you know the data
systems, the computer systems,
most are not set up to have
families come through our system
without some kind of finding
being made on them. Uh, so we
have to change the the data
system that's expensive and time
consuming.
Um, so all these different
drivers leadership? What's there
buying level? How are they
supporting it? Training? How
what? What do our new our staff
who are doing this need to know?
what do our community providers
need to understand when we
screeners need to do in a
different way? Um, we find that
working with an implementation
team is pretty successful, um,
and supportive of us getting a
lot of buy in across the board,
but also thinking through a lot
of different components of this,
you know, repercussions. I
Of this set up for the model. Um
so we tend to have, uh, you
know, Right now we're working
with the state of Kentucky and
we have an implementation team
that not only consists of people
from the child welfare system,
but also parents with lived
experience people from the the
data side of things. Um so
people, so the prevention side
of things, Uh, because we
recognize this is all sitting
within a very connected system
in our communities. Um, And
then, finally, we really take
seriously.
Improvement cycles. So
recognizing you got to start
something, Try it out. Learn
from it. Adjust. Um And we do
that over and over and again
until we feel like we've got the
right model for the right place.
Um, and that takes some time.
You know, I think we're talking
like successful implementation,
I think they say is a good 2 to
4 year process. Um, so, you
know,
Yeah. Oh, I just want to pause
you there because we're running,
um somewhat over time, and I
wanna make sure this group both
has the chance to ask questions,
but then also hear from what are
we? Where are we? Currently as a
state? Um, when it comes to
implementation, What do we still
kind of need to do? So I wonder
if we might now kind of shift
back to the group in the room or
on screen to either ask
questions and then potentially
hear, Um, Secretary Casados. I
know you have your team here to
think about what
Currently doing where are we
with implementation and what,
um, is still needed.
Absolutely.
Do you wanna Maybe start there?
Just sort of. Where are we? As a
state.
Sure. Great. Uh, well, that is
loud. Thank you very much. Wait.
Why is it so?
Um eight.
Sounds like I'm talking to my
kids.
Thank you both very much for
that presentation. I really do
appreciate it. I want to address
them. I think she shared a
handout with everybody. We got
that. That is an old handout
that was implemented and
Um, those are you know this
Specific incident was screened
out. But do they have these
other factors that look at that?
And so, um, we have completely
revamped what That's looking
like now, Um, in addition to the
screen out with this, we're
looking at those that are
screened in as well, Um Cathy is
leading that and I think she's
gonna talk a lot today about
what that looks like, But just
so you all know we're working
with, um Casey family programs
to really develop what that
needs to look like, right?
They're putting a
Model in place for us to be able
to follow. They've given her
timelines and you know we're
working towards that right now.
But it is something under family
services where we really want to
get it up and running and do it,
You know, across the state to
fill those positions as they
said, you know, we've got to
really find the right people
that wanna do that type of work.
And so, um, but, you know,
prevention and intervention is
really what the department is
really trying to focus on and
setting up family service.
This was
Very intentional in being able
to do that, to be able to look
at those cases and you know, I
think Claire said it earlier
this morning, right? We're going
from challenge to crisis and for
us, we wanna focus on those
families that are just having
challenges right now that need
that additional support.
Um, you know, all of our
programs have those emergency
funds that Cathy is working in.
We've made sure to have that so
that if they do just need some
assistant time frame, so unless
there's other specific
questions, I really wanna give
her an opportunity. I feel like
every time we ask her to present
on family services, we tell her
to cut her presentation in half.
And so, um
I. I think you know there's a
lot that she's working on and
doing And so if you're OK with
that, I'd like to hear
presentation so she can talk
about is
Can I just ask, Um, two quick
questions that hopefully would
be incorporated in the
presentation. I I'm just
curious, Uh, does differential
response. Employ? Uh, caseworker
follow up and
I guess maybe Relatedly is, Um,
What does? Uh, when when does
differential response and I?
That's probably case by case,
but I'm just curious.
And I think, Cathy is that all
covered in your presentation.
It's a it's a little muffled.
It's my fault. Did you want us
to
Yep, Sorry. It's I didn't turn
my mic on, Um
Um, for the group. Would it be
helpful if we sort of shift to
now? Here's what other seats are
doing now. What are we doing?
What's the current state? What's
the timeline? What's we have to
be doing so that you all can
hear? Sort of. Where do we
potentially have additional
needs and gaps with that that
work for the group? OK, let's
plan to do that. Amy and Lisa
thank you so much for watching
us through kind of what
implementation looks like in
other places. Um
Cathy, do you wanna just
transition to to chatting? Um
and I think you all passed out.
Formal handouts on is that
right?
Um, there is a formal handout of
her, Um, family services in your
packet. What That packet is? Oh,
yeah.
What That packet is, is the
information that was given out
in Carlsbad, and it may have
been some of it that you've
scanned and already put on
there. Um, but I just wanted to
make sure everybody had a
packet. Yeah, and, uh, come on.
Come on in. Kathy, we're gonna
swap you for me for those of you
online. I know they have a
PowerPoint that is sort of
family services. Um, and the
focus there, it's actually in
the share file for our task
force members, and what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna just let
Cathy start talking. And then
Nathan, you and I
The scenes can red drop into the
chat, a copy of that so folks
that are online, um, can
actually access it.
But, Cathy, I'm just gonna give
you the mic to now talk about
Here's where we are in New
Mexico. Rachel before Cathy
starts Can we take like a three
minute? Yes. I'm sorry. You
probably have been sitting here
a really long time. Um, take a
real quick break. We'll come
back and we'll shift to what are
we doing? And that kind of thing
and that'll get let Nathan and I
make sure
All right, for those of you
online.
For those of you online. We put
a copy of the presentation into
the chat. Um and I think Kathy
is gonna just kind of talk
through not necessarily in
order, so we'll turn it over to
her to just share. What is New
Mexico currently doing.
But you all, um on teams have
the presentation dropped in
chat, so you can kind of see a
hard copy.
Hello, everyone. I'm here to
answer all responses. Uh and
Family preservation.
I have a very soft voice.
All right. So you have a
PowerPoint and, um, but we're
not gonna start with the
PowerPoint. We're gonna just
dive into differential response
and then kind of work our way
into family preservation.
Um, in New Mexico. We have a
multilevel service is what
differential response is called
here. Um, and that was passed in
2019. I believe it's when that
happened. Um, and it started
with quotes called Phase one,
And that's our family outreach
program where we do take in.
Take those screened out
referrals from sky and its
families who it's obvious that
they have some needs generally.
I would say 80% of them are
concrete needs that are needed.
It's like help with getting a
wheelchair for their child. Um,
maybe some food insecurity that
we can support and, uh, we
contact those families and say,
Um, Hey, we noticed that we did
receive a referral. How can we
help you? It's not. It doesn't
reach the level of abuse and
neglect. But we do wanna support
you. And then we connect those
families that in to a community
provider that we do a warm hand
off for from us.
The community provider, and they
set them up with case management
or the services that they need.
So this actually fulfills that
one gap that Claire talked about
where there is a gap between the
screen out calls, but they still
need some services. So this is
one entry into getting those
services and that's part of our
prevention services. It's one
door to come in to be able to
get those the second phase of
our multilevel services will is
in the design design phase. And
when I say that
Because we're working with Casey
family programs to really, um,
design. What type of model is
gonna work? Best for New Mexico
and how we, uh support families.
And so the idea is that the call
will come into sky. It is
screened in, however, it doesn't
It doesn't need to go to the
investigation because it's not
an emergency or it's not a
priority one. Generally, we're
thinking it will be neglect
cases that come in and was it
What kind of supports can we
give?
And so we would. It would go. I
use my hands. But it goes down
this pathway for a differential
response, which is more of a
community pathway. Family
assessment. You see it called
all different things because
it's what are you honing in on
with that family, the number one
thing that's gonna happen with
that family, though rather than
an investigation, is it? It
starts with a family assessment.
Where can we help you? What
helps do you need? Um and then
we'll kind of go from there.
That doesn't mean
We won't go to a home and it's
much worse than what we thought
and there wouldn't be a bridge
back to investigations. But the
important thing is is that we're
really working with families to
say. How can we help? And, um,
so if we get out there and our
family is struggling with, uh,
medical neglect, or, uh, some
physical neglect or multiple
areas of neglect, then we can
support them with different
servicess intensive case
management services is what I
call them. Um, it's
Saying that we're gonna hold
your hand through this to be
able to get these services and
so, um, when I say we're in the
design phase we're working with
Casey.
Family programs, and they gave
me an outline of what they
thought they could do, and that
it would take six months. Well,
because six months seems like a
really, really long time. Um, I
asked if they could do it in 90
days, so we're gonna try to do
as much of an abbreviated
version as you can to get this
designed so we can get those the
programming out and get folks
hired and on to be able to
really support uh, families and
so
We're going to work
simultaneously and doing some
job description design as we're
working on model design, if that
makes sense, because we already
know the basics of differential
response or multilevel response
and what what's needed and
what's gonna be expected,
Because, um, the workforce is
gonna be key to being able to
stand this up. Um
So that's in a nutshell. Where
we're at I. I anticipate that I
hope we have those jobs out
there and everything stood up.
Um, the the goal would be, I
think now, uh, for secretary
Quesada, but she is, uh, knows
that we need to do this
thoughtfully, and we need to do
it correct for New Mexico And
so, but we are working hand in
hand with Casey Family program
to really be able to be
thoughtful.
About this next phase of our
differential response.
So I don't I hope that answered.
Your question, is we? We haven't
hired this phase two level
personnel yet. We do have phase
one, and it's statewide.
So
The phase two were working to
design right now, um, and with
Casey family program, So to say
the go date is January 1 I. I
can I'm not gonna do that,
Because that never works say
things like that. So
Um, but we hope to have it.
Phase two fully designed and the
implementation beginning I, I
think in 4 to 5 months, that's
what that would look like. That
doesn't mean that we're not
really supporting families in a
different way. Now with our
family preservation services,
and I can talk more about that,
because we have created a lot
more doors for families to come
in. And the the hope is that
we're doing that then they're
not even getting to sky to be
able to come in for, uh,
differential.
Or investigation, so
I don't know if that makes
sense. But as we open all these
doors up to provide services to
families, I think it really
makes a difference on how many
referrals are gonna even come
into sky too. So we're actively
working one area of family
preservation family that are
prevention services, and you can
tell how old I am in child
welfare. I see family
preservation. So, um
I don't know if that helps. I
can read you the whole outline,
but it That's the six month plan
and I asked him for a 90 day
plan on, uh, to work on that
implementation.
And they're happy to come to New
Mexico and meet with you also on
what they're doing with us, they
said they would be more than
happy to meet with any
legislators or legislative
bodies. So
Um, we can do that. They're even
more excited. They're super
excited about differential
response. So
Kind of fun to OK.
So let's talk about
Further questions,
OK?
Let's let's go into family
preservation just a bit more,
and you'll see how what I'm
talking about when I talk about
the different doors that
families can come into, Um so
Secretary Casad has talked many
times about family services and
the idea that we're elevating
prevention.
Um and really bringing together
all the different prevention
services that we have, um,
within CYD and and putting them
basically under one division,
and what this does is help us to
collaborate and also helps us to
know what all the programs are
that are out there so we can
support others and support. Um
I call it our internal marketing
and external marketing because
we have to make sure that we all
know what's available. And so we
took our our community pathway
of programs, which is
community-based prevention,
intervention and reunification.
We took keeping families
together, which is a supported
housing program, uh, through
that uses 10 of dollars. And,
um, we brought over our We
brought family outreach together
that phase one screened out that
I talked about. We
I brought over domestic violence
brought over, um, the car
program.
And different. Um JJ programs
such as youth mentoring.
Andino's is coming to a family
services. And, um then, of
course, all of multilevel
response, which is being built
out in our family resource
centers, which is another new
area for us to do.
So, um
I don't know if any of you have
heard about community based
prevention, intervention and
reunification or CV PIR. It's
really has different phases of
Working with families, depending
on what intensity they need. So
it has family services. It has,
um intensive family services. It
has reunification. It has
different areas, but, um, the
One phase uses what we call
family connections curriculum,
and that's what our also our in
home services, which I failed to
mention, uh, has come over to
family services. They're all
using the family connections
Curriculum, which is in the
California clearinghouse, and,
um, it it's designed to work
with, uh, zero families with 0
to 17, which is hard to find a
curriculum that's gonna do that
entire, uh, span, but it really
is the the working with families
and and we're seeing now.
What impact that's gonna have,
Because it's fairly new. Our
contract voters had just started
using it in FY, 24 and the
state, uh in home services
started using it in 21. I
believe so we're really looking
at what is that impact and and
how? How? What are those
outcomes looking like we know
CBPIR has, uh, last year had a
97% of the families did not
enter foster care, which is
which is ideally that's what you
wanna do, right? Not come into
Foster.
So, um, we since they just
started using that curriculum
we're gonna see if it's not
gonna go up. They don't have
much more room to go up, but, uh
or does it go down and then we
certainly would need to start
looking at that again. If that
happens.
So, um, with those programs we
have, um
Also have I almost forgot
Children's trust fund and be
upset with me. We also have the
Children's Trust fund board, and
we have all of their innovative
prevention programming. So, um
With the the care of one of the
significant issues that what
we're addressing is the care
program is being designed where,
uh, navigators are currently
being hired supervisors being
hired a manager being hired and
the program will have will look
Different. It will actually be a
program and by that, I mean,
it's going to, um family
assessments are gonna occur, Uh,
when those families
Come in. And and basically, if
you think about it when I look
at the care program, and I think
about differential response,
they're very similar and that
it's going to be an intensive,
um
Family assessment. It's going to
be connecting families with
services and say we're going to
hold your hand and it's gonna be
these are what you need to do,
And if they refuse to do those
things, then we'll have to look
at. Is this then rising to a
different level, and a different
intervention is gonna be needed,
But, um, it will be where we
have eyes on the baby, and we're
able to provide those supports
that are needed in the home with
the family, making sure the baby
is safe. Um, because ultimately
that's that's ultimately what
we're here.
For is make sure the Children
are safe. So, um
That's the care program, and I
know that, um it's been a little
bit of discussion about Tara
And so hopefully um, that high
overview will answer some
questions, and I'm happy to
answer other questions. So the
other, um, area that we're
looking at with, uh, his family
resource centers and um, which
are community based resource
hubs for families, and ideally,
we we have four locations Now we
have two almost out.
The contract. Then we have two
up and running. And so that's FY
I down in Las Cruces and we have
YD I in Valencia County, and
then we're looking at Rio Riva
County, and we're looking at
Chavez County getting those
contracts out. Um and we're
hopeful that we get additional
funding to be able to do some
mobile family resource centers,
Uh, in Socorro and San Juan, But
we haven't heard yet back from
our federal partners on that.
And this really is saying how
How can we help in a different
way? So
Family can come. Any person can
really come and um in the family
Resource center, they'll be, uh,
navigators, uh, and eligibility
specialists who can support the,
um families to get the services
they need, whether they're state
services like tan F or Medicaid
or, uh, with Workforce
solutions, Or is it do you need
support with childcare Because
we know that that's an another
area, And sometimes people just
don't know how to get connected
to resources or they strugg
With a staying connected because
they don't know how to do the
recertification process. Um, it
could be a family comes in and
they need support with, um
groceries or housing or mental
health services or medical
services. And that's really what
these family resource centers
are being designed for. Is it a
family comes in and then it's
how can we help you to get those
services that you need? Um, in a
nonthreatening way, cause we We
really
Realize that communities know
what they need, and that's the
idea of having a community hub
is that they get to address then
what services are best for their
community, but also then connect
with all the other services that
are within the state that we
have access to, and, um, we know
that we're there's no way we
could collate locate every
agency within a Family resource
center, so the idea is to have
an eligibility specialist who
really has all has enough the
knowledge to be able to be more
like a
Viral screener themselves and is
able to complete applications
and connect with the different
agencies, whether by zoom or
phone call, as needed to make
sure those applications are
processed and go through.
So that's high overview of
family preservation. And I'm
sure there are a lot of I'm used
to having to fly through this So
now I don't know what to do. And
I'm not flying through it. But,
um, I'm happy to answer
questions that I I'm sure I
missed on the the presentation,
but it's a It's a lot of
different ways to come in the
door.
So I think I
Now, my on stuff I just wanna
kind of add to that. I mean,
really, The focus for us is
Prevention and intervention. Um,
I think that's gonna be critical
in the work that we do at CYAFD
to address the issues of
poverty, which I agree with you
that you're at now. During Phase
two. How do we really
incorporate that in there, So
those cases are not making we
have family services really
there to assist them with the
issues that they need, And so,
um, you know, I would love to
have that conversation with any
of you about, you know, what is
it that we're trying to achieve
at the department and how do we
get there?
That we're all on the same, Um
Yeah, I'm not really sure. You
know. How do we get on the same
page so that we can be unified
as we move that forward?
Because, as it is right now it's
still lives within different
areas of the department. And
it's really hard for us to be
able to identify. You know what
resources are we spending on
family services because it's
buried in different areas so
that we can get a true picture
at the department of what is it
costing us And what is that
Return on investment? Right? Are
those investigations going down?
Are we taking less kids into
care? Are we able to keep
families together and provide
them the services that they
need? And I
Think for tracking purposes and
the ability for us to be able to
show that we really again try to
separate out family services so
that we can track if it's making
a and then it'll give our
investigators and our case
workers, you know more time to
really focus on the families
that they should be focusing on
and provide them the services
that they need so we can either
move towards reunification or
move towards termination of
parental rights earlier but have
more time to, you know, I think
this
Um, enables the department to
kind of focus on those two
issues separately, um and do a
better job in both of those, So
I think anybody who wants to
take a look at the plan that she
puts together with Casey family
services, the expedited plan.
Um, um You know, we'd love to
have your input. So as we get a
draft of that, you know, if you
guys wanna take a look at that,
Rachel, if it's something that
we see family services to one of
the subcommittees that you know,
we report out in depth more
about what That program will
look like.
As we move into a question and
think, where do kinship care for
As you know, kinship care
placements within the protective
system, but kinship care
placements, General. Thank you
for that question. I love that
question. Um so kinship care
informal. We have the formal but
informal kitchen care fit
anywhere they need to fit into
our family services division.
And And when I say that, it's
like they could go to a family
resource center and say I'm
struggling to I. I don't need I
need beds or I need this.
Or I need that right in the
family resources centers would
be able to help them now because
we don't have the family
resource centers across the
state are CBPIR, the community
based prevention intervention
and reunification programs, um,
actually have a mechanism to be
able to support them through our
family support services and and
that's like no wrong door you
can self It doesn't matter, but
there's always emergency
discretionary funding in those
programs, so it's available to
to anyone to follow up.
On that, too.
And thank you for this
information.
Um, I know that in
You've mentioned about
Contracting to have the service.
Um
Available in Rio Riba County.
Which I know you know, with
grandparents raising
grandchildren, which is a big
issue.
Yeah, There's a
Issues that I know there are.
Schools are
Very aware of
Of families that are in need.
And
Is part of your outreach to work
with local school districts.
Um, because I know
Even in in my particular area of
when you go and speak with, um
if they're in a community
school, those persons really
know, um, who the need where the
need is.
And who needs a box of food and
other, um, necessities for the
families just to survive day to
day.
So, uh, the question is is, um
And I'm looking at RIA Riba
County in northern New Mexico
because of L.
Lionel Foundation, of course,
has a
Um, a great
Group of persons who are working
together, um, especially to
support kinship families, But
many of them are the unofficial
Who are not going through the
process that we passed, Um for
CYFD, because many families
don't want to get engaged with
cfd for many other reasons, and
we already know
But they're still in need of
services.
Um, So it's just a question, um,
that I wanted just to pose out
there.
Are we working with the schools?
Is that part of your plan in
doing some outreach Because
again, they have a pulse and a
community that
Um, I know CYFD doesn't
And the short answer is yes. Uh
but there is It's absolutely
crucial that that we do a lot of
marketing to make sure that that
we
Schools.
And clinics and all the
different communities. Um
Resources actually know that
we're out there and that family
services can help. I know with
the Family Resource Center in
Rio Riva, a big part of the
application with McCurdy
ministries was just that the
kinship component of it, and
that's what makes their unique
Then, from like another county
that does theirs is we really
It's like we wanna see your
community reflect in your
community needs reflected in
these proposals to be if you
want to be a family resource
center.
If that makes sense. So we're
definitely, um You know, I
believe very strongly in
communities and schools and how
that looks and we need to make
sure that we're marketing to
I think schools but also saying
we're here and this is family
services and in schools
sometimes, um, don't know that
CD can be necessarily a partner
for them, And so we We're gonna
work on that and say we are here
to help and we do want to have
resources and it's OK to to, um,
ask for help, whether in we've
gotten different requests that
have come in in formal request,
and we found the program that it
best suit.
And said, This is how we can do
it, so we're really trying hard
to not say no, we can't help.
Okay. And then just one follow
up on that, too, is when we talk
about juvenile justice and that
the
The interaction.
Um, of for prevention and again,
many a times our schools know of
those students who
Are in need of services not
because they're causing problems
per SE because of whatever
there's always something behind
the scenes.
Um as to why a child is acting
out and doing
Whatever it may be.
Um
So I guess my question here just
for us to keep in mind as we
talk about, um, the juvenile
justice factor as to why, um
Where we have what we have at
this point in time.
I mean, I have my my ideas, But,
um again, I just wanna make sure
that we keep juvenile justice in
this this whole factor as to
what we look out for support
services for these young people,
too.
So I wanna address that issue,
And I think, um, you know, right
now the department where I'm
really trying to set it up, so
it's a department, not
divisions, right? And I think
we've been incredibly involved
with Juvenile Justice Advisory
Council. I think Nick can attest
to that step. Um, Bow was down
in Socorro this week at their
meeting meeting and really
trying to kind of, you know,
integrate the programming that
we're doing for older youth men
with what we're doing in
prevention and intervention. Um,
I think it's critical that
Those two programs work
together.
You know, we receive money
through JJ to do interventions
for youth that are at risk, and
I think you know, I've said it
before. I believe every family
is at risk population That's at
risk. I think at some point in
time everybody needs assistance.
And if we can, you know,
commingle those programs so that
in the community or replicating
for different population, meet
the needs of, you know whatever
success we really struggle with
trying to get some of the
continuum up and running. We're
looking to see how we can Maybe
the local government.
Um, uh, you know, municipality
that can accept those funds and
maybe working with the cogs so
that we have a better
opportunity to distribute that
money more widely, um, and
opportunity to really do more
prevention and intervention
services for kids.
No and I. I appreciate that,
Madam Secretary because I had a
piece of legislation that was
attempting to do what you just
described.
A few years back.
Um, but because sometimes local
government doesn't can't do the
outreach. And when you have
other community organizations
who have a better pulse of the
community
Um, I think that's where we
should be looking to engage with
them.
Thank you. So, I. I have a a few
questions. I guess so,
Basically, you talked about in
terms of the multilevel service
right now. Phase one.
Um, those are the screened out
referrals that I'm assuming that
the social or the workers take
and you said that that you refer
them to a community provider.
And so is that the end of the
contact with the worker from
CYFD at you know when when
they're referred out, Or does
that work or continue to follow
the family first, a particular
So in our phase one. We do that
The warm handoff between our
family outreach and our
community provider and then we
do check back to see how this is
going. Did you get the services
you need and S? So that's not
it's not a warm hand off and
done. There is a a process by
which we do a check back, OK,
and I'm assuming you have
numbers.
In terms of how many how many
cases are, um, screened out
referrals.
Yes, we have that. OK? And, um I
I'd like to see that
information.
Um And then the other piece is
so Phase two.
Um
I would love to talk with Casey
Family Foundation. Um, have a
look at the plan. Just just, you
know, to see what it where it's
going and what it's gonna look
like.
Um my question specific question
In terms of, um you know, it
sounds like you could be hiring
new people for this program. How
many? And, um are you looking at
hiring social workers for that?
So the exact number will depend
on the design. You know, right
now we have, uh, we've got
funding for 19 positions. I
think I think it's 19. And we've
tried to pull out as many
positions as you could. With the
funding and, um so that would be
the start. I. I in my mind,
we're gonna need a lot more
because I think it's gonna be so
great that it'll grow and each
county will look different, but
Um and
Yes, social workers would be a
part of
The hiring.
But so so you're gonna be hiring
social workers for all the
positions to, um in your in your
in your face, too.
Or are you? I mean, yeah, That's
my question. Just how many
social workers are are they all
gonna be social workers?
It would be only hire
exclusively social workers. It
would be, uh, no, I don't
anticipate that It's gonna be
exclusive because we there
aren't enough in the state, but,
um, it would be like
So we always say similar
Degrees of psychology. Would
would be, uh, an alternate
family studies would be an
alternate and people who know
family systems, so that's gonna
be crucial and then and social
work, so I don't know,
Secretary. I know that right
now. We're really struggling
with trying to hire social
workers in the department. It's
really been a challenge. Um, I
think I mentioned at our last
name words starting up a program
like where we're hoping kind of
a grow your own social worker
for CYFD. Um, and that
The pre apprenticeship program
that we started at DWS. So we're
bringing in individuals who have
expressed an interest in social
work or one of these other study
areas that Cathy mentioned and
we're bringing them in. You
know, these are like first year
college students, second year
college students, um, with the
hope that you know we will get
them through. DWS is doing 400.
So we're hoping to get them
through their first year, um,
and then get them into the
stipend program where we can
continue to assist them through
college with part time.
Hopefully, upon graduation, we
can
Them with the promise that if
they stay at sent for any
student loans, we're hoping that
that will help and then we're
using something to bring
somebody on board Debtor
process, So we're hopeful that
that will start to build that
pipeline for us, but obviously
it's not gonna help us right
now. And and then. My other
question, um, has to do with
Kara.
Um, is it department?
Thinking about
Um
A program or a model. Where, um
Moms, um, have who have been
identified as, um, Cara moms.
Um, a program where they might
live in a particular. Um, you
know, um
Uh, area so that they are
provided with the services.
Right there where they're at.
Um, I know that we've had a lot
of of discussion in terms of you
know the follow up for these
cara moms. Um, you know, it's
hard to to care for a drug
addicted baby. I think we all
recognize that. Um, so what
kinds of intensive supports
Are you anticipating? Um, I was
at the care campus. Um, earlier.
I don't remember what day it was
anymore.
Um, this week, um and and they
actually have a housing unit.
Um, where they provide housing
for moms and their babies, and
their services are very
structured. Um, they provide
education supports, if if the
moms want to go to school, um
childcare? Um it's really very
incredible. I mean, there's not
a whole lot of. I think there's
maybe eight moms there. I don't
remember right now. But is the
department anticipating any of
that kind of, um
Program.
For Kira Moms.
Honestly, I don't think that's
anything we've thought about.
I'd love to go down and tour
that
Um, I haven't been there and I'd
love to go and see it. I mean,
there's a lot of things that
we're talking about, Um, with
Kara, I, you know
We're looking definitely at a
structured right now. But
I would definitely be interested
in you know, like
And then the only the other
comment that I wanted to make
was around juvenile justice. Um
and I think that we really need
to look at intervention.
Um, at a much younger age and
not wait until the kids get into
the system. Um, because once
they're in the system, then it's
very difficult, um, for them to
to get out. So, um, just, you
know, to put, you know, um, a
suggestion that we really look
at intervention much earlier.
Um
In terms of, you know, at risk
kids and really become, um,
creative in terms of how you if
if I could build a There is a
framework called you Ride.
Which was developed by the
center for the study, and that
looks at the protective factors
for young people.
Um, that will keep them from
being engaged.
In, um, you know,
Delinquent and pre delinquent
behavior, and it might be as we
think about prevention. It might
be something we at least want to
examine.
Uh, as a framework for thinking.
About the structure.
For those kids.
He recognizes that this is maybe
a discrete population within
Children in state custody. Um,
but I'm curious if in the
multilevel response, I guess
design
If there is supports, built
around Children who need
referral to waiver services.
Specifically, I mean,
I'm disability rights in Mexico.
That's a lot of the constituents
that come across my desk and, um
and I noticed and, you know,
we're talking about access to
public benefits and the
government benefits and, um, the
stressors on families, which can
push them from challenges to
Um, the crisis and it seems like
the waivers would be a natural
fit for some of those Children
to receive in home supports that
would allow the family to to
strengthen and to, um
Be better supported. So, I, I
guess my general question is, if
there is some sort of accounting
for, um
Um, I guess referral mechanism
and I don't ideally something
more than just contacting HSD or
HC A because the same clients.
I'm talking about that That part
was done. CYFD did that part and
So I'm just curious if there's
something that, um
Would better connect families
who potentially qualify for
service. Uh, waiver services to
To get those
So
Yes. Short answer. Um, for
waiver services. You know, ID D
is it's It looks different in
every single age right in the
services that are needed are
different at every single age.
Um, and sometimes within six
months. There's a difference in
what's needed, so it's gonna be
very important to make sure that
everyone in our, um prevention
and early intervention
Connection resources are aware
of services that are that are
there which means that we have
to be aware also, and, um, so we
have to educate ourselves. I do
know the waiver services, but
there are a lot of different
labor services too. Right? It's
not just the Didi waiver as we
refer to it. So, um, I, I think
it's going to be very important
that you know, we know these
things and we're aware and we
have a a giant resource book of
different things. But also it's
about those relationships that
we
Within our communities and
within our state community to to
be able to do connections, and
that's where Secretary Quezada
has been really, really
wonderful about connecting us
with all the different, Uh,
state agencies out there for
different things, because when
there's a need sometimes you
don't know what that issue is,
And you're like, Well, where
could we get those resources?
Um, and so it's it's It's just
really important that someone at
a high level to understands all
the different areas within the
state. Uh, it's like cabinet and
community.
We often need that. We don't
know what all the resources are
so but yes, Also I asked Cathy a
question because she had talked
about both Kara and Differential
response. And it sounds like
you're building kind of two
separate tracks or programs, but
the population verified the for
the group. The difference
between kind of what you're
building for Cara and what
you're building for differential
response.
And how they may work together,
So I just wanted to add really
quick to the question about the
waivers, And so, um
On Tuesday. I was in Farmington
with Secretary Allen and
Secretary R Miho, Um for the
tribal summit, and we I was
discussing with them an issue
that we have for an individual
who's on the waiver right now,
but turning 18 and the
difficulty that we're having in
just doing that transfer and
getting them onto the adult
waiver, and so you know, we had
a lengthy conversation about you
know what does that need to look
like? And how can we solve that
problem? And I think what we
were exploring was kind of
putting together a team within
the departments.
Would be specific to dealing
with the waivers for youth. Um,
not just necessarily those
transitioning, you know, over
18, but just a team that knows
what's available and can solve
problems that are lower level.
Um, without it, always
escalating up to us to be able
to try to figure that out. And
so it's something that we're
committed to doing to kind of.
Thank you. I just wanted to note
I'm for some
For medically fragile Children.
I know there's an up step
benefit. There's money for
project waiver benefit, but the
in home caregiving supports
For for Children who have not
come into custody yet can be a
real game changer. You know
their child at home.
I just I didn't. I appreciate
that in interdepartmental work
and stuff. II. I just was also
hoping that there'd be, um
Um, that phase phase two and
well enough to if I'm not
Correct me, but that that, um,
referral for families who, um
They? They weren't screened out.
There was
Um, I'm thinking of some
clients I have where parents had
years with a child that and they
didn't have these extra
supports. And so the child went
medically neglected for
You know, nine or 10 years and,
um so just things that would
help intervene in interventions
that would help families. Um,
before the child comes into
custody, but I really do
appreciate And I'm that
information. I'm glad that so as
we get that plan put together
with Casey, would you take a
look at that? And, you know,
ensure work with Cathy to make
sure that we're paying enough
attention to that and working it
into the work that we're doing.
Thank you.
And now to answer Rachel's
question, Um, for the Cara
family so that the cara family
referrals will will be coming
from the hospitals. The not to
say that still wouldn't be a sky
referral. I mean, obviously,
we're actually talking to each
other, but, um, when I was
asked, Are they all just gonna
go down differential response?
Well, the the idea behind the
multilevel response is they are
coming through sky with Kara.
the ideas that they're coming
from the hospital and so we're
able to get
With those families sooner and
hopefully avoid any issues that
may be coming up for the for the
free. Well, I think we're right
at the point where we were going
to close. I know some of you
came. So, um let me know. Sort
of. Would you like to wrap or
would you have some additional?
You wanna talk?
Yeah. Thank you, Um
Thank you for the information K
and certainly seen you know some
of the information in the in the
presentation. I just wanna talk
about a couple things one and
maybe it's part of phase two. I
think we learned so much from
the data today. Like the
importance of these like
economic concrete supports for
families, and I think one of the
strengths that Secretary Casados
brings to this position and you
just mentioned it is the ability
to bring other state agencies to
the table. I would love to see
some version of when
A workers having contact with
the family, whether it's a visit
or whatever. That you have
somebody from HSD with you. You
have somebody from because it's
one thing to do a warm hand off
and say, Hey, here's some other
information for you, Robert, if
you want to contact them, but
that's a very difficult process
for people to do. I mean, I just
work with my brother in law and
trying to get him, uh, applied
for snap and Medicaid and we
spent an hour and a half on the
phone with somebody just to try
to make it and the workers were
great. I mean, I sent an email
to the secretary of H.
Your workers are getting it was
just complicated. So for me
being, you know.
Educated and having a computer
and Internet for me to spend an
hour and a half. I can't imagine
what that's like for families
and so the differences in the
percentage of people entering
custody in foster care and all
these different things just by
having some of those things in
place. It would be great to have
something like that built into
the plan where it's actually a
partnership of people going out
together and being able to say,
you know, here's somebody right
now you can ask questions to or
here's somebody because I mean,
we learned that in the JJ world
I can hand you a flyer all day
long. You
We gonna call or if you don't
reach somebody, You're not going
to follow. You know all those
different things that happen
with it, So it'd be great to see
some of that of actually it's
great to have the resource
centers that we're talking
about, but actually going to
bringing that to the families
with the partnership, I think is
a game changer.
Um
And then I wonder address a
little bit of some of the things
that, um Senator Lopez is
brought up and represented
Chavez as well on the on the
funny on the JJ stuff. Um, I. I
know both the Sentencing
Commission Juvenile Committee.
NGH is looking at the same bill
that you had brought a couple of
years ago, just easing some of
the language in the statute. But
the other thing that the
juvenile justice adviser Com
committee has been looking at is
separating out the money right
now that J Jack oversees in the
sense that
So the juvenile Justice Advisory
Committee gets state funding
every year, and that's very
restrictive in the sense of has
to go through a government
agency as a secretary is talking
about, But there's a federal
piece as well that we get
federal money that doesn't have
those same restrictions. So JJ
is always kind of run The
funding through the continuum
and that's where those
restrictions, um, occur. So what
we've been talking about now is
the federal money has much more
freedom so it can go directly to
a community organization doesn't
have to go so
So we're having those
discussions now that can happen
without even a statutory change.
So that's that's good news of
looking at doing the money
different because I agree with
you, like the restrictions that
are there isn't getting the
money to the kids further
upstream, which is kind of what
we all want.
Um
I think what what I've seen over
my years when I was with CYD.
I'm gonna kind of apologize in
advance. I'm always gonna say we
I'm sorry. CYD is gonna be a
part of my heart. I spent 18
years though, so you'll hear me
say a lot of wee when I'm
talking about stuff, But JJ kind
of always had like this
differential response model
under fins. I mean fins has been
repealed, but it's still under
the family Services Act and
statute, So I mean, any family
could walk into a juvenile
probation office and just say a
parent can say I need help with
Kid. I don't know what to do. I
you know it doesn't have to be a
delinquent referral doesn't have
to be any law enforcement. You
know, involvement. You're just
needing help, so it it's great
to see all the work that family
services are gonna be doing
because I know we used to see
the benefits of that for
families to be able to walk in
and just get help without
worrying about you know, this
kid having a record or this kid
having to go to court or this,
you know, having do do any of
those things. I'm super excited
about the work that family
services are doing because we
certainly
All the benefits of it, you
know, on the J props to the work
that's being done.
And there'll be more still to to
talk about juvenile justice
Because as one of our original
where we talked, um
At our first meeting is making
sure that we also keep that part
of it. CYFD is here. Yes,
because of the preventions we
can and should be providing
But also for those who are in
the juvenile justice system. For
whatever reasons and because
there's also learning
disabilities. There's a whole
plethora of other issues that a
lot of these young people that
are in the system that to me
shows we haven't been only that
I talked to parents that I've
talked to a couple of recent
parents who have a child within
the system right now.
One son is on a spectrum And yet
you have an after effect of a
child acting out.
Um, And I mean that that's much
more to talk about. But
If our parents don't have tools
and know how to deal with as a
child grows, those issues don't
disappear. Just, um and then
they get into the larger system
of corrections because of other
issues that
Systemically. We have not
addressed and parents and
families need to have tools
because maybe they don't know
who to go Talk to. Maybe the
diagnosis came and they don't
know how to a
And and how do you deal with a
child who has ADHD and that, you
know, I mean, there's just a
whole bunch of issues that
I think this is a good start,
but we can't wait.
Because we already have Children
support and their families,
right? So as part of, I know to
come
That I always
So thank you.
And and I forget to add one more
thing. I'm sorry.
A recommendation I would make
Secretary because we did it on
the juvenile justice side when
we've talked about the
difficulty in finding social
workers and those kinds of
positions, you know, for the
longest time when I was there,
Um, you had to have a degree to
be a A JP, too, You know, have a
supervising caseload and we we
were able to work with state
personnel Get that changed at
one point where you could look
at experience and those were
some of the best workers. We
ended up promoting because these
are kids that grew up in those
neighborhoods that knew these
kids that had been to those
situation.
And so there's a real benefit to
taking away some of those
restrictions of Oh, you have to
have this degree in order to
Do this kind of work. I
apologize, and because that that
real life experience of people
was was a game changer to these
families, they connected in ways
that most of our workers that
just had this college education
and you know had and, uh and so
I would encourage to continue to
look at those kinds of
opportunities where these
positions weren't so restrictive
with the required degree, but
really that experience can can
really play a difference for for
getting people into these
positions that wouldn't
otherwise qualify.
Thanks, Nick. I think we have
relaxed. Some of those
requirements. Um
And I think it's been
Mixed reviews with, um what's
been re well, Nick, you are a
perfect segue, because, um, we
are over time, but one thing
we've done, um, for you all.
This is just for the members of
the task force. If you wanna
either go to this quick link or
do a QR code, and if you wanna
write down, we'll have we have
the same document for every
meeting. If you want to write
down for the rest of the group
just to put in our notes.
Recommendations you want to
consider or come back to related
to the topic. You can do that.
What it'll do is it'll take you
to. Um Oops. Oh, hold on.
Hold on. I'll go back. Um, it'll
take you to a pad You shouldn't
have to log in to anything. But
this is both for um those of you
on teams. I'll drop it in those
of you on the task force. You
can just add a note to one of
these columns about
recommendations you wanna start
capturing for the group as we go
along? That's where it'll take
you. This is the QR code. Um,
and they'll bitly if you wanna
just go in shouldn't have to
link. Uh, create any logins or
anything. You just add a note.
Um and for those of you on teams
if you are on the task force,
this is for you, Um, to capture
recommendations, So you've got
it in the chat now.
So there you go.
And our next meeting is
workforce. We probably won't
have as many outside folks just
because it's not an area where
we're sort of
New or trying to look to other
states as quite as much. Um, but
workforces are next topic. Well,
let me see. I've got it right
here.
This is our schedule. July is
workforce.
And we have for example, Uh, I
know several of you, Nick, Who's
out there? Jessie had been on
the Kevin pilot team and had
have already developed some
recommendations around workforce
that we asked for, for example,
for for those groups to kind of
share.
Um, within the task force. What
Some of those have been, um and
will also bring some
information just around. What
has the state done so far to try
to increase kind of social work?
That's what we've got for you.
So thank you all. And we went a
little bit longer today. So
thank you for all of your time
for those of you who came up for
those of you who are on teams.
Thanks so much.
