Chair. Senators, we have
adoption of the committee report
and there's there's a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
President, now being 11:59 a.m.,
a move we adjourn until 12:01
p.m. The Senate will come to
order.
Mr. President, I ask you N's
consent that the rules be
suspended. The journals show all
those present in this morning's
and approved, subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. no
objection. It is so ordered.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. You unanimous
Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President, asking
the consent of the Senate where
the record show that all action
for placing House Bill one on
final passage and it on final
Mr. President and members of the
body, this is the feed bill. Uh,
there's money in there for the
feed bill for us. Uh, there's
money for the fire reclamation,
And with that I yield to Senator
Burke.
Oh, we're gonna go Senator, uh,
Senator Stefanik's first.
wildfires and the floods, and I
thank Senator Byrd for
describing everything that's
gone on in Lincoln County and it
affects Otero County as much.
occurred is in the hermit's Peak
area as well. It's happened in
the floodings happened in Rio
Ribo that we'll hear about.
We've had pictures of, uh,
for the Mescalero damages. We
have $100 million to energy,
minerals and natural resources
to work with Homeland Security.
We have another $10 million to
Homeland Security.
interest loans to replace and
repair the damages, and I hope
all of our colleagues here will
understand the plight that
happens to all of the areas that
I just would like to uh expand a
little bit on, on our discussion
earlier today.
Uh, there are hundreds and
hundreds of people without homes
from, from FEMA, but uh to
purchase uh mobile homes and the
small homes so they can actually
get people out of hotels who
have been there, by the way, for
costing the community, um, just
thousands and thousands of
dollars on a daily basis, um.
If you have not been to Reydoso,
and I know most of you have not,
uh, Rodoso, uh Rodoso Downs, uh,
yeah, the little things that we
don't think about.
There's a berm behind.
But that burm has never seen
this kind of water flow before
and so, uh, there's a good
chance in the next day or two
that that berm is literally
shut down Rodoso Down's, uh,
either for a few weeks or for
the rest of the season and how
was Ridoso built? Well, built on
tourism.
And a big part of that tourism
displaced, uh, uh, negative
things have happened to
businesses, um, how are these
people going to get insurance?
How are they going to get the
money from their insurance to
Um, for Homeland Security, uh,
for the next 2 years to be in
Ridoso when needed in Lincoln
County so that they can help
people fill out what paperwork
that will probably be do them in
the first place. So there's a
lot in this bill that will help
uh the uh folks of Lincoln
County.
60 to 70% chance of rain in that
area for the next 5 to 6 days.
And
As I mentioned again this
morning, when it burns.
running off the roof off a well
polished car.
Uh, down into canyons and those
canyons fill up very, very
quickly and that's where you
start losing houses, you start
coming into Lincoln and Rodoso
Rodoso Downs simply by
streamlining the process instead
of waiting for weeks and months
Lincoln and Rodosa will, uh,
then, uh, send that up to, uh,
the board of Finance who will be
the physical agent they have
money in the bank right now and
immediately once FEMA tells us
what to do and then.
Once the FEMA money physically
shows up.
The city or.
basically borrowed it's a 0%
interest, uh, loan. There's no
payback on it. It's a $1 for
dollar, uh, transfer, uh, they
get $1 in Lincoln and then
Vegas area last 2 or 3 years,
uh, this is, uh, an idea that
many of us in the legislature as
well as the administration.
And I wanna thank the governor,
uh, by the way, for her support
money to, to, uh, recover their
homes, uh, to start rebuilding
their lives, so Mr. President,
thank you very much for that
amount of time and uh we're all
to, to yield, uh, this is one of
those things that you guys,
we've all seen the devastation
of fire around New Mexico. Uh,
didn't really get into a town
and have the, the disastrous
effects that this has had, uh.
This bill is extraordinarily
And we need to think past what's
going to happen when everybody's
trying to move back in.
When they want to build their
houses back.
those sort of things start
occurring. Already in the city
of Alamogordo insurance agents
have refused to write.
But those places like
Cloudcroft, like Silver City,
uh, Capitan, Santa Fe, places
That the legislature needs to
consider as as we go forward on
how in the world we're going to
be able to help people if they
can no longer.
Thank you Senator Greggs. We do
have further debate, we have
Senator Perle.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'll,
I'll be brief. I just, I just
wanted to say, you know, it's,
That when these issues come up,
where government fails.
And trust me, government has
failed every time we have one of
these fires. That's, that's the
one consistent in all of this is
complete strangers.
You know, my family not to toot
our horn, but we had a couple of
RVs sitting under a barn and.
Put a couple families of people
donating alfalfa hay, donating
dog food, the things that you
wouldn't think about day to day
that we just take for granted
that these people went from,
hey, there's a fire pretty close
to.
now.
And to see a community like
Roswell step up and the people,
the unselfish.
do something about it and I, and
I'm glad that we're here to do
so. And I'm really appreciative
that, that we thought of the
Mescalero Apache tribe.
I've, I've built so many
checking in on them, what can we
do? How can we help? They're
doing every day, everything they
can to help the village of
Ruidoso and and Ruidoso Downs.
And so I think that's something
And it's those moments that I
think as a senator and as
everybody in this room, those
are the moments that we really
should remember that, that
whenever things fail from the
government.
Point of view
The events of this last weekend,
those types of things that when
things get real.
People don't care if you're
Republican or Democrat. They
want to make sure you're taken
care of. They want to make sure
your kids have simple things as
we can take from this special
session. I hope that's what you
take home with you. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Perle.
Senator Worth
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
criminal competency diversion
programs in several parts of our
state and I very much appreciate
Senator Ortizip Pino, uh, for
bringing this up this morning
and I appreciate this being in
create new uh AOT.
In Santa Fe, Rio Riba, Los
Alamos, San Miguel, and Moa
counties. There's an existing
programs in Otero, Lincoln,
Santa Fe, Rio Riba, Los Alamos,
San Miguel and Moa counties. Uh,
there's a program in Dona Anna.
Once these new pilots are in
If we don't build the
infrastructure now when we come
back in January to make changes
now, we address the governor's
desire for action.
This basically will start that
process, and I think it's super
important to do this
simultaneously with the
ask the governor not to line
item veto this money and I would
go one step further.
Uh, I would suggest that by
signing this treatment diversion
of government, New Mexicans want
that. They need that, and this
is an important first step. And
with that, Mr. President, I
yield to Senator Munoz. Thank
you, Senator Worth, before we
And uh, although I think, uh,
Our floor leader for for his
comments about the, you know,
mental health, uh, diversion
and, and those types of things,
radical environmentalist to set
our forest policy.
And the policy that they set is
that no matter what the national
forest presents as a plan to
And what we actually have is a
forest that is way overpopulated
with trees.
Because the environmentalists
don't understand that you can't
have the same number of trees in
know, normally I'd never
complain about rain in New
Mexico.
But
What we're seeing happening in
Rioso, you know, we could just
maybe ask God if he could spare
Riodoso that rain and give it to
We need to make sure that we
don't let it overgrow because
then it's not healthy.
The canopy is so thick that many
times when it rains, the rain
never reaches the ground.
To actually water the trees.
And this report came out about 8
to 10 years ago.
That in the 80s, the
environmental groups.
uh, spotted owl that we shut
down all the logging in the
national forest because of?
And they claimed that it was
because we were cutting down old
dead trees.
and what was actually happening
is the, there was an invasive
species of owls that live in our
northern neighbor, Canada called
the horned owl.
And they were actually coming in
and killing the spotted owls.
So today we have one.
18 to 1.
And we don't do any logging in
wildlife actually can't survive
very well in them, so you have a
reduction in wildlife because
there's not enough grass
growing.
The fact of the matter is we
need to manage the environment,
Not
To worship it.
Get out of control very quickly.
Because our National Forest
Service has not managed the
forest properly.
His wife and 3 kids barely made
it out of paradise. There were
flames coming over the top of
their vehicle as they drove out.
You're still able to drive and
him and his uh
wife.
Barely made it out.
to keep that fire under control
a little bit and it didn't wipe
out that entire.
Community.
But Paradise, same problem we
have here.
logging, there's no more
managing our forest.
In fact, we seem to think it's
better for air pollution to burn
down trees.
Than it is to log and create
But most of it comes from our
enemy.
And I'm gonna start calling them
our enemy because that's what
they are. We get most of our
lumber from China.
From China.
accountable.
For managing the forest in New
Mexico and if that means our
attorney general needs to
actually start filing some
lawsuits, then that's what we
need to do. Thank you, Mr.
President.
there and toured the fires and,
and saw the flooding the day
before big flood happened
through town and talked to
people. First of all, I want to
thank the state employees from
To the tune of about $50
million.60 million dollars. It's
gone to Ener, it's gone to
Homeland Security. FEMA has been
Nobody was there but us.
There's no business there.
The lumberyard was wiped out
that day, the day before we got
there.
So if you want to fix your home,
School is starting.
What's that gonna look like?
The trailer park at the Y to go
to Elmo Gordo.
To that community, to that
survival of that system of those
people that live there, that
were born and raised, that
worked there, that owned
businesses.
Where is he going to go and
where is he going to go to
school?
Think about that for a minute.
to, the state employees were
working hard and in tune with
them. It was the federal
government side that they were
having issues with.
So with that, Mr. President.
sent the records show the record
has been called and all those
voting in the affirmative are
present and though afirmative
vote in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
House Bill 1 has duly passed the
Senate. Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. I yield to Senator
Linda Lopez. Senator Linda
There's been a motion in the 2nd
and an objection, Senator Bran
to be state your objection. Mr.
Pros I object to Nano's consent,
uh,
there's a unanimous consent.
A motion for CEDA, the clerk to
call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Oh.
Senator Burr. Senator Burke
votes yes.
Senator Campos. So Gilbert Pitts
Center Duhick votes yes. Center
Gaos.
No, ma'am. votes no.
Center Gonzalez. Yes. Centra
Senator Hemphill votes yes.
Center Hickey. Yes. Sendra
Hickey votes yes. C Avisoto.
yes.
Centra McCutcheon Centra
McCutchen boths noent McKenna.
Yes. McKenna votes yes. C Morse.
Send your avail votes yes.
Sinornier.
Center Neibert votes no. Senator
O'Neill. O'Neill O'Neill votes
I explain my vote, please.
Center hurdle votes? No. Center
pope.
Center Pope votes yes, center
Rodriguez.
excused center share.
Oh. Center share votes no.
Centercendo.
Senator Stewart votes yes.
Senator Tollman. Yes, Tommen
votes yes center Woods.
Yeah
Center B.
Senator Burr votes no.
But I have voted 25 in the
affirmative, 13 in the negative.
you, members. Um, you know, we
embarked on this special session
for one reason in that
proclamation, we all know what
it is, Mr. President. It was
crime front and center number
one crime.
especially in our urban areas.
We had an opportunity here and I
want to thank the governor as
well for presenting these bills
and having the courage to step
forward to make an effort to do
of the crime problem in New
Mexico we had an opportunity
here, albeit.
There were issues. There's some
issues in those bills. I have to
Why deny progress in pursuit of
perfection.
Here we could move the needle,
maybe not where we need it to
want to thank those that, and I
want to thank my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle for
for their participation in the
relief for Riodoso.
They badly needed it, something
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Baca. Senator
Morris, you have 3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. President, I had
to stand and, um,
Gosh, we stuck it to the
governor and once again, we did
it to Susannah Martinez and we
we stuck it to Michelle Luhan
Grisham. Now, it's hard for me
as someone who opposes her
politically to say that, even
had a duty to actually do these
bills, and the majority decided
not to do them. Uh, we had the
bills on fentanyl. We had bills
with racketeering, we had bills
on competency. Uh, we had bills
about
that, we just, we just uh got
out of here, passed the bill
real quickly, thank goodness we
pass it for Ridoso, but that's
not why we were here. We're here
to address crime.
And the 2nd time in a row that
listening. She worked really
hard the last 8 years, and you
did too, Mr. Lieutenant
Governor, to get this majority
that she has. Maybe she needs a
little more Republicans here.
Maybe she needs a Republican
legislature here to actually
what's happening nationally and
the trend that's going on, we
will actually be able to address
crime issue next year and you
all we have actually able to do
it. We just need better
minutes. I'm a man of few words
sometimes, um, but you know,
with the exception of.
The legislation with the fire.
You know, what comes to mind
an opportunity and we've
squandered it. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Perle. The
Senate.
As adjourned
S D
