Santer Figueroa.
Center Gallegos.
Sandra Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Maestas
Senators.
Senator Nova
Senator O'Malley
Senator Padilla.
Senator Scott.
Sanidia Lopez.
Senator Sheer.
Santocendo.
Santer Thornton.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Tobiasson.
chamber.
OK.
We got you.
All senators to the chamber.
We are lacking a quorum.
You now have a quorum, Mr.
President.
The shop
You got it. New Covenant Church,
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Please remain standing for the
Let's pray together.
Lord Jesus, we come before you
and we acknowledge that you are
the creator of the heavens and
existence, and that is to bring
you honor and glory and love on
and serve those that you have
made in your image, Father, we
know that we have uh gone astray
that we have gone awry in our
your deep love for your people
by sending Jesus to die upon a
cross for us, and thank you for
the great hope that we have that
we get to celebrate in just a
few weeks of your powerful
thank you for making us aware of
the fact that when all is said
and done, if we know you Jesus,
we know that we have something.
far greater awaiting us.
Lord, I just lift up the men and
and completely on your word and
that Lord, you would give them
the wisdom to make decisions
that would best serve the people
of New Mexico and that would
bring you the honor and the
glory that you deserve.
Lord Jesus, we love you, we
vajodios indivisible colibertar
ihuisia paratodos.
to Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Worth to get us started.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Good morning, good morning, just
fairly good morning but still
good morning, uh, unanimous
consent we go without our
appreciate your prayers. It is
time to kind of absorb the need
for wisdom and to lift us up.
Uh, we had a
late night last night and we're
kind of in the home stretch and
so it's very good to be able to
cameras and any excusals and
then to Senator Woods, and then
I'll let everyone know what
we're gonna do. Senate Majority
Whip Michael Padilla, uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
President. uh, unanimous consent
to excuse Senators Lopez,
Cervantes.
Pope
Charlie Hamblin, Stephanics, and
morning. Um, I have not been
notified by anyone that they're
going to be gone for very long,
so I'm just going to take a
chance until we start voting,
Wortz to take us to today's
schedule center Worth, uh, thank
you, Mr. President, and it's
delightful to have Senator Boone
back and I'm very sorry,
Mr. President, today is outdoor
recreation Day at the
legislature, sponsored by the
Mexico Economic Development.
apartments and uh peace in
we'll do upfront on Senate Bill
17 is 3 times a mended, that's
Senator Jaramillo. I would ask
that our sergeant at arms go
ahead and send, hand this out
got it, so you all have it. Take
a look at it, uh, certainly, any
questions, check in with Senator
Jail upfront.
Uh, then with respect to third
reading, we are gonna do again a
5, in that order. So Senator
Pope, Senate Bill 146, Senator
Padilla, uh, Senate Bill 58,
Senator Campos, Senate Bill 495,
then we'll jump down and do some
house bills this morning. I
think the plan is to run through
items 21 through 25 in that
order, and I'll go ahead and
out. Uh, so Mr. President, now
is the time for members to
introduce guests, and then we'll
do the concurrence.
Thank you, Senator Worth. We
will start with the
announcements in this
New Mexico State Senate know
that uh one of our legislative
aides, uh, Maria, uh, Mariah,
through that, uh, towards the
end of the afternoon and uh
Mariah, of course,
has been working with Senator
Hickey and myself and uh it's
silence in honor of Martin
Michael Martinez, who is the
father of Maria Martinez, who
has been working for Senator
Hickey and myself, if we could
Thank you very much, Mr.
Sennett, uh, Mr. President,
members of the Senate.
Thank you Senator Campos.
I'm proud to introduce a young
friend of mine, uh, yep, you can
stand up, it's OK. His name is
uh David Mesh. He's a UNM
graduate in political science.
David Mesh.
this summer, and one of them
said, well, my friend, my son
has met a good friend down in,
in Albuquerque who's an exchange
student from Spain. I said,
well, send him up.
And so he was sitting in my
office today. If you would
and I am telling him everything
there is to know about the New
Mexico Senate. He came over here
on his own. He'll be here for a
year when he completes school at
Manal in in May, and he'll
campus in the dorms, who is
doing very well in in school. I
asked him what his favorite
things about New Mexico was, and
he said, uh, the burritos, and
so it's very appropriate that
list of places to go. And in
America, he said he appreciates
the really cool stores like
Target and Walmart that sell dry
goods.
coming here. It is an honor for
us to spend the day with you,
Rodrigo.
introduce your uncle and his
wife to the Senate. They're back
in Silver City. She via Canada
and he back after heading away
from home for a while, but I
want to tell you this, Mr.
Devils too. I'm not too sure if
they're truly bought into that,
but I hope.
will. So, Mr. President, if you
can help me introducing or uh
welcoming your uncle, Arnolfo
I'm sure they're proud of their
nephew, Lieutenant Governor
Howie Morales.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
didn't know that earlier. Sorry,
I was late into the chamber
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Townsend, Senator Scott,
objection. Thank you. We do have
further announcementsen Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to take a minute to uh wish
my beautiful wife a happy
Thank you, Senator Maestas. Do
you have any further
announcements, senators?
Any further announcements?
calendar number 4 1st, that'll
be Senator Jaramillo on Senate
Bill 17 is 3 times amendment, 3
times amended. So unanimous
consent, we go to that order
amendments to Senate Bill 17 as
3 times amended.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
See no objections. Senator
Jaramillo, can you please
explain?
corrected. The edit clarified
that the governor who appoints
the parole board also has the
authority to remove the parole
board. I stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator.
Saanen had a meal to close.
Mr. President, all those in the
senator, I'll, I'll go ahead and
Senate Bill 17 as 3 times
amended with the house changes,
and I ask for a voice vote.
Thank you Senators. It's been a
The Senate has concurred with
the house changes the Senate
bill 17 as 3 times amended.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. President. Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
3rd reading. I don't see Senator
Pope in the chamber because he's
probably up in Senate
conservation.
So unanimous consent, we go that
our business 3rd reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
A Sen Padilla, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Um,
Um, I ask unanimous consent to
the Senate that the records show
all that all actions for placing
Senate Judiciary Committee
explain the bill thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the body, essentially what we're
doing here is the further, um,
growth and professionalization
of our workforce and our
processes, and improving access
to services. There are 4 key
components. It moves ECDs,
ECECD's existing childcare
facility licensing Authority
from the Public Health Act to
for continuity of care, and then
lastly, it clarifies that ECCD
is the department to which the
childcare facility.
Licensing Act applies. Thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator, but the
further professionalize and
ensure that we have, um, a top
quality facilities for all of
our early education services in
New Mexico. So with that, Mr.
President, I move that uh Senate
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you, senators. We are.
I'll send it to your seats,
please.
I'll send it to your seats.
I vote of 30 in the affirmative,
0 on the negative. Senate
bill that I was able to get a
photo of the big board. Thank
you, Mr. President, members of
the body. Thank you Senator. I
think the title took longer than
the actual debate, so thank you
Senator. We're going to item
With that, Mr. President, I ask
your names consent, uh, of the
Senate that we excuse Senator
Munoz until he returns to the
chamber except for the purposes
of a call no objection.
President, members of the
Senate, I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the records show
that all action for placing
Senate Bill 495, uh, on final
passage has been taken, is now
subject to debate amendment or
amends the educational
television equipment replacement
fund to include expenditure at
public schools and it adds radio
equipment to an eligible use.
That's what this does, Mr.
the sponsor yield.
They're a compost Mr. President,
Senator Brown.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, can you tell me a
little bit more about who this
operated by public schools here
in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. President, um, Senator,
Tell me a little bit more by
what you mean by public schools?
Are we talking about, you know,
the radio programs that are
operated by, uh, public, or New
Mexico public schools, so
conceptually, I, I would
21 year olds and then going into
public radio programs like uh
KMW where they have ongoing
classes, uh, where they work
with individuals to continue to
so I'm trying to figure out is
this map for K through 12 or is
it meant for college?
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Senator Brandt, this
Senator Brent.
Mr. President
Our college is gonna be using
this money? Yes or no? Thank you
very much, Mr. President and uh
to use this, which is UNM's
radio,
again, as this bill indicates
it's for the uh public schools
in New Mexico, uh, and within
that,
Let me just go ahead and double
check real quick and I'll let
you know.
Uh, Mr. President, uh, Senator
Brandt, this would be used by
was uh something that I, I
hadn't looked at before, but
that does include the radio
stations, uh, that are at public
institutions like uh KUNM.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator
Brandt, I can't tell you at this
time, uh, the only thing that I
know as we continue to express,
floor. Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, I would dare to say
very little, if any.
Do you know of any?
High school
That has a radio station today.
say when I was superintendent of
a public school in Las Vegas. We
did have a program where we work
very closely with, uh, the radio
station at New Mexico Highlands
this is for our universities and
our colleges.
Uh, Mr. President, uh, Senator
Brandt, including, uh, our
President, Senator Brant, if I
may, uh, within the programs,
uh, our radio stations have gone
more digital and of course with
uh today's technology. This is
President. Senator, so, so this
will be um.
So they'll be buying uh.
The, the lights and cameras for
microphones, uh, control boards
and uh other related equipment
where they would learn how to
operate, uh, we'll just say the,
uh, control board and the mic
Our tax dollars.
Funding what I see.
At our university level.
That this is really designed and
intended for a higher education.
And what we have in our higher
education right now.
is a very left leaning.
And some of the stuff they put
out.
is not truthful, and I don't
really call it journalism.
It's more of their dogma.
And I don't think we as
now.
We have a whole group of people
up there.
Supporting a terrorist
organization.
radio programs.
At our colleges,
That are pushing that.
And yet you want the taxpayers
further debate?
See no further debate, Senator
Campos to close on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, I move
that.
Bill 495 do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The records show the roll has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
Senator Brandt Bodino.
Senator Ramos voting now.
Center Tobiasin voting no.
Senator Boone voting now.
And block voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Paul voting now.
My vote of 19 in the affirmative
11 in the negative Senate bill
495 has passed the Senate.
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. I was in the Senate.
Thank you. Senator Brant, if I
Jackets can be removed in the
chamber. Thank you.
We're going on to the next item
what's gonna be item number 3.
Excuse me, I don't remember
before Senate Bill 401 as
amended, and I'll yield to
been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Essentially, we
continue our path to modernize
technology infrastructure across
the state, uh, it seeks to
achieve this by amending the
severance tax bonding Act to
provide funding for education
technology projects creating the
education technology
streamlines and it, it ensures
that we meet our vision of, um,
a unified front in terms of how
we deliver broadband, Mr.
President.
President.
Thank you Senator but the uh
other clothes. Thank you, Mr.
President. Again, this is our
effort to continue building
broadband across the state in a
very efficient, cost effective
and streamlined manner with
that, Mr. President, I move that
Unanimous consent of the Senate.
I'm gonna start that over again,
Mr. President. Mr. President, I
move that Senate Bill 401 as
amended, do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent to the Senate
since it's that time of of uh
point in the session where we're
gonna have senators coming in
and out of committee and into
the house for for votes. I wanna
make sure that I can go to each
of our.
See no senators, we are voting
on Senator 401 as amended if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
Senator Woods voting no.
Sen Gallego's voting now.
Senator Padilla, thank you, Mr.
President, members of the body.
We're going on to the next item,
Senate Bill 315.
And I yield to Senator Sanchez.
or substitution no objections.
Senator Sanchez explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. We
have a
Great bill here today, hot off
the press like the tortillas are
state breed for New Mexico just
like we have the biscochito for
the cookie. We have the yucca
for the flower, um, that's what
we're doing with the bill here
Seeing a sergeant at arms have
let our expert went in the
chamber. We want to welcome our
expert witness. Can you please
identify who our expert
witnesses.
Her expertise is in 5th grade.
OK, thank you. That's a well
rounded expertise.
Senator Sanchez, are you
finished explaining the bill?
As you can tell, I love
tortillas.
Mr. President,
Mr. President, I know there was
long debate in one of our
Mr. President, I stand up to
support Adeline and this bill
So Mr. President, I stand up in
strong support of the tortilla
bean our main New Mexico bread
Mr President. Thank you, Senator
Ramos. We do have further
because number one, having young
people who are involved in our
process and being very
passionate about learning.
how a bill is created and how a
restaurant in Las Cruces, one of
Senator Jaramillo's favorite
restaurants to attend because
they're enchiladas are off the
and maybe it's because I also
need to eat, but having a
tortilla with butter and
cinnamon sugar.
Ma, let y'all sit on that for a
talk about green chili and the
smell of green chili, so much a
part of our fabric of our state,
but so are tortillas and so I
certainly do appreciate the
body, uh, wanting to talk about
this and to support this and
woman owned locally owned
business.
In Las Cruces. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Hamblin.
Center woods
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
I've got a question for the
The burning question.
Which is better?
Blue corn tortilla or white corn
Mr. President,
My expert witness said it
depends on the meal.
better for a blue corn tortilla,
Mr. President.
tortillas.
Center woods. Mr. President, uh.
The last burning question.
Senator that would be Christmas
on any tortilla.
Thank you for that, Mr.
President.
Thank you. Nice answer. Just a
Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo, thank you, Mr.
President. Mr. President, will
the senator yield? Senator
Sanchez.
Mr. President, I yield.
Knows how to make her own
tortillas, is that correct?
just, uh, along the same lines
as the co-sponsors and, and
thank you for bringing this
forward because they're just is
nothing like a hot tortilla for
and butter or ground beef and
cheese. There's so many things
we can do, so, uh, Mr.
President, Senator.
wondering what your expert
witness's favorite meal with
Mr. President, Senator, it would
be a green chili quesadilla.
thank your expert witness for
being here today. Thank you,
Senator Trujillo. I just gonna
for informational purpose for
the body, uh, your expert
witness is gonna remain pretty
busy, Senator Sanchez, as we
Thank you, Mr. President. Would
Senator Hamlin yield?
Mr. President, I certainly will.
Thank you, Mr. President. Now,
as a good kid of the 70s, I will
had a a Fonzie lunchbox. Anyway,
I'd open up my lunch box and
there would be the premier
cinnamon and sugar and butters.
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President
and Senator, that is something
that I think is uh iconic, um, I
did not, Mr. President and
iconic was a fried bologna
sandwich on white bread, Mr.
President.
Senator Tobias, Mr. President,
that sounds horrific. Um, but
a tortilla was in the 70s. I had
never heard of such a thing. So
I'm also curious, has Senator
Hamlin, uh, Mr. President, ever
taught very early and learned
how to make myself in the
mornings when my mom was
already, uh, at her work and my
brother and I were left to get
on our own. So toasted uh
cinnamon bread was something
official state bread.
Mr. President, um, I had thought
of that, but I'm actually not
even sure if it's still made, I
mean I haven't had white Wonder
sugar sandwich.
Would that be for Senator Hamlin
or Senator Sanchez?
Oh definitely, Senator Hamlin. I
don't know that I would trust
Mr. President, any food made by
some buttered cinnamon tortillas
for tomorrow.
Senator Tobiasson. Thank you,
Mr. President. Senator, I will
look forward to that treat and
Thank you, Mr. President. I
guess there's a little irony
here in that. I remember my
mother telling me, uh, and I'll
probably ask uh Senator Sanchez
she, uh, they moved into town
from a little town called Veita
who
Senator Sanchez's his family's
from.
So, um, I think it'd be very, I
think she'd find it very
Sanchez Sanchez.
Mr. President, I yield.
Thank you. Um,
So I was wondering if um Indian
bread ever came up as a
time. I grew up eating that.
That was really delicious, uh,
after it came out of the oven.
It was a round bread. It's very
common, especially the pueblos
make it and if it's really good
with butter.
I see, Mr. President, I see
Senator Shindo was getting up
for his, he was gonna give a
little history and spill here in
a little bit, but I don't know
where he is on the list, Mr.
Mr. President, would Senator
Shindo Yilindo.
Uh, Mr. President, yes, I you
Senator Sanchez.
Mr. President, Senator, would
you like to weigh in a little
when I was asked, approached by
Senator Sanchez, asked me about
The debate that was going on,
you know, fried bread had come
up, oven bread had come up.
And I asked him if paper bread
Because that's a probably the
first bread.
In our language,
We refer to our paper as wobila.
Bela means bread, oo means real.
Probably uh a stone that's
probably the size of, I don't
know maybe uh 2 ft by 18 inches
and it's paced and the uh.
They cook it and then they
Um, state bread, my preference
would be that because that's
probably the first bread.
That was created in this part of
Uh, our traditions.
Because before the Spaniards
came, we didn't have lard.
We didn't have pigs.
rye bread didn't exist.
Early on, and those were late
introductions, and I think
somehow we've sort of adopted
those as our tradition, but in
yeast and lard, that became kind
of the tradition today, so
that's just a little history,
the real bread is made out of
corn, cornmeal.
have Senator Jaamil followed by
Senator Nava. Mr. President, you
hear me say it time and time
again, I represent the beautiful
Espanilla Valley, the Lowrider
capital of the world where we're
brown, we're down and we're.
northern New Mexico. Those of us
raised in northern New Mexico,
no firsthand what a coma is and
a bolio and we know that
flattening out that round
tortilla is an art form in
if there's a difference between.
and northern New Mexican
tortillas. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo
Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. President. I want
to thank the senators for
President, I have two questions,
uh, guided towards the expert.
My first question would be,
Oh yes, Mr. President, would the
expert, would the sponsor yield?
I would like to know if your
expert is going to utilize the
passage of this bill, uh, to
teach other students at her
diversity of culture across the
state, uh, I would love to hear
if your expert witness could
respond.
other organization that she is
in that she can help with, uh,
when she grows up, she wants to
be up here and when she first,
uh, presented me with this bill,
her spill, I believe you heard
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President, uh, and Senator, I
have a second question, um, I'm
wondering if the bill does pass
tortilla competition during the
next legislative session.
Thank you, Senator Nova. Senator
Sanchez.
Mr. President, Senator, she
would love to.
think food is the way into and
into way into learning the value
of culture and I want to know
and share with your expert
And folks were very confused,
but I thought it was an
intentional approach to bring
some green chili and some
tortillas so that people would
learn. So I think I just want to
make sure that your expert
We do have further debate. We
have Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the sponsor and his expert
please yields, do you both
lobbyist who I hope recognizes
that there are reporting
requirements in this building
has been in my office for quite
a while lobbying this. And
initially she had assured me
that this was a bill for
meals are like the best policies
with a little bit of blue.
and a little bit of red.
OK, so I just want to know her
intentions on this. I would,
Senator Sanchez, if you would
Mr.
President, Senator.
The side
you're losing me here, Adeline.
I'd also like to know, Mr.
President, with this
designation, does it come with
some sort of protections, and I
say that because if you've ever
I wonder with this designation,
would it make it then illegal.
To desecrate the tortilla by
using it as frisbees at football
games.
Mr. President, Senator, yes, it
would.
Senator Bradley, Mr. President,
for that reason, I will support
this bill then. I think what a
efforts lobbying this bill, this
session, and I also want to
thank uh Senator Hamlin for
bringing the best tortillas in
southern New Mexico from Andela
and their participation in
getting this bill across as
this topic. I, I will for the
mem the information of the body,
I will be asking very quickly
for the Pro 10 to yield, so I
just want to make sure that
she's aware and then also, uh,
the sponsors, would they be
willing to yield for a couple of
questions.
President, is the president
willing to yielding to yield,
Senator.
Well thanks, thank you, Mr.
President. I don't know if the
uh experts gonna need to answer
this one, but I, I, our pro tem
And so if the pro town would be
willing to yield to one or two
questions on gluten-free flour.
So happy to yield.
yes it is. I buy them all the
time. I buy almond flour
tortillas, sorry for all you
traditionalists, they don't get
as puffy, they're not nearly as
brown rice flour. You can use a
whole mix of them, uh, so as
long as you've got a little
xenom gum in there.
You've got a tortilla that will
rise a little bit.
tortillas in about 45 seconds.
But I appreciate that and it,
and I will say as a result of
the development on gluten-free
flour, Mr. President, and to
our, uh, sponsors and to our
expert over there. I actually
Mr. President, I yield.
And Mr. President, uh, is it
possible to make uh traditional
standard tortillas with uh
Well, I'm a, I'm attempting to
get, you know, I've been trying
to slim down a little bit uh to
the sponsor, uh, you know, he's
been doing the same, but I will
twice as many of them, but, uh,
but so is there any other sort
of flower that can be used in uh
in in making tortillas, Mr.
President.
The flower that Senator Stewart
recommended would be great for
your tortillas. We have some
flour back home that actually in
Senator, to get creative and try
to make any kind of tortilla you
want.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. My
last question, and somehow I
think we're gonna see your
expert witnesses beautiful face
on a package of tortillas that
us, Mr. President, uh, thick or
thin, which are the best
tortillas to roll a burrito, a
breakfast burrito.
you. Senator Padilla. We do have
further debate, Senator
Steinborn. Thank you, you know,
I appreciate the bill. I wasn't
necessarily gonna jump in on it,
mean, you're gonna start a fight
in this building. It's actually
not a fight. These do look like
some epic tortillas. I mean,
there's no debate. It might be a
tie even what I'm about to say.
But Mr. President, colleagues
of World Records for the world's
largest flat red enchilada.
Senator Sanchez.
know how many feet in diameter
that flat red enchilada is that
holds the Guinness Book of World
Records.
diameter, chilly, that would be
eaten afterwards. But, uh, Mr.
President, in addition to
representing Roberto's fine
Mexican foods, which do make
Uh, see, Senor, including the
famous La Nueva Casita, formerly
known as Casita, right on the
historic Klein Park in the
uh,
This state bread is appropriate
and we're proud of our culture
and we're proud of our
constituents and, uh, you know,
it's one of the best things
thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, senators. Thank you,
Senator Steinborn.
See no further debate.
In the words, do you have any
excuses that you need to make.
From the chamber until he
returns, except for the purpose
of a call no objection,
see no further debate, Senator
Sanchez and his expert witness.
here today. I'd like to thank my
expert witness, uh, Adeline
McIntosh, for all the help and
all the support she's given and
the great idea that she brought
to me before I close real quick,
I'd ask if I could yield to
this body, we are dealing with a
lot of very serious issues, and
I
I appreciate the opportunity to
bring just a little bit of
lightness, but also to really
highlight our culture of our
we learned that process, but
it's always refreshing when we
see young people be interested
in understanding how a bill is
created, how you talk to to
legislators and how you move it
part of young Adeline's
experience and understanding her
legislature. So thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you,
Senator Sanchez. Senator
Hamblin.
Senator Sanchez.
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you all senators
to your seats. We're voting all
senators to your seats. If you
wish to vote no.
Typically we don't do that on
3rd reading, but I think that
our expert witnessed such a
tremendous job on behalf of the
Mexico State Senate she was
presented a medal on behalf of
every one of us. Let's give her
By a vote of 2 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 315 has duly passed
the Senate. Senator Sanchez,
thank you, Mr. President, and
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Bill 146 on final passage has
been taken. It's now subject to
is truly a cleanup bill. Uh, we
are amending the interstate
Compact on educational
opportunities for military
children solely to correct two
questions. Thank you, Senator
Stewart. Senators, any debate on
Senate Bill 146.
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands. We
are voting all senators to your
seats, please.
I voted 27 in the affirmative 0
on the negative. Senate Bill 146
has passed the Senate. Senator
that order business announces
miscellaneous Senator. Thank
you, Mr. President. So we are
gonna jump over to the House
bills, uh, items 21 through 25.
Bill 54 will be Senator Souls.
Item 23, House Bill 192 will be
Senator Nava. Uh, item number
24, House Bill 10, will be
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation. I yield
to Senator Campos for item
number 21 House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 191. See no
The records show that all action
for placing house appropriations
and finance committee committee
substitute.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, and, in essence, what
this does is it creates two
wildfire related permanent funds
administered by the uh energy,
as an additional support for
state forestry divisions duties
by supplementing wildfire
preparations, including
prepositioning of resources and
The post wildfire Fund will act
as a repository for
reimbursements, appropriations,
gifts, and revenue for
rental and repair and paint
contract wildfire, uh, wildland
firefighters. Um, the bill, um,
of services related to either
post wildfire operations or
wildfire suppression operations,
uh, the legislative finance
Committee recommendations for
uh, suppression fund will come
from wildfire suppression, uh,
reimbursements from entities
such as tribal and local
governments and cities and
house appropriation and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191, we do have debate. I
yel to Senator Padilla followed
by Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Padilla, uh, thank you very
much, Mr.
President, I don't need the
is something, gosh, you know, I
wish we could rewind the clock,
you know, 50 years and to set
this up, you know, a long time
ago. This is a very smart,
thoughtful way to help in this
area. I think that uh this um is
Uh, with that, Mr. President, I
do ask unanimous consent to
excuse uh Senator Hamblin until
she returns to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call.
Thank you, Senator.
But they see no objection.
yield, uh, just a very strong
comment
I strongly support this
legislation and as you see, um,
every morning when you, you
You know, and just showing that,
you know, um,
Where we are and uh you know the
possibilities of what can
happen, but if we can all work
everyone. So again, uh just uh
stand in strong support of the
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzalez. Any
further debate we do have
further debate. We have Senator
Post wildfire fund are both
important issues for our state.
I know living in the East
Mountains we've, I've, I've
brought this issue up before.
wildfire fun because that's
after the fact and so what I'm
hoping is that we could mitigate
these things and uh prevent them
from ever occurring.
So hopefully with the
Any further debate, seeing no
further debate, Senator compost
to close. Uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President. I move that
House appropriations and Finance
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Send as we're voting I'll send
it to your seats if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
the Senate.
We're gonna go on to item number
22, and that's gonna be center
souls.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
amendment or substitution. No
objections. So we'll explain.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Defibrillators save lives, uh,
in our high schools that we have
them in some of them but not
defibrillators shall be in all
public high schools starting in
the 2026 school year and then
all middle schools, elementary
indicate where they're supposed
to be school personnel training
for them, uh, establishment of
protocols, location of the AEDs
and maintenance of the AEDs, but
See no debate, send their souls
to close. Thank you, Mr.
President. I move that health
education substitute for House
Bill 54 as amended do now pass.
senators to seats please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
I voted 25 in the affirmative, 0
on the negative. House Education
use them.
Thank you, Senator Souls. We're
going on to item number 23, and
I'll yield toen Nava. Thank you,
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Nava to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President. House
Bill 192 is a bipartisan effort,
legislative finance Committee on
subscriber fees and users of the
statewide public safety digital
trunked radio communication
system. This bill has been
for emergency services statewide
improving public safety for all
New Mexicans, um, and with that,
uh, Mr. President, I would like
to yield to my co-sponsor who
consent to bring in an expert
witness in case there's debate.
If you can identify who your
expert witness is, Mr.
President, the expert witness is
Chief Eric Masterson, the
Sandoval County Fire Department
Center block you have the floor.
fees, uh, there are roughly 18
non-federal entities, um, that,
uh, we're paying for plus also
I'll yelled, Mr. President.
Thank you Senators we're
debating House Bill 192 is
amended and I'll begin with
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the sponsor from Rio Rancho
Senator, uh, from Rio Rancho,
does this include ham radio
operators?
Mr. President, uh, Senator, it
does not.
Mr. President, Senator, so this
I, I know you're into that, but,
uh, this does not.
Senator Steinbor well, Mr.
President, it's just, you know,
kind of, you know, just, uh,
made me curious, and I
appreciate you answering that.
I'll keep listening to the
Send a nova to closing the bill
of senator, which senator is
closing on the bill, Senator
Nova, thank you, Mr. President.
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you, senators, we are
voting all senators to your
seats.
You wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of
25 in the affirmative, yeah, and
item number 24 and I yell to
Senator Hill.
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. He no
objections. Senator, explain the
bell. Thank you, Mr. President.
House Bill 10 is a cannabis
department and under our current
law, the cannabis control.
vision has no authority to
enforce criminal laws of our
state. House Bill 10 addresses
that problem head on. This bill
This bill aims to strengthen the
enforcement of cannabis
regulations, ensuring that
public safety and compliance
within the industry is upheld.
This bill protects the hundreds
of New Mexicans who have
of Commerce, law enforcement
agencies, district attorneys,
and many small, medium, and
large canvas license holders
throughout the state.
I stand for questions. Thank
Senator Sanchez and Senator
Tobiasson from the chamber until
they return, except for the
purpose of a call.
economic Development Committee
substitute for House House Bill
10 do now pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that the
I'll send us your seats if you
wish to vote no, please raise
your hand.
Senor Maestas voting no.
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10 is duly passed
the Senate.
Senator Hill
Uh, thank you, Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record showed
that all action for placing.
House Bill
323 as amended.
Yes, uh, this, this is a bill,
House Bill 323 revises
exemptions under the Engineering
and Service uh surveying
Practice Act to clarify when.
Uh, a little background, uh, in,
in, in, in, uh, 2023, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, uh,
had House Bill 411.
Uh, that was introduced on
to stamp or survey for routine
maintenance and changes or
extensions in in the utility
systems uh within their own
right of ways.
You stay up for questions. Thank
you, Senator Shan. Senators,
we're debating House Bill 323 as
amended we do have debate we
have center souls. Thank you,
Mr. President. I wonder if the
licensed engineers at all?
Senator Shindo
to ensure that
Hopefully the designs of
Mr. President and uh senator,
and so having licensed engineers
is really a safety and
protection for the public. Is
that accurate?
Uh, yes.
Uh, yes, they do.
So, Mr. President, it doesn't
make sense to me why we would
not want to have licensed
property, isn't that a potential
for, um,
Causing problems to the public
good?
Uh, let, let me explain what's
cooperatives don't have
professional engineers and so
all the cooperatives are systems
are, are, are, uh, are inspected
understanding is our, uh, hiring
professional engineers to stamp
their uh projects.
Center souls, Mr. President and
isn't there somebody who's not a
professional engineer trying to
read, follow, and understand
those professional requirements?
Uh, Mr. President, I'm gonna
ask, uh, to, uh, request for an
chamber.
Say no objection, Sergeant arms
to escort an expert witness into
the chamber. Senator Senator
Soles.
in very dangerous areas of which
engineers are involved with
Rural Electric co-ops are
dealing with very high power
electrical systems that need to
public good, the public need
needs to be protected, which
means a professional engineer
and maybe they could be hired on
part-time contracts, but I am
really didn't have additional
questions, but I can't support
this. I think the need for
professional engineers is
they're not to protect the
profession but to protect the
public when we're dealing.
with very dangerous engineering
Thank you. Senator. We do have
other senator Shindo who would
like to debate, Mr. President, I
just want to explain that
according to my expert witness,
the professional engineer starts
by Senator Sanchez.
Uh, Mr. President, that was, uh,
kind of the point I was going to
make that
These are
when you build new lines. Tell
me the process, uh, if the good
senator would yield for a
question, uh, Mr. President.
Mr. President, I yield.
improve a system and serve new
load, Mr. President, and
Senator.
In my time when I was on an
electric co op board. We would,
if we wanted to build a new
to do is go out to a contract to
do an engineering study to see
how to do that. And that study
would tell us the, the, uh,
parameters, the specifications
the
engineering firm would be
engineering all during that time
to inspecting to make sure it
was for USDA and those, those uh
requirements was very specific
to that lender. So Mr.
President, and senator is, is
that kind of the outline of the
engineers, Mr. President.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, that
is correct. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods. We have Senator Sanchez
next.
And Senator Woods just explained
it great when we don't need an
engineer in these co-ops for
every single function that's
done every day, every task.
line that put Transformers on
the ground there, Mr. President.
So what this bill does is saying
that we don't need an engineer
stamp for every task every day,
I believe.
to get across is that we do the
engineers will look at the
master plan, but what happens
during the day and, and the
boots on the ground put in, we
don't need an engineer for
with the sponsor yield,
uh, Mr. President, yes, I will.
If there's um some improper
this is more of a comment,
especially after what we've seen
in California and the liability
out there for that particular
company that
entailed in there, it seems that
we're gonna open the door for
liability, and, and fault in
that sense if.
We're not abiding.
I have, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pinto.
See no further debate, Senator
Shindo, Senator, before I go to
Senator center to close center
woods.
Um, uh, I think what Senator
Pinto was talking about his line
inspections. I tried my best to
electric lines, hardening our
system. And, and that kind of
stuff is, is very important
because just what you're
describing, Senator Pinto, the,
shape and it's, but that's not
the engineer's job. That's,
that's the land maintenance job.
lines, and maintenance is a very
definite procedure that you go
through a very structured
procedure and that was the exact
bill I was trying to pass and it
electricity across our areas
and, uh, one of the ways we do
that is, is by doing that
maintenance work and doing that
important to keep flowing
through those lines, even in a
time of a national disaster. It
is so important to keep those.
Uh, home wells working to help
I was just trying to make the
difference between, uh, uh, the
professional engineer in their
stamp and, and what's a common
I apologize, but you did have
your hand up, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, unanimous consent
to excuse Senator Stewart until
she returns to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call. No objection. Thank you,
not pass, and I ask unanimous
Senator of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voting in the
affirmative except those voting
the negative by a show of hands
voting all senators to your
you, Mr. President, members of
the body.
Peter Wars ticket at next order
of business. Thank you, Mr.
President, unanimous consent we
go that our business messages
from the house. He no objection.
enrolled Anne Gross copies of
Senate Bill 82 as amended Senate
Tax Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
clerk.
Journals show the message from
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled and engross copies of
House Bill 161.
the Senate.
Respectfully submitted Lisa M
Marti McCutcheon, chief clerk.
Journals show the message from
the house has been received. I'd
like to announce to the members
of the body.
House Bill 161 and House Bill
175.
Reader to read. Mr. President,
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the duly enrolled
and and Gross copy of House Bill
Marti McCutchen, chief clerk
will show the message from the
house has been received and I'd
like to announce to the members
that the officers of the Senate
have signed an open session,
hospital 5 as amended.
reports.
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred, how synergy,
environment and natural
resources Committee substitute
the recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz, chair.
Senator Munoz,
I asked Ned's consent to the
reader be allowed to read all
it
House Bill 156 do pass as
amended.
House Bill 199 as amended do
pass.
House Bill 209 as amended, do
pass.
House Bill 458 as amended do
pass respectfully submitted,
senator George Munoz,
chair adoption committee report.
We have a motion to adopt the
Bill 24 has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon De Pinto chair.
were acted upon individually no
objection. The read will read.
Is Bill 5019 do pass as amended,
and thence referred to the
signify by saying I.
Those was a supposed the eyes
have it, the community report
has been adopted and the journal
will reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Senor.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senate will come to order.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended, the journal show all
those present in this morning's
session are present in this
afternoon session.
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
Mr. President, it now being
11:59 a.m. I move we adjourn
suspended to the Journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
There's no objection to this,
Senator Padilla.
full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. There's no
objection to this order.
Mr. President.
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. I'm gonna ask
unanimous consent, a committee
report that just got read in for
did check with Senator Woods, so
I think that that's just
cleaning up how it was read in.
Thank you. There's been a
unanimous consent to expunge the
previous report, seeing no
objection.
and cultural Affairs Committee,
to whom has been referred Senate
Memorial 24 has had it under
consideration in reports the
same with the recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
That was a supposed, the eyes
have the report has been
adopted. Senator Worth.
resident, Mr. President, just
give me 11 minute.
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Munoz,
thank you, Mr. President. I'm
going to drop the Senate Finance
referral for House Bill 178, uh,
drop the referral from Senate
Finance.
See no objection, so, said
Emunnoz.
Senator Senator Worth, uh, thank
you, Mr. President. So that is
afternoon committees. Thank you.
We are in that order of business
send them yes.
I wasn't ready to talk yet, Mr.
President.
today. There's a lot of willing
and dealing taking place here,
Senator.
How many times you brought
blackjack?
No comment on that senator.
lobbying you for money, so just
wanted to make sure to warn you.
I didn't lobby you on a bill.
I lobbied you on a loan.
6:30, so we'll go in at 4:30.
We're going to hear House Bill
2. There's a few more bills to,
to hear before we shut down.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you Sander Bergmans see no
further announcements, Senator
Worth, Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We go back to Ousiness
Committee reports. We are back
on that order business saying no
objection. We are on committee
referred House Bill 174, has had
it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
George Munoz, chair,
See, no objection the reader
will read.
House Bill 41 do pass.
House Bill 128 as amended do
Senate Bill 197 Dupas.
House Bill 157 as amended do
pass as amended.
adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
That was a pose.
Yeah, I have the community port
whom has been referred, Senate
Bill 498 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78 do pass.
Senate Bill 512 do pass and
thence referred to the tax
business and transportation
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I mean,
Mr. President.
Move adoption.
Thank you. We have a motion to
adopt the security report. All
those in favor signify by saying
miscellaneous. See no objection.
We're back on that order
business announced its
miscellaneous senatoror thank
you Mr. President. So 6:30
evening, so we will not be doing
a split session tomorrow, uh,
just as a heads up to everyone
as we plan and then probably
Thursday.
Friday, we will have a split
Mr. President, sorry for leader,
I did not have time to come to
tell you, uh, the Senate
Republican Caucus will be
meeting in room 109 at 6
Sergeant at arms, any
instruction for sergeant at arms
or attendees.
Yeah, Mr. President, I just
asked the sergeant at arms to
leave everything on our desks,
uh, and we'll be back at 6:30,
