Santa Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Center Figueroa.
Center got echos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Nova
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Ramos, Scott.
Sania Lopez.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Thornton.
Center Tobiasin.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you. I'd ask
that everybody please rise.
But the invocation to be led
today by Reverend Andrew Black.
Pledge allegiance in Spanish to
be done today by Senator Maestas
and a salute to the Mexico flag
to be led today by Senator.
Please join with me in prayer.
find common ground and common
purpose in serving the people of
New Mexico.
I pray that you watch overall
who represent the people of this
great state. May they serve with
energy, intelligence, and
help the powerless and may all
who entertain this capital and
enter this capital be treated
with great dignity, respect, and
kindness.
Oh great spirit who gives us
of the elk bugling in the hems
revel at the beauty of Bighorn
sheep scaling the cliffs of the
Rio Grande del Norte National
Monument.
are humbled by the hawks soaring
above the Cajado Rio.
majesty of the eagle soaring
over the Oregon mountains and
desert peaks, and our awe struck
by the birds of the Bosquey as
the sun sets on the sandis.
Help us to remember that we're
all keepers of this beautiful
policies and practices to your
land, your water, your wildlife,
and your natural resources.
Holy one in an era of government
dysfunction. Let our leaders
tomorrow.
Give our leaders the courage to
ensure that all New Mexico's
children and all families have
the education, health, safety
and support they need to live
Help this legislature work with
a spirit that ensures
hospitality, compassion, and
basic human rights that you
intend for all your children so
that our state may truly be a
Amen. I pledge allegiance to the
flag.
las Estados Unidos deer.
I salute the flag of the state.
to the Mexico Senate and I'll
yield to Senate Majority floor
leader.
Peter worked to get us started
on today's business. Uh, thank
you Mr. President. Good morning,
everyone. uh, unanimous consent,
we go without our business
Reverend Black, Andrew, as I
know you for just a beautiful
invocation.
Uh, I always like to just pause.
I think we all do, and to hear
your words and talk about.
to, to stop and realize that
they're all here and
All have an agenda for sure, but
being able to hear them, and I
think that's good. And of
course, anytime we start talking
uh Andrew conducted the wedding
ceremony for our son Alex and
his wife Tracy, so he is a
special guest here today. So I
would yield first to Senator
from finance. We were talking
about big horn sheep and desert
sheep and all sorts of stuff,
uh, unanimous consent to excuse
Senate, I'm sorry, UNAS consent
to allow cameras on the Senate
floor and in the Senate gallery.
excuse, uh, senators Pinto Munoz
Shino Campos Gonzalez.
Steinborne and Trujillo until
they returned to the chamber.
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Woods, Senator Brandt,
Senator Townsend, Senator
Sanchez, Senator Brantley, and
Senator Lanier until their
return to the chambers. Thank
the legislature. I know Senator
Nava is giving me the signal
that she's ready to go with 26.
different guests, and she's
going to introduce and
o'clock. Uh, they need to be up
to the legislative council. Uh,
Mr. President, just before I
yield to Senator Nava, I have a
Gonzalez Community School here
in Santa Fe. He's an athlete who
recently wrapped up his
basketball season and plays uh
High School here in Santa Fe.
And either play professional
baseball or become a lawyer when
he grows up, so let's all
welcome Gael as lieutenant
Senator Wirth, and Mr. Perez, I
idea first to Senator Nava and
then other members can introduce
their guests. Thank you,
senators. We're on that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
in the state, uh, today we
celebrate the 20th year of
behavioral health at the
legislature, which is sponsored
by the Behavioral Health
Planning Council in conjunction
with the health care authority
will enable and empower everyone
who cares about behavioral
health to continue to work on
improving lives and building
systems that work. We all know
believe cultural cultural
differences also play a key
role, um, throughout, uh,
behavioral health, um, and I am,
I could not be more honored to
support workers, horses, a dog,
and others who have gone.
above and beyond and supporting
individuals and the entire
behavioral health community in
council vice chair, uh, both
have been pillars of their
community for decades with
regards to promoting and
offering behavioral health
services to support. Thank you
all for your dedication and
support.
you can all please stand.
The and we can hold the applause
to the end if we don't mind, uh,
Mr. President, um, the
behavioral health star
recipients were nominated by
their peers and chosen by a
you do, um, to support
struggling individuals
struggling with mental health
and substance abuse disorders,
um, next, I would like to
and men uh partake in mental
health and recovery. This year's
uh John Henry Award is mountain
Spirit and his owner is Sonny
Harris. Congratulations.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you very much for this award
winner right here, um, next I'd
like to recognize the 2025
winner for the Lifetime Award
Santa Fe. Her father Ralph Sabu
Gallegos was a long term state
senator and state
representative. Congratulations
Ana.
contributions to behavioral
health policy and practice this
year's award recipient is Pillo
director award this year, uh,
this award honors individuals or
organizations for their
exceptional advocacy and
commitment and strengthening
statewide behavioral health
efforts this year's award winner
Kemp Award, the Stanford Kemp
was chief operating officer of
the Behavioral Health
collaborative for many years
through his leadership, he
improved access to care through
New Mexico, including expanding
the award will be given to
people who follow in Stanford's
footsteps through highlighting
innovative approaches to
behavioral health services and
this year.
And I will read to acknowledge
Elsie Padilla, Jalen Randalls,
Jasmine Pena, Denise Williams,
uh, recovery management Silver
City, uh, Laws for Dummy and
from Santa Fe. Erica Hess and
Josh Jammers. April Ruben,
Kaylee Martinez, Louise Drriel,
Paula Jackson, Albert Hawaii,
Sandra Kemp. If the body can
please help me walk. I'm gonna
to the to the chamber and
acknowledge all that you do for
New Mexico.
to lastly um also introduce my
guest for today. I have Miss
Allie C. Yes, who is a mother of
5 and licensed clinical social
emotional learning and
professional development for
those working with young people.
Ali serves on the
On the founding board of the
social-emotional Learning
Alliance for New Mexico and as a
Along with paid interns through
a partnership with New Mexico
State University Center for
Innovation Future Focused
education and New Mexico
schools such as wellness rooms,
youth peer support, and mental
health first aid training and to
invest in paid internships.
There are support their efforts
aim to strengthen New Mexico's
me welcome you welcome Ali to
the chamber.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Novas.
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
a couple of bills that I think
the governor's going to sign
tomorrow and our budget, which
has a huge funding piece that's
gonna come over, and I just
put in place is gonna make your
jobs that much easier. Again, we
desperately need each and every
one of you, uh, given the issues
actually to be halfway through a
session and able to talk about
bills that are going to make
this kind of a difference. So
thank you, Senator Nava for
bringing all these folks and
thanks.
Each and every one of you for
being here.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
those that don't know, Senator
Wirth and Senator Scherer worked
together on this whole big
behavioral health package along
with plenty of other people in
the room, and, uh.
A lot of people think that that
doing everything and I think
that this is going to be
landmark, uh, legislation that
will really make a difference
for everybody in New Mexico, so
thank you and thank you.
brought uh what looks like every
behavioral health professional
in the state to the Senate
chamber today. She did a great
job of recognizing these folks.
I want to echo the comments from
our uh majority leader and
minority leader, and I want to
aware of this, Mr. President.
but this organization was
successfully able to build
launch, uh, plan, design, and
implement a youth detox
facility, uh, on that property,
hitting the, the, the goals that
they've set for themselves and
so I think Serenity Mace is
doing a a beautiful job, so I
want to recognize them
especially, but everybody else
that is here, we all know how
critical and how very important
I too thank um Senator Nava for
bringing so many uh behavioral
health specialists here. I had
the opportunity to work with
members of the Behavioral Health
Collective and many advocates on
on alcohol specifically to fund,
um certain behavioral health
services and it was the input of
that all of the behavioral
health needs are met in New
Mexico and not just the court
involved ones and so that was
something that I'm very proud
that it was able to contribute
more of you and we know that
we're working on that very hard
and we know that with your
assistance we're gonna move the
needle in this state on alcohol
to others who'd like to.
just guess, are there any that
would like to speak specifically
on Behavioral Health Day,
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President. And
courage after this summer to
come back around and really
identify that this is an
incredible need in the state,
So just in, in all humility, I
want to say thank you leaders
for your work. Um, secondly, uh,
I want to thank all of you, uh,
I have spent a good deal of my
and um with that, we are,
without, without the head and
the head working well, the body
doesn't work very well. And so
you're working.
is so important and is from a
times, but also, um, it will
save the state a lot of money in
the long term by recognizing
that the body has a head and
to apply for grants. I was up in
your meeting in the room and
there is money start when, when
that bill goes into effect,
start to get the information,
apply for those grants. It's
years for us finally getting
there and again
for our leadership and making it
happen. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Senator Paul.
Williams. She is from or works
down in my neck of the woods,
uh, with the 12th judicial 12th
judicial district, excuse me,
and she's a forensics navigator
that we appreciate all your hard
work.
work.
Thank
Senator Charlie, were you
wanting to speak on behavioral
healthy?
Senator Charlie.
the chamber today, uh, I know
that you all are the folks who
are helping people in their most
time of need, um, you're meeting
them with care, love, and
are, you're the people who
are meeting our community's
needs.
On the front end, um, and I
wanna do a special thank you to
people to health and wellness.
Thank you, Dawa.
Center souls
assistant here a couple of years
back, but she is the CEO of the
Border Area Mental Health
Services Southwest Counseling
Center that has major services
years back. It's nice to have
her back in the great service.
that Southwest counseling does
for the southwest part of New
Mexico.
today. Uh, this is my brother,
uh, Doctor Daniel Duhe, who is
an addiction psychiatrist and
the medical director of Duke
City Toolbox, which provides
integrated behavioral health and
welcome my guests.
Senator Gaygos
uh, every year we have a teacher
from um 5th grade students from
Junction Christian Academy where
I go to school, uh, go to church
in Hobbs, uh, she brings her 5th
these young minds.
a chance to do it. I was gonna
ask him stand one at a time as I
call their name and then if the
body will welcome them. I start
off with Anna Lee Camano.
Elijah Tarin.
We have Hope Parker.
Shall we, bishop?
Thank you, Senate. I appreciate
the youth coming to.
To Santa Fe and I just uh look
Further announcements we have
Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senate body. I'd like for you to
uh welcome my shadow today. She
comes from our neck of the woods
Mexico State University, the
student government. She is also
the founder of the mock trial
team, a community organizer, and
today she is here to learn about
Thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Center Maestas
Thank you Mr. President.
Sun Country Golf Foundation, the
way the PGA organizes itself
nationally, we are joined by
West Texas, so New Mexico and
West Texas are one section and I
game of golf, approximately 13%
of the rounds of golf are by out
of state tourists which bring in
uh uh every percentage of
tourism golf rounds brings $22
so the economic impact is
tremendous and and another kind
of wonderful tidbit, 45% of the
golfers are, are uh are minority
members, which is the highest
percentage of any state in the
know.
in our in our age, but I also
want to welcome 4 leaders of the
PGA here in New Mexico. They're
on the rostrum and I'll
introduce them if they could
stand. Corey Armstrong, who's
and the head of the local uh
Santa Fe Country Club is alo
Biodsky, please welcome these
leaders in PGA golf.
tons of letters because in the
envelope is a uh is a golf pass
a wonderful golf pass, which is
a gift and it will get you one
free round at the following
Riodoso so I'll keep this in
your pocket. You play a
wonderful round of golf at one
of the.
these courses this summer. We
want to thank the gentlemen for,
for the gift and welcome them to
the Senate. Thank you.
Seeing no further announcements,
I'll yell to Senate of Georgialo
leader Peter Worth for that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Senator
Brandt, are you, uh, ready for
your certificates, Senator
President, if the reader would
be allowed to read the
certificate.
Senators there's been a request
for unanimous consent for the
reader.
To read see no objection.
The reader to read
and acknowledgement to missing
and unidentified persons,
whereas to assist in the efforts
to locate and identify missing
missing person's information and
reporting.
Act to share the following
information with the national
missing and unidentified person
system created by the United
clearinghouse and B all
information the Department of
Public Safety receives pursuant
to the missing person's
information and Reporting Act
regarding the identification and
sharing requirement became
effective on June 14, 2019, and
whereas in New Mexico, there are
currently more than 243 active
missing and unidentified.
system as of February 20th,
2025.
Whereas the national missing and
enforcement, medical examiners,
coroners, allied forensic
professionals and family members
of missing persons and whereas
persons and 15,255 unidentified
persons entered into the
national database and whereas
The National Crime Information
persons records and whereas
missing persons cases affect
people of every age, race,
religion, socioeconomic status,
gender and social and cultural
than the unknown whereabouts or
fate of a loved one.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the Senate of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
And be it further resolved that
New Mexicans recognize those
families affected by a loved
one's disappearance and continue
Craig W. Brandt, Senator Candy
Spence Eel, Mimi Stewart,
president pro tem Sherry de
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
our coffee room.
Uh, this act was, was named
after his brother.
And his brother has been
messing, uh, for over 8 years
now.
imagine, you know, it's hard
enough to, to lose someone and
know that they've passed away,
but to to not know.
That's gotta be one of the
hardest things in the world.
You, you have no closure.
letting us realize again that
that we have someone in our own
chamber in our own.
Uh, family.
Per se here who
His brother has been messing,
to have to have the holidays
come up every year and not know
where your son is or your
brother is or your family
member, um, I just can't imagine
that. I'm glad I've never had to
know, very similar situation
just disappeared and, and we see
this not just with our Native
American community, uh, but we
also see this throughout our
member or a friend who's
disappeared, who they have no
idea where they are, to, to not
have that resolution, and so I
really appreciate that this, you
their DNA and check that system
to see if that happens to be one
of the messing people, um, that
gets done anytime they find.
unidentified body, uh, or when
members that are messing in a
special family member here
would like to say thank you,
Senator Brown, for bringing this
special, this meaningful
certificate.
Other senators.
Mr.
found.
And Mr. President.
I was stunned whenever I was
reading.
missing persons.
And these come from all
nationalities, all, all, every
race, age, religion, socio
economic status, gender.
are found and they do get to
come home for closure for these
families. And I just want us to
recognize.
That these people and especially
Leonard here.
Thank you, Senator.
Seeing no further discussion,
Cenbrand.
Uh thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, members of the
Senate, um, you know, the, the
Their drive is pray that one day
and one day soon.
That they'll have resolution to
this situation as well, all of
Any further announcements from
any senators?
Senator Gallegos, Mr. President,
can I yield to Senator Trujillo?
to.
To yield by Senator Gallegos?
Deer yield
Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr. President,
I do yield.
wanted you to, if you would
start with the, uh, gift bag
that we have, Mr. President,
Senator. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Trujillo, Mr. President,
thank you so much for that, and
Um, listed on them. They're full
of all kinds of goodies, and I
just want to recognize um these
are from the United supermarkets
goodies in there. Many of you
may not know it, but one of my
first professional careers was a
grocery store checker, and I
begged the groceries.
baskets, the bags that are on
your and thank you so much to
the United Supermarkets LLC.
Thank
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
So goes.
groceries very fast, so, um, Mr.
President, Senator, I, I just
want to stand. We do have United
Supermarkets here, uh, just to
give you a little brief history.
I live in Eunice.
40 miles south, but I want to
start with, uh, talking about
them, uh, they're in the 109th
year of operation, United
Texas and New Mexico and the
United Family operates 100
retail grocery stores under 4
unique banners. United
Supermarkets, Market Street, A.
United Express, Market Street
Express and Albertson's Market
Express. The United family also
includes RC Taylor disputing.
Center Block deal.
I do, Mr. President. I'd also
like to thank the United family,
uh, here as well. They are
right next to West Hospital. So,
um, I see it there. It makes me
hungry going by there all the
time and uh looking forward to
doing some business there. uh,
Mr. President, the United Family
here in New Mexico alone with
350 more potential jobs coming
to our new Market Street
location in my hometown.
footprint will grow again as uh
my friend Senator Gallego said
opening in Lovington, uh, later
this year we're looking forward
to that and we're looking
forward to a lot of great
Cagos Mr. President, before I
introduce my, we've got a
meeting right after this, uh,
with the mayor of Artesia, who's
would stand as I call their
names and we will welcome them
as one group, uh, this morning
we have Sydney Hopper who's
president.
Santa Fe. So I'd asked the
Senate to welcome them into our
still in that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Woods.
Um, and, Mr. President, I'm
sorry it was late for the dance
today, uh, apologize, but uh
I want you to know he's in New
Mexico State senator.
A student senator at New Mexico
State, but let me tell you a
little about him.
uh, extension agent up there in
Union County. His grandmother
Midge was a longtime
superintendent at Des Moines.
Mr. President, I would like you
to welcome, uh, Kobe into the
Ebel Woods, so just so you don't
know her, she's here.
Thank you said it was. Any
further announcements, senators?
See no further announcements so
OK, good. They're coming in, so
we're gonna read those committee
reports in. We'll do the
confirmations then on 3rd
reading, we're gonna do items 1
unanimous consent, we go to that
our business committee reports.
We're in that order business see
no objection.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your rules
Emily Brooke Wilbanks as a
student member of the Eastern
New Mexico University Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation expire in
Katie Doig, chair.
Center had a meal, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rec that the reader be allowed
to read all the committee
reports that we vote with them
under consideration amended
Senate executive letter number
55 dated January 16, 2025, in
which the governor makes the
expiring December 31st, 2030.
Your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment.
Jarameo.
January 4, 16th, 2025 in which
the governor makes the following
reappointment. Lance A Pyle as a
member of the Eastern New Mexico
University Board of Regents for
Senator had a meal, Mr.
President, I move the adoption
of the committee report.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those opposed, nay?
Unanimous consent we go without
our business confirmations, and
I yield to Senator Harmil.
We're on that order business
confirmations, send her how a
now yield to Senator Woods.
Thank you, Senator Woods to.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Pursuant of the mended state
hereby confirm the reappointment
of Landy Pa to the eastern New
Mexico University Board of
If you explain the country
Mr. Powell has, has come to us
from, from, uh, eastern New
and 17 of those years, he served
as a county manager.
He has kept the county strong
financially and focused on
improving infrastructure,
service, and quality of life.
Management Association in 2017
and then 2021, he completed the
National Association of
Counties, high performance
master's degree in Business
Administration, majoring in
human resource management with
distinction. He also served, he
started out his career in
place.
Uh, serving on several local and
state boards.
Uh, Mr. Powe has served on the
contract with the best
university chancellor president
in the state, Mr. James Johnson.
They have approved 0.
the past 6 years, and IMU has a
strong financial health, the
reserves are healthy, adequate
for current operations while
allowing for necessary
increase in enrollment in state
support and the most recent
audits continues the trend.
Of unqualified or clean audits,
in serving the original baby
health facility that is being
constructed and and uh.
friend to me for many years, so
I, I do appreciate him, uh, so
much, Mr. President, and I, I
would stand for any questions
Senator for, uh, for, uh,
carrying this nomination. I just
really rise to support Lance. I
know, and it's good to see you
and your, your family here
today. Welcome everybody, and
the senator, um, he really cares
a lot about policy, and he cares
about doing.
a good job, and he puts in the
work. I mean, you think we have
to go to a lot of events every
time you turn around, Lance is
get recruited someplace else,
you know, but, but I, but I
think you're, you're, uh, you're
a real blessing to your
community and you'll be a, I
know you already are a good
regent, and we do have some good
further debate, Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
wanna
Um, basically reiterate what
Senator Woods and Senator
Steinborn said, um, you know,
Lance Pyle has been my friend
second, Mr. President. Um, he is
a greyhound through and through
in his um beautiful wife is a
grad.
family, he has served at so many
different local levels. I have
worked along with Lance when I
was a county commissioner on the
multi-line board and I have seen
rather, uh, great things uh for
a wonderful university. So, um,
Mr. President, I want to just
Go if I, I love the greyhounds,
they're great racing dog.
Uh, Mr. President, and I'm a
Thank you, Mr. President. I, I
would echo what my colleagues
have said about, about Lance and
I, I just want to stand and, and
there, so it's a special place
to me and, and, uh.
I know from Lance's body of work
his county manager in Curry
County dealing with some of the
Knodhead commissioners he's got.
community and in our area. And I
think he's gonna continue to do
a wonderful job as regent at
Eastern New Mexico University.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Boone. Any further
of you for commenting today and,
and now I'm gonna make a motion
that I asked for unanimous
consent that the records show
University border regions for a
term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
31st, 2030 has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate, Senator Woods.
I present to you a brand new
regent for eastern New Mexico.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator had a me.
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Emily Brooke
Wilbanks, be presented to the
Pursuant
To Senate executive letter
number 4, dated February 24,
2025.
See,
see no objection,
Senator Boone, to explain the
company. OK. Excuse me.
she's gonna graduate in May from
ENMU with a degree in, in
communication.
With emphasis and broadcast
journalism and public relations
at the age of 19.
work.
And in the committee meeting
this morning we talked about, we
listened to and talked about,
uh, overachieving and I believe
she's overachieved.
Board of Regents and I, I thank
you for considering her, and I
urge you to.
Voter right in. I appreciate it
very much.
Thank you, Senator Boone.
Thank you Mr. President and uh
I'm really happy to see this,
uh, nomination because I got to
meet Emily, uh, about what was
it 2 years ago? I think it was 2
people today and uh I believe
that they're gonna, they're
gonna be the ones who are going
to change the world, and I'm
really grateful for Emily's uh
passion and enthusiasm. I cannot
And so I stand.
strong support. I'm very excited
about that. I'm very proud of
you and uh can't wait to see
what you do. So thank you, Mr.
President and congratulations,
Emily. Thank you, Senator
pretty sure that uh this young
lady's grandparents used to work
at the Grady School.
I'm not mistaken.
And uh
I could be wrong, but, uh,
reminder to face the chair so
I'm just looking for
confirmation.
I could be wrong, Mr. Chairman,
but I stand very much in support
of this young lady and the hard
See no further debate. Senator
Boone to close.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent that the
The appointment of Emily Brooke
Wilbanks as a student member of
the Eastern New Mexico
University border regions for
term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
ENMU border Regents.
Emily Wilbanks.
Thank you.
confirmation.in had a meal.
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Ricardo Floyd
Gonzalez be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
executive letter number 55,
dated January 16th, 2025. I move
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Ricardo Floyd Gonzalez to the
Ricardo shared with each and
every one of us his heartfelt
story, and I, uh, I know that
everyone in the room was deeply
touched by that story, and it
credentials, he's very
transformational insightful.
He's very credentialed. He's
qualified for the position.
He's very passionate,
thoughtful, and most
forward. Within that, his
credentials basically indicate,
uh, this goes back 25 years when
I first met him and he was
working as a Senate analyst here
his ability to continue to carry
forth, if you will, whatever he
undertook and most importantly,
as he's gone through his career
working with El Paso Electric
bachelor's degree there, truly
make him very qualified, and
lastly, uh
Mr. President, members of the
Senate, one of the good things
yes, he has his job there with
El Paso Electric, but more
importantly, he continues to go
ahead and share everything that
he has to make life better, not
Ricardo Gonzalez. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
Senators, we're debating the
appointment of Ricardo.
Gonzalez
We have Senator Padilla followed
you can call this uh gentleman.
I'm not, I'm not kidding members
of the body, you can call this
individual at 2 o'clock on
Sunday afternoon or 2 in the
morning on Tuesday morning, and
he will answer the phone and he
will, he will do his job and,
the very diligent work that this
individual does, I think is a
truly
asset to New Mexico, so I'm
really excited that this uh this
confere is gonna join the Board
of Regents at the University at
the Mexico State University, Mr.
always steps up and and bends
over backwards to to fight,
just, you know, for all sorts of
issues for New Mexico, so I'm
very proud of him, uh, being one
of the nominees here and uh with
that, Mr. President, I do ask
Thank you, Mr. President. This
is an easy one. I think most of
us know Rico and have known him
for a long time, seen his work
around here, but I think there's
an important opportunity to, to
questionable judgment exercised
by certain regions, and I think
there's something interesting to
take out of that with regard to
this particular appointment,
which is RIO is part of our
community in Las Cruces. He's
boards and, and that's gonna be
somewhat unusual at, uh, New
Mexico State because right now
out of the border regions, we
really of the, of the
non-student regions, we only
have one who's really from Las
regents who're really not from
the community.
In in Spanish we have an
expression in veruenza, um, and,
uh, you know, when you live in
the community that you represent
Every place you go, Enrico's on
just about every board that I
can think of in Las Cruces. He's
like a professional board
member, um, and every board I'm
on, he's on. So, uh, the great
thing about that will be to have
maybe something that, that we
should, when we're looking at
regions and appointments should
really be hoping to expect is
that there are people that are
coming out of the community and
there are people that are
accessible to that community at
you, Senator Campos for bringing
this regent nominee forward,
Rico's been a friend for a long
time, trusted friend to many of
Represents New Mexico State
University. I think he's going
to do an excellent job, and I
think that's the kind of reasons
that we need. People that are
part of our community that do a
wonderful job and have a great
See no further debate, Senator
compass to close. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, I ask unanimous
consent that the record showed
the roll has been called and
that all those present voted in
raise your hand.
Buy a vote of 36 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative,
the appointment of Ricardo Rico
Gonzalez as a member of the New
you very much, Mr. President,
and if uh we could please first
of all ask uh Rico's family to
stand. Uh, he's a very strong
family person if they'll stand
to you the newest member of the
New Mexico State University
Board of Regents.
Go, Aggie, ladies and gentlemen,
is.
I'll yield now to Senate
Majority floor leader Peter
Worth to take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent. We call that our
Senate will come to order.
Mr. President, I ask UNA consent
that the rules be suspended. The
Journal show all those present
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session.
in full and approved, subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. There no
objection. It is so ordered.
Senator Worth, Mr. President and
now being 11:59 a.m. I move we
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session. There's no objection.
It is so ordered.
Mr. President, I ask you to
answer consent that the rules be
suspended that the records show
I mentioned, uh, we're gonna do
items 1 through 5, this morning.
Or this afternoon at this point,
uh, we will take a break and
then come back and do item
grab something to eat before we
come back, um, so that's the
plan with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent. We go to that
our business 3rd reading of
legislation, and I yield to
Senator Campost for item number
Senate, I ask and ask consent of
the Senate, the records show
that all actions replacing.
Senate Bill 162 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken
and it's now subject to debate
if that is allowed, his name is
Brendan Gray, who is uh an LFC
economist. And if I may just
very quickly, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, uh, this
young man continues to go ahead
unanimous consent request to
allow the expert witness into
the chamber.
Seeing no objection, Sergeant
Ars please escort our expert
witness and provide a chair.
increase the market rate
investments. The severance tax
permanent fund is the state's
primary tool to achieve
long-term fiscal stability. The
LOC has been carefully studying
This is, uh, is in thanks to the
bipartisan work on this leg by
this legislature, which is
charted a course for a future
with reliable revenues. However,
The fund's lagging performance
will reduce balances of the
severance tax permanent fund by
$11 billion by fiscal year 50.
The underperformance of the uh
investments in New Mexico
startup companies.
The in-state private equity
program has been has had poor
performance with the recent
the in-state private equity
program at 700 million as a
result over the long term, this
bill would generate hundreds of
millions of additional revenue
the ship on New Mexico's long
term fiscal health, but the job
isn't done. This bill continues
that effort and keeps us moving
in the right direction toward
into New Mexico, uh, today right
now as of last evening, we have
4.
13 $4 billion that we've already
generated from federal
forward that we have the maximum
rate of return with this
particular measure by fiscal
year 50, the intent is with it
we'll be able to continue if you
Senator Scott, do you wish to
debate?
Yeah, thank you, Mr. President.
Well, the senator yield for a
question or two.
11%.
So
Mr. President, we're on that
billion dollars is, that's a
limitation, but
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President, Senator Scott, uh,
we're in the neighborhood of
about $450 million that are, uh,
invested or if you will invested
Enough opportunities to get to
the billion dollar cap
currently. Is that correct?
and identify enough of the uh
prudent investments which would
go ahead and if you will, take
us up to the cap, but in essence
again going back we're at about
the $450 million mark. Thank
you.
steel having some headroom in
that program to get to the $700
million. Thank you very much,
Mr. President. Senator Scott,
you're correct. Thank you.
Dinner Scott.
A 7% loss on $700 million is, in
fact, about $35 million per
So, uh, Mr. President, uh,
Senator Scott, uh within the
list, uh, there's somewhere in
the neighborhood of about 25 of
the uh venture capitalist uh uh
continues to to dwindle, and
that's the concern that we have.
We want to ensure as we move
forward, Mr. President, uh,
Senator Scott, that we do have
the available resources,
particularly as we continue to
would do if uh it is enacted,
this would help us with the
sustainability, so, uh, in 10
years and all the way up to
fiscal year 50, uh, that would
OK, uh, Mr. President, not sure
that's.
Continue
Continuing the growth of state
government at the present course
of speed is uh an appropriate.
Ceremonial.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
I'll ask the sponsor to yield
uh.
fish and game.
At the moment we may include it
in this bill and any moment, uh,
I do require that waiver, um.
doing and how we're spending. I
say this all the time. In the
last two years in LFC we made
investments.
off $25 million a year for the
very first year. And we're
talking about putting that
towards a medical school. We're
talking about a billion dollars.
The agency wanted to spend a
This was a portion of the SIC
that we were getting low returns
or no returns on. They wanted to
spend even more in the end of
administration, and we're trying
to get some controls and change
in a fiscal responsible scenario
with the amount of money we have
and taking our investments and
really watching.
ing them, and that's what this
is. It's a shepherd's with the
LED and anything else. And so as
we watch these stair steps go to
these bills. I mean, this is
where we get fiscally prudent
and fiscally sound. Thank you,
Mr. President.
analysis states that the law
would almost certainly impair
the contractual obligations and
financial commitments the SIC
has already entered into with 20
venture firms.
addressed, Mr. President? Thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Thank you very much, Senator
Cedillo Lopez. Uh, yes, it has
been addressed in committee, and
as we move forward, one of the
issues going back is that we're
that particular issue as
the uh raised the question, uh,
it would be our intent to ensure
that we're not going to be in
violation of state statute or if
you will, of the, uh, the
place and so nothing will change
there, Mr. President. Thank you
very much, Mr. President. uh,
excellent point, Senator Cedillo
Lopez. Yes, you're correct.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
I've seen a lot of the, the
investments have been that have
been made and um you know, New
Mexico companies have a hard
time, um.
Senators, Mr. President, uh,
it's not a debate on the bill
before we go to the vote. I'd
like to excuse Senator, uh,
See no further debate. Senator
Compos to close on the bill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, uh.
I move that the Senate Bill 162
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative.
LFC who is one of our
economists. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
We're going down the calendar.
We're gonna go to item number 2
substitution.
See no objections. Senator
worth.
To explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr. President. What this bill
does is deal with a situation
builds the housing themselves,
they're clearly exempt from
property tax, uh, in this case,
uh, the University of New
Mexico.
university land for students,
uh, in those dorms, uh, so
that's what the bill does is
allows those to be exempt as
well, given that they're on the
university land for students.
working with Senator Wirtz so I
have to not work with him now.
But I do have a question, Mr.
President, if, uh, the senator
will yield. Mr. President, I'm
happy to.
think the vast majority of his
local governments after the Big
Mac changes back in the early
80s, the state gave up its share
of the property tax. I know
something that's.
districts get some of it as
well.
Center share. So Mr. President,
that's exactly my point. So here
we are as a state government.
Telling a county government.
other taxpayer because somebody
still has to make up the
difference there in, am I
getting that right, Mr.
President? Mr. President, here's
the difference for years, this
sudden the rules changed in the
middle of the game. So all of
these, this, this.
Uh housing was built by the, in
the P3 arrangement with an
understanding that it wasn't
back to the old interpretation
where those taxes weren't paid,
but if the bill doesn't pass,
then you're right. There's no
question that there's a small
amount of money here that is
the old rules.
And sure.
So, Mr. President, when, oh,
When we say the old rules, when
did this, did this rule just
something else that changed. So,
Mr. President, I think it was an
interpretation of, of an
ordinance. I mean, it's
interpretation of, of the, the
constitutional provision. The
Mexico went and hired a private
company to build these dorms to
save students money at the end
of the day because they could do
it for less money.
And so it had always been
interpretations of the, of the
different ordinances and how
they get applied in this
particular case, there's no
question in the last couple of
years, there was a different
I don't want to raise the uh the
price of dorms because well,
then we would follow that up
with free dorms for everybody,
um.
But
I still
I think that's probably where we
need to start, because most of
the dorms, at least in.
My world have been on state
property.
These are dorms built on the
campus of the University of New
Mexico. The fee underneath them
is owned by the university.
Because, however, the university
for a period of years, and at
the end of those years, the
buildings revert back to the
University of New Mexico because
they use that framework, that's
this is public land, and that's
really the, the genesis of the
bill.
Well, thank you, Mr. President.
So, so, so I do believe then
with, so therefore it was never
on the tax rolls am I, am I
right now, Mr. President, you
are exactly right, and that's
the issue. It's, this is
university land. They just
dorms on the state land on the
university. So the fee
underneath is public land.
OK, Mr. President, you know, I
wanted to fight with Senator
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
We'll, uh, sponsor you for a
question or two. I'm happy to.
Those apartments.
What were the property tax
that there was no property
checks charged.
I, I can bring in my expert for
the specific, but I don't think
there was any reference to the
property taxes there was an
assumption that there was going
President, let me just unanimous
consent to bring in an expert
witness, David Campbell, who is
the executive director of global
Development and since he's aware
of it, I want to get you the
exact answer if I could. Thank
Senator Scott, once our expert
witness gets settled if you can
ask that question once, once
again, our expert witness is
able to hear that.
Um, Mr. President, I don't even
think I need to have him ask
again cause I was right, since
there was never property tax
that was envisioned to be
charged, there was nothing in
the contracts that dealt with
property tax.
With a presumption.
That the capital investment
required would be recovered.
that were
Uh
I presume approved by the
University of New Mexico. Is
that correct?
put through, uh, basically
what's gonna happen, I think in
the FIR it says it's about
$350,000 a year that will get
passed on to those students and
those tenants and cause the, the
was for anyone to move on to,
that's a whole different deal.
So Scott and Mr. President, do
we know?
about $35 to $40 a month per
apartment.
Per student. Yeah, that would be
the rental increase, if it was
passed through.
Senator Scott.
further debate, senators?
Seeing no further debate,
Senator work to close on the
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
I appreciate the debate and move
112.
I voted 39 in the affirmative, 0
on the negative. Senate Bill 112
has passed the Senate. Senator
Worth.
Thank you, Senator. We're going
on to item number 3.
Senator Bergman, Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that.
Replacing
Senate Tax Business and
amendment or substitution.
Senator explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
unanimous consent that my
experts be allowed to join me.
You can state who your experts
are, senator.
chamber.
See no objection, Sergeants, if
you can please escort our two
expert witnesses into the
chamber.
Senator Bergmans will explain
the bill. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senate Bill 175 is a
simple bill that expands the
legislature in 2003 with the
intent of helping childcare
providers around the state
expand their business with
access to small interest loans,
and since then it has only been
And the one thing that's in the
175 is attempting to do is to
allow loans from this fund to be
paid back on a contract for
Childcare desert and offering
non-traditional hours of care.
The bill also expands the
eligibility of the loan to allow
employers who wish to offer
childcare services to their
parents struggle to find
adequate childcare in their
communities.
Many providers would also like
to expand services and are
unable to do so because they do
not have funds to renovate or
build.
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 175.
San guy goes you wish you to
debate. Senator guy goes.
Mr. President, with the sponsor
history on school board and
units, and we are currently, I
know the, uh, mayor came to
speak to the governor's office
and didn't get into to ask for
school staff, 30 for the city
staff, 30 for the community, and
10 for our students.
Would this loan fund, uh, allow
us to borrow money from the
And Bergmans. Thank you, Mr.
President. No, this, the
intention of this fund created
previously was for private.
Childcare options.
Senator Brigman's, yes.
Mr. President, Senator, I thank
you for that. I was actually
looking for an application that
Thank you, Mr. President, with
the sponsor yield for a
question.
Senator Steinborn and Senator
Hickey.
Senator Steinborn and Senator
that are building private
childcare facilities. What type
of restrictions, if any, are put
on those uh facilities and
employers.
exist with rules uh made between
the early childhood education
and care department and NMFA.
And also, if they are to qualify
for the contract for services
option, we'll have to meet the
for non providing childcare for
during non-traditional hours.
Demonstrating that at least 50%
of the children at
At the provider or employer
serve our recipients of
Thank you, uh.
Thank you, Senator Townsend. We
have further debate, excuse me,
this forward, Mr. President, as
you know, this is a topic near
and dear to my heart, and it's
one of the main reasons I ran
for this legislature to begin
with. This is exactly what we
cases, and these, these wind up
being private providers and and
and
part, Mr. President, and I also
just want to commend the sponsor
for for doing this because that
might be the only option in some
um, you know, maybe smaller or
more rural, and it was our goal
to make sure that this was
across the state. So I just want
to thank the sponsor for doing
this, and I think she's doing a
great job. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla. Any
Uh, Mr. President and sponsor,
is this your first bill to
present on the floor.
I'm sorry, Sandra was a Senator
Bergmans.
forth a very comprehensive bill
for the first bill to be
presented by you on the floor.
Congratulations to
Getting it this far so far, I
Mr. Chair. Will the senator
please yield for some questions.
Senator Bergmans deal. Yes, I
do. Senator Steinborn, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Senator,
congrats on this bill.
I just have a question, um.
Thank you, Mr. President. Yes,
it was in the tax committee
first and then it was in Senate
Finance.
Educating people on these
Mr. President, Senator, it did
not go to the education
committee and I believe that
would be because it has to do
with the fun.
do need to do education about
people, about the bill. Would
you be open to that referral?
Mr. President, Senator, thank
you, Senator Steiner. Senator
Bergmans. Definitely not.
OK,
still debating Senate tax
business transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 175.
See no further debate.
do not pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. All senators to your
Senator Brandt voting no.
And share voting though.
Senator Ramos voting now.
Senator Brantly voting no.
Senator Thornton voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Miss Fresnia
You know, objection, senator.
Senator Woods, is, uh,
So we roll call vote would not
be appropriate on this. Send a
share. Thank you.
Now you got us all confused
There is an objection, Senator,
Senatorship since that's a
debatable motion, I ask for a
motion once again. I'll, I'll
remove my objection, Mr.
President.
See no objections to be
unanimous consent requests that
all those who voted in the
negative.
Buy a vote.
A 40 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate tax,
business, Transportation
All right, we're gonna continue
on the 3rd item, uh, 3rd reading
and I'll yield to Senator Woods
for the next item on the
calendar.
8 once amended.
Be on final passage.
Be taken in our subject to
debate amendment or
This is a to enact a loan.
For, uh, to repay.
To work in the uh large animal
or the food animal, veterinary
business.
In the underserved areas, this
bill will
Uh
go to the debtor, your, your
creditor.
Not to you, but to your creditor
of your loan. And Mr. President,
There'll be a, a, uh, board that
sets up to determine who
The candidates are, there's also
we're gonna set up a place where
we can find the underserved
areas and just a note on this
analysis was talking about the,
uh,
practicing veterinarians with
300 of those practicing in the
urban areas of Albuquerque,
Santa Fe, and Las Cruces.
So that leaves according to
this.
discussion. I do have an expert
witness, uh, the expert witness
is
Uh, Heather Romero, if I could
consent request to allow the
expert witness into the chamber.
Say no objection, Sergeant Ar
you please escort our expert
witness into the chamber and
provide some seating.
President, I'll be happy to
answer any questions we're
debating Senate Bill 8 as
amended. Anyone wishing to
debate, we do have debate, uh,
Senator Brown, would you like to
objection, so ordered Senator
Brand. Thank you, Mr. President,
thank you for reminding me to do
that.
I, I forgot so, um, with the
sponsor of the bill yield
animal veterinarians or will it,
will it be for all
veterinarians?
No, Mr. President, this is only
for a large animal
veterinarians, food animal
When you're in the country, Mr.
President, when you're in the
country, you're gonna work on
the barn cats and the horses and
everything else that's out
there, but the particular line
of practice is called uh
I'm going to vote for it, but I,
I do want to, you know, bring up
the fact that that actually we
have a shortage of all
veterinarians in our state and
we, we probably need to look in
the future.
veterinarians in the in the uh
uh towns as well. Senator.
Any further debate, senators, we
I certainly will, Mr. President.
Stewart. So, Mr. President, uh,
we heard this bill, I forget
which committee and I'm looking
at my notes here and it's
amendment to do what we talked
about in judiciary, which is
Have half of the loans be
available for the large animals
and the other half for regular
for other veterinarians, so.
question.
I did have that drawn up.
When I got into the Senate
Finance.
I had a discussion with the
chair.
For this
This, this bill actually asked
for $5 million.
I think we're going to have to
cut some program.
To tell you the truth, I don't
believe that this is a program
that I would be willing to cut.
I will try to come back next
year on another bill, but this,
this is so important to me this
year that I kept it like it was,
reasonable, makes sense. I just
really appreciate the way you
worked with all of us on the
other issue, really understood
it and we tried to go there, but
we'd like to see in the legal
profession. My question was
asked and answered by Senator
Stewart because I had exactly
the same question, um, and I
really do think Senator Brandt
was right. I mean, this is a
appreciate your commitment and I
respect that and we talked about
an amendment after the judiciary
Committee, which is why I was
gonna stand up on that, and I
just think down the road here.
program. That makes sense to me,
with only $2 million.
I'll vote for this bill like it
is. If it had been 10 million
all going to the one side that
wasn't what we talked about and
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh, no
need for the gentleman to yield.
Just want to thank him for his
leadership on this issue and
educating us with regards to.
Uh, to the lack of veterinarians
out there and the eastern side
Because it's my understanding
based on your descriptions, Mr.
President, uh, Senator Woods
that there's just no market for
veterinarians in those areas.
And so with $2 million I know.
game fish or whomever to provide
those services, so 2-3 years if
this problem is not solved, we
should consider that but because
we definitely have to get vets
See no further debate. Senator
Woos to closing the bill.
Mr. President, I, I do
appreciate the debate and, and I
Uh, judiciary Committee and, and
told them that I couldn't keep
it, and I apologize for that,
but Mr. President,
Even at the best that I could do
in my bill that would only
repay.
80,000 of that and some of those
are coming out with much higher,
Uh, do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show
voting all senators to your
seats.
Senators we're voting I'll send
it to the chamber if you wish to
vote.
Mr. President, thank you very
much for the consideration.
Thank you, Senator Woods. We're
going on to the next item that's
gonna be Senate Bill 133 as
amended.
And I'll also to Senator
Stewart.
final passage has been taken.
It's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objection. Senator Stewart to
explain the bill.
Uh, one provision is that
teachers can wait out 90 days
and then continue to get their
retirement but work for
teacher and the uh LEA, the
district have to continue to pay
into the retirement, although
the teacher does not get
increased retirement when she
that you can go back and keep
getting your retirement, but I
work for a quarter hour, quarter
time or less.
That had a provision also that
you couldn't make more than
too little, so the bill also
raises that from 15,000 to
25,000, uh, this hasn't been
changed in a long time. It's
worked pretty well for the ERB,
systems, um, other workers, so I
will tell you that uh it's
actually a former Senator
Stewart Ingle, who called us up
and said, I can't get bus
Senators, we're debating Senate
Bill 133 as amended, we have
Senators to Panic.
Thank you, Mr. President and uh
that come out of the retirement
systems we need to assess how
many of those professions should
be able to return to work and I
thank you very much for bringing
this forward.
sponsor would yield?
Happy deal.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Um, Article 2 Section 22 of the
this one of those changes that
would require analysis, and if
so, was that made and presented
at committee?
Um, Mr. President, I don't know
the answer to that. I do know
One, it may increase the amount
of funding going into the
retirement funds because uh
teachers are going to be able to
work longer, return to work,
moving it up to 25,000 because
for those folks, they don't pay
into the retirement and neither
did their locals, so I think one
FIR said it was a little over
certainly FIRs reflect the
funding people paying attention.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
happy to put that on the record.
I've been very consistent about
um asking that every time we
Thank you, San C Lopez. Any
further debate? see no further
debate. Senator Stewart to close
on the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
as unanimous consent senate that
the record show that thriller
has been called out those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by show of
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Bill 133 as amended has
passed the Senate. Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thanks to my Senate
are in that order of business.
Message from the house, the
reader to read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 91 as
received, Mr. President. I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the House has passed House
Bill 103 and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa and
request the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted,
Lisa Ortiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk.
of business.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 31 as
amended, has had it under
Mr. President, I consent of the
Senate, the reader to be allowed
to read all the committee
reports we brought on them with
one motion, the general reflect
their acted upon individually.
to read.
Sent 2002 as amended to pass
Senate Bill 280 do pass.
respectfully submitted Senator
George Munoz's chair.
adoption committee reports we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
Mr. President, your education
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 167 as
amended has had it under
consideration, reports same with
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually
objection.
The reader will read. Senate
Bill 411 do pass and thence
referred to the finance
Senate Joint resolution do pass.
Senate Joint Resolution 11 do
pass.
substitute for House Bill 24 do
pass and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee.
I move adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the print
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposed,
whom has been referred.
Senate Bill 103 has had it under
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
do not pass, but the Senate
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 113 do pass as
amended.
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair,
Senator Lopez motion to adopt
the committee report. Senators,
we have a motion to adopt
security report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Reader to read. Mr. President,
your tax, business, and
transportation committee to whom
has been referred Senate Bill 7
Hamblin, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually
the reader will read.
amended and the referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Bill 249 do pass and
And that referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 259 do pass as
amended and the referred to the
reports same without
recommendation and that referred
to the judiciary Committee.
move the adoption of the
committee report. Senators have
a motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those are prone.
The eyes have it. The report has
been adopted and the journal
referred Senate Joint Memorial 3
has had it under consideration,
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the education
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
the the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually no
objection, the reader will read.
Certificate of congratulations,
certificate number 6.
Certificate number 49.
Certificate number 50.
Certificate number 51.
Certificate number 52.
Certificate number 56.
Certificate number 57.
Certificate number 58.
Certificate number 62.
Certificate number 63.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those oppose me.
Yeah I have it the community
port has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
messages from the house. See, no
objection. We're in that order
of business. Messages from the
house.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 69.
House Bill 297 as amended by the
House and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martis McCutcheon, chief clerk.
Journal shows that the messages
President. You know, Ms.
Cassette we go about our
business, introduction of
legislation. There's unanimous
consent requests, no objection.
We're in that order of business.
Introduction of legislation.
relating to firearms, amending
the extreme risk firearm
Protection Order Act to allow a
law enforcement officer to file
a petition based on information
collected while carrying out
conforming, conforming
amendments. House Bill 12.
That's Bill 12. Haven't been
read twice by titles referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee's House Bill 12.
rate structures. House Bill 91.
House Bill 91 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
is.
I referred to the Senate
An act relating to crime,
increasing the penalty for
aggravated battery upon a peace
officer. House Bill 103. 103
having been read twice by title
an act relating to unemployment
compensation law allowing the
Secretary of Workforce Solutions
to waive the one week waiting
period requirement for
twice by titles referred to the
Senate Indian Rule and Cultural
Affairs Committee, then Senate
tax business, Transportation
Committee, that's House Bill
249.
just a reminder that we'll have
some food at 6 o'clock for all
the members and staff in the
lounge. And before I go to other
chairs, I want to yield to
Senator Jaramilo because the
will be having a caucus meeting
immediately following the floor
session in the lounge. Thank
you, Mr. President. Senator.
Senators to Panics.
President.
Cin Cervantes President Senate
Judiciary Committee will meet
between uh the caucus and coming
back to the floor. It's a little
hard to predict when we'll be
minutes after that. So those of
you on the committee, please,
uh, just kind of stand by and
pay attention. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Cervantes. Senator
Lopez, uh, thank you very much,
half hour after we finish our
caucus meeting today.
So please stay tuned. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Any
further announcement, Senator
Senator Woods?
Any further announcements,
senators.
See no further announcements,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Perez. I
just asked the Sergeant Ars
evening. See, no objection. The
Senate to sat in recess until
6:30 p.m. tonight.
