Senator Brown.
Senator Brantley
Senator Campos.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gonzalez.
No
Senator.
Senator Nova.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Senator Scott.
Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shando
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Wirth.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. I ask everyone to
please rise.
For the invocation to be led
today by Pastor Ilia Quinones of
the Advent Life Church here in
Souls and the salute to New
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator Paul.
Good morning.
So with this in mind, let us
pray.
Father, they are yours.
Each child, adult, and elder in.
You have gifted us a position
that could be used to stand up
for those who do not have the
strength.
And to help shape law.
The father
I ask
Therefore, Father, for those in
this room fill our cups.
Let our hearts be stirred
knowing that as you have
commissioned us to take care of
your children, you will take
care of ours.
Give our hearts the thing it
needs in order to accomplish
this great task for your people,
your children, and our
neighbors.
I asked this God, not as a, not
Once again we'd like to welcome
you to today's session of the
New Mexico Senate, and I'll ye
to Senate my majority whip.
Michael Padilla to get us
started on today's order
business.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
much, Pastor uh Quinones, and,
uh, Mr. President, with that
I'll ask you to ask consent that
we go to that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous.
for several of the members, uh,
but before I do that, I'm gonna
yield to Senator Jaramillo to
make a couple of uh.
unanimous consents. Senator
Padilla. Senator Jaramillo, Mr.
gallery and in the chamber.
Senator Hao. President, I also
ask unanimous consent to excuse
senators O'Malley, Pinto, and
Cervantes until they returned to
the chamber.
a motion that's made. It hasn't
been made all session, uh, for
the majority side, but that
could be a motion that how the
senator chooses to do so.
Senator Hatami.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I need
to excuse unanimous consent to
excuse, uh, Senator Sanchez
See no objection, sort of except
for the purposes of a call.
See no further announcements.
I'll go back to Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
certificate, uh, to be read by
Senator Jaramillo, uh, senator
has, uh, some guests, and I
think there's gonna be 6 guests
there. We also have a
certificate for Dennis Hawk, I
believe I pronounced that
Maestus block again and Brandt
and, uh, Mr. President, uh, we
do have tomorrow, uh, if the
body wants to listen up here for
your lunch and what have you.
Enjoyment tomorrow. Special
This is tomorrow to the for the
members of the body tomorrow,
uh, they will be serving
Carnealdovada beans and
tortillas starting at 11:30 a.m.
and I heard.
Some yums right behind me. Um,
uh, be waiting and they, we
don't want them to eat all the
food, but, uh, so that's.
That's what we have going on
this morning, Mr. President. So
all yield, Mr. President, to
other members who wish to
chamber. It's our chief clerk's
birthday, Sherry Luhan is
One year around the sun again,
starting today. And so unanimous
Happy birthday to our chief
clerk and on behalf of the
entire Senate we hope all of
your birthday wishes come true,
you're appreciated more than you
know. Thank you, Mr. P
speech.
President. You have a special
gift today, the book that you
have in front of you shutter.
By Ramona Emerson. Miss Emerson
and creative writing from the
Institute of American Indian
Arts. She is an Emmy nominee, a
thriller that set against the
backdrop of the Navajo Nation
and Albuquerque. It's about a
forensic photographer working
for the Albuquerque Police
point her toward the clues that
other investigators overlooked.
Shutter was long listed for the
National Book Award for fiction.
finalists for the 2023 Pen Book
Best Books. We've got a real
winner here in New Mexico with
Ramona Emerson, and let's thank
Deborah Condit and books on the
this Ramona Emerson book.
my guests. Proceed, Senator.
Thank you so much, Mr.
President, honorable members, I
have two dear friends here
joining with me today. They're
social workers who've taken time
off to learn about the Senate
up in Espanola, and lives there
on the bluff on the west side,
uh, please welcome Ms.
Mr. President, uh, thank you for
the opportunity. I wanted to
talk to the body about, uh, a
gift that we have from Lee
County, uh, there's a cup on the
for this state in other EDC, the
Economic Development Corporation
Lee County puts a lot of effort
into explaining what we do in
Lee County.
and thank you for that, Lee
County, number one, oil produce
in County in the country.
Number 2, gas producing county
30,000 jobs and Mr. President,
these are high wage jobs that
provide
Citizens of our county along
with Eddy County.
Those are the two drivers of the
bus.
That are making such a huge
contribution.
acknowledge that, uh, Lee County
does do a lot for our state.
I've represented both Eddie and
Lee County and without them, I
think our bankroll for this
state would be a little bit shy
I have a special guest today,
uh, once a Marine, always a
Marine is what they tell me as
an Air Force guy.
But uh this is Chris uh
the floor today with me. You'll
hear more of his story a little
bit later this morning, but
also, Mr. President, in the
gallery is his beautiful wife,
to welcome, uh, one of our
heroes in the United States who
went over and served this
country, um, Staff Sergeant
Peskovski. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Center souls
Thank you, Mr. President,
sitting up there, I believe, to
Senator Martin Heinrich, Kay Fox
14, and NBC Sports for the 2024
Olympics. Uh, he's up in Santa
chamber.
Thank you, Sin Souls.
Any further announcements,
senators.
listen up to this one,
the Society of Women Engineers
and New Mexico Society of
Professional Engineers, actually
have provided, uh, dessert for
the members. It's in the Senate
engineers, uh, dropped off some
desserts here today, and they'll
be here to interact with our
members. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Padilla.
Any further announcements,
senators?
Senator Brantley.
still cardboard, but they're not
the dissolvable cardboard, and I
know that Senator Trujillo was
sending daily complaints to the
corporation. She was upset that
there was a place on the website
legislator, number one.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I'll take us to that
order of business committee
go to certificates. Uh, we do
have Los Alamos Day, and that
will be, uh, Senator Jaramillo.
I'll yield to him now.
Say no objection. We're on that
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
legislature, first session 2025.
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
mesas and canyons known as the
Pajarito Plateau and was the
home of the ancestors of the
Pueblo people for approximately
400 years and whereas in the
decades prior to the 20th
federal government in 1942 as
the location for the Manhattan
Project and whereas Los Alamos
County was incorporated in 1969.
And whereas Los Alamos County is
technology for more than 70
years, and whereas Los Alamos
County is the gateway to the
Manhattan Project National
Historical Park, Bandelier
National Monument in the Valles
governments committed to
developing and supporting
resilient, equitable, and
sustainable communities and
whereas US News and World Report
And whereas in December 2022,
Los Alamos County was designated
a World War 2 her heritage city
joining 17 other communities
across across the country
neighbors and since 2022, the
Los Alamos Regional strategic
Project Fund has offered
assistance and supported
projects in Ririba County and
recognizing March 12, 2025 as
Los Alamos County Day in the
Senate.
Signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
what's coming. You can't hide my
hilltopper pride. You see that I
brought my letterman. I'm an
honorary letterman of Los Alamos
High School. Los Alamos County
is a second home to Mr.
because he reminded me that
education would be the key to my
success. Since then, I've had a
28 year career at Los Alamos
National Lab.
discoveries are made, Mr.
President. It's where scientists
are leading the world in
research and ensuring that we
come up to answers for this, for
the issues that we're facing
senators, and I'd like to yield
to two senators, one who
currently helps represent Los
Alamos County today and the
other who's a former senator
before redistricting who also
represented Los Alamos County,
they're able to hear.
The speakers as they present
Senatoregos.
Mr. President, I thank you for
that, uh, I was not standing for
some time on, but I love being
on the mountain. I'll just tell
you, Mr. President, senators,
I'm forever my whole life has
Mr. President, I thank you for
that, uh, I was not standing for
Los Alamos, but I do wanna speak
on them. I love the package they
have for us here on the floor.
I've gone through it, uh, the
until it was part of one of our
meetings, uh, for the
legislature up there, but I do
stand in support of, of his
certificate. I just was caught
off guard, but I thank you for
Jaramillo for the certificate.
Uh, also, uh, you know, in great
appreciation for our guests that
are in the rostrum and uh I do
represent uh part of the Los
listening to the meetings that
we have had and uh continuing
that and the most important part
is uh just uh being able to work
for our nation. So again, uh
thank you for being here today
and welcome and uh this is your
place, so thank you.
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Jaramillo.
Thank you Senator Gonzalez. I'll
guess what? Los Alamos County, I
yielded to a southern New
Mexican who had nice things to
say before I yielded to the
senator who truly represents Los
Alamos County with me, which is
represented a third of Los
Alamos County in the Senate and
Los Alamos County had 3
senators, and I would like
have so many beautiful Native
American artifacts and
archaeological sites, and I
would encourage everyone.
here to please go up to Los
Alamos County, uh, even White
Mr. President, I do have some
very special guests from Los
Alamos County as I call your
name if you can stand and remain
standing so that we can welcome
you to the Senate. I have my
councilor David Regor, County
councilor, Anne Laurent, County
manager Juan Real, deputy county
manager, Danielle
manager, Philo Shelton utilities
director and Eric Martinez,
public works director. So, Mr.
President and members of the
Senate, if you can help me
welcoming my guests from Los
Thank you Senator Jaramillo.
Uh, say hi to me. Are you gonna
expect to get an honorarily uh
honorary Letterman's jacket from
Padilla, uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President, and on that
theme, we do have a certificate
for Dennis Hoke, uh, that is
Senator Gallegos. I will yield
to him now.
The legislator, uh legislature
of the state of New Mexico
fifty-seventh legislature first
session 2025.
years, spending time as a
teacher, coach, principal,
assistant superintendent and
superintendent in 3 eastern New
Mexico school districts and
whereas Dennis served as
challenges of the coronavirus
2019 disease pandemic from July
2020 through June 2021. And
whereas Dennis helped in the
design of
2019 to 2024. And whereas in
2024, Dennis represented his
fellow superintendents in
negotiations with council and
the testimony on the witness
As the New Mexico superintendent
of the year for his tireless
efforts as president of the New
Mexico school superintendents
Association and again in 2024
associations 2025 National
Conference on Education
alongside superintendents of the
year from each of the 50 states
and whereas Dennis retired from
public education in.
congratulations be extended to
Dennis Ross for his exemplary
career in public education for
twice being twice honored as the
New Mexico superintendent of the
Protem Sherry Luhan, chief
clerk, New Mexico State Senate.
Thank you. Before I yield to
Senator Galgos, I would ask that
the members of the body if we
can just please keep the volume
Center share.
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
Actually, I'm, I'm stunned by
this. I didn't realize that we
hired somebody that knew how to
district pulled off a trifecta.
Spotlight schools are those that
are spotlighted because they're
so great.
And
academic academic performance,
graduation rates, uh, progress
for English language learners,
student attendance, and he
managed to pull that off for all
you, Mr. President.
Schools are in the spotlight
designation if they're students,
uh, score within the top 25%
across the state in math,
metrics. I, I just can't brag
enough on, on Dennis. He has
done a great job in every school
system he ever
then became superintendent. He's
just a fantastic educator. He
told me one time, Mr. President.
That
trying to teach this lesson.
Maybe you would be more
effective if you would have said
it this way.
Now
Isn't that a novel idea?
yield to Senator Galos again.
Thank you, Senator Gagos. We do
have other uh members who would
like to speak to the certificate
as well, uh, unless you're gonna
yield to another member
yourself.
support not only this
certificate, but the work that,
uh, Dennis Ross has done
throughout his career. Uh, we
both served as superintendents
people were encouraged that they
attended school that they had
good meals.
that they of course are working
very closely with staff that,
uh, the teachers were always
well prepared to go ahead and
fact, I was there with uh
Senator Woods at one time.
Uh, for some of these honors
were being presented, if you
will, to one of the Logan
schools, but I'll never forget
but at the same time, when it
came time for presentations,
they were there as a young uh
young students that really
wanted to get an education, but
I attribute so much of that to
Dennis to continue to be honest
and transparent and hardworking
and definitely his heart is with
our children. Congratulations,
Dennis on this award. Thank you.
bringing this memorial forward,
um, Dennis and Rochelle have
been friends of us for.
qualified dedicated people in
education, and when you put
qualified dedicated people
together in leadership roles,
President, uh, Senator
Gallegoset.
On one side of me, I was tickled
to death to see, um,
He had dedicated, uh, heart and
soul to, to get them and
watching them progress. So, uh,
it's, uh,
them helping you in in a current
role, but you also have to
acknowledge the fact that that's
those are big shoes to fill, and
Not applaud. So, um, I, I'm, I'm
here to support um the memorial
and of course, Dennis and his
family as they go forward.
Thank you, Senator Gallegos for
representing this or uh
recognizing this kind and loving
New Mexican Dennis Roche.
That Dennis Hoke and, uh, Mr.
President, I just wanted to rise
was chairing a committee and uh
I think it was education at the
time or yes, yes, and he just
was always so kind and generous,
and you can disagree with
people, but this young man, this
gentleman's never been
children well qualified you for
managing this caucus. Thank you
so much for the investment that
you've made and the difference
you've made in the lives of New
Mr. President, thank you very
much. I too rise and supported
this because this is one fine
gentleman.
that is sitting right before us
the sacrifice that your family.
is going through right now
because you have your hands full
up here, and you've done it with
grace.
think.
I want to strive to be like him.
Whenever we were on the House
Labor Committee together.
very calm and meaningful way,
and I do appreciate that and I
appreciate your service to our
state. So thank you very much
for your time and your
endeavors.
I call you my friend.
just kind of a good opportunity
to just say two cool things
about you. Uh, number one for
the colleagues that don't know,
Dennis, of course, was in the
house and he and I were in the
house together and, and Dennis,
created webcasting, you, you had
to watch it real time and we
worked for 5 years to do it, and
I didn't.
introduced this thing like I do,
and then you made it happen in
that you represented Texaco in
Mexico and there was a cool
movie that came out where Texaco
was the deciding vote by one
vote in the election was that
Kevin Costner? It's a great
Dennis. Yeah, thanks. Thank you,
Senator Steinborn, and I'll
yield to Senator Bollen and
Senator Bollen, I'm happy to say
that he has grown in New Mexico.
Senator Boone.
for this, uh, for just to
recognize a man that, that.
Has just contributed
unbelievable to the to the
fields of education and now he's
move on.
And I also know that he
understands and recognizes when
he's, when, when we're following
the will of the Lord for our
lives.
We go where he sends us and I
then for the help to our body as
a whole. I just appreciate you
Dennis. I'm glad to be able to
stand up and congratulate you.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Boone. Senator
Maestas.
well deserving in the memorial,
uh, got the chance to serve Mr.
President, as you know what in
the house with um.
With Dennis for maybe 10-12
years, and there was some epic
time, he, he was a heck of a
debater and uh kept us kept us
on our toes and kept us more on
our toes the two years were, uh,
Democrats were in the minority,
second half of your career.
all the best to your family and
you know, my friends on uh on
this side, they need a little
help, but don't, don't teach
them too much, don't teach them
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you. uh, I want, uh, Mr.
President, about one of the
topics you brought up is Senator
Boone's memorial, and I wanna
start out, but I believe you are
I, I, he and I are friends. Uh,
when I started in 2016, the
prayer caucus, he was one of my
original members to come over.
every Wednesday morning. It's
one of those times we get
together and just to not worry
about politics, just.
Worry about biblical presence,
uh, here in the Capitol. Uh, I
was really
Interest in the Senate Secretary
Romero back then who was also a
superintendent earlier at Los
Lunas and Damming, uh, was
proficiency, uh, readers from
that last year prior. And that's
unheard of in New Mexico.
Uh, he, Secretary Romero also
how education progress goes.
We're always looking for
success, but I think one of the
things in Secretary Romero also,
And I looked, Mr. President and
senators about, uh, RPD and,
and, you know, the discussion is
we've had so many secretaries
that it's really hard to build
Superintendents. It's really
hard for them to direct that
ship in a positive means for our
children and our kids, but to
have dentists in there for 10
that I, I talked about him, um,
his service to, to his schools
because that's very important.
Sorry, Mr. President, uh, uh,
but with that, Mr. President,
wanna get permission for that.
Absolutely.
I'll yield to Sen share.
Mr. President, after hearing all
this stuff, I don't think I want
Congratulations.
Dennis, thank you for all the
work that you do, and I'll yield
back to Senator Galos.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
Senator Michael Padilla.
We we believe we do have another
announcement, Senator Padilla,
before I go, Senator is out.
of a child who is just 10 years
old.
His family was forced to leave
New Mexico to find the cure he
desperately needed.
stiffness, and doing difficulty
doing the things that child
should be able to do.
disability.
He needed to see a pediatric
rheumatologist urgently.
But in New Mexico that was not
an option.
Nowhere
We searched for weeks, his
family waited helpless watching
their sons struggle while our
clinic worked to find an answer.
acceptance forms, logistical
hurdles.
Just to get him seen by the
right specialist.
Finally, after weeks of
uncertainty.
pack up and drive more than 450
miles from Roswell to Phoenix
Children's Hospital just so
their son could get the
diagnosis and treatment, he
I do everything I can to help
coordinate his medications and
treatments remotely, but this
day all over our state.
Mr. President,
we have patience and perils.
New Mexico does not have enough
afford to go. Many can't.
Many suffer in silence.
Mr. President.
With a consistent net loss of
physicians every single year.
Our failure to retain and
The Mexicans deserve better.
Our children deserve better.
now to Senate majority Whip
Michael Padil to take us to that
next order business. Uh, thank
you very much, Mr. President.
Uh, I'll take us to that next
order of business committee
report.
You no objection. We are on
that.
consideration Senate executive
message #2, dated February 4th,
2025, in which the governor
makes the following appointment.
committee recommends that the
Senate confirmed this
appointment.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Katie Doig, chair.
Senate executive letter number
24 dated May 14, 2024, in which
the governor makes the following
September 24th, 2023, expiring
September 23rd, 2027. Your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this
reappointment, respectfully
the eyes have it, the community
report has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
Center Padilla. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. At
Senator Jarami, Mr. President, I
ask that the credentials of
Chris Heffner be presented to
the full Senate for
consideration as a state mine
inspector. I now yield to
Senator Brantley.
reappointment of Mr. Chris
Hefner, a state mine inspector.
See no objection, Senator
Brownley, if you'll explain.
members of the body, I'd like to
silver, coal, kitty litter, and
responsible for the safety of
our miners is our state mine
inspector and so Mr. Hefner is
responsible for ensuring the
but extremely valuable industry.
We thank you, Mr. Hefner, for
your work and promoting that
industry and we are happy to
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Mr. Heffner. Uh, we're in
committee earlier and I was able
to talk to you. Uh, I just want
to tell you how much we
appreciate you. I actually have
we're talking about your, your
service 24 years and it's really
hard. We're talking earlier with
Dennis Ros on 2.5 years being
their average and
superintendency.
But it is really
employees' safety, and I just
wanted to stand and support and
thank you for what you do. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Gaels. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
Sheer.
responsibilities that go along
with this, and certainly some
economic uh history, uh, so in,
in Northwest corner, we have a
couple of really big coal mines
continued up until just, well,
one of them still happens there.
Multi-generational employment,
and it's amazing. In fact, for
the Navajo.
It also is a huge uh portfolio
for us for energy and all this
time when we're talking about we
need more EVs and we need more
actually really, really like
coal-fired cars, coal-powered
cars.
Um, and it's also pretty cheap.
I know people are talking about
no, not really, but in New
For for Northwest New Mexico,
the coal companies have been
great members of our community.
They've, they've helped directly
to, uh, reiterate that to
everybody that the state mine
inspector.
Needs to take all of these
things into consideration,
safety, absolutely. But what
else is going on in that
Thank you, sir, for your.
You
Ability and willingness to serve
guess.
And we still do, but it works
hand in hand with the potash
industry.
The potash industry is more than
just
and it's so important, and I
just stand in support of what
you have done, the reputation
that you have, have earned in,
Mr. Hefner. Thank you so much
for all that you do and keeping
our miners safe in southwest New
Mexico.
the copper mines, Freeport
silver, perlite, and zoli, so we
have a very important mind down
in southwest New Mexico and I
thank you so much for coming
down to Southwest New Mexico and
We're happy to advance this name
forward, and I ask unanimous
consent that the records show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative, except for
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, the negative, the
reappointment of Chris Hefner as
a state mine inspector for a
term.
Commencing on September 24, 2023
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Gina Marie De
Blasi be presented to the full
Senate for consideration as
Secretary of the Department of
Health, and I know yield to
Senate do you hereby confirm the
appointment of Gina Marie de
Blasio as the secretary of
Department of Health no
objections when you also you'll
explain.
Mr. President, you know, they
always say, you know,
And I don't think I could say
what I really put.
What I really want to say, but
she's with the person you want
there right now.
With what's happening in the
$40 million was at Saint
Joseph's, which is now loveless,
and it could go on and on, but
when you talk about true
honesty,
When you talk about really
big part of, of Gina's and I's
conversation for a year or two
ago, my hospital is broke, dead
broke. Should have been
bankruptcy, should have been
closed up, and she helped me
figure out a path forward and
state of New Mexico, uh, because
if you lose one rural hospital.
We're coming to yours next. We
lose Gallup, we're going to
Albuquerque. You lose one in Las
Vegas, they're going to
Thank you, Senator Munoz. We do
have debate on the confirmation.
I'll begin with Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, it's uh.
It's great to go ahead and stand
serving the underserved and uh
as she deals with so many of the
issues across the state. We know
that there's going to be the
need for not only the resources,
And along with that, uh, soon to
go ahead and have the uh, uh,
Epiduran, uh, Northeastern
Regional recovery Center that'll
have considered at this point
for this confirmation process.
If it was to go forward, I know
that with her due diligence, the
hard work, and her real
patience.
but more importantly to the
entire state of New Mexico and
so with that, Mr. President, I
stand in full support of this
particular confirmation.
Thank you, Senator Campos, will
yield to Senator Hickey,
support of her nomination, uh,
when she first started as the
principal health advisor to the
governor. I worked with her a
number of times. And what was
Saint Joe's and Finance, she
really understands how health
care works.
works, a real rarity, um, in
individuals who
to look at all sides and really
come out for what's going to be
best for the patient. So I was
thrilled to learn that she is
now being nominated to become
HCA and the
DOH at times, uh, the higher
education, uh, she has really
brought tremendous insight and I
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. I too
stand in strong support of of
the alcohol tax, uh, bill.
And she provided information she
served to connect us to people
illnesses other than alcoholism,
but cancer and some of the other
things that are called by caused
by alcohol misuse, which was
With regard to that very
difficult problem we have in the
state, and I know that her
experience working with all of
the agencies and her experience
state and I just think she is
the perfect person at this time
for, for the agency and I'm
very, very proud to stand in
support of this.
Hi, Gina. Uh, yes, Mr.
President, I rise in full
support. I have to say that uh
prior to her current assignment,
I think she was doing the
assignment anyway, and uh I have
to say that uh every little
while I would hear, we got to
heard about by other members.
And I, and Mr. President, you're
a member of this body for quite
some time, uh, I think you
started when you were 5 years
old, I think something like
that.
And you know that when you're
can you please come to this
meeting, you know, uh,
secretary, always there, usually
the first one there.
Not excitable, very relatable,
to work with. So thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
am very proud to support um Gina
from the local level through the
regional level to the national
level and this shows us her
drive, her energy and her
too rise in support of this
confirmation. I have had the
pleasure of working with soon to
be Secretary de Blasi, um, when
I was at the regulation and
possible. Secretary Gina De
Blasi.
Thank you, Senatorjil.
See no further debate.
She's going to lead the
Department of Health in a great
direction. It's gonna, it's
gonna be a lot of work and a lot
of turmoil, but
Um, she's the right person for
asked him to consent. The
records show the roles have been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands. Thank you
Senators, to your seats, please.
We are voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Blasi as secretary of the
Department of Health.
For a term commencing on January
30th, 2025 to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been confirmed.
By the New Mexico Senate,
I'll now yield to Senate
Majority Whip Michael Padilla to
take us to that next order
business. Uh, thank you very
miscellaneous Senator Padilla,
uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President, and the members are
going to want to listen up here.
We're gonna talk about what
we're gonna do today. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. So on your,
uh, floor calendar today, we
will be doing items one.
going to be Senator Souls.
Uh, Senate Bill 267, that's item
number 2, will be senators
Hamblin and Bergman's.
Item number 5, Senate Bill 166
will be Senator Maestas.
And item 6, that is Senate Bill
219 will be Senator Steinborn in
Hickey.
House Bill 47 and that is
Senator Pope.
Sender Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. So
with that, Mr. President, uh,
I'll take us to that order of
Because I'm just there is, um,
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate Bill 52 on final
on the reimbursements that we
get, um, on most of our
reimbursements, it is based on
the federal reimbursement rates
that is updated every year on
person who was doing it did it
based on the federal instead of
on the state level. What this
bill does is it moves all.
all of the reimbursements for
Thank you, Senator. So Senators
we're debating Centerville 52.
Anyone wishing to debate?
See no debate, send their souls
to close on the bill. Thank you,
negative by a show of hands. All
senators to your seats, please.
We are voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
I vote of 30 in the affirmative
0 on the negative. Senate bill
267 and I'll yield to Senator
Hamblin. Thank you, Mr.
President. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended and
that the records showed that all
actions for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
explain your bill Thank you, Mr.
President and Senate, Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 267 comes to the
floor after numerous
conversations, compromises, and
clar.
helpful committee substitute
from the judiciary Committee. We
compromised and decided to
remove the provisions that
allowed for reusable credit and
background checks and really Mr.
even more out of reach. In
excessive fees charged to rental
housing applicants makes
securing rental housing very
difficult for our low income New
Mexicans, especially seniors
living on a fixed income as well
so what SB 267 does is it
reduces a major barrier to
entering housing by reducing fee
transparency standardizing
application fees.
regulating those fees, uh, and
so Mr. President, at this point
I look forward to discussion,
uh, that will come from this
body.
So thank you, Mr. President. uh,
I want to thank the sponsor
here, uh, when we heard this in,
in, uh, tax committee, uh, I
voted for it and I think all the
Republicans are voted against
it. I think all the Republicans
worked the bill, and while the
whole concept may be weird to
me, uh, I, I, I know that
there's been consensus now, uh,
with the various parties and I
uh, to make this bill as good as
we could make it. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Sher. We do
have further debate, Senator
uh, this cap on the screening
fees is, is set. What?
kind of thieves have you seen,
uh, I mean, is, was there a
driving force to cap it. I'm,
uh, um, understand the fees it's
been, I think, many, many years
since I've been in an apartment
and understanding that there's a
pet deposit fee, but now, Mr.
President and Senator Townsend,
holding fees just to hold the
application, uh, which may not
guarantee that you even get the
apartment. And what we're
seeing, Mr. President and
senator is that they're out of
much higher for people to get
housing and apartments and so
Mr. President and Senator, it is
really some extraneous fees that
maybe you and I were not used to
pay when we were trying to rent
Senator, are, is there any
information?
About the potential renter or
because what we're finding is
that these mortgage companies
are not disclosing, that's one
of the transparency issues is
that they're not disclosing that
complexes and what happens is if
you are looking for an
apartment, and you go to
apartment complex A owned by the
same complex of A, B, and C.
They can charge you a $100
apartment complex B or apartment
complex C that is just unfair. I
think all of us can agree.
That that is just unfair to our
residents who are trying to get
into an apartment, so I hope
The housing industry of those
people that that go out and
build, um, apartments for
people. Are they in support of
this? I mean, it, when we say we
mentioned, uh, the apartment
association we worked a lot with
that apartment association to
try and come with some
compromises they have now
I'm trying to figure out what
the impact is to to the housing
you save individuals trying to
rent homes in New Mexico.
Senator Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you,
Senator Townsend. That's a very
look at a credit check, I mean
those can go anywhere from $50
to $100 a piece and so those
alone would be $300 that if
somebody is looking for multiple
Senator, I don't really know the
answer to that question because
we're looking at mainly
apartments and affordable
apartments and so I don't have
that question, um, that answer
for the for the senator, Mr.
President. Senator Townsend.
Center city up is not being in,
I'll yield to Senator Hamblin to
close on the bill. Thank you,
Mr. President, and thank you,
Senate body and I do appreciate
them a stronger bill that will
impact all of our residents.
And so on that, Mr. President, I
move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 267 do now pass, and I ask
I'll send it your seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267
has passed the Senate, Senator
Hamblin. Thank you, Mr.
President, and thank you. We're
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
302 on final passage has been
taken that is now subject to
debate amendment or
Senate Bill 302 strengthens
regulatory oversight within the
gaming industry by expanding the
background checks require
background check requirements
for those, uh, seeking gaming
requires strict safeguards to
prevent fraud, financial
misconduct, criminal activity.
these things of those nature. So
this bill is just modernizing
and enhancing these safeguards
uh those include National
Criminal history screenings and
financial disclosures as well.
Thank you, Senator Paul.
Senators, we're debating Senate
yield?
Yes, Mr. President, I yelenator
Lopez.
Mr. President, my question is
what exactly is the problem that
this bill is seeking to address.
Senator Paul
up to ensure that those that are
applying for these licenses,
permits, and in this.
unescorted access, uh, or
in how we do those, uh,
background checks and to ensure
that they're getting done in the
proper manner.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
then, so the language in the
bill is facility of the gaming
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator.
Mm
The, the background checks would
If they do not fall under the
control of the gaming control
board, then no.
Senator Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. Then I think it might
be good facilities controlled um
those are my questions that
popped out at me when I reviewed
this bill, um, if, if the
problem we're trying to address
is fraud that is, that is a
really important problem. It's
Thank you Senator Celia Lopez
see no further debate, Senator
Paul to close on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
the Senate Bill 302 do now pass.
We are voting all senators to
your seats, please. We are
voting.
If you wish to vote now.
Please raise your hand.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, members of the body. We're
going to go on for the double
header on #4. Are you able to
Senator Paul once again for
Senate Bill 303 as amended,
final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution. no
objection, Senator Paul, if
you'll explain your bill.
Thank you Mr. President. So
Senate Bill 303.
set by Nevada in New Jersey.
This bill removes those outdated
requirements and ensures that
the gaming machines will comply
with New Mexico law and rules
patrol board has been in
existence for, you know, 20 plus
years, they are more than
qualified and experienced to
establish the standards for
gaming machines here in the
state, and that's what this bill
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
I move that Senate Bill 303 is
amended, do now pass. Can I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 303 as amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill to
166 and I'll yield to Senator
Maestas.
Uh thank you, Mr. President. I
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment.
Or substitution.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
So
reading with Senate Judiciary
Committee subs for Senate Bill
166, Senator, my, I apologize if
we can start that over.
Thank you
for Senate Bill 166 on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Thomas.
McClelland and Sergeant David
Bentley from Mexico State
Police. Senators, there's been a
request, unanimous consent
request to allow our experts
into the chamber.
Our expert witnesses into the
chamber and provide them safely.
Senator Maestas to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Honorable members. This changes
43-11 and also the assisted
outpatient treatment Act, which
is 43-1B1 and by changing this
this will facilitate more folks
getting the treatment they
deserve and more families
receiving the peace that that
they want for loved ones, uh,
and family.
numbers and with that I'll stand
thank you very much, Mr.
President. uh, unanimous consent
to excuse Senators Bergman's and
Trujillo until they return to
the chamber.
See no objection, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President, with
Uh, definitions need to be
redefined or updated. What, what
are you trying to address?
Thank you so much, Mr.
President, Senator Townsend, so
definition of likelihood of
serious harm to others.
Means that it's more likely than
not that in the near future a a
person will inflict serious
bodily injury, uh.
individual rights and community
interests so that we say now
harm to others means quote that
within the recent past, the
person has inflicted or
Mr. President.
Senator Townsend, Mr. President,
thank you. Why is the new
evidentiary standard reasonably
enforcement standing behind you
and, and which gives me some
comfort, but I'm trying to
figure out
What?
Exactly.
Does this bill do and why is it
what's not in the four corners
of the bill is the uh what what
is referred to as AOT assisted
outpatient treatment. So the
bill actually changes the
definition in the act, but if
the patient in living and
functioning in the community or
to attempt to prevent the
deterioration of the patient.
mental or physical condition, so
they're numerous thresholds
that person may be a harm to
self or others, so by changing
this definition it, it gives a
clear line as to who is eligible
for these services, these, uh,
parent, a sibling, uh, or a
close relative or by an officer,
um.
Doing a lawful uh arrest so
instead of taking him to jail
Mr. President, Senator, does
this also help provide
protections to those that are
trying that are making that
decision to help that person.
true, true, uh, interest at
heart, uh, to get their family
members uh into treatment, uh,
to get him stabilized and and
back to their old self, uh, I
think this would facilitate that
Seeing no further debate.
Cenestia Lopez.
but here you have something that
happened recently, which can be
proved and then you move on to
look at the likelihood that
it'll happen in the future. So I
think it is an improvement, and
I stand in support of the bill.
uh, her, her, uh, chief counsel
Ms Holly, uh, for her brilliant,
um, adaptation of this bill. I
also wanna thank the members of
uh Senate Judiciary, in
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 166
do not pass. I asked the
anonymous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those president voted in the
Well, senators to your seats, if
you wish to vote no.
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 166
has duly passed the Senate.
Senator Maestas.
the next item that's gonna be
item number 6. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 219, and I'll yield to
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. I ask unanimous
all action's been taken to place
it on final passage that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. no objection,
Senator Steinborn, if you can
explain your bill.
Mr. President, colleagues, this
Uh, Mr. President, colleagues,
medical psilocybin has been
shown through research to be
very effective at treating a
variety of behavioral health
conditions. In fact, the FDA
childhood trauma, drugs weren't
effective, major side effects,
out of desperation turned to
medical psilocybin. When you
talk to people, you'll find a
lot of people like this through
this journey, Mr. President, I
have
life anxiety.
This bill seeks to create a
carefully
Calculated, thoughtful, um, and
patient program that would be
developed by the Department of
could only be administered in a
medical setting by licensed
providers.
Um, this treatment and sometimes
it can be as effective as one
treatment and people can have
more later if there's medically
efficacious data to show that,
um, those 4 qualifying
conditions that would start off,
um, in this program several
really honored to be, to have a
couple uh of our veterans here
in the house today, uh, uh,
Crest and Crystal, um, thank you
all for coming. Um, also, I have
some expert witnesses and
have Dominic Zerlo with the New
Mexico Department of Health.
And I have Doctor Larry Lehman
from UNM.
There's been unanimous consent
requests to allow our expert
speak, um, in addition to
creating this program, the, the
legislation has a couple of
other important facets. Number
one, it creates, creates an
equity fund.
by insurance or Medicaid, um,
this will be health care that
people will have to pay for
recognizing that there's those
that won't have the ability to
do so. If we create an equity
Um, we recognize the important
need of continuing to do
research, so we have the best
program here where we're the
Department of Health is making
kind of the best available
psychedelic medicine programs in
the country at UNM with the man
sitting behind me, Doctor Larry
Lehman, who is a physician, but
he's also the head of the
program. So, uh, we
starting with Senator Doctor
Hickey. Thank you, Senator
Steinburn. Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President.
As I became aware of the
talked with people who have had
treatment, clinical treatment,
and this is clinical treatment.
This is in no way, shape or
form, any type of entertainment
States and the impacts that me
they described to me are
literally night and day as we
fungus spore blew in a window in
a research lab, uh, where a
petri dish with pneumococcal
pneumonia was residing in prior
the fungus penicillin that
literally also killed bacteria
and set us off.
on this amazing bacterial, uh,
breakthrough in its impact in
all of the four areas. The
other, other thing I just
learned about the other day when
Senator Sendo mentioned it to
at using this modality for 14 to
16 year olds and starting to
show success. So it really is
one of the true wonder drugs,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President
and.
Yeah, started this down this
trail with, uh, Senator
and to anyone that actually has,
uh, struggles with PTS and uh.
You know, it's, it's uh severe
depression, PTS, and a couple
People with PTS, they try to go
for the counseling through it
and it doesn't work.
Um, and this is, you know, kind
Had to go out of the country. I
believe it was Jamaica that she
went to, to go to a program that
she was able to get this
treatment and it's completely
changed her life.
could use in that setting, um.
As Senator Steinwor said, this
is not.
Marijuana 2.0 or medical
in a clinic with a guide with
you the entire way.
And so I think this is a a great
program that shows a lot of
promise for for veterans as well
Center block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
One of the sponsors yield for a
question,
please Mr.
Uh, but maybe your experts do,
and if they don't, that's OK.
Can you tell me the number?
Um, of veterans that are
suffering from PTSD here in New
Mexico.
And here's Steinborn.
I, I will say, um, Mr.
President, I'm aware of a
statistic that sadly New Mexico
is one of the leading states in
the country for veteran suicide,
sadly.
And uh we do have a behavioral
tell you, I
I was adamantly against this
bill.
Adamantly against it and
A couple of things, uh, came to
President Trump signed
legislation on a right to try
certain medication to.
Help expand people's
Uh, lives and their quality of
This is a
Very, very difficult issue.
For me personally.
Bear with me on that one.
I talked to Crystal Romero,
Master Sergeant, United States
Army.
She's above my right shoulder.
Marine Corps on my left.
Chris is married to Samantha up
on my right for 18 years.
Who served in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
A Purple Heart recipient.
Sky was blown up.
By a vehicle-borne IED.
Chris and I were in Afghanistan.
He also did a tour in Iraq.
Chris and I had.
A long talk in our in my office.
Shed some tears.
But many of us returning home.
Like Chris, who served from 2003
to 2011, struggled with PTSD.
Depression
Bad intense anger.
In an overwhelming inability.
I battled drinking.
Chris
was stuck in a cycle.
And I can relate to that.
Chris couldn't focus on the
people he loved.
In his relationships.
stood by him.
Because Chris was not a great
husband and a great father.
But he is now.
veterans.
Going to counselors that does
absolutely jack squat for some
of us.
Eventually Chris.
As a man and a husband.
And a father, and I believe it
has changed Crystal's life as
well.
To be present finally home.
To reconnect with his community
and his family.
In a meaningful way.
Somalia
Afghanistan
A rock
Serbia
Many other places.
Beyond Chris and the individual
would one person heals.
One person gets better, Mr.
President.
And sponsors.
Chris will tell you he's become
a better father because of this
treatment.
And I believe him.
His relationships with his
beautiful wife Samantha.
She's probably right.
Chris has become more engaged
with his family and his
community. He's volunteering to
help veterans. He's supporting
We have to remember, Mr.
President, sponsors that this
country had 2 straight years of
war from September 11, 2001 to
It's not just about treating the
symptoms, Mr. President and
fellow senators.
It's about restoring lives.
Families heal and when families
heal,
communities grow stronger.
I was against this bill.
Mentally against it.
supported it in committee is an
investment in collective
healing.
In a healthier, more connected
New Mexico.
Lastly
I just want to say.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Block. We do
have further debate with Senator
Tobiasson followed by Senator
Woods.
And send her had a meal.
human, and I think every person
in this room can think of
someone who has had uh alcohol
family member who
went through what's called brain
mapping several years ago. It
was lengthy. It was incredibly
expensive. It worked.
is groundbreaking. Not only does
it work, it, it, in many cases
works faster and it's so less
expensive and it is very safe,
so I wanna share some of my
mushroom or psychedelic, you're
thinking back to Woodstock, and
I would say about half of us in
this room, myself included were
weren't alive then. So we didn't
live through.
even pronounce it right, um,
it's been shown to rewire the
brain by promoting
neuroplasticity.
And it affects the brain's
patterns that maybe aren't in a
person's best interest, um, it
temporarily reduces activity in
the DMN and allows for new
time to time in the legislature,
um, but here's what it does.
It's been found to promote uh
the growth of new neural
connections and strengthen
This experience often disrupts
habitual thought loops allowing
for more flexible, creative, and
open-minded perspectives. It
increases connectivity in the
insight.
Uh, let's see what else I've got
here. I've got a lot. I did a
lot of research on this once we
started hearing it in uh Senate
started researching who has this
therapy, we're on a long list
and in good company, Australia,
Canada, other parts of the
United States, the United
Kingdom, Switzerland, Spain,
beginning trials before they use
this as an actual approved
therapy. So there's long
history, there's a lot of
groundbreaking therapy and
studies from around the world
legislature is behavioral
health.
We've just passed SB 12 and 3.
How do we not bring forward such
Thank you, Senator Tobias and
Senator Woods.
Um, if the sponsor would yield
for a question. Senator
For you, Mr. President, you know
this bill really, um,
that's the realm in which the
FDA will approve and regulate a
product. In fact, this
legislation, Mr. President,
Senator, excludes future FDA
comes to uh synthetic products
which have different strengths,
different formularies. It's not
really the expertise of the
state of New Mexico to, to
regulate those products that are
already heavily going to be
Mr. President, Senator, the
Department of Health will highly
regulate this natural product.
They will, um, approve producers
of it. They will approve
Senator Boone, this is a uh
agriculture bill too, because
this will be produced here in
the state of New Mexico, um, and
have, I'm sure very precise
quality dosing standards, but
Uh, dosage.
Um
Right rules, uh,
sense any more than it is on
them with other medical programs
that they regulate, um, I think
from a legal liability
standpoint that is going to be
on those entities that are
exists, it's not going to be
with the Department of Health. I
don't believe, Mr. President,
Senator. Thank you, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Woods.
So it will be on the
Like
Anything else if they.
Exceed their authority and
they're grossly negligent such
that it would do harm to
product and ask for the
The use of this product and ask
for this process to come to
them.
technically neutral, uh, would
be a fair way to put it,
although they are, um, favorably
predisposed to it. I think I can
walk up to that line and say
that we developed this
You, you've eliminated the state
without any liability.
And the Department of Health is
And because it's going to be
organic, it's all good.
Have I got it covered, Mr.
President?
Thank you, Senator, uh Woods,
Sin Steinmo does he have it
Thank you, Mr. President.
We do have further debate with
Senator Jaramillo, followed by
Senator Charlie, Senator Scott,
and Senator Zel.
Mr. President, to ask unanimous
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
don't need the sponsors to
yield, um, but I do ask this
body and those watching.
are ailing from PTSD and other
neurological struggles is not
new. This medicine has been used
to treat generations of people
indigenous woman be erased while
I have access to these spaces,
Mr. President. Maria Sabina was
an indigenous healer from Oaca,
We cannot and must not continue
the practices of extraction,
cultural appropriation, bio
prospecting and colonization,
ask those uh voting today that
we carry this knowledge forward.
This is something that our
communities have offered people
this works, this heals people.
It is not new. It is not ground.
breaking, and it does work.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you. We do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
amendment sponsored by Senator
Katie Doig.
So do to move the amendment. Mr.
President, I move the Senate
floor amendment number 1 for the
Senate Judiciary Committee
So this amendment does a couple
of things, um, one, there was a,
a discussion, uh, a few moments
regulation of those FDA
products, but then it goes on to
provide some
Information that that would be
regulating them. And so instead
that such products shall be
authorized for use, so that if
the FDA has approved products
that are authorized, they would
be authorized under this bill as
well, but would not be regulated
otherwise by the state.
talking about, uh, developing
the, the program.
The, the medical use of
psilocybin program and was
talking about um appropriate
that, that is talking about the
medical conditions that would
qualify for treatment under this
bill. So it's taking out the
references to producers and
clinicians in that context.
couple of specific people who
are, are noted to be on the
board. Uh, I also, I think a a
healthcare provider should be
services in New Mexico.
And then finally.
The last thing that this does.
I'm just trying to remember what
I was thinking here, um.
I'm sorry, on page 7,
I, I think I might, I think this
is something that, that Senator
amendment and then that last
item, Mr. President, just
removes a little redundant
language. So it's a little
cleanup language, really.
Thank you, Senators. We're
debating Senate floor amendment
number one.
consent for a voice vote.
Senators, there's been a motion
to adopt the floor amendment and
Senate floorman number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 219.
is now one time amended.
We're back on the bill,
senators.
Are you to Senator Scott,
followed by Senator, Senator
Ramos, and Senator Pope.
Mr. President, Senator,
Psilocybin was well established.
50 years ago was a psychedelic.
Over that period to establish
This drug's approval for
Any of the ailments that have
been described today.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
qualified conditions that are
in, in this act, including might
I add, um, to then encourage the
FDA, none other than the FDA to
rule it as a breakthrough
And Mr. President and Senator,
is this actually been approved.
For
Any use.
know, this, uh, now has been
approved in 2 other states, so
it's a little bit cutting edge,
but in the state of Oregon, Mr.
President, um, these treatments
are allowed and they have
But Mr. President, nonetheless,
it remains an illegal drug.
is it it makes it, it removes it
from being illegal. It it makes
it legal only for purposes of
this program in the state of New
Mexico, which we have the
authority to do.
Scott
Steinborn, Mr. President, that's
a very good, fair question. It
is actually considered
Of
Most drugs to be the least
addictive because it does not
intense, so it's by researchers
and including Doctor Lehman
who's sitting over here, uh, in
the data I have, it's, it's, it,
it's not considered really
addictive.
In the way that some other drugs
anything else where they're
using it in a repeated way, um,
so you gotta keep that in mind
too.
Center and Mr. President, I
chemical in uh in New Mexico,
what kind of expertise will
those folks need to serve on
that board.
Steinbor. Thank you, Mr.
President. And while the
the amendment Senator Doig, her
excellent suggestion, we just
added a behavioral health
provider. We also have a veteran
on this advisory committee, um,
Beyond that, I mean, those are 4
kind of requirements that a
representative on this must have
in addition to being
knowledgeable about medical
psilocybin, but all the other
For any of those board members.
To be regular consumers of this
drug.
out though, Mr. President,
Senator, this board has no
authority other than being
advisory.
All of the qualifying conditions
And so, um, including all the
rulemaking on everything I
described earlier, that's also
all by the Department of Health.
So this advisory committee is
just advisory. I will tell you
though, however, in speaking to
the department, they're very
interested in appointing
medical cannabis on that
advisory board.
Senator Scott.
And uh last question.
Mr. President, are these going
That is
Uh, peer reviewed.
By the medical community such
that
Apologize, Mr. Mr. President,
Senator, I think the short
answer is no, this bill does
not, this bill is not about
President, and thank you,
Senator, for your answers.
Thank you Senator Scott. We do
have further debate. We have
Senators, followed by Senator
Ramos, Senator Pope, and Senator
Padilla.
much. I do have some questions
on this because even though I am
from the Woodstock area.
era
eaten. It could be mixed in with
food or beverage, so.
I.
Thank you, Mr. President. So
provider? Is it the talk to me
about that. How do they know how
much should go in, say, the
drink mixture, um.
Whatever the case may be, I'd
like to know how that is done.
that will be determined by the
Department of Health figuring
out what is the best dosage that
a patient will be given, um, you
know, it could be, I wouldn't
prejudge it because quite
several grams, um, for frankly,
a heavier experience.
And that is the right dosage to
get the right therapeutic
effect. So I think it will
also read that microdosing can
lead, also lead to insomnia,
increased anxiety and
depression, poor mood, lower
energy.
And cognitive function and
impaired social skill, Mr.
President, I'm kind of wondering
if some of us might not already
is not safe for people with
psychotic conditions such as
schizophrenia, uh,
schizoaffective disorder or
severe forms of bipolar disorder
Subject to some of these
conditions I just read.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senator, thank you
for raising that because that is
not the best course of
treatment, it could have an
adverse impact. There are
certainly some of those. This
program and the approach laid
out in this legislation is very
approved, let alone given a
treatment. These are all, uh, I
would say primary
considerations, so, so that we
can be very safe and only give
it to the patients that
me, because when we're talking
about patient selection
criteria, I'm sure that is going
to be at the top of the list.
Uh
people that don't qualify. Is
that correct?
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, Senator, I, I would
certainly hope so. I mean,
because of the, the department
will also determine who are the
will be one option that someone
might be seeking out. They might
not be a good fit, but hopefully
in the course of seeking that
help, they will get other kinds
of help that maybe is a better
fit for him.
That they, they should take into
advisement the needs of
qualified patients who live in
rural areas, federal subsidized
beneficial to the people that
they are considering treatment
for.
Senator Steinborn, Mr.
President, so,
Uh, this is a, this section in
and that as it gets created and
then as it functions that
they're able to actually see
who's getting treatment, maybe
where we have, frankly, a
that it's not just serving
people in in urban areas, for
example, um, but having said
that, I think again with safety
first, you know, um,
We don't want this to be, you
safe, um, rollout but with good
data behind it.s very fair, Mr.
President, I would also like to
Inter Steinborn.
Mr. President, it was, um, but I
would also tell the body that
that money is in the budget for
this, um, I haven't seen the
latest iteration of House Bill
recommended money go in for the
research fund for the equity
fund. But in terms of what the
Department of Health needs to
stand up the program. It's about
1.5 million. Right now for this
half a million go for continued
research at UNM and then that
research can commence right
away, not have to be let through
an RFP which could take a year
or so. We want this research to
total, which is in the budget.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. So you're saying that part
of this money, hopefully the $2
million you said.
and the medical psilocybin
Research Fund.
So which, which do you think
needs to come first.
Well, neither of those are, are
even come into effect until
literally January 1st, 2028 when
their patients and there's an
actual program, so we really
don't need to fund that until
next session or even the session
afterwards. The research part of
UNM and and rather than give
that money into this research
fund, which we could have, we
thought it was a smarter
approach to give it directly to
the people who are doing the
research right now to enable
Mr. Press, thank you very much.
I've, I've pretty well gone
through the bill itself and the
other, some of my other
questions in regarding the bill
I do have some questions about.
It states that section 13
removes the medical use of
psilocybin and psilosin from the
list of hallucinogenics
Comprehensive drug abuse
prevention and Control Act that
might be detrimental to what you
may, you may be trying to get
done here.
for the state of New Mexico,
which we had to do because it's
currently illegal, just when
following the program,
not sure, I, I didn't mark it
evidently, but it was also, uh,
Not going to be covered by
Medicaid, Medicare.
that is correct at, at this time
and hopefully if we, if we do
this, um, that will change over
time.
a son of a gun. I was doing so
good, dang it. All right.
I'll comply, Mr. President.
Uh, just because this is going
to be done in Albuquerque at
UNM. Do you see any
rural areas of the state. If
this is adopted.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, I would think that when
we start this and when this
program starts December 31st,
2027. It won't be limited to
drive, hopefully you'll be able
to find a provider and uh.
You know, I think
For this life changing,
potentially life changing
treatment, it could, uh, it will
Your comment to Senator Boone
really perked my ears up. You
said this could be New Mexico
grown, as you know, whenever we
did pass.
restrictions, not enough
evidently on who would, who
would be allowed to grow
cannabis. Tell me about growing.
Yes, Mr. President, Senator, so
as a Schedule One, the law would
be different in different states
around us, and so, um, to not
crossed state lines. As far as
how it's grown, you know, we all
know mushrooms grow very
naturally in a natural medium,
but you could also, I'm sure
grow it hydroponically. I'm not
a mushroom growing expert.
Health, and they will determine
the best.
You know, producers, the best
growing techniques, and then
also, of course, the, the, the,
the uh consistent quality so
explanation, but just like in
the cannabis growing industry,
uh, there are precautions that
are already out there that have
to be followed that were set
hopefully thwart off people that
do want to go in and do a little
bit of thievery on the side
there. How do we, are those
protocols going to be followed
in the growing of this.
Regarding what private property
rights are.
And I could see a black market.
Starting it very easily if
we absolutely, they will, I
should say, establish protocols
for licensed producers, um,
Colorado has just done this for
their producers there, so
themselves won't be able to just
get this from the black market
and give it to patients. I'm
sure that would.
violate their um their ability
to continue to be a provider and
attempting to procure product
outside of what's been
authorized, you actually would,
you would have, you would have
legal exposure and that's
actually specified in this bill.
Mr. President, thank you very
much for that explanation. I'm
glad that there are protocols in
here already in place for
years, however long ago it's
been, I can't even remember now.
I think we kind of jumped the
gun on that by legalizing it and
then putting protocols in place.
If this is past that there will
be some safeguards, safe,
safeguards. I'm gonna put
safeguards instead of using
safety rails, uh, in place to
President, um,
You know what,
I don't have, uh, I just have a
comment. I don't need the
sponsor to yield.
said, well, I wonder what kind
of tree he wants me to hug.
Then I, then I sat there and I
said, well, I wonder what kind
of amoeba this is that he wants
to save that's in the water.
Then he started telling me what
this bill could do, Mr.
President.
And Mr. President, if we can
help 10 veterans, if we could
help 100 veterans.
During this ugly time that we're
living in now, Mr. President.
I truly feel that this is going
to help thousands of people, Mr.
President.
And I hope it turns out.
I hope the Senate really really
falls behind this bill and, and
gets it through so that we can
start helping more people, Mr.
President. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Ramos. We have Senator
Pope next.
thank, uh, Senator Charlie for
bringing up the fact that this
isn't new and novel.
And what we can learn from our
indigenous communities, not just
here in New Mexico and in the US
when they come back with what
they've dealt with.
Whether it's PTSD or just
adjusting with life.
And so I think any type of
And so we need to have every
tool in the toolbox to help
folks.
But this bill just isn't about
veterans.
It's about folks who are in law
And this could be so helpful to
them.
So I urged the body to really
understand and support this.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Pope. Senator.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I do have a couple of
Certainly, Mr. President.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. So, you know, I have,
uh, and I've been very clear
with the sponsors that I've been
struggling with this one
greatly. Um.
So I
Is it on one of the drug
schedules, Schedule 1, Schedule
2, all the, the various
schedules. Does it fall into any
one of those
and Senator Schedule One.
Because, uh, Senator and Mr.
President, uh, because it does
have potential, uh, in this
of any drugs that are on
Schedule one and uh they uh are
various other reasons, but, uh,
again, I want to note that the
FDA is
they classify it over time, it
could go to a schedule too, um,
but right now it would be in a
schedule one.
Thank you Senator Hickey center,
just mentioned, um, and that,
that this is the least
addicting, uh, as we know now,
of any other Schedule One drugs,
that'd be another reason that it
would be on a Schedule One.
because there is a high risk for
abuse. Can you talk a little bit
about that? I'm very concerned
about that.
Senator Hickey.
therapeutic purposes, the, uh,
this drug is not something as
you wondered the other day and
finance it, do you take it every
setting, uh, that is in one day
or up to 5 days and uh you don't
have access to it, uh, it's not
a little while ago, just a
couple of moments ago, that
there's uh some trials and
testing and and this and that to
take it maybe from a 1 to a 2.
So, and again, I, if they don't
know this, that's fine, Mr.
what percentage of them actually
succeed and actually move
forward. OK. Uh, Mr. President
and Senator Padilla, um,
probably
the only field of medicine that
failed grade in the percentages
are, but the clinical trials
that have been done over 20
years are showing tremendous
efficacy, and I would again
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
So, I just want to transition
now over to things related to
cost and access then. So I think
I heard in the Senate Finance
approximately, uh, was it $6000.
So I'm concerned about access.
And, and that's not a question,
but is, is that accurate, a
$6000 cost to actually
Thank you, uh, Senator Padilla
and Mr. President, uh, that's
$6000 was the cost to go through
a week-long retreat in Jamaica
a week and you have, uh,
68 people and you have 3 or 4
guides who are highly skilled. I
So Mr. President, yeah, I want
to underscore that and that for
members of the body, $2000 to
have access to this particular
type of treatment. So, so should
we go down the road of, of, of
Senator Hickey.
Mr. President and Senator
Padilla, uh, given the efficacy
of the drug and as if you've
achieved by the patient no
longer, uh, being in extended
therapy on other drugs, uh, or
their uh eventually chronic
cost uh sometimes it could be as
little as $1000 you're gonna
save hundreds of millions of
dollars later on and so as this
country, um, my sense is that
this
as this gets the approvals and
synthetics come out that health
plans are going to want to cover
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Then I, I, so I think I heard
it.
question that I can look through
my experience as an insurer if a
new drug like GLP1's, uh, have
such profound effect, um, they
synthetics are developed, um, I
believe that the insurers would
cover it again.
Because it's just common sense.
Senator Padilla, thank you, Mr.
Senator Padilla and Mr.
President, uh, I can only
speculate insurance companies if
would still cost the average New
Mexican $2000 at a minimum, or
let's just say thereabouts in
that neighborhood, $2000 to
receive this type of treatment?
Center Hickey.
could be the case, or if a New
Mexican wanted to cross the
border to Colorado, they could.
Senator Padilla.
I appreciate that, Mr.
President. I, I do have to say
standpoint. It's one of the very
few things that I disagree with
the uh the uh two sponsors on
and I'm gonna have to continue
to listen to see where I vote.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Padilla.
debate and discussion and I,
I've been convinced, although I
think many of you all know I've
been very resistant, reluctant
to legalize more and more drugs,
make them more and more open. In
been persuaded by the testimony
in this case, this is a
different circumstance. I, I
rise simply because I know some
of my colleagues are concerned
about access.
drugs or recreational drugs and
so forth. I'll just remind
session about the time of the
last session. Friday night,
Central Avenue at Morningside
you can buy marijuana uh
marijuana you can buy mushrooms
freely on Friday nights in
to his story that Friday nights,
the market's open. He tells me
there's been no response. State
police say it's the city of
Albuquerque problem, so let's
not kid ourselves, uh, mushrooms
Thank you, Mr. President,
colleagues, thank you sincerely
for, for the serious discussion
that this warrants. This is a
involved in a lot of medical
disciplines. We worked really
hard to get it right and the
bill has been amended in this
process. I appreciate Senator
Doig as well for her
suggestions. It's important to,
This is about, this is the
humane thing to do.
If there's something out there
that can help someone
struggling.
With their mental health.
is the humane thing to do. And
then you look towards a state
like Oregon that's done this,
and you come to research over
9000 patients have done this. No
one has passed away, thank God,
Medical drugs, of course, all
have very serious side effects,
and I would dare say any serious
antipsychotic medication has
higher rate of side effects than
this treatment has been shown to
and Crystal and all those out
there struggling.
Hope we can get this done and
give you this option. So with
that, Mr. President, colleagues.
substitute for Senate Bill 219
as a man to do now pass and ask
unMous consent of the Senate
that the records showed the role
has been called on all those
present voted in in the
affirmative, except those voting
Woods. And Mr. President, I'd
like to excuse, uh, Senators
until he returns to chamber.
And except for the reason of the
call. Thank you, Senator.
The nurse Scott voting noator
Woods voting no.
Senator.
Thank you again, Mr. President,
and thank you again for my
co-sponsors. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senators, we're gonna
go on to item number 26 on
today's calendar.
to Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me a little practice on
that title. I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution.
See no objections. Senator Pope,
if you please explain the bill.
property tax exemption from 4000
to $10,000 for veterans and then
it also allows for proportional
property tax, um, exemption
equal to their service related
Um, the property, the tax year
that would is when we would
start the disability exemption.
And but in 2025, uh, we would
Pope. I believe that uh your
house sponsor has arrived, so
he's permitted to.
Please provide a seat for the
representative.
pass the constitutional
amendment or something about
veterans and property.
Tax this last go around, Senator
Woods, are you asking Senator I
we sent, uh, we passed here
passed this and then we've sent
it to the voters and it passed
as a constitutional amendment to
raise the property tax exemption
from 4000 to 10,000 and then
emergency clause, Mr. President,
is really the enabling language
of when this would start.
In 2025, the $10,000 exemption
would start in a 2026, the
See no further debate.
Senator Pope to close on the
bill.
Mr. President, I move that.
clause to do an outpass, and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record showed
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except for those in
the negative by a show of hands,
Thank you, senators. We are
voting all senators to your
seats, please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand. reminder there
is an emergency clause.
With the emergency clause has
passed the Senate. Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
wanna thank our late
representative Alcon who had
championed this for years.
Padilla to take us to that next
order of business. All right,
thank you very much, Mr.
President. I'll take us to that
next order of business. Messages
from the house. No objection. We
are in that order of business
messages from the house, the
Lisa Amartiz McCutchen, chief
clerk show, the message from the
house has been received.
Mr. President, I am directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 71 as
amended by the House and
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 73 and
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 67, House
Bill 87 as amended by the House.
House Bill 155 House Bill 295.
Bill 487. House Bill 532 and
request the records of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa Martis McCutchen, chief
clerk.
Journal show the message in the
submitted Lisa Marti McCutchen,
chief clerk show the message
from the house has been
received. Mr. President, I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the House has passed House
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 458 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
has passed House Bill 65 with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa
Amartiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
show the message from the house
has been received.
that next order of business
committee reports. We are in
that order business committee
reports the reader to read.
respectfully submitted Senator
William Pe Sole's chair.
I asked the unanimous consent of
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
Senate Bill 552 do not pass, but
the Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill for
552 do pass and thence referred
to the judiciary Committee.
And thence referred to the
finance.
House Bill 64 do pass and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Those oppose, the eyes have at
the community report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
under consideration and reports
same with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Kerry Hamlin,
chair. Senator Hamblin.
Senate Bill 122 as amended.
Senate Bill 138 do pass as
amended and thence referred to
Senate Bill 277 do pass as
amended.
Senate Bill 401 do pass and
thence referred to the Finance
Committee.
Then a bill 481 do not pass.
House Bill 36 as amended do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Kerry Hamblin, chair, Senator
Hamlin, Mr. President, I move
the adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor, please signify
Reader to read, Mr. President,
your rules committee, to whom
has been referred House Bill 15,
as amended, has had it under
consideration and reports same
of the recommendation that it do
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individuallying no
objection, the reader will read.
Certificate of condolence
certificate number 11.
Certificate number 12.
Certificate of recognition
certificate number 69.
Certificate number 70.
reports we have a motion to
adopt the community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those oppose the I have at the
community report has been
adopted and the journal will
to whom has been referred House
Bill 172 has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with the recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually,
the reader will read.
House Bill 249 do pass and
thence referred to the tax
business and transportation
Respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon De Pinto, chair.
Pintos. I move adoption of the
committee report. We have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred, Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42
has added under consideration in
reports same with the
Cervantes.
Move it up. Senator Cervantes
moves adoption of the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those of Bona,
it under consideration reports
same of the recommendation that
it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Senator
George Munoz, chair.
the committee reports and that
we vote on them with one motion
and that the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually.
Saying no objection, the reader
will read.
report. We have a motion to a
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
I suppose.
The eyes have at the community
report has been adopted and the
journal will show that they were
acted upon individually.
consideration reports that same
has been duly enrolled and
engrossed preparatory to signing
by the offices of the Senate,
Senator Bergman move adoption of
the committee reports we have a
motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those oppose they, the eyes
Senate majority Michael Padilla
to take us to next order
business. Uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President. I'll take
us to that next order of
business. Introduction of
legislation.
See, no objection. We are in
that order of business
Senator Gonzalez a memorial
requested the office of the
state engineer to study the
benefits, costs, and feasibility
of constructing an earth and
Senate Memorial 23.
Santa Memorial 23 haven't been
read twice by title is.
Order printed and referred to
schools, clarifying that local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools shall
determine the total number of
instructional days per year and
the number of instructural days
per week that students are
Committee, that's House Bill 65
by Representative Garrett.
Bill 6767 having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate Education Committee, then
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, House
Bill 67.
care program fund from the early
childhood education and care
fund House Bill 7171 having been
read twice by title is.
substitute for House Bill 73, an
act relating to limitations of
actions, eliminating the statute
or of limitations on actions for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 73.
Judiciary Committee substitute.
House Bill 87 introduced by
Representative Hoffman V. Hill,
an act-related criminal sexual
contact, eliminating the
requirement that the
nonconsensual touching bead to
an unclothed intimate part.
House Bill 8 House Bill 155
introduced by Representative
Zamora and actually they aim to
155. 155 having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate tax business.
Transportation Committee that's
House Bill 155.
person's information and
Reporting Act to include
cognitive decline or impairment.
House Bill 197.
I'll be 197 having been read
Representative Representative
Small and actually they do
taxation, making improvements on
land owned by the Mexico
Renewable Energy Authority
exempt from property tax for so
Conservation committee, then
Senate tax, Business
Transportation Committee, that's
House Bill 295.
tax credit, amending the
definition of threshold job
applicable to the credit.
House built 368.
substitute for House Bill 402,
an act relating to insurance,
requiring the superintendent of
insurance to promulgate rules
established in a time frame for
health insurance carriers to
If the health insurance carriers
fail to load that information
within 30 days of receiving a
complete credentialing
House government elections and
affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 42, having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax, Business,
Transportation Committee, that's
house government elections and
relating to intergovernmental
agreements enacting the
physician assistance Licensure
Act.
Interstate compact.
House Bill 413.
Representatives Dixon Chatfield
and Small and senators share and
Lanier.
An act relating to the
Creating a fund permitting
transfer of stewardship to the
state, making an appropriation.
House Bill 458458, having been
An act relating to border
development.
Amending the Board of
Development Act.
Changing the composition of the
border authority.
Providing professional
of the NMSA 1978. House Bill
469.
House Bill 469 having been read
twice by title is referred.
Grola
And Mirabal Moya.
Senator Lopez.
An act relating to Hispanic
Requiring the Hispanic education
advisory Council to meet at
biannual Hispanic Education
summits.
Allowing for demon mileage for
To the Senate Education
Committee that's House Bill 487.
House Bill 532.
Introduced by representative
Sanchez.
An act relating to public
schools.
guidance be provided to parents
of each student at the beginning
of each school year.
House Bill 532532 having been
read twice by title is referred
Introduced by representatives
Gonzalez, representative
Gonzalez and Senator Liz
Stefanis.
A joint memorial requesting the
New Mexico state legislature to
heritage.
House Joint Memorial 5.
As Joint Memorial 5 having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Rules Committee.
us, I'll take us back to that
order of business committee
reports no objection. We're on
that order business committee
reports the reader will read.
Mr. President, your tax business
And that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senator Carrie Hamblin, chair,
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President,
I move the adoption of the
committee report. We have a
Well Michael Pali to take us to
that next order of business. Uh,
thank you very much, Mr.
President. uh, Mr. President,
I'll take us to that next order
of business. Messages from?
executive message number 8 and
members of the New Mexico State
Senate. Dear President pro
tempore Stewart and members of
the Senate in accordance with
Agnes Josephine Vallejos for
reappointment to the Mexic
school of the blind and visually
impaired Board of Regents for a
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
Board of Regents for a term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring on December 31st, 2030.
Respectfully.
Submitted, Michelhan Grisham,
very much, Mr. President. I'll
take us to that next order of
business, announcements and
miscellaneous no objection.
We are in that order business
announces miscellaneous center
but thank you very much, Mr.
President. So now would be a
good time for committee chairs
all of the great desserts that
were in the Senate lounge. Thank
you, Mr. President. I also want
to remind, uh, the body that
tomorrow.
Special Olympics New Mexico will
be serving carne adovada beans
and then I do want to let the uh
body know that we will be
reconvene tomorrow at 11 a.m.
We are in that order business
announce its miscellaneous. I'll
yield to Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee will meet at 3:35
today in room 311.
Your Senate, uh, I mean, yeah,
your Senate Finance Committee
will meet at 3:45.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
I guess, uh, Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. President. This
and the Indian Rural Cultural
Ciner had a meal, Mr. President,
there's a big basketball game in
the pit tonight. Do you mind
telling people who's playing in
that game. I'll go ahead and
have you answer that, Mr.
President, the number 3
I don't think that's good, well,
I better not say that. Last time
I talked something bad about the
Taos Tigers, the Sun Devils
lost, but I'll keep you posted
on the game, Mr. President. I do
Seeing that I want to give a big
round of applause to Senator
Padilla and him running the
floor today. Senator Padilla, a
great job.
With that I yelled to senator,
