on the table in front of them
today and that would be a fresh
and nutritious salad locally
and I want to give a shout out
most of the members probably
know that Meals on Wheels is a
leader for the last 53 years in
a week to hundreds of New
Mexicans across the state and
that includes fresh frozen meals
to all 33 counties.
constituents and they serve that
function for New Mexicans across
the state, um, the guest, Madam
President, had to leave, so I
actively seeking partners around
the state to deliver more meals.
They are ready to expand. They
need local distributors so if
you have these needs in your
to serve to our communities and
with that, Madam President, I
yield to my colleague, Senator.
and.
Senator Tobiasson.
final years, she was in
Corvallis, Oregon, and Meals on
Wheels was a tremendous, um,
relief not only for her, um, as
getting um daily deliveries of
nutri
food that helps sustain her in
her final days.
Thank you Madam President.
Thank you, uh, Madam President
and to the members. I just like
to announce that uh long and
waiting but um Tulsike Valley is
inches to 4, but it's way
overdue and so we're approaching
uh the spring part in the summer
and also the cautious of um.
You know, the drought and, you
you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, Senator
Jaramillo, Madam President,
unanimous consent to excuse
senators Lopez and Stephanics
desk is a bag with swag from the
New Mexico Tourism Department.
As all of us know, it's a
statewide agency tasked with
promoting New Mexico for leisure
travel and driving visitations
department also manages grant
programs and other.
services that strive to empower
communities with resources and
technical expertise to develop
and promote tourism in our own
arts, entertainment, creatives
and diverse people. In addition,
the tourism department operates
for visitor information centers
throughout the state of New
Mexico, so all of you can enjoy
Thank you. uh, we'll move now to
our next, uh, certificate of
recognition, this one for New
Mexico Food and Farms, Senator
Campos. Thank you very much,
Madam President, and to the
farms day this is grown from a
few people, uh, participating
decades back all the way to
today where you see, uh, fresh.
that, uh, Madam President, uh,
with your permission, I wish to
uh introduce a certificate and
if you would please ask the
reader to read. Thank you, Madam
President.
State Senate does hereby extend
its recognition and
acknowledgement to recognizing
January 30th, 2025 as New Mexico
food and farms Day in the
local food, farming and ranching
economy.
While emphasizing that everyone
in New Mexico should have access
to fresh local healthy and
food for New Mexico award
celebrating New Mexico farmers
and farmers' markets, Silver
City farmers' market.
Be the sewing change award for
See, the heart of the land award
for outstanding leadership in
farming or ranching. Bryce
Townsend, Black Mesa Farm.
the growing
stewardship.
Melanie Kirby, Zia Queen bee's
farm and Field Institute.
And if the New Mexico Golden
Chili Award honoring all
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that January
30th, 2025 be recognized as New
Mexico Food and Farms Day in the
Senate in celebration of
in the city of Santa Fe, Senator
Pete Campos, Senator Elizabeth
Lis Stefanis, Mimi Stewart,
President Pro Tem Sherry De
Luhan, chief clerk, New Mexico
State Senate.
to grow and our hopes over the
next decade is that we get to a
point of 90% within New Mexico
so that people realized that by
state along with.
that, Madam President, members
of the Senate, as we move
forward, we have, of course,
many people that are being
recognized, but this comes after
healthier society. They're there
for the fight in Washington.
We'll continue that fight here
in New Mexico and so with that,
Madam President, members of the
Senate were available if there's
they've been with us all morning
and they continue to be those
strong advocates for the future
of nutrition here in our great
state. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator Campos. Is
initiative, um, as you know,
Madam President, we as a
legislature as a body as an
entire group of of people up
here made the decision to
provide um universal free
doing in this world, Madam
President, but you know, that,
that effort was.
Focused on the healthy portion
and the work that Senator Campos
and all the advocates that that
we've met today and and and just
comments? uh, seeing none, uh
certain compost to close on the
certificate. Well, again, Madam
President, thank you very much
is here. She'll take the uh
recognition back to all of the
awardees, but if the members of
the Senate would please con
du late not only the awardees
use to uh continue to grow all
of these things that continue to
make us healthy. Thank you very
much, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
report, so chairs committee
reports.
If there's no objection, we're
on that order of business
committee reports, the reader to
read.
that it do pass and thence
referred to the conservation
committee respectfully submitted
to Senator William P. Soul's
chair.
Sinners souls.
Uh, the reader to read all the
committee reports.
Senate Bill 11 has had it under
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
William P. So's chair.
Their souls. I move adoption of
the committee report.
We are on adoption of a
committee report, all those in
favor of signify by saying aye.
Madam President, your
conservation committee, to whom
has been referred to Senate Bill
22 has had it under
consideration and reports same
submitted Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stefani, chair.
Senator Seddi Lopez.
Madam Chair, I move adoption of
the committee report.
So madam chair again this
morning, it seems that.
In an effort to get down into
the weeds on a bill, we limited
debate.
find out what things are.
And if we limit debate.
We're not allowing the members,
thus not allowing the public.
To know what's in these bills.
limiting debate that we're
denying the people of New Mexico
the knowledge of what's actually
in these bills and eventually,
Madam President.
I will become more aggressive
But if we want to do that, then
we can, we can have it right
here on the floor.
not right, Madam President. It
is not right that members of the
state senate elected by their
districts.
are not allowed to dig down and
where you really get the
information and as you know,
Madam President,
We can't ask an expert here.
Yes, we can have an expert.
But then it's funneled through
we're in committee.
Madam President, we got to put
this kind of thing to bed.
Because it will cause a problem.
Uh, seeing none were on a motion
to adopt a committee report.
Those in favor signified by
saying I.
Those opposed, nay.
All right, so we're on a
challenge of the ruling of the
chair.
How would you like this to be
done?
A roll call, Madam President.
committee report from
conservation if you vote yes you
will uphold that if you vote no,
you will undermine that. Clerks
shall call the roll.
Boone. Saint Boone votes no.
Center Brandt
Senator Brantley.
Senator Charlie votes yes.
Center do Hick.
Sariel.
No. Centers our votes no.
Yes.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes.
Senator Hamlin, Senator Hamlin
votes yesent Hickey's excuse,
Center my
myest votes yes. Yes.
Sater Mignos votes yesent nova.
Pinto.
Yes. Center Pinto votes yes,
Senator Pope. Senator Pope votes
yes, Senator Ramos.
Senator Ramos votes no. Center
Lopez. Yes. Centeredia Lopez
votes yes, center share.
Center share votes no
centerendo.
Sendo votes, yes, Center souls.
Center Stewart, Center Stewart
votes yes. Center Thornton.
No. Senator Thornton votes no.
Center Tobiasin.
Center Tobias and boats no
interorentor boats, yes, center
woods center oos votes no.
My vote of 20 in the
affirmative, 13 in the negative,
the ruling of the chair has been
upheld.
We're back on committee reports,
decorum and so forth and to.
Partly for the, the people that
are counting votes.
We need to be at our seat to
vote.
And
chair to vote, and I don't think
everybody that voted today was
in the right spot. So I would
just remind the body to make it
easier for the clerk and those
people counting.
That if you're gonna vote.
Be in your chair.
conservation committee, to whom
has been referred to Senate Bill
21 has added under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
I would like to point out to the
rest of the members of the
Senate.
That it is very important to me
that my constituents' voice is
cannot delve to the bottom of
all these bills that we are
hearing.
Their voice is being ignored.
There's some problems with some
objection to what is happening
here in the Senate and our
committee rooms,
Madam Speak, uh, madam, I'm so
sorry, Madam President, thank
you were speaking, um, but we're
in the middle of the committee
report, so when you want to
speak, it is debatable, but you
have to let us get through the
process first.
Yeah
It is debatable.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
I was a participant.
state of New Mexico.
As I
Point of order, Madam Chair,
this, this is not the
conservation?
The questions that were being
asked by both sides.
Of the debate.
Were not frivolous.
They were not repetitive.
Move in the state of New Mexico
forward and it deserved a full
fare and complete hearing.
Not limited.
To the legislative committee
handbook rules.
And our mason's rules.
Now, if we're going to have the
rules.
excuse Senator Cervantes until
he returns to the chamber.
Uh, seeing no objection, we will
do so, uh, Senator Sheer, um,
thank you, Madam President.
and waters for fighting over, so
we're gonna fight, but the real
problem here is
This is water. We hear water is
to them.
Both very serious, very big
water bills.
Bills that probably should have
bill is, uh, water quality and
pollution.
OK
But we don't have good
definitions, at least not there,
debate. We've, we've cheated
the, the citizens of New Mexico
out of important knowledge.
And we can't do that, Madam
Senator Woods. Thank you, Madam
President.
You know, these, these
particular bills were very
complicated bills.
Madam President, that needed a
committee and they can take care
of it.
And, and Madam President,
That kind of diminishes the
reason to have the first
committee.
If, if, if.
question a bill, the sponsor of
the bill, and completely thrash
out where the pluses and the
minuses are because these
Take precedence on a Supreme
Court decision.
On water
They're kind of important stuff.
And just to say, well, the next
objective, objecting to the
process of limiting debate in
the committee.
Thank you, Mr. President, Madam
President.
Thank you and thanks for that
chair today for 3 straight hours
on these two bills, which
originally were scheduled on
Tuesday, uh, due to Senate Bill
4, taking the full committee
Padillaz start the floor, and I
just want to defend
And, uh, committee chair is not
here, but I think she did do a
good job of
Committee. This bill is referred
to 3 committees. There are
serious issues and, and I don't
disagree that the water issues
here are super important. We
time, the last 50 years when
those streams and, and wetlands
were covered.
So again,
We're not gonna turn I
now. We're just copying it, but
we need to tune it up. But the
idea that we're going to turn
every committee into a committee
that deals with every single
issue is just not gonna happen.
limits, and I think we need to
work through that and just
watching the different
committees since we had the
initial discussion, I think
that's happened, members,
you could literally filibuster a
bill in committee and say I
haven't had my questions
answered, so we're just gonna
sit here until I do, and
obviously that doesn't work, so
there's.
There's got to be a fine line. I
and I, and I out of full
respect, and I mentioned to the
members on that committee, I, I
get that these are big issues.
gets to the floor, if it gets to
the floor. So the two big issues
were judiciary issue and then
lots of funding questions.
About the fee, uh, how we're
gonna pay for this? Where do the
discussed in a good way. So I
felt like they were good
hearings and, and we hear both
sides got a chance, the public
got a chance to participate. So
I just wanna to counter the idea
came up, but here in the Senate,
we've always tried to work
through these things, and that's
what we're doing. And, and I
appreciate, you know, the
frustration. I'm not minimizing
schedule around. We also can
start coming in on Saturday. I
know that's what they did in the
house, you know, Energy
Committee met every Saturday.
You know, if that's really the
direction, you know, that we
want to go, we'll probably hear
the one in the chair for 3+
hours today on these two bills.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh
Senator
leader's remarks and, and he was
right, uh, senatorsani was
polite and, and.
And I thought she did.
I came over here, Aaron, and
quite frankly, had a
conversation with you, and you
said, we do things a little
different in the Senate.
And what I'm seeing is.
Juveniles, we weren't being
repetitive. We weren't asking
the same question over and over.
We weren't doing that. We were
Comments that came from our
analysts about these bills.
And I, uh, I appreciate the
leaders.
That if my comments and my
questions aren't answered in, in
my committees that I'm assigned
to.
That the person that's going in
force them through in the 30
days, come hell or high water,
then all of these other
committees are just for naught.
And I don't believe that should
be the case. And so,
Uh, compassion toward the
Opposing argument and that
everyone realizes that they need
to be vetted and vetted well
Thank you Madam President, Madam
President, I was in the
committee room this morning too,
and I think I'd like to add a
couple of things and repeat some
should tell us something, uh,
if, if the thinking is this is
something that somebody just
trying to push through without
the scrutiny if there's any uh
comments or concerns that that
I'm sitting in the conservation
committee, and I'm sitting in
the judiciary Committee. I will
oftentimes reserve my comments
or thoughts and debate for the
Judiciary Committee, assuming
the bill's going to pass out
Attributable to me, but I'm
explaining the reasons why, and
it's not to, to curtail
anything. I think it's also
important to add that that we
had enough time today to go
through some numbers twice. I
Senator Townsend, you and
others, um, so the chair made, I
think more than adequate time. I
do think that it's important to
affirm that we've now seen 2 and
2.5.
in New Mexico there's no, no
question, no doubt about that.
Can't be, um, and, and the one
thing that uh I would want
members to know too is I used to
chair conservation.
chair to try and manage their
schedule, recognizing there is
that hard stop. The bad news for
the president pro tem and those
on judiciaries we don't have
necessarily a hard stop um in
time because we have the time.
It's really just that simple.
We, we will take that time
because we have that time and
conservation simply does not
always have that. And so, um, I
appreciate the concerns, but I,
cutting anybody off other than
than the demands of the floor,
and I think we have to respect
that of a chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
voice vote, uh, those in favor
of adopting committee report,
please say aye.
Those supposed nay.
Are we done with committee
reports? OK. uh Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Madam President.
Senate Bill 37 introduced by
Senator Stefani, Senator Wirth,
by the interstate stream
Commission, providing that the
strategic water reserves shall
be used to assist in water
management and conservation
efforts designed to support
that will provide supplementary
supplementary benefits in
addition to at least one
authorized purpose, making an
appropriate.
creation
Senate Bill 37.
Senate Bill 201 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez.
For the legislative finance
Committee, an act relating to
evaluation plans approved by the
Department of Finance and
Administration, requiring the
Department of Finance and
administration to consult with
the legislative Finance
Senate Bill 201 had been read
twice by titles sort of printed
and referred to the Senate
Education Committee, thanks to
Senate Finance, Senate Bill 201.
finance, standardizing language
and funds managed by the state
investment officer, including
all funds invested by the state
investment officer in chapter 6,
Article 8 NMSA 1978.
treasury and reducing the amount
of that money in the fund will
revert by one year, reducing the
amount of time that unreserved
and undesignated funds of state
licensing department be
deposited in the regulation and
licensing department operating
fund repealing an outdated
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee thanks
to Senate Finance, Senate Bill 2
202.
Senate Bill 203 introduced by
requiring licensure of
establishments where massage
therapy is offered or perform
performed.
Providing a penalty.
Amending and enacting sections
of the NMSA 1978.
twice by title order printed and
referred to the Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee,
thence to Senate Judiciary,
Senate Bill 203.
Repealing sections 61-78-1
Bill 204. 204 had been read
twice by title or print referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, thanks to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 2204.
An act relating to state
government.
Creating the Office of housing,
Planning and Production.
Providing powers and duties.
Senate Bill 206 introduced by
Senator Padilla representatives
Lundstrom and Garrett.
projects, adding the definition
of public-private partnership
agreement to the procurement
code requiring state agencies
and local public bodies bodies
maintained by the state
purchasing agent.
Allowing approved continuing
education units to be used for
recertification.
Defining continuing education
units.
Adding exemptions for
information technology,
enterprise services capital
equipment and software
contracts.
Exempting contracts for
Excluding certain sole source
contracts from central
purchasing for agencies with a
certified procurement officer
and allowing those contracts to
Providing for modification or
withdrawal notices of bids
containing mistakes.
Requiring that professional
services contracts be reviewed
by the state purchasing agent or
Increasing the amount for
certain purchases by a central
purchasing agent.
Allowing state agencies or local
public bodies to issue certain
direct purchase orders.
competitive sealed bids or
requests for proposals.
Increasing maximum terms for
professional services contracts
to Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 206.
Senate Bill 207 introduced by
senators Stefaniks and Hickey
representative Thompson.
authorizations or step therapy
protocols, Senate Bill 207.
7 twice by tiles or printed and
referred to the Senate Health
Senator Campos, an act relating
to water increasing the annual
transfer from the New Mexico
irrigation works construction
fund to the Asea and community
Conservation Committee thence to
Senate Finance to Senate Bill
208.
Senate Bill 2009 introduced by
Senator Campos and making an
appropriation to the rural
referred to the Senate Indian
Rural and Cultural Affairs
Committee, thence to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 209. Senate
Bill 210 introduced by Senator
in penalties for a violation of
water law to account for
inflation. Senate Bill 210.
Sent Burner 10 have merit by
title disorder printed and
referred to the Senate
An act relating to taxation.
Creating the quantum facility
infrastructure income tax credit
and quantum facility
So Bill Turnervin had been read
twice by title asserter printed
and referred to the Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee, thence to Senate
Finance, Senate Bill 211.
Creating the quantum testing and
evaluation gross receipts tax
credit.
Senate Bill 212. 212 having been
read twice by titles or printed
referred to the Senate tax,
Senator Gonzalez.
An act relating to motor
vehicles.
Enacting a new section of the
motor vehicle code requiring
vehicle drivers to yield to the
213.
So 213 had been read twice by
titles that are printed and
referred to the Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee thence to Senate
An act relating to the Mexico
Department of Agriculture.
Updating acts over which the
department has administration
and enforcement powers and
duties.
Providing for a standardized
prescribing penalties, amending,
repealing, enacting, and
recompiling sections of the NMSA
Committee, Senate Bill 214.
Senate Bill 215 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo.
An act relating to insurance,
printed and referred to the
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee the to
Senate Judiciary, Senate Bill
215.
An act repealing the prohibition
on political subdivisions and
home rule municipalities from
enacting rent control or
privately owned real property.
Committee, thence to Senate
Judiciary, Senate Bill 216.
Senate Bill 2017.
Department of Information
Technology's role in approving
information technology
procurement and projects by
state agencies amending section
section 6 as amended. Senate
Bill 217.
Senate Bill 217 having been read
twice by Ty is sort of printed
and referred to the Senate
Health and Public Affairs
senators Doig and Bergmans.
An act relating to election
administration amending the
election code.
Providing the process for
program administered by the
Secretary of State and to
receive certification.
Providing election day
procedures for newly appointed
election board members.
Providing provisional ballot
law.
Requiring the Secretary of State
to implement a secure internet
application to gather electronic
signatures for the qualification
of political parties.
Amending the circumstances in
which an automatic recount is
required.
Providing a procedure.
For qualified political parties
to place a candidate for
Amending the voter voter Action
Act.
Expanding the definition of
qualifying period.
Providing procedures for
declarations of intent.
Repealing a section relating to
municipal election procedures,
amending the special Election
Act.
convention designations,
eliminating references to party
conventions.
Amending, repealing, and
title, ordered printed and
referred to the rules committee
thence to judiciary Senate Bill
218.
And
Andrea Romero.
An act relating to health care.
creating an advisory board
providing powers and duties.
Amending the controlled
substances Act to remove
psilocybin and silosin from the
Making appropriations. Senate
Bill 219. 219 having been read
twice by title is sort of
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you,
Madam President. I'll take us to
that, uh, order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
have on the table there. I do
want to let the members know
that we will be coming back
tomorrow at 11:30. Now would be
a good time for committee chairs
to make some announcements.
Committee will be meeting, we're
gonna do, we'll do.
22:30 just to make it easy for
everybody to get there on time.
2:30 tax business and
and we have the secretary of
Economic Development Rob Black.
So we will start promptly at
2:30 in room 321, that is your
tax business and transportation
committee. Thank you, Madam
Senator Wirth, Senate Bill 109,
Senator Souls, Senate Bill 124,
Senator Doig, and we'll also be
hearing SJM1 from Senator
Padilla. Thank you, Madam
President.
room 311. Uh, we have bills from
Pope Sendo Steinborn Brant.
Pope again and Figueroa, we try
to take them in order unless,
you know, there's need for other
people moving around from
early childhood, K-12 and higher
ed will all be in 311 for a
morning meet and greet. There
will be some breakfast there.
It's to learn, meet those
secretaries, no formal agenda
order of business we'll have in
education at 9 o'clock will be
Mr. Munoz giving an update of
the educational landscape at the
national level. And so please
join us for all of that, uh,
meeting 15 minutes after the 4th
session today in room 322.
Thank you
Sinners share
Uh, thank you, Madam President,
committee procedure, uh, and so
the rules of the procedure in
the committee are the same as
the rules on the floor, however,
and I did skip a couple words
there, however, insofar as the
A no motions to close or limit
debate are allowed, then there's
several others, but let me go to
F.
A member may speak more than
once at the same stage of
sentences I didn't read, but
they don't make any difference
there. I just wanted to share
that, but Madam President, I
would acknowledge.
That
Telling anecdotal stories about
let the members allow the people
of New Mexico to know what's
going on.
And we can do it by the rules of
Mason's. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other
that does reference limitations
and so I think what we'll do is
get our chair of rules and our
ranking member of rules to sit
down together. There's also been
a bunch of citations to a
rules are the rules, and if the
rules are silent, we go to
Mason's, as Senator Scherer is.
Uh, so again, I do think this is
a discussion we'll continue to
have, but I wanted to point out
have, oh, here she is right
here. So let me yield to Senator
Duha. I do think it's important
to cite the other provisions of
Masons, so we have them all
since we're gonna have this.
debate now I guess on the floor.
Thanks.
little bit blind cause I, I
missed what was being said by
Senator Scher, uh, as I was
running down here.
So.
chapter 58. It starts on page
470.
And the important sense is here
insofar as conditions permit,
the rules regarding debate
example, no motions to close or
limit debate are allowed, and
then as I go down a few of
those. A member may speak more
than once at the same stage of
consideration of a proposal.
to keep in mind what the order
of authorities are for
For our rules here in the
Senate. First is our
Constitution. Next is our
What they don't explicitly
address is whether whether time
can be managed and controlled by
look at section 57 in Mason's.
It's on page 48. This deals with
when you can interrupt a member.
And it specifically says
the authority of of the
presiding officer in committee,
it would be the chair.
To implement time limits on
speaking. I also, if you go a
Uh
Sorry, Madam President, um, but.
To the extent that there are
things in Masons that are
motion to close debate. Um, and
to the extent that things are
not covered by, by our rules.
Masons is what predominates and
Masons inherently.
that's going to include, in
order to ensure a thorough and
uh full debates where everyone
gets an opportunity to speak and
represent their constituents,
do in the Senate Judiciary
Committee when time gets short
on things, um, the other another
source of our rules.
Uh, and this is from Mason's is
essentially it gets imputed to
our rules as well. Thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you.
Center share
hours.
2 hours.
It shall be in order for any
senator to move to close debate.
But back to Mason's.
read insofar as such rules are
applicable to committee
procedure. However,
Insofar as conditions permit,
the rules regarding debate
should be relaxed.
to do.
But both of these, uh, what,
what the, the first part she
read too.
Was particularly for floor
The first part was the rules.
For debate here.
The part I read were rules for
the debate in
Committee
But if we want to play by those
going on in a specific bill. I
think
That we could talk 2 hours on
every bill in every committee.
If that's the rule we want to
play by.
Uh, our members on this side
asking questions that are not
relevant to the bill.
But Madam President, if they are
relevant to the bill.
All right, well, I, I think it's
a, it's needed that the rules
chair and the ranking member and
perhaps the minority leader that
talking about this further uh
among the the uh folks that are
have that handy copy of Mason's
and the rules.
Right. Any other announcements,
uh, with that, Madam President,
I move that the Senate stand a
recess until 11 a.m. tomorrow
morning aren't you asking for
unanimous consent, I am asking
for unanimous consent that the
