Center Figueroa.
Center guy egos.
Santa Gonzalez
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Maestus.
Senator Minos.
Senator Nova.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Center Scott.
Senator Sidia Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you and I ask
that everyone please rise.
The invocation to be led today
The played in Spanish to be led
today by Senator Gonzalez and
the things that you've done for
us, especially to thank you for
the things that we don't even
know that you've done for us.
Lord, we also ask you to forgive
us for all of the things that
on everyone in this building on
the state of New Mexico, the
United States of America and in
fact the entire world, please
Lord, bless us all.
in La Republicacados.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico, the symbol of
leader Peter Wartz to take us to
that first order of business.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Good morning. Uh, unanimous
consent, we go out of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
He ain't no objection. We're in
of us, to all of those outside
and all over the world. I
thought that was very
appropriate, uh, Mr. President,
before I just go through our
announcements. Let me yield to
Senator Padilla for some cameras
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Good morning, um, and
thank you, Senator Sheriff for
the kind words this morning.
Uh, UNESS consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor and
Senate gallery.
Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Center share, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
uh excuse the Senate
miscellaneous so yield to
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr.
President, uh, unanimous consent
to excuse senators, uh,
Stephanics, Cedillo Lopez.
Charlie
President see no objection, so
ordered.
We do have one that ordered
businesscellaneous and I'll go
to Senator War to take us to
today's calendar. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President, and just for
have them stay up, uh, just for
the first part of that, uh,
before we get going. So just
explaining why lots of folks are
hard at work, uh, Mr. President,
and thank the city for being
terrific hosts to all of us.
It's also disability rights
Awareness Day, New Mexico
Cairo's power engineering
company that that's going to be
read and some guests.
that, uh, some important
reminders, um, Monday, February
assume it's close of business,
we'll continue to uh keep
everyone in the loop on that.
Also, another important deadline
that's much sooner, it's in 3
figure out what's expiring, um,
those forms have to be submitted
to be part of the discussion as
Senator Munoz, uh, mentioned
yesterday and we talked about
reauthorizations. If you don't
We'll work on that. Uh, before
we go to guests, just in terms
of events, Hispano roundtable of
New Mexico's 30th annual tribute
to Hispano legislator's dinner
Uh, Quando Los Ninos legislative
meet and greet at La Fonda in
Santa Fe, Rome from 4:30 to 7:00
p.m. by invitation.
in room 326 sponsored by Growing
Up New Mexico, the PN3 coalition
and community Voice Coalition.
Uh, Mr. President, just before I
order. Senator Padilla, Senator
Jail, and Senator Figueroa.
Uh, so that'll be 3rd reading
when we get there, and with
that, Mr. President, I'd yield
to other members to introduce
their guests, and then we'll get
Mr. President. I do have a very
hardworking guest members of the
Senate here who is joining me
from the Elai program, and she
is, uh, tends if you want to
please stand, um, and she
filmed there, Mr. President,
multiple other movies. We have a
uh bank on the property. We have
a hospital, we have a, uh, we
have a courtroom.
on the on the on the uh on the
who's been shouting me. She's
been analyzing bills, actually
to Mr. President, already today
and gave me some great feedback
on the bills. Her name is
Brianna Bowie, and her name
Brianna and uh she grew up
learning a lot about her
heritage. She is uh Navajo Dana,
uh, she is currently a senior,
like I said, at the Trisco
Heritage Academy located in my
district on the southwest
She's very nervous when she got
here this morning, and she was
very, very excited when I told
her she got to meet you this
morning, Mr. President, so.
Thank you for taking a photo
with her. Uh, she is uh has much
Thank you Senator Padilla. We do
have several members who would
and Senator Thornton will add to
the list from there. Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Colleagues, it is really my very
high honor to it, it welcome and
introduce some very
NAACP, long time. Her highly
fashionable husband.
And instead, extraordinaire uh
Howard Guillaum.
Reverend Carolyn Williams.
Well,
Wilkins.
Wilkins, sorry, I apologize,
Reverend, and Eleanor Quinn,
And Mr. President, they will be
here of course for African
American Day tomorrow and we'll
President, and with me today I
have Johanna Cox. She has a JD
and a PhD and as a special
prosecutor and attorney that
practices around New Mexico and
Um, event, um, but she does some
very great work in our area and
is a very great advocate, um,
from what I hear she's not a
native New Mexican, but I'm glad
first time here.
Thank you Senator Pinto. Senator
Shindo.
Senate floor today. I'll start
with uh Mr. uh Brady McGee. He's
a, a senior farmer in high
school with the lawsuit program,
uh, Braden is a dedicated 70
Presented the program with
enthusiasm and commitment. He's
actively involved in the San
Juan College Club, uh, Collores,
where he participates in and
his family's business known for
his motivation and friendly
demeanor and eagerness to assist
others, uh, Brady consistently
seeks out new opportunities to
grow and learn new skills. He's.
uh, and then along with uh him
also I have two individuals, uh,
our former, uh, uh, Senator
Bernie Sanchez, a former school,
Hispanic Education Act and was a
driving force in advocating for
land grants and shipping them
into the political entities we
know them as today a graduate
Mazer, she's a founder and CEO
of Global Give a Book, a
nonprofit dedicated to promoting
children's literacy.
And responsible for the books
gifted to each of your members
English but discovered a
profound love for reading during
the college years raising 5
children as a single mother
ignited a deep passion for
literacy, solidifying her belief
me welcome uh Brayden,
Bernadette and Sylvia to the
Senate chamber.
know I could count that good.
Um, with me and you can rise
individually. I have Kevin
Mitchell, uh, Mike Shaw.
Mr.
President, did you, do you
notice this book that we got
today, who the, uh, uh, authors,
I think it's.
Did you look at the top of that
And the Grammy Award winner
Rihanna Giddens.
Oh, you got a different book
than us.
Well, there's 42 of us and only
1 of you.
Mr. President, uh, just so
everybody knows, Senate Bill 12,
and 3 is in your emails in a PDF
today, make sure you look for
that and, and, uh, understand
what's gonna happen on 12, and
3, in the next coming days.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Munoz, and welcome
Delgado started high school, he
found a liking for the
legislative branch of government
through the Lorenzo the Zavila
youth legislation session, uh,
from there he was able to become
students need at McCurdy, which
is a gym floor.
There has been uh has completed
two dual credit courses at
Northern New Mexico College and
is working as a community health
become a city councilor and
would also like to start a small
business of selling his baked
goods. So ladies and gentlemen
of the Senate, if you can help
me in welcoming Elio to the to
the chamber.
Thornton, Senator Hamblin, and
then Senator Galgos.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
have with me from the Ilase
program is Johan Rodriguez, uh,
he grew up in Las Cruces and has
something that taken me a year
to try and figure out how to get
something off of my computer. So
if anybody has concerns or
problems, I loan him out for
short, uh, computer fixes you
might need, um, he's known for
school, Johan, uh, enjoys
playing video games, spending
time with his dog, with which
fuels his creativity and sense
of balance. He's currently in
his last semester of high
New Mexico Senate because he
does play some basketball too,
and, uh, it's nice when we're
high school students, it's my
size already, you know, and so
hopefully this will fuel and
spark him to maybe get into
politics in a few years and join
Senator Sis, thank you for the
update on basketball. I
understand that EMTs were
involved in today's morning
session.
Uh, yes, many of you, uh, Mr.
President, you know, uh, Rico
rest of the day. So, uh, again,
it just fuels why I tell people
come a couple of times before
the game, you won't hurt as much
the day afterwards if you get a
little bit of bumping and
running in first.
come by. We appreciate them and
welcome them to the Roundhouse.
In addition, today, we have
Dimming Cesar Chavez Charter
High School here. It's a
district authorized charter
high school serving Luna County,
the school plays a vital role in
supporting students who are
seeking to recover academic
credits. Currently they serve
transform lives. They stand by
the mottosis se puede yes we
can. Our commitment to those
students remains unwavering, and
we continue to provide the
here with us today from uh Cesar
Chavez uh charter school. I, I
went and visited this school and
it is such a great school. I
love that they're thinking out.
outside the box and doing a
Andres Porras.
Uh
Eden Florney.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. Uh,
Senator Thornton.
Excuse me, Senator I'm, I'm
sorry, we're gonna yell back.
grader from Las Cruces, desert
Heroes Elementary School. She is
a competitive cheerleader, plays
basketball. She has a love for
would like to welcome her to the
New Mexico Senate. We're also
joined by her little brother, my
nephew Enzo, top 3 for nephews
and my best friend and sister
Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
have the honor today to, uh,
announce Sydney K Wood. She is a
would think what would someone
that age want to do that for,
um, she likes hiking, hunting,
and, uh, spending time with her
friends. She currently works as
a house cleaner and a barista
but she plans on, uh, going on.
uh very godly and her parents
are as well and welcome her to
the state senate today. Thank
you very much.
cheese royalty. This is my wife
Shar Doctor Shar Ullman, who is
a full professor at the
University of Texas at El Paso,
um, you know, I'd like to say
that she's coming up here
researcher at the University.
of Texas at El Paso and there's
a great deal in helping guide
and uh and shape our future
Lynn Anderson Kearns and her
husband Tim Kearns, um, uh, Lynn
and Shar were college roommates
and uh this is Tim's first time
to New Mexico, however, it is
very glad to welcome them to our
lovely home state to southern
New Mexico. They're gonna be
going down to southern New
Mexico toward the end of the
weekend to see our neck of the
woods, uh, but they're enjoying
Thank you Senator Hamblin.
Senator Gaygos
I'll head that way.
Senator Ramos,
and Mr. uh, please help me
welcome Mr. Noel Nunez, who is
the director, um, and, and I
failed because he means so much
it's that great example for
these students every day and I,
I would have not been able to
live myself of, uh, Mr.
President, if I want to
introduce him because he's doing
and help me welcome these
individuals. Thank you.
Senatoregos
Thank you, Mr. President. uh, I
uh, I am currently still on unit
school board, and I wanted to
acknowledge I don't see them up
in the gallery, uh, UNI schools,
uh, Hobbs schools, and Lovington
Uh, but I then from that I'd
like to talk to you about uh
some young people that I have
here on the uh seats behind me,
uh, I'd like to introduce some
children from some young people
stand and we will uh platform
all at one time when we
recognize them, but I want to
tell you that uh Loving High
School is one of the top 10
schools.
important it is for local
control these school board
members have decided the value
of these students are in a 4 day
system Eunice IM school board
for their kids, so I'm gonna ask
uh Natalie Galvan to stand.
We have Kamala Contreras.
Zoey Acosta.
Clayton Westfall.
loving high school advisor,
Joanna Jones. I asked the body
to welcome them to the Mexico
State Senate.
want to introduce my and last
guest this morning Elias Romo,
he is a junior at Piedra Vista
High School, the Panthers up in
Farmington area, but he's also
gonna be graduating early. He's
of in LA. He enjoys politics and
he also enjoys teaching young
people MMA mixed martial arts
specializing in tae kwondo.
Please welcome Elias Romo.
One more. I'll just give a few
moments.
Senator Maestas
You, uh, thank you, Mr.
President, uh, wanna do some
Mexico United, uh, soccer club,
uh, here in New Mexico is about
it was founded in 2018. They
either 1st or 2nd in the nation
only gonna be a soccer stadium
but also uh uh a cultural uh
event center and and place for
all folks can gather please
welcome, uh, the owner of the
So these uh these dear friends,
Mr. President, uh, are just
tremendous leaders providing
hope economic opportunity,
pride, and marvelous, marvelous
Seeing in cinemaster.
Thank you, Mr. President. So, so
let's uh New Mexico United Day.
I thank you for the swag, uh,
leader, uh, worth.
welcome. Thank you.
Senator Worth.
yours next. Uh, so it's my
honor, Mr. President, to address
all of you and and celebrate
today's city of Santa Fe Day.
For me, every day is City of
Santa Fe Day, but this is the
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature first session 2025.
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
Constitution of New Mexico was
approved by the voters of New
Mexico and whereas every year
since the city of Santa Fe has
hosted the legislators from
early Native American village to
the Spanish European settlement
through the Pueblo revolt to the
Spanish resettlement as part of
Mexico and now the United
continues.
to welcome a diverse
constituency from New Mexico and
visitors from the region and
nation during each legislative
session and whereas the
inclusivity and honor Southwest
history and whereas the
residents, culture, and economy
of the city of Santa Fe, greatly
benefit from the devoted and
residents and elected officials
of the city of Santa Fe salute
the dedicated efforts of
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
and state legislators working in
partnership to address the
Fe, an enjoyable one.
offering access to city
facilities and services, and
whereas the city of Santa Fe has
made outstanding progress in the
600 young Santa Feans as members
and participants in the teen
center.
Expanding the learn and earn
Fe Public schools, continuing to
address homelessness with an
outstanding code blue life
saving program as well as a
successful pallet community
has filled 1000 more potholes
this year than last year, hosted
the 100th anniversary of Zozobra
to the delight of thousands of
construction of the largest
movie and digital production
studio in northern New Mexico
and been selected the best place
to live and work as a.
movie maker for the 3rd year in
Now, therefore be resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that congratulations be
extended to the city of Santa Fe
for being the great capital city
it is, and that February 13,
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mexico and interesting issues
there. Uh, one fun fact about
the city of Santa Fe, it is the
only capital city in the country
that has been the capital under
continue there. Uh, I just want
to thank the city for the
incredible hospitality. It
continues, uh, with this fun
little gift bag. I see there's
is a, uh, it's a big lift for
all of us, and I'm, I'm, I can't
complain. I get to drive up the
hill and be done. Everyone else
is coming here though and live.
is tremendously appreciated, and
so we wanna make this your day
and really say thank you to our
mayor and city council. What I
will do is yield to other
members and then Senator
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. I rise in full
support of the, of the
recognition of the city of Santa
Fe every time we do this, I love
to get up and tell the story of
worker that stopped and helped
me to stand back up again on my
feet and uh that's always I I I
think a lot of people may know
or not not know. I walk very
early in the morning and I feel
very safe when I walk around
this.
Beverly Hills, if you will, and
uh you guys do whatever you can
to help us. I'm sure it's just.
I can only imagine what all of
you deal with, with all of us.
outdoor during the winter. OK.
All right, well, that's great.
Now we got that out of the way.
Um, if there's anything I can
ever do to help you when you're
in Albuquerque, I hope that
you're going to reach out to me
as well, and I think I have
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
also want to thank my friends
who are up in the rostrum and
think Santa Fe, even though I'm
just 25 miles away, it becomes
my second home, but I wanted to
Hispano Latino culture that was
right here in the heart of
northern New Mexico, Latino
culture or Hispano Americano
culture was brought up when the
all those cultures combined to
commissioner and even when I was
just the cheer coach like Lee
who's up there that I've known
since high school who helped in
so many ways. Thank you for
opening up the city to us we're
Thank you, uh, Mr. President and
to the members and BB Needles to
our to our guests from Santa Fe,
that I represent, I have become
a very, very well acquainted
with my constituents and uh
that's pretty much the Chimayo
area and it's been uh a very,
must love Santa Fe. This is my
30th year here. And, uh, you
know, so we could come in and uh
but again it's a big business of
We really appreciate everything
that you do for us. Gracias.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Gonzalez. We have
to uplift uh Lia de Santa Fe and
as someone who grew up half of
my life in Santa Fe. I just
wanna tell you how grateful I am
for that and how grateful I am
to have been in a place that was
the representation they like.
like counselor Alma con mucho
mucho guo alma cilio
from. So muchas graciasi que
viva Santa feta mien even though
you are not in my district still
you are in my heart.
Thank you, Senator Navas.
all of you are amazing leaders
who I enjoy working with in
different capacities, uh, which
I won't mention, but obviously,
you know that and uh and my
mayor, my brother from a
show all of us when we come to
your city. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Trujillo.
collaborate together and we just
couldn't do the work that we do
here at the Roundhouse without
the work that you do. Santa Fe
is a place of not just
museums, uh, I mean, there's
just an unlimited number of
things that adults and children
can do, and I think we might be
one of the most dog friendly
night, uh, a couple of nights
ago we saw somebody walking 3
giant dogs and um it's just
warming, you know, to know that
this is such a friendly place,
so I have the.
that you do so we've got if you
wouldn't mind, we, we do have
others who raise their hand
afterwards, so if I can yield to
other members and then we'll
come back so you can do the
introduction if you wouldn't
mind yielding to the other
late to the chambers today. Um,
had some stuff going that was
killing bills for me, getting it
out of the way.
lately and it seems that there's
a couple of casitas outside that
we need to talk about. So, uh, I
know that I'm not in that
but we, uh, we're on big
discussion right now about money
and uh so I was just letting you
know that I was, thank you for
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
to rise in support, uh, of this
day, um, welcome, Mr. Mayor,
Senate chamber, and, and your
delegation.
Um
late 1800s and uh unfortunately
closed the doors in 1998, so
from 1978, uh, to 82, I spent my
high school years in Santa Fe in
Santa Fe was very different at
that time.
the trails and the, you know, La
Cienega and everything west of
uh uh.
The road uh going towards
towels, there was nothing back
there. And so those were my
it. Thank you, Mr. Mayor for all
you guys do to make us welcome
here before I go to Senator Jil
to close, I wanna make sure that
all members have a chance to
speak who would wish to senator
Stewart.
visiting me every year because
they've lived in Guam,
Australia, England, Germany, and
Italy, uh, so they decided they
They speak Portuguese to him.
They, of course, speak their
Spanish all over Santa Fe, but
they also have other languages,
so in the meantime, my
spy tour. He has just a basic
Santa Fe tour, so I now know a
lot more about Santa Fe because
they live here and they have
loved it so much, so.
for what you do for us. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Stewart seen no further
comment, I'll yield to Senator
Trujillo to introduce her guests
and to close us out, Senator
Trujillo.
understand the city manager, our
new city manager, um, is not
well today and so he's not here.
I was hoping that I would get to
introduce him. Yes, keep
standing, Mayor. It's probably
We have counselor Michael Garcia
District 2.
We have counselor Jamie Cassatt,
District 4. Jamie is my
counselor. Thank you for being
here. We have councilor Lee
Faulkner District 3.
Can we recognize and
congratulate our elected
officials.
incredible city employees and I
have to say like many of these
employees I have worked with,
they are peers, um, they are
friends, and it's my honor to
We've got uh Regina Ruiz, who is
communications director, and we
have Emily Oster.
Who is the finance director and
Regina Wheeler, who is the
planning director, please help
with Cape Eva Santa Fe.
Thank you, Senator Hill. I'll
yie to Senate majority floor
leader Peter Worth to take us to
that next order business. Uh,
Padilla has a certificate of
recognition for Cairo's power
engineering company, Ideal
Center Padilla.
All right, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Mr.
Leader. It's exciting day here
words, I'd like the unanimous
consent that the reader be
allowed to read the certificate
for Cairo's power.
Hearing no objection, we are in
that order. I'm sorry, the
reader will read.
The legislature of the state of
Whereas Cairo's power is a
mission-driven engineering
company and a pioneering force
in the development of advanced
nuclear reactor technology that
the site of its new engineering
center for non-nuclear research
and development and whereas over
the next 10 years, Cairo's power
expects the Mesa del Sol.
100 new jobs, including career
pathway internship programs
through the University of New
Mexico and Central New Mexico
Community College now therefore
be it resolved by the Senate of
It's groundbreaking leadership
and advanced nuclear energy
technology and its development
of emissions free pathways that
support and grow New Mexico's
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President. You
heard all of the wonderful
things that are happening with
President and members of the
body, uh, you know, I did have
an update, you know, from my
guest today telling me that
they're not at 100 employees,
they're actually at 140
employees already. These might
at about 250 over the next
couple of years. And so this is
all very exciting stuff. I will
tell you that, uh, my office is
also located in the area, Mr.
President. I kind of look over
where they're at, and I don't
know exactly what they're doing
they're doing, but at the
moment, Mr. President, they have
already invested.
Almost a half a billion dollars
in New Mexico and that's very
exciting for our economy and all
the certificate and announ it
miscellaneous.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Mr. President. I have 3 of
the leaders of Cairo's power
Cairo's government affairs
analyst, Lee Mall.
And uh if the chamber will help
me welcome our third guest from
Cairo's Power. He's the
can please help me welcome my
guest today.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
you to Senate Majority Leader
Peter wants to take us to that
flip things around just a little
bit, uh, and do some of the work
on the table to give them a
chance once I get a sense if
they're gonna be close or not.
So let's go ahead and unanimous
consent. We go to that our
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 13 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the finance
Thank you,
thank you. Thank you, Mr.
President, since there's more
than one bill.
The reader will read.
Senate Bill 17 as amended, do
pass as amended.
that Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills 21
and 22 do pass and thence
referred to the finance
Those opposed, the eyes have it
the community report has been
adopted in the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually. The reader will
read.
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 14 is
reported without recommendation
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
ask you to ask consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Linda M. Lopez, chair
adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Mr. President, your education
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 38, has had
it under consideration, reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion in the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually. There are no
objection. The reader will read.
Senate Bill 235 do not pass, but
that Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 235
Senate Bill 238 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted Senator William P.
So's chair.
I adoption of the committee
journal will reflect they're
acted upon individually.
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Warz to take us to that next
door to business. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. I said we go our
business announcements and
miscellaneous. He no objections
on that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
many of you may be aware of the
New Mexico School Board
Association every year conducts
its annual school board
institute during the New Mexico
breakout sessions, and many more
activities including lobbying
all of us for the issues that
are important to education and
to schools, uh, this year's
Board Institute is held today.
the
President of the New Mexico
School Board Association from
Socorro, Pauline Aramijo.
Uh, we have the president-elect
Gadsden district, Arlene
Murrijo.
Past president from West Las
Vegas, Christine Luddy.
And, uh, the executive director
then many of you know our, uh,
school board executive director,
Mr. Joe Guihan, we served
together back in the
mid-nineties on the school board
looking out for our young
children every single day.
wanted to mention an article
that I ran into. It's called the
Copper can't be mined fast
enough to electrify the US, um,
copper cannot be mined quickly
A normal Honda Accord needs
about 40 pounds of copper, the
same battery electric electric
Honda Accord needs almost 200
being an EV and I know there's a
lot of bills out there that's
going to affect the copper
industry and we got to make sure
that we um do everything we can
a lot of bills out there that're
going to have a lot of
unintended consequences, so I, I
bring this to you all and
And, uh, hopefully we can uh do
what we can to save our copper
President, this week, a good
friend of Northern New Mexico
coach Jerry Villarreal passed
away. He was a successful
basketball coach at Messa Vista
gonna be Mr. President, if I
could ask unanimous consent for
a moment of silence. Thank you,
senators. There's been a request
for a moment of silence if I can
know all those in the gallery if
you were able to.
Center souls
Thank you, Mr. President. I, uh,
for giving me a second chance, I
failed to mention that also our
and stuff. And so we ought to be
recognizing our wonderful
leader.
or a reader as well. So if you.
Senator Jail for reminding me of
something, one of my good
friends passed away just the
last day or two. Her name was
of the T4 ranch there. Uh, it
actually is part, a part of the
old bell ranch when they split
the Bell ranch up.
Thank you Senator Woods there's
been another request for a
moment of silence if you're able
to rise, please do so.
Senators we're still on that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous.
See no for uh center Shao, did
you have an announcement to
make?
Seeing no further announcements.
conservation folks, uh, final
chance to make it down, you
know, we go that our business
introduction of legislation.
Hearing no objection. We're in
Munoz and act relating to state
employee benefits, amending the
contribution percentages for
state employee health benefits
authorizing the Secretary of
Centerville 376 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
Maestas, an act relating to
motor vehicles and acting a new
section of the motor vehicle
code to create a New Mexico
United special registration
plate establishing criteria for
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business Transportation
Committee, the Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 377.
Act to alter rates of the liquor
excise tax.
Senate Bill 378.
Centerville 378 having been read
twice by title.
Senate Bill 379 introduced by
Senator Campos, an act relating
song Se a Bill 379.
Senate Bill 379 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Indian rules and Cultural
Senate Bill 380 introduced by
Senator Campos, an act relating
to public funds, creating the
physician graduate medical
to the physician gradual medical
education trust fund.
Senate Bill 380.
Senate Bill 380 having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by Senator Spence
Azell.
An act relating to crime.
Defining the livestock in the
criminal code, amending the
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate.
Judiciary Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee Senate Bill
381.
Senate Bill 382 introduced by
bullion.
Sent a bill 382382 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
municipalities providing for the
issuance of flood recovery
revenue bonds for rebuilding,
repairing, replacing, and
hardening of municipal property
the payment of of flood recovery
revenue bonds, providing a
governmental grocery receipts
tax deduction for the sale of
services and property to a
municipality.
Providing a delayed repeal of
the governmental gross receipts
tax deduction, declaring an
emergency. Senate Bill 383.
Centerville 383 having been read
Introduced by Senator Trujillo
representative Armstrong.
And Senator Gallegos.
held at the same time as a
partisan as partisan elections.
Senate joint resolution 11.
Senate Joint Resolution 11.
Having been read twice by title
Peter Worz to take us to that
next order business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent would go out our
business announcements and
miscellaneous ideal to center
woods. There are no objection
we're in that order of business
announces miscellaneousinwoods.
Except for the purpose of a
call.
Hearing no objection. So, thank
you, Senator Woods.
Senderworth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So we are going to go
Jaramillo, and item 3 is Senate
Bill 75, Senator Figueroa, so
with that unanimous consent we
go that our business 3rd reading
of legislation, and I yield to
Senator Padilla for item number
one, Senate Bill 161.
ask you to ask unanimous consent
to the Senate that the records
show all actions for placing
Senate Bill 161 on final
passage.
Has been taken and that is now
um, the bill, you know, mandates
comprehensive state and national
criminal background checks, uh,
for all applicants, employees,
and volunteers who will
key provisions are that we
mandate these background checks
that they are conditional
employee.
uh offers and that the use of
the background check information
will be kept private, uh, some
of the, the more important
focused on this very sensitive
information. So I think what
we're gonna see here, Mr.
President, is that nobody will
be uh supervising or monitoring
children, uh, for the state of
New Mexico in this area unless
they have a clean background
checks.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the senator yield for a question
Uh, yes, Mr. President, I will
yield Senator Stewart,
uh, so Mr. President, we've,
approve our original background
check. We did not add the names
of every different staff
category there were.
wondering if you were able to
use what the FBI wants from the
last two bills that we had to
redo in this background check
bill.
we had some very um
comprehensive research done by
the drafter Janelle Mason and
Legislative counsel as well as
the chair of Senate rules who
signed off on the legislation as
well that this is meets all of
See no further debate, Center
for theater close. I thank you
very much, Mr. President,
members of the Senate. I move
voting to your seats.
I vote of 30 in the affirmative,
0 in the negative. Senate Bill
161 has passed the Senate,
check it out. A little thinner
but definitely older. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, your
photo looks wonderful.
Congratulations on your bill,
your first bill passed this
session out of the Senate.
records show that all actions
for placing Senate Bill 47 on
final passage have been taken
and that it's now a subject for
debate, amendment, or
political subdivisions of the
state governed by the land grant
general provisions. Now that
bill specifically named 26
active land grants with this
Cruz de la Cannada land grant is
in statute and will be.
recognized as a local unit of
government by federal and state
agencies and other local
governments.
bill.
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Bill 47 do now pass, and
I ask unanimous consent to the
Senate that the record showed
that the role has been called
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
By a vote of 34 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate Bill 47 has duly passed
the Senate.
Senator Remi, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Santa Cruz de la
Cannada land gran, muchisimas
gracias. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and that the
records show that all actions
for placing Senate bill 75 as
To present the bill. Thank you,
Mr. President, and colleagues
power for the ERB to share
information with Perra for
members who have credit in both
consent to allow the director of
ERB to join me on the floor as
expert.
Thank you, uh, Senator, you're
expecting many questions, I
assume by asking an expert to
the name? Director David
Archuleta.
Mr. President, I am ready for
questions. We can continue while
he's coming.
Senator Padilla
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. My questions today
are directed, uh, I'm, I'm
assisting the leader with some
questions that he and I both had
seriousness, how many, uh, uh,
direct employees or retirees, is
this going to, to directly
affect.
inactive records how many of
those have cross, um, also
credit with Per we don't know
because they're not allowed to
talk to each other.
Thank you, Sanda senator.
tanking the thing? What's going
on here?
Mr. President, there is no
effect on the fund itself, um,
Mr. President, and uh how long
have we let this uh sort of wag
out there in the wind, if you
will, uh, with, we've been,
we've been out of compliance?
oversight interim committee
because they had flagged these
things and they thought they had
enough gathered that it was
worth introducing a bill at this
they still there?
Mr. President, that move is
still in progress.
Well thank you Mr. Price. It
Mr. President, it is not related
to the legislation, but if Mr.
President allows, we can discuss
it.
Thank you, Center for Center
Padilla.
gotten their, their office space
in place.
Mr. President, that building is
Um, as we all know, we have, we
are limited on office space here
in Santa Fe, uh, to the point,
to the extent of building uh a
new executive office building
Mr. President, according to my
expert, not at all related.
So, uh, Mr. President, I guess
you know when you said there
were 50,000 we'll just go back
to the direct piece of
legislation. There were 50,000
you, can you tell us how many by
county?
Mr. President, do not have the
data by county with me today,
the expert can get it to you if
Thank you, Mr. President. So I
guess in all seriousness then so
would these potential portion of
these 50,000 members, all of a
sudden show up and have a claim
to a retirement check.
being able to communicate with
PEA and cross reference records
should help or we hope will help
find some of them.
Mr. President, no, at this point
we don't, but it is calculated
into the ERB funding because the
expectation is that it will be
50,000 make up.
credit across Per and may be
entitled to a refund, um.
More than
Or the pension benefit that they
have accrued.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. We
do have several members who are
still wanting to ask questions.
Are you also Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, if the sponsor would please
I notice here it talks about
unclaimed member contributions.
And it said they would be
deposited in the educational
retirement fund.
So
excellent question. The answer
is they are they are sitting in
the fund. This is a piece of
clarifying language to state
what is already happening.
How much money are we talking
about there?
That and, and explain uh maybe
uh define the term a little bit
Mr. President, and Senator.
OK.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
retirees total. That includes
active and inactive and these
that are dormant.
different funds around the state
where different uh chances of
redeeming those funds, and we
have a, a list that's sent out
Uh, what's the process for that?
Do we actually send out a last
known address or do we put it on
a list? Do we put it on a
funds to the folks who have
earned them and accrued them
over time, so there is
definitely a proactive search to
reach letters to last known
address and then a search
to check those names with Perra
will hopefully help them find a
few.
more of these folks.
And, and Mr. President, thank
you for the answer, Mr.
President and Senator, but
do they become? What, what
timetable, what day, what?
You
Uh
When do they become
An unclaimed member.
what time are they no longer a
participating member.
In the fund.
Mr. President and Senator, thank
you, Senators Senator Firo.
inactive for any number of
reasons that doesn't mean
necessarily they're out of
contact where ERB, Mr.
President, is having the most
ERB is required to start
distributions and if at that
point, Mr. President, they
cannot reach the member they go
me now, so, uh, just because.
We, uh, haven't contributed for
72 and have mandatory.
Withdrawals to be done.
But we deposit that money. This
What, what is the minimum? What
is the criteria to withdraw from
this fund, uh, age and
Uh, years of service, is it?
Mr. President, there are 4
different formulas at which
point a member could become
pension eligible.
Center Woods
Yeah
Mr. President, my expert witness
approaching that age, uh,
there's tier 1, tier 2, tier 3,
and tier 4, and they're a
combination of years of service
Well, Mr. President, I, I think
I've asked enough questions.
I'm, I'm sure that I'm, I'm
better educated now, um, I'm
legally doing it and uh I'm glad
that we're still searching for
the people that haven't, uh,
That claim on those and maybe
we'll be able to give those some
money though, although I know
For
Um, it's stability, it's
Are what percent are we?
Do we have enough money in the
fund to pay out what we owe
right now. That's what I'm
trying to say, and I don't know,
I'm sorry about that, Mr.
President. Senator, could you
And that is 4% points higher
than it was 4 years ago, so Mr.
President, it is moving in the
right direction right now our
unfunded liability is 9.3
Uh, uh, probably yesterday.
And uh
this topic came up.
Same meeting that's talking
about those casinos.
And uh
for these pension funds. And the
statement was made that, uh, the
one thing that we need to do is
get this in order.
And I know that we're gaining on
uh,
For this we, we are, we are, we
are got a liability, another
liability, Mr. President, here
that, that I hope the mineral,
where we operate to, to get a
lot of money in the state. So,
just as long as that statement's
made, I want to thank you,
Senator, for your, your answers
to your questions. I think you
did very well. And, uh,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
will the senator yield for a
question
The bill that Senator Peter
Worth and I are offering.
To increase the salary of a
retired member without a
suspension of their work to get
So Mr. President, Senator, uh,
what if it did? What if we were,
uh, we were doing the same
section of law. What would
happen then?
Senator Firo
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stewart, uh, Mr. President, that
answer was not acceptable.
You should know that being over
still waiting to learn.
Stewart. Thank you, Mr.
President. This is not a
teachable moment. Thank you.
We do have further debate. I
I think these are serious
questions. So the bill started
out making changes to NMSA
22-11-5.1 in the Senate
there's another section of law
that covers this.
Mr. President and Senator, yes,
you've hit the nail on the head
to repeal.
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President, and I figured that
was the case, but it was worth
having that question answered.
Uh, my second question is in
we're adding in a new, it looks
like an exemption from public
inspection for, it's on page 17,
the public employees retirement
Board for the purpose of
administering the public
Center Firo Mr. President and
Senator, that is an act that
allows uh employees.
To earn credit in both PE and
communication to flow so that
members who might have credit in
both but not remember perhaps 25
years ago they worked for 3
You learn something new every
day. I did not know that that uh
act even existed and it makes
total sense. Uh, Mr. President,
I guess my, my question is why
making requests. I'm just
curious why this is, we're
adding this exception.
Act information with a very
specific group just Perra.
Mr. President, uh, senator, that
makes sense. So in the
discussion of the reciprocity,
Mr. President, I appreciate very
much the answers. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Senators, we're still debating
Senate Bill 75 is amended.
you for the discussion.
I move that Saniel 75 as amended
do now pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
take the vote, I, I do want to
yield to both whips to ensure
that there's no one that needs
to be excused.
Cena and all senators to your
We have a roll call.
The clerk
To call the roll.
Send your boon boats now.
Senator Brat.
Senator Brandt votes no. Senator
Brantley Center Brantly votes
Santadu Hick.
Sandu Hick votes yes.
Figueroa.
Centraos votes no. Sandra
Gonzalez. Sandra Gonzalez votes
yes. Senator Hamlin. Yes.
Hammond votes yes. Hickey
aer votes no Centra Lopez Centro
Maestes.
Yes. Maest votes yes.entinos.
Sentos vote yes Nova. Yes.
Center Paul votes no. Centra
Pinto.
Senator Pope. Yes. Senator Pope
votes, yes, Santa Ramos. Santa
Senator Scott votes no. Center
CD Lopez Center share.
Oh
Sent to share votes no. Center
souls.
Center soul's votes, yes, center
Sandra Stewart's votes, yes.
Senator Thornton.
Center Tobiasin.
Center Tobias and vote no.
Center Townsend.
Senator Wirth, for which
purposes do you rise, Mr.
President, for a point of
inquiry.
State your point, Senator, Mr.
President. So would you like me
With that being said, 18 voting
in the affirmative.
15 vote in the negative.
You can now make your motion.
President.
Just to clarify,
Senator Figueroa closes again?
Correct. And this time, maybe
she can ask.
quite the bill to begin your
Senate career with.
But seeing no.
Opposition
Center Figuerotolo.
of the Senate that the records
show that the role has been
called and all those in present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands. All senators to
your seats, please. We are
Buy a vote
Thank you.
Allows uh senators to
congratulate Senator Figuerofi
choose to do so.
announcement miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. So that is it for
today. Uh, the work on the table
was done a little bit earlier,
Uh, Mr. President, we'll, we'll
come in tomorrow at 11 o'clock.
We do have a joint session for
African American Day at noon,
Democrats will have a caucus
meeting immediately following
the floor session in the Senate
lounge. I'll ensure to keep in
contact with the minority caucus
chair as to when we're wrapping
Republicans will be in 322 right
after floor session.
Thank you San Diego center
souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Education tomorrow morning,
on starting at 9:30 tomorrow. So
a late start due to the school
board association breakfast, uh,
we have on tap, uh, Ramos,
regents from the New Mexican
Military Institute with uh
Senators Tobiasson and his
sponsoring and then bills from
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. President, your
tax business and Transportation
Committee meeting will be
meeting in room 311. We'll do
that 20 minutes after the caucus
the committee will get through
that. So, uh, we'll give you 20
minutes to get what you need
before we meet 20 minutes after
the caucus meeting ends in room
311.
321. Thank you, Mr. President.
1:30 or a half hour after the
floor in room 311. Uh, we have 3
carryovers and 2 new bills,
landscape architecture and
license plate reader Act. Thank
education committee with me.
Thank you, Senator Munoz. I'd be
honored to go and join you.
Mr. President, it's called NIL
name likeness and image. I mean,
so we could have your image on
senators and they may be late
for breakfast tomorrow, so maybe
we'd shoot 10 o'clock and you
could be in the room with me.
Thank you, Senator. Does that
come with a $2.5 million
appropriation?
sports, which I think is a
little unfair.
Um, but that's what the feds are
trying to do, saying it can only
be used for football and
basketball, but women's sports
are just as good as men's and
same and equal in Mexico, so
that's a matter with things that
need to happen in a matter of
fairness, um, we're gonna go
into the Senate Finance today,
maybe a half hour after the uh
and really work hard and make
sure we get your coffee cups
made.
Thank you so much, Senator
Munoz. Any further
announcements?
Wow, Mr. President, I think our
president is pretty smooth. He's
laying the groundwork right
there. I like that, uh, with
that, Mr. President, unanimously
sent the Senate's down a recess
