Brantley.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Pope.
Senators.
Senator Senator Tobiasson
Townsend.
Senator.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin
Mary here in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. We ask that you remain
standing for the Pledge of
Allegiance to be led today by
Senator Benny Shchino. Pledge of
Lieutenant Governor Morales,
senators, and all men and women
present here today. I thank you
for this opportunity to be here
to offer this prayer.
archdiocese of Santa Fe.
I spent my entire adult life in
service.
For the 1st 26 years in military
service to our country.
formation with your own senator
Pete Campos.
And scripture tells us time and
again.
We have not only the duty but
the honor of serving the least
history.
But we move forward as a unified
people.
May you never forget those in
our state who are in need of a
just and compassionate
legislature.
Great creator of the universe.
We turn to you this day in our
need. Remind us of the nature of
this season of Lent that we may
cooperation with the wisdom and
guidance they need to pass just
laws for all New Mexicans to
provide the opportunity for a
quality education for all of our
Send your spirit upon them that
they may stand up for the right
in the face of the adversity
that is sure to present itself.
Rain down your grace upon our
leaders and give them the
courage to do their very best in
all that they do today and every
flag.
Once again, I'd like to welcome
you to the New Mexico Senate and
we yield to Senate Majority
floor leader Peter Worth to get
us started on today's order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Good morning. Uh,
uh, Deacon, for being here, for
your service to our country for,
uh, your service as a deacon and
appreciate particularly your
reference to Senator Campos, um,
and again, your prayers this
time for all of us every morning
to just take a pause.
Uh, Mr. President, let me yield
to, uh, our majority whip for
cameras and excusals and then to
Senator Woods on the other side,
and then I'll let everyone know
allowed both in the gallery and
on the Senate floor center, but
yeah. uh, thank you very much,
Mr. President. Unanimous consent
to excuse senators Duig and
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Eel.
Until she returns to the chamber
a lot of folks up in the
rotunda, including the governor,
uh, also we have Carne Atavata
lunch today, beans and tortillas
be serving senators. So if you
want an attendant to to go get
some food, you can do that or
just head into the lounge. Uh,
we are gonna do one certificate
a sense of what we're gonna do
today. We are going to do a
split session, so we'll be in
this morning and then we'll be
back at 6:30.
Uh, this evening in the morning
session, we're gonna do items 1
that. And then there's also, uh,
number 22, Senator Nava. There's
a joint memorial that we
probably need to move along and
we might do some other memorials
depending on the time. I also
morning, but we're not, I want
everyone to
look at it. They've done
something in recompiling the
statute that's got about a
House, but that's gonna take
some time to look at. I just
don't wanna force that down or
give everyone a chance to see
what's in there and make sure
that we understand what's there,
and we might do that this
evening just so everyone has
Well, Mr. President, let me hold
on. I don't want to do the
certificate quite yet. Let's
let's get the guests first and
then we'll yield to senator
share. OK, apologize for that. I
very special guests here with us
in the Senate. Uh, if they could
just stand up, John and Lisa
Fish.
John and I are both, uh, retired
spouse supporting John
throughout his career and now
John has continued to um still
serve the country as a
Thank you Senator Block Senator
Nava.
am very proud to be joined today
by the man that I speak of quite
frequently here on the chamber.
The gentleman who taught me the
Senator had a meal.
on that Espadilla Valley High
School Letterman jacket because
the Espanilla Valley High School
Sun Devils defeated George
Silver City Colts last night and
a good game at the pit by a
President and ladies and
gentlemen of the Senate, you
can't hide the lieutenant
governor's son.
Devil pride.
And I just have one more
announcement, Mr. President.
Senator Townsend, get ready.
Thank you, Senator Haamil. Thank
you, Mr. President.
I must say it fits pretty well,
so I may just have to hang on
this for a little bit.
Thank you, Senna Jade. Any
further announcements?
house. We're in that order of
business. Messages from the
house. The reader will read.
Mr. President,
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the House has passed
chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 163 with
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 208 and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 230 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa and
you ask consent that we go to
that order of business messages
from the governor.
There ain't no objection wearing
that or the business message
from the governor, the reader
will read.
the Senate in accordance with
Article 4 Section 42 of the New
Mexico Constitution. I hereby
submit to the Senate Rules
Committee the following
nominations for appointment.
Expiring on December 31st, 2026.
John V. Wertheim for appointment
to the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regions to
appointment to the Western New
Mexico University Board of
Regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and expired on
December 31st, 2030.
confirmation and expiring on
December 31st, 2026.
Respectfully submitted, Michelle
Lujan Grisham, Governor.
The journal will show the
miscellaneous, and I will yield
to Senator Scherer Hearing no
objection. We're in that order
of business announces
miscellaneous send a share. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico.
Fifty-seventh legislature for
session 2025. The New Mexico
jointly sponsored by the
International Society of
Nephrology and the International
Federation of Kidney
Foundations, World Kidney
Alliance and whereas the
volume and secrete hormones to
assist in red blood cell
production.
And whereas kidneys play a
central role in regulating blood
and whereas chronic kidney
disease is becoming more common
with a significant increase in
its prevalence in the United
States over the last 10 years,
resulting in 1 in 7 people
pressure, and whereas many
people suffer a heart attack or
stroke before they become aware
that they have.
Kidney disease. And whereas
healthy lifestyle choices,
appropriate levels, maintaining
a healthy weight through diet
and exercise and drinking plenty
of water helped to reduce the
risk of kidney disease.
Albuquerque Journal, New
Mexico's rate of end stage renal
disease is higher than that of
other states because Hispanics
and Native Americans are
genetically at greater risk for
There were 4,652 active dialysis
patients in New Mexico as of
December 31st, 2022.
kidney transplant centers, the
University of New Mexico
Hospital and Presbyterian
Hospital in Albuquerque.
And whereas according to the
National Center for Health
Statistics, 371 New Mexico
general public and government
health officials about the
dangers of kidney disease,
especially chronic kidney
disease.
in the city of Santa Fe. Senator
William E. Scherer.
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem
Cherry de Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
person that would like to
comment on this before I close,
so I yield to Senator Tobias.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Scherer for bringing
polyangitis, and when he was
diagnosed with that in his early
40s, he was actually in Reno,
full renal failure and um was on
dialysis for a period of time
scarred, that can't happen, but
for him it did. Um, he does have
compromised kidneys now in his
early 60s, um, but we're doing
everything we can to keep him
off of dialysis and off of the
you don't have a healthy body. I
mean, that was a, a long list of
functions that the kidneys
actually help us with everyday.
So thank you so much for this
acknowledgement and for
Thank you, Senator Tobiasaneni
for the senators wishing to make
a comment you send her share.
Thank you, Mr. President. So in,
kidney patients. Uh, it's just
somewhat personal to me. My wife
was a, a type one diabetic from
age 11.
And she was pretty healthy for a
pancreas transplant because it's
not solid.
And uh
So after that, she's no longer a
diabetic and because she got
can test for, figure out before
you have a heart attack before
other things uh happen. And so
we just really wanted to bring
that to everybody's attention,
About 15% of kidney donors, you
can give away a kidney, uh,
because you have two of them.
Uh, about 15% come from
relatives.
From people that have died
recently, mostly through
unexpected causes. And so if you
are not a donor today, an organ
appreciate y'all.
Thank you, Senator. I do believe
Senator Figueroa would like to
speak to the certificate as
well. Senator Fira.
of 12 with kidney failure and my
mother was informed her 12 year
old daughter would not live to
the age of 20 nor grow any more
than she did, but I'm here to
she could hit the 5 ft mark in
growth. She was recognized for
her recognized nationally as a
the patient's perspective who
are living on dialysis or kidney
transplants because she lived
many years under both systems,
so thank you for the
certificate.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you Senator Sheriff for
bringing this forward, um, I
think the entire body
understands how important, uh,
and for everyone in here who's
lived through this experience
with a family member or
themselves, they truly
appreciate it. Thank you,
Senator Scher.
husband's cousin was also
diagnosed with kidney failure
when she was 12 years old and
she is, uh, on her 3rd kidney at
Of life now, uh, my father
passed away from kidney failure
and, um, ultimately, um, he was,
Thank you, Senator.
Send a shirt to clothes.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think it's important that we
there that has kidney failure
and needs, needs our support. So
thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Sher.
We're still on that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
See, no objection. Thank you,
Senator Peter Worth, uh, thank
you, Mr. President. So we're, as
I mentioned, we're gonna hand
out the concurrence on Senate
in there, uh, as mentioned, I
think Senator Padilla went
through the lineup on, OK, let
me go through the lineup then on
3rd reading, we're gonna do 1
through 5, item number 1 is
her way in, so we might jump
around on that. Item number 3 is
Senator Nava.
Uh, law enforcement
qualifications, Senate Bill 364,
item 4 is
Senator Padilla and others on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute, uh, for Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42, and then we definitely
will do, uh, item 22, that's the
the joint resolution. 22 is the
one we're gonna do, Senator Nava
and Charlie. So with that, Mr.
President, you can have we go
that his 3rd reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
Lanier for item number one,
That tie kind of clashes with
that jacket. I don't know if I
Uh,
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 434
as amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
no objection, send it in there
to explain.
All right, so as a retired
school teacher, Mr. President,
that students.
Come up to the right level of
reading and arithmetic.
So this substitution for Senate
Bill 434 does just that.
Our intervention has has emerged
and has been proven to, to be
more effective than 85% of their
education interventions,
It is tutoring one on one
tutoring, high dosage.
Structured in um
Uh,
and importantly, this, this
program is already funded 7
million.
For the high impact tutoring is
Bill 434 as amended and we do
have a floor amendment.
The reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
to Senate Education Committee
Mr. President, I move that
Senate floor amendment number
one for Senate Education
Be adopted subject to debate.
Good job, Senator. I just needed
to add as amended as amended.
Thank you. See no objection,
Senator, if you'll explain what
of line 25, it adds in or a
charitable volunteer or
charitable organization, and
that's to make sure that things
like um we have in our community
does.
is on page 2 line 9. It, um,
The third thing it does is on
page 3, line 14 and 15. It takes
out of the notice to the
report a tutor or have to change
the tutor every time the tutor
might change. And the third
thing it does is I wanted to
make sure that there wasn't a
conflict with the reed.
we're doing here is we're saying
that high impact tutoring
provided pursuant to this
section may be provided in lieu
A mandates that school boards
create and adopt remediation
programs for their schools and
Thank you, Mr. President. And,
and I do want to reach out and,
and thank, uh, Senator Figueroa
and Senator Trujil, I would
Senator. We are debating Senator
For Amendment number one, and
I'll yie to Senator Cila Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. May I,
may I ask the sponsor of the
amendment why they're deleting
would you like to answer that?
I'm happy to answer that, Mr.
President. The reason that we're
taking out that uh the name of
the high quality tutor is that,
Another tutor may come in. The
point is that they have to be a
high quality tutor and those
have to be either licensed by
PED or approved by PED and so we
didn't want to have a
those tutors' names as they
might change.
Senator Lopez, thank you, Mr.
President, but could a parent uh
request the name of the tutor on
doesn't prohibit the school from
letting them know who the tutor
is so absolutely the parents
could request the names of the
tutors that come in to tutor
their students.
Senator C Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. Those are my
yields.
I do, Mr. President.
Uh, so, Mr. President, um, I
agree with Senator Lanier this
8th grade students would be part
of this and if so, why would you
be doing,
the by the 30th day of the year
and those assessments from what
we discussed in my understanding
is that the assessment's not
done until 3rd grade for the 1st
just at 4th through 8th grade.
Yes
Uh, Mr. President, well, now I
understand why I, I, I don't
districts, uh, to offer this by
saying only 4 through 8 and also
by requiring just these two
assessments, but.
Still a good bill, even though I
asked my question, which would
be why 4th through 8th, but
thank you for answering that. I
don't need you to yield, but I
do want to say thank you for
changing it to or volunteer. We
have a number of Los Alamos
Espanola public schools and Los
Alamos public schools. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator.
Jaramillo, any further debate on
the amendment, senators.
See, we do have further debate,
And seeing that we do have
further debate on the amendment,
Senator block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Would,
uh, the sponsor, um, Senator
Lanier, yield, please.
removed from the class for
remedial training. Is that
correct? Senator Block, are we
referring to the amendment?
Mr. President, I yield until the
amendment?
See none, Senator Trujillo, to
close on the amendment.
Mr. President, I move that
Senate floor amendment number
adopted, and I ask for a voice
vote. Thank you, senators.
We're voting to adopt Senate
floor amendment number one. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator Trujillo, for
getting us ready for war our
debate. We are on debate. We're
back on the bill. I'll yell to
Senator Black.
wanna make sure I understand a
little bit of the process here.
So this is going to identify
those students who are assessed
in the bottom quarter 25% of
uh, Senator, how did they do
that? Is it tests or is it a?
Uh, accumulation of tests,
quizzes, homework.
Send in there.
those results, and that's why
we've, we've had to take it
forth through 8th grade, because
we, we don't administer those,
those tests until their 3rd
grade year.
How do we assess them to, uh,
understand if they're right back
to where they're, uh, with their
peers.
Send it in there.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator. Yes.
advancing and along that same
lines, I want to add that, um,
we were, are going to require
that they notify the parents of
their progress.
training, are those assessments
coming down from the PED like
the, uh, assessments for their
respective grade. Yes, sir,
Senator, that's correct.
The uh remedial training is
working to get these students,
uh, back with their peers. Uh, I
want to thank the senator for
sponsoring this. I'm in full
support. Thank you, Mr.
President, I yield. We do have
further debates. We have senator
Thank you, Mr. President, as
when it was in committee, uh, we
had talked about when will this
turn tutoring take place before,
after school, during school.
Send it in there.
already have a, a funded
tutoring system for before
school and after school and so I
just wanted to enhance that with
this bill so that, for example,
One way to schools, so that's a
4 hour trip and so we wanted to
be able to tutor those students
during the day.
And not require them only after
would this take them away from
other key academic areas as well
as things like recess and um
lunchtime, uh, DE other kinds of
format their own process so some
individuals, um, you know, we
would encourage them, of course,
not during lunch, uh, the kids
don't have a, a very long lunch
a a good time for each student
to be pulled out of, say, a
class, um, not, not anyone's.
specific, but any class that,
President and Senator, and I
think that's a really important
thing. First, you know, a couple
of pieces in that, that it is up
to the local school district to
determine the time, but also
behind in math and maintain your
self-esteem, uh, as far as a
math learner, and I think that's
a really important piece. I'd
like to point out the bill that
we passed.
passed out of the chamber here
current education system so that
students are able to advance and
move forward very much
appreciate the senator bringing
this and encourage people please
support.
Thank you, Senator Souls.
Senator Lopez, thank you. I
noticed that it that on page 3,
line 6, it says that the
tutoring may be provided at a
Mr. President and Senator, thank
you for that question, and, and
that's part of the impact of
this. We want to limit those
students so it's more of a one
low in either reading or math,
and so by limiting the number of
of kids in a or per tutor, it's
more impactful and more one on
one.
and I am concerned about um.
How this is framed has, you
know, extremely low, um, or
are gonna, are going to address
their issues, um.
Where they are, uh, but I hope
that it's looked at as a
strength based program that
thing and I am a little bit
worried about the, the courses
that they'll be pulled out of it
would be bad if a gifted artist
is pulled out of art and um a
helpful to the kids and also
allows them to pursue their
passions. Thank you, Mr.
President.
See no further debate, settled
in there to close on the bill.
as amended.
Do now pass, and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
Just, just clarification, it's
been amended twice, so I let the
members know it's been amended
twice.
All members to your seats, we
are voting if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand.
I vote of 39 in the affirmative
0 in the negative Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 434 is two times
amended is duly passed the
Senate. Senator in there.
Mr. President, I ask him this
incredibly sexy voice, unanimous
consent of the Senate.
Ah, that the raw be suspended
There are no objections, Senator
you'll explain the bill and
committee and senators. Senate
Bill 357 as amended creates the
essential services Development
Bill 357, only the state may
provide public support for
essential services projects
including grants, loans, loan
guarantees, infrastructure
improvements and professional
services.
clause to allow the expenditure
of state money to provide for
essential services primarily for
residential services to include
infrastructure like Internet,
To protect public money and
safeguards to protect other
public resources.
SB 357 is the first implementing
legislation for the approved
constitutional amendment.
afford the 150 or $20,000 it
would take to connect them. So
if they're stuck with depending
on septic systems, many that are
leaking or not functioning, they
are putting themselves in harm's
Many of us have rural
communities in our districts,
but this doesn't just apply to
those in rural communities. It
can help those in urban areas as
well. Those who are on septic
systems and with poor access to
Paul. I do yield to Senator
Thornton, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I stand in support of
this bill. I believe the
However, there are many areas of
our state, both rural.
And urban that still lack access
to these basic services
necessary for public health,
education, and economic
development.
is to authorize the state to
spend money to assist in the
construction of utility lines or
other infrastructure for energy,
internet, water, and our
support associations and or
private corporations that
deliver these services.
Now within my own district I
have a 501 C12 water association
legislation.
The communities they serve are
rural and have limited
resources, but rely heavily on
their services, so this
legislation is not just a matter
you, Mr. Senator Thornton.
Senator Halin, Mr. President,
that is all. I, uh, I look
forward to the discussion that
will come from this body. Thank
you, Senators. We're debating
Senate Bill 357 as amended and
How will this pertain to our
tribal, our indigenous, our
tribes ns and pueblos.
Senator Hamlin the sponsor with
you.
I do yield and Mr. President, I
chamber.
See no objections. Sergeant Ars,
if you please escort our expert
witness into the chamber.
Senator Pinto, if you can
restate the question once our
Center Pinto
Thank you, Mr. President.
And Senator
Mr. President, thank you. If
you, uh, and senator, if you um
run the request through a local
government, um, then you can
get, uh, so like a local city or
Is there anywhere in the
legislation that um notes of MOU
with the tribes nations or
pueblos or an IGA or anything of
that sort.
between uh looking at if there's
a relationship between the local
tribe, the the local tribes and
a local city government. So Mr.
President and Senator, um,
have a MOU or have an IDA with
our tribes, nations, and pueblos
to allow
To allow access to this
particular legislation.
Mr. President, this is
incredible um um insight because
at the moment they can engage in
a uh joint
joint powers of agreement.
Um, if, if it, if it, we can do
an amendment in the house
because it's very important and
I'm, I'm grateful for the
senator to bring that forward.
Uh, Mr. President, sponsor, yes,
Center Block thank you Mr.
President. Would the sponsor
yield, please. Yeah, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator, if you could ask, um,
the county commissions do vote
on IGAs in joint powers uh JPAs
with our tribal partners because
in Sandoval County.
We have 14 of them. It's the,
have the authority to do IGAs
and JPAs and other MOUs or MOAs
that would allow this bill, um,
to, to occur.
Thank you, Senator Block. We do
have further debate. I don't see
her in the chamber. Senator
Giselle.
You wish to debate.
Mr. President, Senator Thornton,
Senator Brantley, Senator Paul
and I move that Senate Bill 357
as amended do now pass, and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show
that the role has been called
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
Senate bill 357 as amended.
That's gonna be item number 17
um item number excuse me.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
364 on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
Thank you, Mr. President, I am
very proud to bring Cenel 364,
uh, to the Senate floor this
bill is a bipartisan piece of
President, recognizes that our
immigrant family members,
neighbors and friends are
integral and valuable part of
our community and.
workforce. It does so by
is allowed, um, and I think it's
extremely important to address.
Mr. President, the need given
the understaffed police
departments recruit officers as
1996 and later received legal
protection under deferred Action
for Childhood Arrivals known as
DACA. My brother Eric.
Who is 5 years apart from my,
in high school and then ROTC at
UNM. His dream was always to
serve the community and to
protect his fellow New Mexicans
as a police officer.
Mexico and found a police
department that recognizes the
value that he could bring to
this vital work for workforce
and public service.
He wanted to be here today, but
as you would understand, not
even if his sister requested
that he be here. He could not
escape the actual training that
work to individuals who have
received work authorization from
the United States Citizenship
and Immigration Service USCIS
that means legal permanent
residents but also.
soccer recipients like my
their character, not their
immigration status.
That would open the door to more
than 51,000 more New Mexicans
who would now be eligible to
Public safety starts with having
police officers in our
communities available to help
and respond to our residents
needs.
Every police department and
sheriff's office in the state
and nationally has a similar
challenge.
My brother Eric could have
failed one of those openings. He
could soon be an officer who
that for the wonderful people of
Blue Island in Illinois.
I hope that today we take the
first step towards fixing this.
With that, uh, Mr. President,
proud to support this bill, as
you know, we have a shortage in
many of our departments in New
Mexico, uh, law enforcement
departments and um.
be able to serve in our
communities to help keep us
safe.
Uh, there's absolutely no reason
not to do this, and I think it
will help us to be a safer
community, help us to be a
full staffing, but I know just
down the hill from me in
Albuquerque.
There are almost 400 officers
short.
So they basically got 2/3 of the
departments, so I urge the body
to support this bill. It just
makes a lot of sense, um, and,
and allows our immigrant
community to
any questions we're debating
Senate Bill 364.
And I'll yell to Senator Hill,
then Senator Townsend. Senator
Trio.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
um
This bill passes, um, will your
brother be uh willing to come
back home because, uh, Chicago's
Mr. President, Senator, I
absolutely hope that I can get
him to the point of recruitment,
uh, to ensure that he comes and
serves the state that gave him
President. I'll stand in strong
support of this. Thank you. We
do have further debate. We'll
have Senator Townsend, followed
by Senator Celia Lopez and
Senator Cervantes.
Senator, I understand exactly. I
think what you're trying to do.
And
But I want to ask a question.
Yeah
You're
To ask this is a person who
Has, um.
may be illegally come into the
You know, their years, sometimes
2 and 3 years out, which is
unfortunate, but
Would that person under this
definition, be here legally.
to your expert witness, and
you'll ask unanimous consent for
them to be allowed to come in.
Mr. President, thank you for
that unanimous consent to allow
my expert witness Jessica Innes
Solutions.animous consent to
allow the expert witnesses into
the chamber.
See no objection, Sergeant Ars,
if you can please escort our
expert witnesses into the
chamber, provide him seating,
allowed to remove jackets. Thank
you, Senator B. Senator
Jaramillo beat you to that point
and hence why I'm wearing this
Letterman's jacket today. So
thank you, senator.
I'm gonna let you finish getting
upset.
an influx of immigrants that
came across the border.
And
Many of those are in the system
now.
Under this piece of proposed
legislation, would that person
Mr. President, uh, senator,
thank you very much for your
question. That is definitely a
complex question because it'll
support systems, but they do not
have, if they, they don't
officially have a social
security number at that point
then we can't give a direct
Senator, it's my understanding
that most of these people were
issued a work-only Social
Security card, so they do have a
But it is entitled Work Only.
Mr. President, uh, Senator, so
even though these folks do get
granted a work authorization,
permanent status, uh, and it
varies again by person.
Senator Townsend. So Mr.
President and
Uh, Senator
Uh, say at a dock worker in the
harbor area where they have to
have specific clearances for
Immigration and, and, uh.
train employers, uh, for this,
and I, and
Mr. President, Senator, I'm, I'm
Uh, situation.
Mr. President, uh, senator, to
don't have uh work
authorizations that expire. uh,
and which means that their
status is not expired, they
simply have to make sure that
they renew their green cards,
I was a former DACA recipient,
uh, so for folks, uh, who are
DACA recipients, it also varies
because some of us have adjusted
support system to an area of
desperate need.
Thank you, Senator Nova. Senator
Townsend.
in, in the US today.
Immigration from Mexico into the
United States is messed up.
And
ago, who are embedded in our
society who owned homes, kids go
to school, they pay taxes, they
Senator for, as I see it, for
them to
Get a status that is permanent
farm programs that you can, can
work with them for and
And I'm just trying to make sure
that we are not.
and we're not.
This doesn't help
Centerinnava Mr. President,
the United States, uh, we know
immigration is a complicated
subject. We know that the
pathway into legalization is
extremely complicated and it
immigrant populations, um, but
again this would only apply for
those who are legally authorized
to work in the United States and
Mr. President, I would also like
to yield to my co-sponsor if he
It says, well, I'll start on
page 2 just to read a
qualifications of members,
members of the New Mexico State
Police except the chiefall at
the time of their appointment.
That's what this bill is dealing
with. It's not dealing with dock
workers in in San Francisco
where dock workers anywhere.
It's dealing with who are we
going to allow to serve.
To try to, try to pull in other
issues. That's not what we're
dealing with in this bill.
This bill is providing a path.
officers. It's all it's doing,
it's not opening up anything
else and it's not doing anything
with people who
Don't have authorization to work
here.
Thank you, we still are on
debate. Senator Townsend, you
still have the floor. I
appreciate that and to respond
to my friend, I'm not trying to
Of the population that's in the
Mexico right now.
That have kids in our school
that
Pay taxes.
My, my intent is not to cloud up
anything, Senator Brandt. My
intent is to
Address an issue.
just to remind you, Senators, so
we are debating.
ensure that we refer as a
senator, we did not.
Approached them by name.
Senator Nava, is there, Mr.
President, Senator Nava, do you
see an opportunity in your piece
of legislation to try to include
legal permanent residents, so we
are definitely hoping that we
can ensure that we open pathways
for them into this opportunity.
Senator Townsend.
only be because it doesn't
address an issue. Thank you,
Senator Townsend. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
Cilia Lopez, followed by Senator
Cervantes. Senator Scott, and
Senator Thornton.
this for many, many reasons, and
I just wanna say I wish that the
state had the ability to provide
opportunities for so many
individuals who are really part
that um this administration,
this federal administration
seeks.
To seeks to push um this is a
bill, this is a great bill for
people who are authorized to
aren't authorized to work and
they're afraid and they don't go
to law enforcement enough, um,
when they are victims of crime,
victims of domestic violence,
brother, um, I think it is
gonna, it's gonna make the
police force in general more.
Um
More available because of
be protected. I thank the
senator for bringing this, this
bill. It is an excellent bill,
um, and I only wish that we
could do, because we're not the
immigration law, um, I just wish
we could, but this bill is
probably about as far as we can
go and I'm just thrilled and
delighted to support this bill.
yield, Mr. President.
Uh
Mr. President, I, I'm just, I
think this is a a good bill and
authorization from the United
States Citizenship and
Immigration Services. What, what
does that mean? In other words,
what, what are the limitations?
Under those work authorizations.
folks hold.
Mr. President, Senator, also
they do not have an expiration
period uh for their uh
authorization.
Thank you for that.
How they would go through that
process uh with this training
and because apparently and I'm
not a federal person, so I'm not
around that?
Mr. President, Senator, thank
you very much for asking me that
question, which I think is very
legally authorized to work in
the United States so for legal
permanent residents if an
immigrant has obtained lawful
status in the United States,
there is no prohibition, uh,
that a person actually can own a
office, it would not be illegal
for an immigrant to possess a
firearm.
And additionally, last, uh, Mr.
President and Senator, we are
not the first state to implement
to the chief of police, uh,
where my brother is at right now
and they are underwent this
entire process. Illinois is not
the only state who has
implemented this as well.
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 364 amendments
sponsored by Senator Thornton to
move the amendment.
To move Senate floor Amendment 1
to Senate Bill 364 no objection.
Thank you, Senator Norton.
Senator, if you'll explain with
your amendment attempts to do.
term lawful permanent residents
that we've heard from the
senator that that's who we're
referring to and I just want to
be clear in this bill.
And then in the sections 2
in three areas and that's all,
that's the only difference in
the bill. It doesn't change the
impact, doesn't change the
intent of the bill, but it's
very clear on, and I'm thinking
Thank you, Senator Thorn. We are
debating Senate Floor A
amendment number one, and I'll
yield to the sponsor.
Sit.
Mr. President, Senator, this is
an extremely unfriendly
Yes, Mr. President.
So
Well, the sponsor of the bill
yield.
Sending of a deal. Happy to
yield, Mr. President.
Um
Is that not what we've been
talking about the whole time and
now I, I, I missed the how it
makes darker people.
authorization is to the deferred
action for Early Childhood
Arrivals. They are not legal
permanent residents.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
Senator.
Do
is somebody that came when they
were a child, 4 years old,
whatever they grew up in
Farmington, they went to
Farmington High School, uh.
Even though they've been here,
they've got, uh, they're
authorized to work whatever
there's they could not be a
They're not lawful permanent
then is not a lawful permanent
resident, according to what I
think I just understood, so
what?
recipients are a specific
classification of work
authorization, um, so it still
does not define them as LPRs.
to, but Mr. President, but they
are authorized to work. They
have a, a Social Security card
that says work, Social Security
guard?
Mr. President, Senator, yes they
do.
there's, there's lots of people
around that have that, that
Social Security card that says
work only and they live here and
they work here and they pay
Social Security taxes and
Uh, so I'm still missing
something, if they're, if
they're allowed to be here, then
why aren't they lawful?
and ever since DACA was
implemented, it's just a legal
term of difference.
Thank you now. Senator.
OK, Mr. President, I still don't
think I understand, but I'll,
I'll believe her.
Senator Thornton, to close on
the amendment.
Mr. President, I move that, uh.
Senate House bill amendment
number 1 for Senate Bill 364.
negative by a show of hands.
Senator Thorn, just a correction
that this isn't a Senate House
bill.
It's a Senate bill, but you did
a good job with this.
So where, and you, I'm sorry,
If you wish to vote no on the
amendment, please raise your
hand.
Senator Brand voting no.
Senator Cervantes voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Do we recorded Master's vote?
Senator Pope voting no.
Senator Campos voting now.
Senator Nava voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator, had a meal voting no.
Senator O'Malley, voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Bergman's voting no.
Senator Stephanics voting no.
Center souls loading now.
Senator Lopez voting no. Senator
Figueroa voting now.
And senators, if you wonder why
I do go slow when we're reading
amendment number 1 has failed to
pass the Senate. Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
President, thank you. We are
back on the bill, senators.
And we do have Senator
of the sponsor to yield, but I
appreciate her invitation to
co-sponsor this bill with her,
and I think it's important for
us to take the moment to
recognize that so much of what
we're doing this session and
this last year has been
our inability to fill the ranks
of our law enforcement and for
example, in Albuquerque,
Albuquerque once had 1000 over
1000
police officers employed by APD
but around the stadium in our
interim, we've heard repeatedly
law enforcement, Las Cruces,
Santa Fe, and elsewhere I was
having difficulty filling their
ranks just as we've had debate
we should do this bill and other
things to assure that we can
fill those jobs and have more
people on the streets addressing
crime, arresting people, getting
convictions and seeing cases all
the way through and so this is
on this bill. Urge your support.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. We
do have further debate, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
yield, Mr. President. Mr.
President, uh, Senator, during
the course of this debate, I've
been looking at the
And that is, uh, equally
applicable.
To a concealed carry permit.
legislation is working around
that requirement.
Can you explain?
Center now
that if a firearm is issued by a
state or local law enforcement
office, it would not be illegal
for an immigrant to possess the
firearm.
Thank you, Senator Nava. Senator
But would not be illegal for a
police department to issue
Mr. President, and senator.
Doesn't make a lot of sense. Uh,
well, specifically with with
respect to
backup weapon that would not be
uh an option for one of these
folks. Is that accurate?
OK, thank you very much for your
answers. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Center share.
For a 2nd time.
You're correct. It was on the
amendments. He had a question on
the amendment share for the
first time doesn't matter, Mr.
President, because I'm confused
too.
So, Mr. President, um,
served in the army. Uh, I was
also in charge of army
recruiters. Yes, I was a
recruiter too, but, but my real
job was to, to deal with other
if Dreamer was the time then,
but, but.
He was from Mexico, but
There was nothing Mexican about
him.
nobody could understand him.
Uh, but apparently, he passed
the English test.
So
So I'm just reading right here
because I, I, the, the amendment
Or a legal permanent resident.
And so when I changed from, I
didn't like the idea to, I'm
Confused me.
Because clearly the soldiers
that I served with were great
soldiers.
And, uh
because that was the fastest way
to become a citizen.
I think he was, I don't know.
He probably went to the Air
Force recruiter before he went
to the bathroom. I mean, it was
But the whole, why would, why
would we not limit it to
Of the same standards as the US
military, and that's legal
permanent resident. So I guess
that, that's a question, Mr.
President, if the sponsor will
I would not consider uh amending
it to only
Um
Accept legal permanent
residences because as I've
recipient like my brother, who
could be serving who wanted to
serve and have not had the
opportunity into legal permanent
residency and as I shared with
there was absolutely no pathway
for him so this bill would
expand an opportunity.
For folks who have been
contributing, those of us who
know no other country beyond the
And I understand that.
But now the whole DACA thing has
has jumped up in here being
Uh, I agree that police officers
that speak the language of
whoever they're dealing with is
important. I know that in parts
of the country, uh, police
officers ought to be speaking
So from that perspective, I
agree, this is, this is an
important step.
But if they can't
Serve in the military.
So this, this really has torn me
up. I, uh, now it's got whiplash
because I was against it, and
I'm for it. Now maybe I'm
against it again.
And
officers.
So I'm just, I'm looking for
Is there an amendment out there
anywhere.
In anybody's mind.
They can make this
But we've got this one little
weird thing in there, and I
don't know how to deal with that
right now, Mr. President. So.
Uh, unless she has an answer for
me, um, I'm, I'm gonna stop
We do have further debate. We'll
have Senator Maestas follow.
Thank you, Mr. President. Will
the sponsor you.
Happy to yield, Mr. President.
and of course, the office is the
office, it's not the president,
so DACA has remained uh through
now a 4th term and 3 presidents,
but who, who received DACA? What
Mr. President, uh, senator,
thank you very much for
reminding us, uh, of DACA and
its inception, uh, DACA
Had to qualify through a whole
lens of vetting systems, um,
So the criteria was that we
needed to be in this country
under the age of 16 to have come
continuous uh residents in the
United States from June 15, 2007
to the time of filing the
request. We also have to
system and there were quite a
range of qualifications, um,
that I don't necessarily have
right in front of me, um, but
the qualification system for
Right now, uh, Mr. President and
Senator right now up to date, we
have about 500,000 DACA
recipients.
Center. Thank you, Mr.
came into the United States, uh,
they did not have permission.
And so it was an illegal entry
and if you, uh,
law?
Thank you Maen Nova.
Mr. President, Senator, that's a
Mr. President, uh, Senator, yes,
it is extremely complicated.
Thank you, Mr. President Cerova,
and that's the key, that's the
key, and that's why the nuance
of the language and I
here and DACA students, uh, or,
or DACA recipients rather, uh,
because the DACA has this legal
nuance where even though it was.
DACA recipients have not been
granted full citizenship because
not only were they brought here
as children, but you have to.
You have to not do a whole
citizen to be a DACA recipient.
Me and my friends, Mr.
President, there is no way in
heck we could have been eligible
for DACA because we got in
trouble so much, but when you
playing, doing everything by the
rules, paying taxes, raising
families, taking care of their
families, so these are the folks
that if they want to be a police
officer, they will be tremendous
they're law and order.
To the max, um, and, uh, and
that's why the nuance of the, of
the wording of the of the bill
and that's why we should support
here pretty soon. Thank you, Mr.
President,
we do have further debate. We
have Senator Tobiasin followed
by Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr. President. I'd
DACA recipients and joining the
military and it seems to me, and
I know I can't cite other bills,
so I'm gonna, how do I dance
around this? Um, it seems to me
struggle with adding and um
passing cadets through the
police academy would one be
because we've stripped them of
qualified immunity. They're
Albuquerque and um knowing that
everything I've worked for could
be taken away, um, with one
wrong move. um, so.
qu al ified immunity when we
but now.
I don't know if it's half. I
forget the exact numbers, but
hundreds of our men and women in
blue are sitting behind a desk,
other cities around the state
safe and when we aren't
addressing the fundamental
challenges that we're facing
within our police department and
Senator Celia Lopez for a 2nd
time.
Thank you, Mr. President. This
discussion has really showed
a GAO report that was released
in 200019. It details how ICE
ignores two of its long-standing
policies that require them to
check the veteran status of
enforcement operations agents
are required to review and
document veterans' years of
service in the US military
deployments and wards. They're
also supposed to move any cases
involving veterans up the chain
a full 21% of immigrant
veterans' cases did not receive
a complete review.
of their service. similarly 70%
of cases never made it to ICE
headquarters.
President, the agency has failed
to keep track of just how many
veterans they picked up and
ultimately deported, so many of
those veterans that um senator
Scher might have served with
maybe in their home country
deported and uh and and we're
Mexico who are trying very hard
to get the government to pay
attention to their status and to
the service that they have
problems with ICE. Thank you,
Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
See no further debate.
return to the station, except
for the purposes of a call.
Thank you, Senator, and I, uh.
I love the way you refer to the
chamber as a station.
Center block, we already closed
the debate.
fruitful one, and I believe that
with respect, with empathy, and
with consciousness that's how we
get things done in this chamber.
federal government, we can do
things to address the issues
that we are.
seeing and that we are impacted
by each and every day across our
state and again this is a public
the line for us to serve this
state and with that Mr.
President.
seats. We're voting senators,
all senator seats. There's been
a request.
For roll call.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Bergman. Yes, Senator
Center Brandt votes yes. Senator
Brantley is excused.
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
votes yes. Santos Cervantes
Center votes no. Figueroa.
Yes. Santa Figuero votes yes
Centraallegos.
Hamlin votes yes. Hickey votes
yes. Centa meal
sent our mealser votes no.
Senator Lopez.
Yes, ma'am.
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Popes to Ramos. Santa
Ramos passes. Senator Sanchez is
a Senator Scott.
Santoendo votes, yes, Senator
Souls.
Center souls votes, yes, Senator
Stepanics.
Senator Stefanik's votes, yes,
Thornton votes no. Senator
Tobiasson.
Center Tobias and votes? No.
Center Townsend.
Center Townsend votes no. Center
Trujillo.
Center block votes.
No,
Santa Ramos. Santa Ramos votes
yes.
And proudly presenting this
bill.
Senator had a meal.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record showed that all actions
explain Centerville 327. Mr.
President, everybody knows in
this chamber that I proudly
represent the lowrider capital
of the world, the beautiful
Espanilla Valley where I like to
origins of low riders are often
a subject of debate in the
1980s, Mr. President, MTV
declared my hometown, the
Lowrider capital of the world.
The title has stuck ever since
only in Espanola but all across
our great state.
Lowrider culture, Mr. President,
is alive and well in New Mexico
and it's one I'm so very proud
much so, Mr. President, that 60
Minutes did a full episode of
the Lowrider Capital of the
world, bringing in dozens of
people who wanted to know more
about low riding and our culture
economic development and it's
about bringing pride to a
community that I proudly
represent. And with that, Mr.
President, I stand for
questions. Senators we are
debating Senate Bill 327.
Senator Woods. What's, what's
the speed limit going up to
Chemayo Saturday afternoon.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Woods.
We do have further debate,
Senators out.
Mr. President, will the senator
yield,
Mr. President and Senator
Harramio, I see that we have 7
other license plates that have
license plates that puts New
Mexico.
Having
On their books right now.
Send her how a mail.
Mr. President, Senator, I don't
about the license plate where it
is in committee, and if it's
actually passed.
Thank you, Senator Senator
though.
Mr. President, I.
Mr. President, that's news to
me.
Well, we do have license plate
for autism. We have the cumbers
and Toltec Railroad. We'd have
pollinators, uh, wildlife, fish,
the children's trust fund, you
name it in Mexico's got it
covered, so Mr. President.
paintbrush to make it look brand
new. So, uh, otherwise I might
be arrested. Did you realize
that you're not supposed to
manipulate a license plate. So
have on my car, Mr. President,
thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator Haril.
Senator Thorn followed by
Senator Block. Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Harmio, will these
license plates, will they sit
lower than regular license
plates?
Sent her had a meal. Mr.
President. Senator, absolutely
Center had a meal, Mr.
President, once those switches
are hit, they definitely are
going to bounce.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
going to be looking forward to
getting one on my truck.
Mr. President, I thank you, Mr.
President. um, I was wondering
Um, our laws that's developed by
the division.
In collaboration with the
Espinola lowrider Association.
Could the senator tell us the
Thank you, Mr. President. Do we
have a picture?
Of of that has there already
been a uh a draft, uh, senator.
More aesthetically pleasing than
the jacket, the lieutenant
governor's wearing.
Mr. President, I think both are
forward, uh, to this. I was
wondering if maybe, uh, Mr.
President, the senator could
describe at least and just give
us a little peek under the
curtain.
Uh, what the plate would look
it there, but it's definitely a
low rider that will be on that
license plate.
Mr. President, I
I, I'd like to know in 1964
what?
sponsor. We do have further
debates. We have Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, thank you so much for
doing this, Bill. Of course, we
have low rider cultural all over
know, uh, you really celebrate
culture in all different ways
and manifestations, and I think
uh it's only fitting if we do
this bill, Mr. President,
Senator, if you would, uh,
Thank you, Senator Steinberg. We
do have further debate. We have
Senator Hamblin.
Mr. President, I don't need the
sponsor to you. I just want to
thank him for this, uh, as also
pachanga I see these beautiful
works of art, and this is not
only just part of a cultural
element, but it's also, uh, an
ingenuity uh to creating such an
amazing part of what is the, the
fabric of our culture, um, and
as somebody who, uh, goes around
those pachanga with the
cruise.
And pick up more low riders
along the way from Espanola all
the way down to Las Cruces.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator. How to.
See no further debate.
Senator Jaramillo.
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Bill 327 do now pass and
Senators, we're voting all
senators your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Yeah
by a vote of 40 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 327 has passed the
Senate. Congratulations, Senator
Jail.
Thank you, Mr. President, and if
I may.
latest Espanola joke and we're
not laughing and we don't want
to hear it. This place is a
light on the valley and a light
on a culture of low riding and
it's one when their senator says
While they're cruising low.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Jarameo. We're
gonna go back, we're gonna go to
item number 22 on the calendar.
wrapped up in the music. I
jumped aheaden up there to
present the item number 5 on
today's calendar.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Um, I ask you to
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution explain the bill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. I just want to start
by saying that this legislation
Brantly, um, this is also a
bicameral piece of legislation,
Mr. President. We do have House
minority leader, uh, Armstrong
is a part of this effort, um,
Senator Doig has contributed to
chambers, but essentially what
this legislation does is it
enhances foster care prevention
services under the Federal
Families.
First prevention Services Act.
government, and it requires
strategic plans for foster care
services to comply with federal
guidelines, and then it also
enhances uh confidentiality and
improve the service delivery
there, but we'd want to do this
because we want to improve
foster care services.
And become compliant, as I said
with the Family First Prevention
Services Act. We want to
work done along the way and then
we want better, better data and
transparency and confidentiality
coordination, uh, when this
information needs to be shared
with the public and others for
Uh, center through Hill.
Thank you, Mr. President, thank
you, senator for the amazing
introduction. The only thing
that I'll add is that it does in
approved a family's first plan,
um, from the federal government.
It also, uh, sets timelines for
implementation of a pilot
program for the multi-level
yield for unless Senator
Bergman, would you like to, all
right, then we're gonna go ahead
and yield to the, the body, Mr.
President. Thank you, senators.
We're debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
uh, just, uh, unanimous consent
to excuse, uh, Senator Block
except for the purposes of a
call no objection to close.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Again.
Committee, a joint family effort
here in the Senate, Mr.
President, to get this very
important work done also
bicameral support from folks
like House Minority Leader
Armstrong. With that, Mr.
that the record showed that the
roll has been called on all
those presidents voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you, Senators.
We're voting all senators to
your seats if you wish to vote
no.
I vote of 38 in the affirmative,
Now we're gonna go to item 22
and I'll yield to Senator Nava.
Mr. President, uh.
Uh, yes, unanimous consent of
the Senate that the records show
that all action for placing
Senate Joint Memorial 3.
Mr. President, uh, thank you
Fellow colleague Senator
Charlie.
As as many of you all know, New
Mexico is one of the most
linguistically diverse states in
the nation, yet our education
students by addressing the
severe shortage of bilingual
educators and expanding faculty
at our universities.
Our students' languages and
cultures are assets to be
More than 1/3 of New Mexico's
residents speak a language other
than English at home. Our
classrooms should reflect and
support that reality. The data
language at home. 12% of
students are from immigrant
communities and yet we don't
have enough bilingual teachers
to provide the education these
students deserve.
Senate Joint Memorial calls on
the higher education department
to work with bilingual education
faculty at UNM and MSU, New
Mexico Highlands University in
Western New Mexico University to
it also urges PED to address
fund and support the linguistic
needs and the rights of
bilingual students under the New
Mexico constitution.
The bilingual and multicultural
thrilled to co-sponsor this
along with President Pro Tem
Stewart, who also joined Senator
Charlie and I and members of the
I am so proud of this memorial
because not only does it address
a need that we have existing in
against the uh state of New
Mexico and um this just makes
sense. It is time we need to
give uh educators, the tools
that they need to address, uh,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
I'm so happy to be a co-sponsor
of this joint memorial. It's,
it's the perfect method, I
believe to get us started down
have plenty of students who want
that, so I like several things
about this, the call out to our
graduating seniors that get the
uh
looking at them to encourage
them to go into this bilingual
education, by having a degree
program. Uh, so encouraging
allows uh native speakers, many
of them elders to teach in the
schools, uh, without a, a
teaching degree.
So I think this is the next step
have senator Gonzalez followed
by Senator Jaramio. Thank you
Mr. President and members, um.
I stand in full support of this
and to uh
members that um in uh 1973 from
uh the University of New Mexico.
I was one of the first groups to
receive an endorsement in
bilingual education.
And then from there uh
know, we did work very hard to
where endorsement certified
teachers would receive an extra
compensation for this. So we
have been uh making some strides
But, uh, we will get it and also
seeing that our state is the
only state in the Constitution
that says that we should be a
bilingual state, you know, uh,
Sanna had, Mr. President, I
don't need the sponsors to
yield. I just want to say as
importanttequino so celebramoso
de los nativoo
speaking Spanish in school that
they were told that they could
only speak English, but in
celebrating indigenous languages
by celebrating the Spanish
language, it's definitely gonna
tie us to our roots of who we
Sent her offer to close on the
joint.
Mr. President, I move that.
in the negative by a show of
hands to your seats, please. We
are voting.
I vote of
Thank you very much Mr.
President. Thank you colleagues
for standing in support of this
cultural competency matters and
language.
gonna do 2 more memorials, item
number 23 is Senator Pinto,
Senate Memorial 9, and then
Senator Gonzalez is going to do
item number 25, Senate Memorial
22. Thank you, Senator War.
Senator Pinto.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment and
substitution. no objections,
Senator Pinto to explain.
Senator Memorial 9 request that
This memorial proposes a
comprehensive review of the
certification program to address
challenges and strengthen its
to debate?
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
just stand in strong support of
out. So this is a perfect
memorial going to LESC and I
look forward to the study. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Center souls.
Thank you. I was actually gonna
President, I do not know. That's
why I asked you and also asked
Senator Stewart.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
was just going to poke the
over the interim and how we can
continue to support our native
languages, uh, languages very
much our culture and when
languages are gone, cultures
die.
consent of the Senate that the
records show that the role has
been called in all those
president voted the in in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands all senators to your
And it works if you can report
to your seat to record your
vote.
passed the Senate. Senator
Pinto. Mr. President and members
of the body. I'm gonna yell now
to Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President, I
and that it is now subject to
debate amendments, or
substitution. Thank you, Senator
Gonzalez.
You'll explain the memorial.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. President
firmer, more into this is um
this fall.
You know, I sponsored a water
symposium. We probably had over
200 attendees into that. We had
That we talk about in many
fashions in many ways about our
water in New Mexico and how
precious it is and how it's
And what is important here and
on this symposium, one of the
things that came out is what are
we doing for our young people.
And this is the individuals that
um this would give the public
education department to explore
the visibility of creating a
curriculum focused on water
And what I'm visioning here, uh,
members is that, uh, the
curriculum would be on a K
through 12 with a scope and
sequence, and that way that
value, the asset, and everything
that we have with our commodity
of one of the most uh important.
Part that we have in our state
President. I just rise in strong
support of this, uh, this
memorial, um, the body did pass
Senate Joint Memorial One
recently, uh, through the
chamber and it's going over to
school for all um uh K through,
I'm sorry, um, high school
students, uh, would, and then
they would wind up graduating
with some knowledge of hot water
management and conservation. I
think this
is great, it backs it up even
so I think that that's just
fantastic, and I, I totally
support this effort. Thank you.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, uh,
don't need the gentleman to
issues related to natural
resources into our K through 12
curriculum. I really appreciate
it. I see this is his latest
attempt to do so. You know, Mr.
President, senators, we are
The fact that we would be really
training um our upcoming
generations about not only water
but other natural resources
about climate just all makes
future and about the future
preservation and vitality of our
state and our natural resources
and of course in this case our
water. So thank you, senator for
doing this year after year
continuing to.
thank you, Mr. President,
Senator Senator Steinborn.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President, and I stand in
support of Senate Memorial 22.
President, um, I shared with our
new state engineer and the
previous state engineer and the
previous one about the role that
I believe that government has
Aseass are here, land grants and
they have a lot in agua no avida
it's true because water is
essential for us to be here, Mr.
President, and working with.
we have begun.
And Mr. President, Senator,
there is a, when Cherish was at
school and elementary school, I
think it was PNM that came to do
President, a 5 minute shower. Oh
my God. But Mr. President, I
think that's the way that we are
going to be going if our water
continues to dwindle in the
Mr. President, I stand and rise
in support of this memorial. We
always say that RSV that and we
should be motivated by the young
that we have water conservation
as part of the curriculum is
something I think this
generation wants, this young
generation wants, and I want to
thank the senator for bringing
this up, something that we're
doing with our Aseca communities
Senator Woods.
I want to thank the good senator
also, Mr. Chair, but I'd like to
make a statement.
Senator Wirth, and he was
presenting a bill.
And he was talking about how
much less water, the city of
whether it was the exact same
time or anyway during that same
meeting, a state engineer came
in.
And he was trying to tell us how
But he made a, a statement about
a chicken egg.
And I doubt that the good
Senator Worth remembers that
For an egg for a chicken, but
it, you know, it was taken from
the time the chicken was born
until
All the way through and
That always made me wonder.
How accurate
Google is on everything, you
know.
So
understand, he says. Everybody
says we're running out of water.
He says, where's it going?
He says, how can it get out of
the Earth's atmosphere.
When we start talking about
there's not as much water.
Where did it go?
And comes down somewhere.
During a conversation and a
conservation meeting one day.
he was talking about climate and
how the climate was changing,
and I asked him, I says, well,
how come if you can predict
that.
climate is what happened
yesterday.
That's a measurement we have
from whether it's what's
happening in the future.
But we're not going to predict.
Whether on the future.
accurately in the future.
So I have, from that point on,
To, to forecast with.
Because whether you, you, you
watch the weather every morning.
But the closer it gets, they
change your prediction. They
change their models because they
use models, Mr. President.
do when we teach kids, I just
hope.
Senator, that
I got a face.
Realize that.
The future is yet to come.
And
I've always thought of my dad
He says
Son, he says,
Mhm
The good Lord determines the
rainfall, and that is the
Man can't predict rainfall, but
you have to prepare to accept
the rainfall to grow a crop.
You have to be ready. You have
to have your, your soul ready,
And that's what makes a farmer
successful.
His being there at that moment
in time. So I hope that is part
of the curriculum too they
teach.
That
Seeing the successful ones of
those people.
And maybe have them come in and,
and speak to the schools once in
I don't know how many people
come up to me and say, well,
I remember when I went to my
granddad's place.
Sometimes me to
Understand what people talk
about.
Because until they feel that
It is what makes, that's what's
feeding the world today.
That's what's feeding the United
States. That's what's feeding
New Mexico.
The first of this century back
in 1920.
The average farmer fed 3 or 4
people.
3 or 4 people.
They had more food available for
and that information is spread
through this program also.
I'm boring you, Mr. President.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
See no further debate. Senator
are provided some comments. I
just want to 11 part is uh.
You can teach when you
integrate, you can teach math,
science, history.
going, you know, you learn so
much in the kindergarten and
then by the time you go to the
upper grades, you know, your
curriculum starts expanding. And
uh this is what we want to see,
uh, Mr. President, I move that
Senate Memorial 22 do not pass,
and I ask unanimous.
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the role has
Memorial 22 if we can have all
senators to your seats, please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of 37, the affirm it
is real in the negative Senorial
22 has passed the Senate.
Senator Gonzalez.
Hearing no objection. We're in
that order of business. Messages
from the house, the reader will
read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 518 and
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Worth will take us to that
next order business, uh, Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
go on our business committee
reports. no objection. We're in
that order of business committee
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Linda M. Lopez,
chair
the community report has been
adopted.
The reader will read.
Mr President, your conservation
committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 161, has had
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually no
objection. The reader will read.
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill.
191 do pass and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Dupas respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Lis Stefani's
chair,
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee reports we have
a motion to adopt security
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee.
To whom has been referred Senate
Bill 225 has had it under
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we act on
them with one motion, but the
journal reflected that they were
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10 do pass and
then referred to the finance
House Bill 252 as amended to
pass as amended, and thence
referred to the Finance
Committee.
saying hi.
Those opposing a.
The eyes have it the community
report has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
The reader will read.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
George Munoz, chair.
Move adoption committee report.
will read.
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
do pass as amended.
Do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
George Munoz adoption of the
committee report. Senators, we
have a motion to adopt the
read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Memorial to as
amended has had it under
Bergman's, Senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs. Senator, Mr.
President, I move adoption of
the committee report, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
House Memorial to as amended.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Memorial 19 as
Cary Hamblin, Senator Heather
Bergman's Senator Nicholas A.
Paul co-chairs.
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report.
the members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session center
Memorial 19 as amended. I yield
to Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter wants to take us to that
next order business, Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
representatives Dow, Vincent
Chatfield, Murphy, and Duncan.
An act relating to elections,
allowing a qualified elector
applying for a hunting or
House Bill 230 introduced by
representativeshispanski and
Thompson.
An act relating to medical
adverse employment actions,
providing requirements for
determining impairment.
Requiring the Department of
Health and the workforce
solutions department to develop
That's House Bill 230. 518
introduced by
Representative
Anaya, Senator Jaramillo,
Senator Hamblin.
numbered year as a lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer,
and expansive day. House Bill
518.
18, having been read twice by
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection. We're in that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you.
President now being 11:59 a.m. I
move we adjourn until 12:01 p.m.
The Senate will come to order.
Mr. President, I ask C's consent
that the rules be suspended the
records show that all those.
That the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Mr. President, I ask you to ask
consent.
That the rules be suspended and
the Journal show all those
present in this morning's
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee.
It is ordered.
Senator, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So that is it for
I gave a copy to Senator Sheer,
just a half page explanation of
what changed in this bill
despite the 20-page concurrence
report, so take a look at that.
we need to announce that the
Republicans are going to have a
caucus meeting immediately after
we shut up on the floor today.
Thank you, sir, I was gonna go
to San Diego's next. OK, thank
you. Then you can go to
Senators.
Um
Caucus member, uh, to let him
know when we're out of
committee, uh, but we will be
having a caucus meeting
Thank you, Mr. President. As
we're finalizing the budget, you
want to remember New Mexico is a
wealthy state.
We sit on vast reserves of oil
and gas generating billions in
revenue.
Despite this wealth, we allow
our children to go hungry, to go
unhoused, and to go without
basic necessities needed to
survive.
Too many of New Mexico's
Others go to school without
stable housing, struggling to
focus because survival takes
priority over learning.
And too many families are
trapped in cycles of hardship,
resources. It's a question about
priorities.
Oil and gas bring in billions,
yet our children suffer.
Why? Because we have chosen to
With the 4% decline in the stock
market.
But here's the good news, we can
change this.
We can demand that our state's
low-income children the
advantages they need to succeed
in the future.
We can ensure that no child in a
wealthy state like ours grows up
our children not corporate
interests, our priority because
as a state that allows its
children to go hungry, unhoused,
and without hope is not rich at
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to remind uh the, the body
that your tax business and
transportation committee will be
meeting.
Let's say 2:45, um, uh, that may
through first and then we will
have the regular business of the
night, so we will have bills
that will be heard from Senator
Jaramillos Dia Lopez, Stephanic
Trujillo, and then a couple of
Consent that the proposed Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
emergency Senate Bill 535
sponsored by Senator Minos
remain in Senate Finance
Relating to peace, public
health, safety and welfare, uh,
increasing the, the fees to the
workers' compensation
administration fund and
unanimous consent request.
See no objections, so ordered
send Munoz. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senate Finance is
kind of wrapping up the budget.
trying to finish out capital,
uh, so we're gonna wrap up the
budget in the next couple of
days, uh, everything's
tightening up and the numbers
are coming together. So, uh,
in the chamber with us, but
Senator Jaramillo has quite the
big smile today because he was
the winner of a bet.
I know I gave him my tickets to
the game.
side.
Oh, he was on the right side you
were on the wrong side.
He's on the left side.
All right, Mr. President, thank
me can send and send it to sing
sing to our chairs please rise
and Senator Pintovi can lead us
in that happy birthday song for
Senor Lopez.
Yeah
Happy birthday.
Senate Education Committee
committee meeting will be
meeting tomorrow at 9 a.m. in
room 311. We have, uh, one
Senate bill and 4 House bills on
the agenda. Thank you, Senator
In the United States, the bolo
tie are widely associated with
Western wear and common in the
western areas of the country.
1987, the state legislature also
adopted the bow tie as the
official state tie on March 13th
of 2007.
Women and men both can purchase
uh Javier bow ties on Saturday
on. We have uh I have appointed
State of New Mexico Senate
Bolota contest.
Now,
for members that don't own one,
there's a lot of stores, a lot
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Gonzalez see no
further announcements, uh,
Senator Pinto. Mr. President,
and, uh, Senator Gonzalez, will
promised them that I would
protect them.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senor, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Just for the sergeant
at arms, let's leave everything
