Senator Campos.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Do Hick.
Senator
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Harmio.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Nova
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Yeah. Sanidia Lopez.
Senators.
Senator Tobias, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
today by Rabbi Beryl Levertov.
from the Santa Fe Jewish Center
in Chabad.
And I ask that you remain
standing for the Pledge of
allegiance to led today by
Senator Jeff Steinborn.
Mexican flag to be led today by
Senator Scher.
Thank you, Mr. President, it's
an honor to be here again, and I
promised last year I was here, I
Manhattan Avenue Deli, thank you
for inviting me to open today's
session with a prayer.
As is the Jewish custom, before
we pray and ask Almighty God to
well for later, not to keep, but
just to pass on to charity.
Please join me in prayer.
Almighty God.
Creator of the universe.
people of New Mexico, humanity
in general and to serve you.
They are gathered here to
legislate laws to ensure that
this state and your, your world
is a better place.
fulfilling one of your seven
commandments which you first
issued to Adam at the time of
his creation 5,785 years ago and
then reissued to Noah and his
You issue the following 7 laws
which became to be known as a
seven Noahide laws to worship
you alone.
Never to blasphemy holy name.
and that every society governed
by just laws which are based on
their recognition and
acknowledgement of You, O God,
as a sovereign ruler of all
people and all nations. Here are
to this beautiful state that you
created and the world at large
and may they be rewarded with
good health and prosperity for
their hard work, them and their
Israel, and your beloved people
dwelling thereon. Oh, please,
please restore law and order in
that part of the world today.
521 days since they have
suffered the most horrific
them free the remaining innocent
hostages who have been suffering
inhumane torture for so long.
Please change the heart of the
evil terrorist to know thy name
and give up their fight to
destroy your beautiful world.
and this week we celebrate the
Purim, we celebrate a victory of
good over evil when you're you
Almighty God saved your people
from annihilation by the Persian
Bandera de los Estados Unidos
America.
Once again we'd like to welcome
each of you to the New Mexico
Senate, and I'll yield to Senate
Majority Floor Leader Peter
Worth to get us started today.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President, and thank you,
Rabbi Levertov, for being here.
Uh, it's certainly our honor to
have you here, and I assure you
much appreciate your
Blessings, we do live in an
extraordinary state, and we're
here doing lots of hard work and
I particularly appreciate you
Padilla for cameras and
excusals, and we'll do the same
thing on the other side and then
I'll, uh, let everyone know what
we're gonna do.
Thank you, Senator, but yeah,
thank you, Mr. President.
gallery and here on the Senate
floor Center, but yeah, thank
you again, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to excuse
Senators Lopez, O'Malley,
Cervantes, and Charlie until
they returned to the chamber.
Senator Brandt and Gallegos, but
also the members of the finance
committee who I assume will be
here eventually.
See no objection.
but we are gonna start off, uh,
with the Tao school mariachi
band who are gonna play one song
for us in honor of Taos County
days, so I want to yield to
Los Mariachis and Los Tigres
Taos.
Senator Gonzalez to announce all
the students in the mariachi
band and then we'll, I'll let
him talk about Taos and
introduce the guests that are
here. So I'd yield to Senator
Gonzalez first to just introduce
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
and uh thank you, uh, Senator
Wirth, uh,
Very beautiful, very touching,
In the northern part of the
state and uh what a blessing,
you know, and then to uh also be
here with uh this morning with a
know, uh, and existent and many,
many students that have
participated with the assistance
of uh Michelle Montez. She's a
director right by me, and we
have
again.
Madeline.
Jerome. Jerome.
Sai Melina.
Elizabeth, Priscilla, Antonio
Isaiah.
Alejandro Gabriel.
Miguel
Senator Gonzalez
We, uh, really appreciate and we
really thank you for being here.
here in the rostrum and I'll
start off with um Taos Pueblo
Governor Edwin Concha.
And we have Commissioner Bob
Romero, and we have um.
The commissioner and Janette
council member Marietta Ambro.
And town of Red River, Mayor
Linda Calhoun.
Superintendent Doctor Antonio
Leighton.
And Penasco Independent School
District school board president
School board president Jason
Rael.
And superintendent John Maldan
Maldonado.
Fund board, and Chevron mining
is providing lunch for us, boxes
to us uh in the chamber.
President and members, uh, with
that, uh.
Oh, thank you very much for
allowing us uh this moments to
share with you. And if we can
give our students again a big
hand of applause and to our
And they will be at the rotunda
starting a little before 12 for
a good while there performing
some more beautiful music. We
thought I'd turn it back to you,
sense, uh, there's two other
certificates that are gonna get
read. One is a certificate of
condolence for Ralph Leonard
Moya, and that'll be Senator
Campos, and there's gonna be 6
be here and Senator Trujillo
will do that when we get
that point. Um, final thing and
I'll yield to to to gas, and
then we'll do the certificates,
um, senators Townsend, Brantley
think that's in lieu of Agfest,
is that right? Or is it in lieu
of an ag group dinner of some
kind. So we did Agfest already.
So anyway, much appreciated for
members who have guests. Thank
you, Senator Werth. We have
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to welcome all of our
visitors today from the
Enchanted circle and the uh Taus
New Mexico and I know we've been
through some challenges, but
you're doing so much great work
with tourism and innovation and
energy and just kudos to kudos
to all of you and thanks for
being here today and thanks for
like to introduce my two guest
shadows today. First, Doctor
Davis is shadowing me. He is,
uh, in charge of the transplant.
also I have a Lexis Espinoza.
She just finished her master's
degree in social work and in
macro social work and she's here
shadowing, uh, to see how the
Thank you, Senator Souls.
Any further announcements,
senators.
Mr. President,
I want to be the end of the
amount and thing, but you got a
couple other certificates and
then we're gonna come back to
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth to take us to that
miscellaneous and I'll yield to
se comps. Thank you very much,
Mr. President, members of the
Senate.
It's um it's really an honor to
go ahead and present this
certificate of condolence be
read in honor of Ralph Leonard
Moya.
Seeing no objection.
The reader will read.
Ralph Leonard Moya does hereby
extend its sincere heartfelt
condolence and sympathy to the
bereaved family and friends of
the deceased.
And whereas Ralph Leonard Moya
children born to Jose Leon Moya
and Adelina Mirabal Moya and
whereas from an early age, Ralph
exhibited a profound commitment
to education, public service,
School in 1970 and whereas Ralph
went on to receive a bachelor's
degree in social work from the
College of Santa Fe and a
master's degree in social work
communities of northeastern New
Mexico with an unwavering
commitment to providing needed
services to underserved
populations as
especially the disabled and
counselor at Mental Health
Resources Incorporated into can
carry.
Clinical director at the Shire
house in Santa Rosa, a home
health social worker for
And whereas Ralph was also
active in public service,
serving on the Tucum Kerry City
commission from 1980 until 1994,
including one term as mayor
And whereas Ralph returned to
the Terry City Commission in
2016 and served until 2023,
Grisham appointed Ralph to the
counseling and therapy Practice
Board, where he advocated for
improved mental health services
for the people of New Mexico.
extended to all creatures, his
family and the people of New
Mexico and whereas Ralph's
selfless contributions have left
an indelible mark on the
countless people he helped in
And whereas Ralph was preceded
in death by his parents, Jose
Leon and Adelina, brothers
Charlie Moya and Robert Moya and
George, Doramas, Janamoa May,
Richard, and Imogene Moya
Easter and many nieces and
devoted New Mexican signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator Pete
Campos Mimi Stewart, President
Pro Tem. Sherry De Luhan, chief
clerk.
to Ralpher Moya and his guests
Senator Campos. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, uh, going back to
Christmas Day.
And within that, of course, he
passed suddenly to each and
every one of us, at least as we,
uh, we're so used to hearing his
Going back to about 1972, 1973.
Somewhere in that time frame,
Ralph and I began our work, if
together, if you will, programs
that would serve those with uh
alcoholism and and other uh
issues that they needed to deal
with. And we both went on into
everyone takes from uh today.
Is that earlier we recognized uh
Governor Bill Richardson and the
work that he did globally.
every ounce of his being from
his resources to the animals
that he loved to working closely
with his family and always
serving the community of Tucum
carry, Quay County, and the
But they always went to look
Ralph up.
Have that conversation with him
and seek his guidance, seek his
help, and he was there for
people throughout his life.
The family was there.
We were all, if you will, bound
together by community spirit,
But it's important for us to
know.
That is, we all go forward.
Whether it be that we provide
services to those at the local
level.
time I would like to yield to
Senator Woods to continue with
this tribute and then of course
it would be open to anyone else
who wishes to indicate um.
left. Thank you, Mr. President,
and if I may yield to Senator
Woods. Thank you, Senator
Campos. Senator Woods. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. I, uh, I had
to,
I can't say that I was always,
uh 100% in tune with him. The
fact is, there's a time or two
that
The far ends of both spectrums.
He was a man that was 100%
community service.
in Tutan Carry to, to service
people to have a place for them
to go and socialize and
And it's, you know, he, he did
things.
And, uh, and took and carry.
And, you know, it's much like a
lot of these icon theater set of
But he was a community-minded
man.
And that's what makes great
people.
When they're willing to go in
their community and, and
uh, one day, he had invited me
to come to a
To a uh
A political event.
For some reason, this this
forgot to go to.
Representative Chatfield called
me that night, and he says,
I said, OK, so I
Immediately
Change my clothes and I headed
to To and carry.
Well
but I got there and I tried my
best, you know, apologize for
this.
Forgetting
To be somewhere.
Mr. Moya was, was not quite so
receptive that I had missed his
event like that.
But I sit there and talked to
them for what we were doing in
Calling me every so often and
letting me know I'm gonna miss
those phone calls.
Senator
Uh, I just, I hate it because
At times
The whole behavior health and
the whole hospital and
everything that's they're in to
can carry. He was 100% in on.
You know, you just, you just got
to admire people doing it that
way. So,
compost, thank you for, for
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Woods.
to basically wrap it up in terms
of uh the type of person Ralph,
And he called and he indicated
and he said, Peter.
I need another ambulance for to
can carry and you better get it
for me soon.
Other communities step forward.
And so this is the type of
individual that we're talking
about.
there's anyone else who wishes
to make a comment, we're open to
that. And if not, then I'm gonna
go ahead and introduce some of
the family members that are here
and others that are still making
their way to the Capitol.
the list of the brothers and the
sisters in the family. Some are
here and again, like I
indicated, others are still on
their way. We have Dora Mays,
Imogene Easter, who is the
sister of Ralph Moya and
retired.
We have Howard Moya, brother of
Ralph Moya, and retired truck
driver.
Moya May and Joanna is the
sister of Ralph and lives in
Clovis. So with that, uh, Mr.
President, members of the
to can carry for so many years,
and now they're here to continue
with his legacy, the legacy of
the individual who we're talking
about today, Ralph Leonard Moya,
thank you very much, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
guess is that is going to take a
little bit of time in the house.
So what we'll do is,
Probably go to 3rd reading and
then take a break.
And
So, Mr. President, um, let's go
ahead and read in the committee
report just for the rules
committee on the confirmation,
and we'll do that and I assume
reports. The reader will read.
Mr. President, your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
letter number 30 dated September
August 16, 2026. Your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment,
respectfully submitted Senator
Katie Doig chair.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
Senate executive letter number
30 dated September 16, 2024, in
which the governor makes the
following appointment. Melanie
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
Katie Doig chair,
I adoption of the committee
reports. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
And a majority floor leader
Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President,
Mr. President, I ask that the
credentials of Melanie Kierine
be presented to the full Senate
for consideration as secretary
of the Energy, Minerals and
number 30 dated September 16,
2024. I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Melanie Kinderine as
President, it's a pleasure to
support Melanie Kinderine to
serve as New Mexico's Secretary
of MED. She has such an
But her leadership today with
Mner has, among other things
launched it's here and her tax
incentive, uh, solar for all
hotshot crews. The members
hotshot and coral and the ecos
River hotshots in Las Vegas
these compliment accomplishments
already in New Mexico.
Energy for both the Clinton and
Obama administrations. She
served as director of the Office
of Energy Policy and Systems
Sponsored this country.
Melanie Kinderine for secretary
of Mner. I stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
support of this appointment, uh,
I had the opportunity to attend
a continuing legal education
seminar that was done by the
PRC. One of the things is
PowerPoint that was just
Unbelievable, talking about how
energy works, all the
connections, um, how New Mexico
of this caliber, uh, coming back
home and stepping up like this,
I did see you the other day
sitting up at the Governor
Richardson, uh, memorial
Stewart bringing this, and we
are very lucky to have you. So
thank you for serving.
Thank you, Senator Worth. We
have Senator Trujillo followed
by Senator Padilla and Senator
Woods. Senator Trujillo, thank
Kinderine and um uh I will just
say the first time that I heard
her speak, I knew that she had a
gift, and I knew that we needed
her here in New Mexico. She
way above my head, um, all of
the connections, but she really
helped me understand the
connection between oil and gas.
minerals and other uh material
for building uh wind turbines
for building, uh, electric
vehicles for moving in the
when I walked out of the room
listening to her, I felt like
I'd really had a paradigm shift
in what I needed to know and so
I think she's gonna make a great
really concrete manner. So thank
you again.
Thank you, Senator Tillo.
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President, and thank you, Madam
about a year, maybe a year and a
half ago when she took on the
role that she has now, and I am
always in awe every time I have
an opportunity to listen to her
speak, and I think that uh I've
of legislation out there, but
Mr. President, whenever I hear
her, I think it's we're in such
great hands, um, I think it's
also going to lend itself her
experience is going to lend
itself to New Mexico having an
what I hear. And so, um, we're
very lucky to have her, but with
that, Mr. President, I also ask
you consent to excuse Senator uh
Gonzalez until he returns.
Senator Woods.
to call you designate anymore,
shortly. Um,
I met her
Sometime last summer.
At some conference somewhere,
full of
Rare earth we've got a state
full of
Potential.
And I just hope that we can
bring this potential to our
citizens.
And I think
I think she's one of them that
can do the job, and she told me
she particularly liked this job
because
Thank you, Senator Woods.
See no further debate, Senator
Stewart to close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
With that, I asked unanimous
consent that the record show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
raise your hand.
By a vote of 31 the affirmative,
0 on the negative.
The appointment of Melanie
Kinderine as Secretary of
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Thank you, Mr. President. Let's
all welcome Secretary Kinderine.
Anderson be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
state engineer. I now yield to
Senator Stephanic.
of Phoenix, thank you, Mr.
appointment of Elizabeth Liz
Anderson as the state engineer.
Seeing no objection. Senator
Stephanics to explain.
spent over 25 years working on
water issues in both the private
and public sectors my chairmen,
our former state engineer
brought her on as a senior
experience with rural water
systems, salinity projects,
wastewater treatment reclamation
projects, and drinking water,
and she made a point of saying
The appointment of Elizabeth
Anderson.
Senator Campos, followed by
Senator Jarami. Thank you very
much, Mr. President, members of
the Senate, it's indeed an honor
quick study. Secondly, as she
gets going, she's highly
committed to all of our water
issues throughout the state and
how she's doing this, I'll just
only with the 50 year water plan
and some of the initiatives when
we deal with dams orcas, all of
our water issues. She's there.
She has the foresight and most
members of the Senate, I stand
in full support of this
particular nominee, Elizabeth
Anderson. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Campos.
comes up with solutions.
Recently we had an issue in
trauma where our wells were
drying up and she quickly got on
it to see what she could do to
assist. She's knowledgeable
the work that's done and so
appreciate everything she does
for my district and what she'll
do for the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Jame. Senator
Woods.
know, he was.
All in for her to come in and
she was, I'm pretty sure with
the Berlin Water Authority had
before.
water to
The river and, and how important
that is, the, the return flow.
Uh, I worry a lot about
Senator Woods. Senator Lopez,
followed by Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. President, I
would be remiss if I didn't note
that she is the first female
natural resources committee
already and um she just seems to
have such a good grasp of these
very complex issues and it's
gonna be we're gonna face tough
We have Senator nearer followed
by Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. um,
I've been fortunate enough to
work with Liz through the, uh,
And she is going to be easy to
work with. Her life.
It's pretty much devoted to
water and water projects and the
motivated.
She is very pointed. She knows
exactly what to do, and I, I
stand in support and I
congratulate you and what a
great day.
pleasure of working with her
this uh session on legislation
and I found her to be honest,
trustworthy, and
it out of committee, but he's
ignoring me right now, but I'm
gonna keep talking.
until he at least raises his
hand and tells me he's
listening, but I don't know if I
want to get that done or not,
Senator To see no further
debate, Senator Stephanics to
close.
Mr. President, I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Elizabeth
voting in the negative by a show
of hands are voting all senators
By a vote of 31 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
2026 has been duly confirmed.
By the New Mexico Senate.
Senator Stephenics.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
before I ask her to stand, she
has her husband and two lovely
Thank you, Senator Fenics. I'll
yield now to Senate Majority
Wirth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Just before we go to
3rd reading, I, I forgot to
mention that uh Questaconomic
funds and Chevron Mining have
provided box lunches in the
is to start with items 1 through
6. So let me give the lineup.
Senator Maestas, item number 1,
Senate Bill 290.
Item number 5 is Senator Sheer,
Senate Bill 168, the tax
substitute, uh, and Senator
Padilla has item number 6,
Um, thank you, Mr. President.
A rise today to share a story of
a doctor who fought for his
patient, one of many.
President.
In May of last year, this is
from him. In May of last year, a
patient walked into our clinic
in excruciating pain, sharp,
stabbing, radiating down his
neurological weakness and
profound foot drop.
These symptoms were urgent,
requiring immediate
neurosurgical evaluation.
But as a doctor practicing in
could not get him referred
without imaging neurosurgery
neurosurgery would reject.
The referral unless we had an
confirms a surgical issue.
Without this policy, they would
be overburdened with patience,
better suited.
So we fought for him. We ordered
nerve root while navigating the
referral barriers.
In June, after his imaging was
complete, we submitted the
referral to UNM neurosurgery.
could do to get this patient
scheduled, but even after all
the pushing, the earliest
available appointment for an
initial, for an initial
evaluation.
Wasn't until the end of the
year, far too late.
surgery in September.
Remember, this started in May.
His surgery relieved the pain,
but because of the months-long
paralyzed, causing the foot to
drag while walking.
And this is what haunts me, says
the doctor.
Had the patient been treated
urgently, this permanent
I stand before you alongside
with my colleagues to sound this
alarm. New Mexico health care
system is on the brink of
collapse.
We're the only state in the
nation that has lost physicians
every single year.
From 2019 to 2024.
afford this inaction. It is our
responsibility.
We've lost a staggering 248
physicians.
And this comes from Searchlight
New Mexico if you want to look
it up.
pushed out of practice. Lives
are being permanently altered by
delays that should not happen.
Our constituents, both patients
to timely quality care before
it's too late.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff,
Senator Ramos.
And uh till today I'm saddened
to say that we still do not have
anyone appointed to our board of
regents.
You know, we, we gotta
Try and get a
President for WNMU as soon as
possible.
The only people suffering by not
I like to call anyone.
That can help on this situation.
And make sure that we get some
we get some names.
And uh as of now we have not
gotten any names and being that
it's in my district, I really
All this is going to affect is
our staff, our faculty, and our
students and the future of our
university. Thank you very much,
Mr. President.
packets sent down to the rules
committee, uh, any day now. So
I'm anticipating that we will be
having those confirmation
hearings, uh, possibly, uh, on
next Monday.
recounted. I don't see him in
the chamber if he's here, but he
was recounting the story of a
patient who had some difficulty
getting care, and I think we all
recognize how difficult it is to
get care in New Mexico and we
implication here and what
Senator Sher may have missed was
the example that he just gave
here he is back center.
Uh, the example Senator Sher
just gave and the implication
that this may be somehow tied to
a governmental hospital and so
the suggestion that we don't
have access to doctors because
of medical malpractice coverage
and difficulty getting coverage
malpractice insurance. So any
suggestion that that patient was
unable to get admitted or seen
or cared for.
UNM Hospital wouldn't apply
under the circumstances here.
That would be a wrong, uh,
Sheer that the difficulty was
getting into UNM hospital or or
being seen at UNM hospital by a
specialist there and that would
not be implicated by the by the
uh claims that are uh difficulty
an MRA required. Again, uh, that
would be a matter of medical
decision making or perhaps even
insurance coverage, uh,
requiring the additional
diagnosis or the diagnostic
tools, so I, I know that, that
way explained the uh the delay
in that patient's care.
I think the other thing that we
probably need to give some
thought to is the fact that you
know when we have a, uh, a
dearth of doctors in this state,
years they've not increased the
number of doctors we're
producing in the state and those
of us that are business people
know it's um sometimes a matter
of supply and demand, so we
we're having that difficulty,
why are we not producing any
more doctors.
And perhaps the Doctor Hickey
can answer that question for me.
I see him nodding his head, but
let's be honest about that. Some
supply and demand. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you. I know
there's other senators who wish
to make uh comments. We aren't
announcements miscellaneous and
senators do have the right to be
able to share announcements or
not be debating any piece of
legislation that's not here on
the floor. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
think it's also important to
recognize the fact that
lost doctors. And if you talk to
the American Medical Society and
doctors in general in private
practice.
They will tell you that medical
malpractice is a significant
issue.
Mexico today, work as
hospitalists for a larger
corporation to give them some
protections. So,
While I certainly respect, uh,
across New Mexico who
continually tell us this is an
issue and to say it isn't it's
just we're sticking our head in
the sand and we're, and it's
points of clarification. Uh, UNM
has a strategic plan, uh, that,
uh, President Stokes and Doctor
Richards are, uh, have put
uh, I can't remember, but we
are, that issue is being
addressed in a strategic plan
and fund.
to get that done, um, secondly,
uh, last week I learned that the
cancer center is now turning
away, uh, a patient with a, uh,
colon cancer because they don't
other places we have to get the
faculty up to the average salary
in the US because in many areas
there, it's, it's well under.
away and um uh the probabilities
are much higher in New Mexico,
uh, since uh 21 and that fear is
well known around the country.
you, Senator. Senator Worth.
Thank you, Mr. President. So we
are waiting for the uh Trujillo
family to come over from the
house.
What I think we'll do is just
jump into the 3rd reading and
item number 1, Senate Bill 155
as amended.
Thank you, Senator we're on that
order of business they union
legislation.
And I'll read, uh, yield to
amended on final passage has
been taken, and now it is
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution.
See no objections, send her to
explain the bill.
for all jurisdictions, as you
know, embezzlement consists of
an individual who is entrusted
with money or property
converting it to their own use,
um, this bill.
public defender department, the
DAs, the judges, and allows
victims to get their
restitution, uh, given a longer
length of probation with that, I
will stand for questions.
Mr. President,
Mr. President, yes.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
uh, Senator,
be faced with.
Compared to current law.
Thank you Mr. President. Senator
$2500 20,000 dollars for, for,
uh.
Misdemeanor 4th, 3rd, and 2nd
degree crimes, but this will
instead of the $200 threshold.
Senator Townsend, thank you, Mr.
President. uh, Senator, um,
it is the DA's association is
supportive of this. They
actually brought us this bill,
uh, over a decade ago it was
signed into law, but there was
some confusion as to uh whether
to put together, um, and the,
uh, the victims, which are
mostly nonprofits or small
business.
businesses want to be made
whole.
So it's easier to have one case
Thank you, Senator Maestas,
Senator Townsend,
uh, Senator, I see looking at
the
Analysis that I have that this
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Townsend.
That's a peculiar concern.
and you can include that in the
charge or the indictment, so
it's not like you prosecute
somebody and then the next day,
oh man, they, they stole more
than we thought they had stole.
different cases so that you
don't aggregate.
Uh, cereal and Bezzler together
but the, uh, embezzlement with
regards to a certain victim uh
Thank you, Senator. Um.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you.
Senators were debating Senate
Bill 155 is amended, seeing no
further debate.
support this legislation, uh, we
made a promise to get certain
work done by the midpoint of the
session on crime, but we're
continuing that march, and the
goal here is to make sure that
there's a steady stream of
Um, the headlines are violent
crime, the headlines are murder,
the headlines are on, uh,
despicable and horrific crimes
in our society, but it's
important we also recognize
credentials, a lawyers, uh, CPAs
and others are also held to
account, so I urge us all to
support this unanimously again
as our effort to look at crime
from a more comprehensive.
perspective. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President, I
move that Senate Bill 155 as
amended do not pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
That the records show.
That the bill is that the roll
Senators to your seats, please.
We are all voting. I'll senators
to your seat if you wish to vote
no, please raise your hand.
By a vote of 41 in the
our business announcements and
miscellaneous objection.
We are in that order.us
announces miscellaneous. Thank
you, Mr. President, as I
mentioned, uh, we are very
honored to have the Trujillo
yield to Senator Trujillo and
this will be read.
Thank you.
Senator Hill
Mr. President, I ask that the
certificate be read?
As they listening to the
certificate reader to read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
condolence and sympathy to the
bereaved family and friends of
the deceased, and whereas
representative Jim Rodolfo
Trujillo was born and raised in
the Puaca Valley and was one of
And whereas Representative
Trujillo graduated from Saint
Michael's College in 1961 with a
bachelor's degree in elementary
education, during which time he
Trujillo also managed a local
branch of Di Financial Manager
and owns Al General and general
store and liquor Incorporated, a
small business in Paaca started
as a member of the that office's
legislative tracking team and
whereas Representative Trujillo
was appointed on January 7th,
every two-year term from 2006
through 200.
18, Representative Trujillo ran
unopposed with no primary or
general election opposition.
introducing tax credits for the
purchase of electric vehicles.
And supporting education funding
initiatives and whereas
Representative Trujillo actively
Affairs Committee.
And whereas Representative
Trujillo served on numerous
standing committees and that the
House taxation and Revenue
Committee as vice chair from
And whereas Representative
Trujillo was lead sponsor on
several important pieces of
legislation, including 2019's
House Bill 6, which pushed to
Trujillo loved sports and was a
dedicated golfer and Little
League baseball coach for 30
years, not only to his sons but
to other aspiring community
athletes.
away on March 3rd, 2024 at the
age of 84 and whereas
representative Trujillo is
survived by his loving wife of
Deno Ramon Trujillo, Geraldine
Maxine and Clara de Maria and
numerous other relatives and
friends.
Trujillo, a loving husband,
father, and public servant who
was committed to being a voice
for his community.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you reader for reading
that. First, I just wanna say
thank you to the family for
being willing to come here this
morning and to share this
Representative Trujillo has been
a long time champion for this
community. And there's a couple
of names that just really are
etched into the etched into the
And knowing him not personally,
but knowing who he was and all
of the work that he did. I was
kind of shaking in my boots that
um, to go and meet with him and
talk with him in person, because
I just had such great respect
for him.
And we sat down and I don't know
how long we talked, but we
about his business. He shared
his life with me, and I, I will
never forget that and it gave me
a new sense of understanding of
go, but he pulled a check out of
his pocket and he handed me a
check for $100 and he said, go
get it. You can do this. And so
Jim Trurilos supporting this.
So, you know, he's always been
a, a mentor for me from that.
time on, he has really stood by
my side in many different
There we go. That is the
Trujillo caucus. So we're only
missing one member, but this is
the last photo that I got of
Representative Trujillo. It was
And so I said, hey, let's just
get a picture. And this is one
of my most prized possessions.
I've used this photo as my Zoom,
over who was the actual chair of
the caucus. Um, so I never
really knew who was the chair of
the Trujillo caucus, but I
secretly think that Jim was
really the chair.
Representative Trujillo had been
gone from the session because of
um health issues.
And we were going to vote on the
clear, Mr. President.
Representative Trujillo was an
advocate for early childhood
long before it was a popular
thing to do.
Like right behind me.
And we got to the end of the 3
hour debate, and all of a
sudden, who walks in the door?
hat. He had been sitting out in
the garage just waiting for the
debate to come.
To enclose so that he could come
in and he could cast his vote.
And Representative Trujillo.
Cast his vote.
And the whole chamber stood up.
I would have never run against
Representative Trujillo.
It just so happened that I was
redistrict out of his district.
So that I could serve and try to
attain, try to attain the same
things that he.
So again,
As the leader of the Tree Hill
caucus, and with that, Mr.
President, I will yield to
Senator Wirth.
Thank you, Senator Hill. Senator
Werth, uh, thank you, Mr.
legislature, uh, speaking of
being intimidated when I was
elected in 2004, uh, the Santa
Fe delegation was Speaker Ben
And so was lucky and so was the
speaker, but we became very
tight and we worked together as
needs, not just who's was in my
district or Jim's district or
Loy or Ben, we really worked
together.
And
I just want to highlight one
thing that was mentioned in the
piece of tax reform, certainly
in my 21 years here that we have
done and Jim took the lead on
that, and it dealt with income
capital gains, working families
tax credit, low income, uh,
comprehensive tax rebate. This
bill was the foundation for all
the work we have done in the
last 6 years on tax reform,
I miss him a ton and really
appreciate you all being here
and appreciate you giving him
the chance to
do this service. It takes a lot
coming in when he wasn't well to
cast that deciding vote, so.
Lots of love to Vicky, to you
and to the family and again I
appreciate the certificate.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
Vicky and the family, I want to
thank you for sharing
Representative Jim Trujillo with
all of us.
And my work with him really had
to do with the aging and
central New Mexico Economic
Development District and he went
there, uh, a lot. He traveled
all over through the 10 counties
and so he knew what was going on
President. I'm honored to stand
here and talk about my friend,
uh, Jim Trujillo. I have 3
things I'd like to say, um, one
of them.
I worked for 10 years, 10 years
I worked with, uh, his son JT.
is over there and my team was
here and we really, we had a
great time working together. Let
me just tell you, we remained
friends from the first moment we
saw each other, but he was
always stopping and mentioning
about his mom and his dad, but
he was often referencing his dad
and just how much he loved him
and how what great advice he got
from him and when he was
struggling with something, he
would mention his dad, and I
like to say. Second, when I
arrived at the legislature, Mr.
President, and and, and Vicky
and family, uh, when I was
trying to introduce
amendments to House Bill 2,
Representative Trujillo can give
you some great ideas, uh,
representative Trujillo can tell
you how to get that in the
budget. And I did. That's how I
formed a friendship with him. I
would go track him down. I mean,
I was a senator, he was a
also, and we would just
reminisce about JT once in a
while. And the third thing I'd
like to mention, Mr. President,
because I know a lot of people
probably have a lot to say here
is more on the lighter note is I
up behind him and uh he had a
beautiful car. I think it was
like a Mercedes, if I recall,
uh, two-seater or 34 Mercedes.
And I'm following him down and,
and we did have to stop at the
I first arrived at the
legislature, I really was kind
of a speed demon. I, I drove way
too fast, and he said the next
time I see you driving like
that, I'm gonna call the state
a state police officer did stop
me eventually and gave me the
same advice that, uh,
Representative Trujillo did too.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Padilla. We have
Senator Maestas followed by
Senator Cervantes and Senator
Campos.
next to uh Representative
Trujillo my first year in the
house and so we are there on the
left hand side of the room by
the exit sign and so sitting
next to somebody for 90 days,
then what was great is I learned
that he
at Pawaka High School and so my
dad back in 1961 act taught at
Pawakke High School before he
got uh a job writing sports for
The two,
as mentioned, Mr. President,
the, the, the vote on the early
childhood Amendment
constitutional amendment.
You need uh a majority of the
I've seen on the house floor in
my 16 years in the house, but,
but maybe more importantly was
the House Bill 6 that was
2019 in committee, which was a
tough vote for everybody
involved. He laid out, he laid
out why we needed that bill and
why, uh, it was important for
the state of New Mexico and so
families in the state of Mexico,
one of the most dramatic fiscal
policy things we've done, uh,
and it's just, it made a
tremendous tremendous difference
in.
In people's lives and we're
still continuing with that work
Thank you, Senator Maesta,
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
Vicky family, it's always fun to
have you over here in the Senate
because we're part of the old
House group, right, back in the
recognitions to thank you for
accepting me into your
household. Uh, you all, you're
smiling, but, and I wasn't a
Cowboy fan, uh, which made it
even that much more special to
McDonald's takeout every night,
and you all would welcome me
into your home as a member of
the family and Super Bowl
Sundays were always very special
and I just remember the, the
great food, the tamales that I
with your family, and I
appreciate you always included
me as part of your family and
household.
Vicky and boys, thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator
Cervantes. Senator Campos, thank
you, Mr. President, members of
contagious. What a smile, and
that's the way he looked at all
times. There are often times
when we would get together,
let's say, to talk about
capitally, the budget, taxes.
Are that this individual was
respectful.
He always listened
He opened up his heart, and then
So that's one of the keys right
there, and that's a big lesson
for all of us. This process is
not personal.
Even though we come from various
we deal with it as Mr. Jim, uh,
I'm just gonna go back, our
representative Jim Trujillo
would indicate to all of us.
As we go forward.
gave up. He knew what was
coming. He loved community.
He was a grand representante.
Jim uh Rudolfo Trujillo.
And charismatic and when he
leaves with all of us is being
so charismatic that within that
he taught us all how to be great
Thank you and thank you, Senator
Trujillo for bringing us this
forward.
Um
I remember many wonderful
conversations that
representative Trujillo and I
talk about family.
Um, I remember he used to talk a
lot about watching Lorenzo grow
up over the years.
And
And I appreciate it and I told
him so. I always appreciated him
serving with us on the interim
committees and we always talked
about the commitment that we
And Mr. President, um,
You know
Representative Trujillo was
somebody very special to many of
About life and he always had an
answer, something that was very
calming.
And ultimately what it would
come down idiosquere.
And that's just the response
And I always appreciated that,
Mr. President.
And I just want to send love to
each of you and to Mrs.
Trujillo, you're still very
special to me.
The picture I have of him and I
don't have it with me is, is in
my book of memories.
You will never be forgotten.
Thank you, Mr. President.
if you could just stand for a
minute, um, Vicky, uh,
Representative Trujillo's wife,
the lady in red.
And uh Jeff.
And
please join me in thanking the
Treehill family for sharing
representative Trujillo with us
Worth to take us to the next
order of business. Thank you,
Mr. President. We're gonna go
back to that order business 3rd
reading of legislation, so
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
53 on final passage has been
prescribing psychologists for
them to be allowed to supervise
their own prescribing
psychologists in New Mexico
provide behavioral health
portion which is what's on page
2. This is just clean up
language to put that into the
definition so that it.
appropriately describes what
they do.
Thank you, Senator. So senators
Senate Bill 53 do now pass, and
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and
that all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
Senator Dohe voting no by a vote
of 30 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. Senate Bill 53.
Has Julie passed the Senate,
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Mr. President, I ask you now
consent of the Senate for the
record show that all acts and
replacing Senate.
Uh, Bill 45 is amended to be put
on final passes and all actions
bill to amend the county
Healthcare Assistance fund to
add to the authorized uses that
county by law can use their
Bill 45 is amended. Anyone
wishing to debate.
Center Woods.
him if he'd yield. Senator
Steinborn to yield.
Mr. President, I yield. Senator
Woods.
What's the downside of this
bill?
purely optional for counties. It
is 100% the county's choice what
they use these funds for, um, 32
of 33 counties in New Mexico
have this fund, which is
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods,
uh, how did we get the fun
funded? Where's that money come
from?
Yeah, Mr. President, Senator, so
which are indigent funds. We
also in that same law authorize
their permitted uses of these
funds. And this was the fall.
Vision of this law when it was
is to allow uh more coverage of
health insurance so that people
working poor essentially, Mr.
Chair, could have access to
healthcare.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
this is the indigent funds.
That's exactly what this is, and
4 counties, and it's really,
hopefully they don't end up in
the ER. I think that's a good
thing about this bill is that if
emergency rooms. They can end up
getting primary care and
actually, frankly save more
expensive in medical
interventions when they don't
have health.
Care because that is what'll
happen is I'll end up in an
Signing up so that I don't have
to pay my deductible.
Our premium
For my insurance under this
plan.
Well, Mr. President, you know,
indigent, and so it's really on
a county by county basis, if you
even qualify for it, and this
is, you know, near this is like
200% of poverty level type of
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods, Mr. President,
they have to have some kind of
insurance.
In place.
In order for this to pay for a
cofund.
Um, Mr. Mr. President, Senator,
that is one possibility. This
bill um allows out of pocket
costs, including co-pays, so
that's one option of what a
county would be authorized to do
Right uh monthly premium. How do
you apply for that?
I mean, what are the
qualifications to apply for the
monthly premium.
even directly pay for um cost
from the exchange and the good
thing about that is that that is
heavily supported, you know,
through the healthcare, um, the
30, 50, but less than that a
month for someone to have
health, health care, and these
are people, Mr. President, uh,
you know, that are part of our
workforce. These are people that
are part of the community and,
Senator Stefaniks to yield for a
question?
Uh, I will yield, Mr. President.
So Mr. President and Senator
Stephonics.
That have got state went through
the state system and found
insurance.
a county health uh board
commission would actually
determine if they were going to
utilize this fund, these taxes
might not have children, so you
and I.
Senator, uh, Woods and Mr.
President have talked about the
cliff effect. This would allow a
county to assist somebody from
available would have the
discretion and here for example
in Santa Fe County.
There is a county um health
advisory board who makes
once a year or once a month, and
then the county commissioners
would identify whether that was
an appropriate use and not get
OK. I think I've got an idea of
it. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Scott, I'm sorry,
Senator Townsend, followed by
Senator Scott. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Senator Townsend. Thank you for
that, um, Mr. President. I'm
trying to
figure out exactly.
People to be covered.
Can you explain what we're doing
here and who's, who were, who
People with undocumented status,
they certainly could.
If they chose to, it's county by
me where they come from and what
they are.
Thank you, Mr. President. They
come, uh, these funds come from
Mr. President, is, is that the
only place they come from? It's
all GRT is where they are
derived from.
gonna have to give me, give me a
little break here, but, uh, Mr.
President, uh, Senator
Steinborn,
These, um,
Uh
These people
If they're not in the system, if
they're not documented, if
they're not paying taxes, how do
we, how do we know that? or is
that?
yeah, I mean, I think by virtue
of being GRT we know they're
paying it because we're all
paying GRT at stores and things
like that. So, uh, I think right
off the bat, we know that every
to. I appreciate that, Mr.
President, what I'm trying to
get to
I, you said they had to to
qualify, they were like 200% of
are if they're not in the system
if they're not paying taxes,
etc.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator. So you know, counties
again determine their own
criteria. By law, they are the
also the ones that get it to
find um proving that eligibility
through income verification or
other means.
So, Mr. President and Senator,
Mr. President, Senator, yes,
that's correct, and that's
existing law. The only thing
this bill does is just add on a
few allowable uses of these
Uh, people, it's just opens up
the door to more, uh, allowable
uses.
Mr. President, yes, that is
With the uh sponsor yield for
multiple questions.
Senator Steinburn yield to
questions. Mr. President, I do.
Senator Scott.
these county indigent funds as a
consequence of this legislation.
Is that correct? Mr. President,
if I understand the question
you're saying it doesn't
increase the total dollar amount
they're collecting, they're
collecting right now if they've
imposed that full GRT.
Um, this just expands the use of
what they can do with that if
they choose.
Thank you, Senator Steinbrene.
Mr. President, um, no, I, in my
county, Donana County, uh, who
are strongly advocating for this
bill, and some others, no, they,
and so they would like to be
able to expand, to be able to
cover more people, and so they
they do have excess capacity in
some communities, Mr. President,
Senator, it's possible that they
Or the folks that utilize or
might be available.
To utilize this funds.
Medicaid one way or another, but
usually, as it's been described
to me, in some cases, it's
because they make just a little
too much to be on Medicaid, but
there's still what's considered,
you know, the working poor.
Thank you Senator Steinborn,
would qualify for these
services.
Mr. President, Senator, it just
depends, uh, you know, I threw
out a ballpark of what's been
told to me in my county, but it
determination of how they define
Inogen. Thank you, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Scott.
And Mr. President,
This
For anyone who comes in and
applies that, that would be
eligible.
Senator Scott, just a reminder
to maintain eye contact with the
chair.
Senator Steinborn.
Thanks, Mr. President. Senator,
yes, you are 100% correct. This
these insurance policies to
these individuals.
And Steinborn.
Well, Mr. President, I guess it
could be from a variety of um
places, but I, I would hope the
further. So,
Mr. President, why would these
folks not already be on the
exchange.
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
can't afford healthcare. It's a
luxury item that when they're
just trying to survive, they're
paying bills as we know the cost
of rent, the cost of energy, and
Thank you, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Scott, you have the
floor.
And Mr. President,
This
These policies.
like country legally. Is that
correct?
Mr. President, Senator, this is
a county by county decision.
status, is that correct? Mr.
President, Senator, yes, this
bill does not have a litmus test
based upon citizenship, and
again, this is a county by
the 33 counties, uh, their
eligibility.
OK, uh, so, Mr. President,
I guess the question would
have little opportunity to have
completely free medical care
available to them.
medical care for folks that are
not in the country legally.
Senator Steinborn.
Well, Mr. President, I think the
case to be made for giving
That's, that's, let's, we'll
start with that. But then in
many cases, they are really
important part of our economy.
And if you're going to
specifically talk about
undocumented community. You're
issue of our country's
immigration laws, our situation,
but
You know, that's the reality of
why you would want to do it. You
would want to do it for pure
Senator Scott, Mr. President,
Senator can't disagree with
that. One last question, how
would one
With
President, um,
You know, that, that gets into
the technical details of how one
buys insurance on the health
exchange, which, frankly, I
don't know if it has a
someone could buy insurance or a
county could procure insurance
for them.
Senator Scott. OK. Thank you,
Mr. President, and thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Senator
yield. Mr. President, I do
yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to make sure I have this
clear. So this, there's no
additional tax or increased tax
rate, you're just saying, hey,
Mr. President, Senator Close,
it's not really expanding who
has access to it. It's the
county controls the funds. It's
just expanding the authorized
uses of those funds that they
can choose to expend them for.
County and I did a little
research, so if my numbers are
correct, Mr. President.
We have since 2023.
it'd be 90,655 people in
Bernalillo County alone who are
currently classified as
indigent. Is my math correct?
Mr. President and Senator, I
again a county by county fund,
um, based upon the GRT and what
they choose to impose as
authorized by law. So I, but I
we pay $3200 a month.
For Presbyterian Healthcare
Insurance.
That's a lot. I don't know that
might be more than the average
working poor, senator, that
they're paying 20 or $30 a month
for insurance. Is, is that what
I heard?
Mr. President, so, so this might
subsidies, one of which is the
New Mexico Healthcare
Affordability Fund, which, by
the way, is paid for by
insurance companies as part of
their uh privilege of doing
it go away, which might be
another reason why this bill
becomes important is federal
health subsidies paid for by the
federal government, and so that
also helps bring down people's
considered end up becoming
incredibly low. Once you go
above like 60, 70, 80,000 a
year.
Those subsidies go away and you
were paying full boat. So it
Thank you Mr. President. So if
the cost is that inexpensive,
why are we expanding access to
this money to pay people's
premiums.
300, 500, 600, 1000 may not seem
like much to you and me, to some
people that, that, that are
living paycheck to paycheck,
which is a great percentage of
our society. It's actually a lot
That's why we created this
county healthcare assistance
fund.
Senator Tobi, I understand, but
I thought I also heard you
increase taxes on energy, so why
wouldn't we just forego those
increased taxes across the board
so that the working poor could
afford their premiums, could
afford their deductible, could
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
I think it does have bearing
because we are overtaxing our
citizens, we're over regulating
business we're making it harder
taxpayer dollars go towards
helping people learn to read,
gain skills, then continuously
find programs and ways to expand
programs to pay for everything
employment and for that reason,
I, I can't support this
legislation. Thank you.
I can send her to bison. We do
have further debate. Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President, so
this really affects 32 counties,
Mr. President and Senator, would
you agree with that, not 33.
Earn Steinborn.
Yes, Miss Pris, I thought I said
because the exception is
Bernalillo County, which
operates on a mill levy.
Um, Mr. President and Senator,
we, we talked about this in
committee, and, um, I asked you
President, Senator, they are
neutral on the bill this year,
but they were in support of it
last year, which is just
something I said at the
beginning of the committee, but
then I made it clear, you know,
the vast amount of counties are
against this bill with only 6
supporting because the
provisions of this bill.
Would not affect the money
flowing in to each county's
because there's no way to put
that money back in unless the
county has to
Fund additional uh money into
this account through its
the counties.
Um, Mr, Mr. President, Senator
is
How many, how many counties are
doing this particular.
Um, policy right now.
I'm, I'm sorry, uh,
how many, no, I don't think
that's correct. How many
counties are actually doing this
is a county by county decision.
This is 100% by law, local
control, local rules governed by
local ordinance, local criteria,
so I, you know, I'm gonna assume
each county might be a little
best practice, as Donana has
done, why, why hasn't it, um,
permeated throughout the entire
state.
Mr. President, Senator, I would
say it has permeated. That's why
the flexibility of what counties
can do this very much in the
spirit of this law. It is a
county healthcare assistance
fund.
Thank you Mr. President. No,
supporting this bill and only 6
of them are, including, by the
way, uh, your, your home county,
which is their prerogative, so.
Um, I, I don't see a reason why
it to the counties, um, but
right now, uh, with the vast
majority of counties actually
not supporting this bill
according to the Mexico
Association of counties, um, I,
the debate, we have Senator
Gallego.
Mr. President, with the sponsor
yield Steinburn to yield. I
yield, you have the floor.
was trying to get just some
understanding, um, Mr.
President, Senator.
A little while ago you talked
about federal, federal subsidies
now that is something that as I
understand it, Congress is
dealing with just generally
speaking.
Oh, Mr. President, Senator, I
disagree with that, uh, I
thought you were in the meeting
President, no, that's
inaccurate. There, we obviously
don't affect federal law, where,
where state lawmaking body, so
this bill has zero bearing.
authorized uses of
Mr. President, Senator, uh, when
you and I talked in committee,
uh, you started out talking
about a lady that had cancer,
the reason you're bringing this
and I presumed we're talking
about immigrants and you had
said that they are domiciled,
not residents, but domiciled in
the county.
That you live in, is that
correct, Mr. President or
you're still talking about
immigrants that are domiciled in
Donana, Mr. President, Senator
Mr. President, she, she, if you
remember the webcast wasn't
here, but that sounds about
right.
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
thank you for, uh, checking that
on, uh, checking on that for me.
I do want to go back, Mr.
President, Senator, just uh
Mr. President, Senator?
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, no,
I, I haven't heard what the
senator reported out today, so I
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
uh, I would hope as you're
running the bill that you'd have
some.
Um, better information on that,
but I'll go on to my next
talking about county to county,
but do we have a total amount
statewide, Mr. President,
Senator?
All right, I was a little
distracted, Mr. President, or
did you ask me how much total
question. I don't know the
answer to it. I know the answer
to Donana County, which is 9
million a year.
Mr. President, Senator, let's
just stay with Don Anne on the 9
million. Do you know, Mr.
This present sinner, yes.
Um, I don't know the answer to
that question, Mr. President.
Well, Mr. President, Senator,
use, and I was just wondering,
Mr. President, Senator, could
you remind me how many
Domiciled individuals you
haven't done in counting.
backwards.
Mr President, Senator, I
appreciate that. I wish I'd get
better notes. I've got my old
bill here, but I don't have what
you stay in committee, but uh, I
users there in Donana currently
Mr. President, Senator.
Well, Mr. President, this is all
100% local discretion. Counties
will decide how they use these
it also depends upon do they
have available funds as I
gathered Donana County has, in
which case it would, it would
not reduce anything, assistance
currently provided to people, it
is, is that, you know, if you
cover someone through health
insurance.
You might actually get them
more.
Support for the same amount of
money is if you're just paying
same amount of money by doing it
smart, which this bill would
allow you to do.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I,
I appreciate that. I, I guess
where I was going.
And,
uh, then that money reduces. I
was just trying to figure out
how many people in Donana you
would be hurting if they are
bill doesn't necessarily mean
you're covering more people,
you're just allowing additional
uses of that fund. So again,
it's all local control how many
on the domiciled individuals in
Dona County, are they eligible
right now for this, Mr.
President, Senator?
Mr. President, and again that
opportunity, so I would think
that Mr. President, Senator,
that would reduce the amount of
money you have allocated out,
but I'll change uh targets on
this, Mr. President, Senator,
distribution go out, Mr.
President, Senator?
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator, you know, that's very
possible that it would be on
receipts. I think that would
make sense if you're paying for
And again, that criteria is
going to be determined 100% of
the local level.
A Miss President Senator, I just
uh wanted to alert you to that
cause I know, uh, EBT cards are
let you know there's some, I, I
would rather go with a direct
payment to an institution
instead of to an individual,
but, uh, Mr. President, my last
question then will be is.
them. Uh, do you have any
projection.
Of the use of this or the
increase if you talked to anyone
that would have, um, uh,
come up about how others might
feel about it. I've not gotten
one.
Email or one phone call or one
visit from anybody in the state
at a county level or otherwise.
about authorization that we're
giving a county government and a
county alone. No other county
can decide how Donana County
uses his funds, and Donana can't
county or the state of New
from anyone other than from
those that are frankly excited
about the bill, um, because it
can allow them to do more.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I
understanding of what we do to
offset some of the cost towards
indigent, but I will yield with
that. Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator Gallegos Cervantes.
beside each other. Uh, Senator,
we, I didn't get a chance to
hear this or see this in any of
the committees that I serve in,
but I, I do have a couple of
questions in my mind, which is
private insurance of an indigent
person in Donana County. Am I
reading that correctly, Mr.
President, Senator, yes, you
are.
And so Senator, the one thing
want to have private insurance,
how we decide how will the
county decide which of those
individuals the county will pay
the health insurance premiums
Donana County that you know
supports this bill, they have
set their own criteria for
eligibility into this fund in
fund, so the county gets to
determine what income
qualifications, or other
qualifications and then those
individuals have to prove their
eligibility to the county, um,
you have assurances in the
county that there are enough
funds to do this equitably, in
other words, uh, what I'm trying
to avoid, Senator, is the fact
that some citizens of Donana
way. So if we say the county is
going to pay for private health
insurance for a certain
individuals in the county will
we have enough.
money in the county to do that
for everyone, and, and how we
because they collect $9 million
a year from this fund. Jamie
Michael, who's county health
director, is my expert witness.
Unfortunately, she's at a Mor
county meeting right now or she
Donana County. So she has
basically assured me of that,
and that's why she's not just
supportive of this bill. They,
they're very enthusiastic about
the bill in Donana County.
Senator Cervantes, Mr.
County has $9 million a year
that they're not fully
utilizing. I think this is uh
something worth discussing, but
I'm still concerned and, and I'm
if this bill passes, the county,
uh, can and will be paid for
private health insurance of the
citizens, and I, I could see
where the surplus that or the
private health insurance
senator, and so that that's my
concern is that, that those
funds, uh, ultimately won't be
nearly enough to pay for private
health insurance and, and the
bill.
insured under this, how many
families and, and, and
ultimately, how would, how do we
do this fairly? How do we make
sure that everybody in the
county gets the equal access to
How do we do this fairly? How do
when when there's finite limited
resources as a government, how
do we make sure everybody gets
the same opportunity and or how
do we avoid saying some
recognize that if the private
insurance, health insurance, uh,
industry learns that the county
is going to be paying for that
private health insurance, that
this fund as well too, so
there's gonna be an incentive
for the private insurance
industry to say, well, uh, the
tax.
Beers of Donana County are going
to pay for the premiums of the
insurance and they're gonna pay
because that's all going to get
paid for out of the county fund
and so I'm, I'm a little
concerned that we're maybe
incentivizing increase in cost
of private health insurance and
Thank you, Mr. President,
Senator, and I do have an answer
actually because the insurance
rates are regulated by the
superintendent of insurance.
We're really talking about a
poverty level that wouldn't even
qualify for this. So really,
we're talking about a negligible
sized group of people again.
The very regulated product by
the superintendent of insurance,
kind of a matter of who's paying
them, so I, I, I kind of
disagree with the premise
because of what I know about the
insurance market and how it's
regulated, and also just kind of
doing the math on the size of
this population.
bill applies to payment by the
county of insurance, private
insurance premiums, among other
things, uh, how for indigent
persons, how many indigent
persons with the county be
paying private insurance for in
Donatta County.
over the whole county in Donana
County being one of the bigger
ones, you can kind of deduce the
math, but I don't exactly know
that number, so I, I don't want
to be quoted on that, but again,
million people, but I don't know
how we could begin to believe
that the fund will be adequate
to pay for private health
insurance for by, by the term of
the bill, what are called
talking about here. I, I'm
incredulous how we could ever
begin to assume we'd have enough
money to, to
Pay private health insurance for
indigent prisons without knowing
how many indigent persons we're
right now, Mr. President, this
fund allows counties to pay for
hospital care for indigent
people. So I'd like you to think
for a moment how much a hospital
bill costs for someone who
doesn't have health insurance.
submit to you, you can get
health insurance for probably
multiple people.
Multiple people, maybe 5 people,
maybe 6 people, maybe 10, maybe
20 people for what it would cost
less people, um, because of
allowing this, I think it's,
it's just again a smarter use of
the funds, Mr. President, and
getting a better outcome because
now somebody has preventative
healthcare, so maybe they don't
consideration that that's
existing law, that this fund is
allowed to be used for ambulance
care, and that's a vastly more
expensive product than providing
a premium for someone who's low
income.
as you said for hospital care
for burial, funeral, things of
that kind, ambulance care. So
those are allowed uses if we
begin to now expand the uses of
this fund to pay for private
think we can all.
see where the problems are going
to come. We're gonna have to,
uh, obviously rely if this bill
passes, we're gonna have to rely
on the county to have a very
is that those who are well
schooled or well advised or have
access to information, we'll be
the ones to have the county
paying for their private health
insurance and the remainder who
are unaware, uh, maybe
proper help, uh, that everyone
else does and so some people are
gonna get their private health
insurance paid for by the county
and others are not, and I'm
gonna look for ways to assure
that the county, if it, if it
are not gonna know to go get the
county to pay for their private
health insurance, so I, I'll,
I'll, uh, I'll continue to
listen and watch this bill
carefully. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Steinberg. We
Thank you, Senator, um, I'm, I'm
one of those people that wasn't
on the committees just went
through, um, but.
I, I wanna ask just a couple of
questions about the indigent
through the state? How, how is
the fund funded?
Mr. President, um, Senator, it
is funded through GRT.
Mr. President, that is correct.
It's funded at a local level and
posed at a local level, funded
at a local level for the local
level.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
is um.
It was spent down. Will the
local government then go out and
raise the GRT rate so they can
get more money into that fund?
No, Mr. President, um, under the
It's up to them to decide how
they want to spend those funds.
This just gives them a couple
more authorized uses, but it
doesn't require them. That's the
important thing. This is not a
mandate.
When we set how much the GRT
rates can be charged locally.
They are already charging the
max that they can.
Mr. President, um, I believe
that's the case.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well,
the speaker yield Mr. President,
Senator, I do.
Um,
Mr. President, so I'm kind of
premiums are on average?
Senator Steinborn.
Mr. President, no, I, I mean, I
use, frankly, my own experience
and knowledge of, of different
Thank you, uh, Mr. Mr. President
and senator.
Are the um so it's my
understanding that this program
serves sort of as a
a little bit to where you could
be a little bit proactive with a
certain population if, if a
county chose to.
So Mr. President and, and
And uh just basically covered
general medical applications, is
that correct?
Mr. President, Senator, yes, uh,
thank you. Under this bill,
basis, but this would expand the
kind of the things that you
mentioned, although I would note
for behavioral health, uh,
because of Senator Hickey, um,
New Mexico is the first law in
the country that doesn't charge
statistics for Donna and Akino
County. Now they're a little
old, a little dated, uh, 2019.
And it says that about 23% of
coverage. So 23% out of 220,000
or so population comes out to be
roughly around 50,000 people.
So we may have to cover 50,000
people with
that would be a 50,000 people
who were to get some kind of
medical coverage, insurance
coverage.
That would be a premium of about
$180 per individual.
a million New Mexicans are on
Medicaid.
And, and so that's half the
state of New Mexico, roughly or
maybe a little less than half
are on Medicaid. So if you look
Um, in a gen covers within
Donana County a population just
a little bit above who don't
actually qualify for Medicaid.
So I think the kind of baseline
numbers of your, um,
you know, as I mentioned, the
premiums are incredibly
affordable for people at this
income level when you buy them
through the exchange, so.
Believe it or not, that amount
of money can go pretty far as
far as buying a premium for
someone.
some of them would be under
Medicaid, but, um,
But even if it's half of that
25,000 again, the the numbers
that are gonna be available to
people who could actually use
I think we're talking about a
considerably more, uh, larger
number of folks who would be
under this and whether or not
this the counties could afford
that is something that's not
clear to me that this bill
colleagues, I appreciate the
good questions and debate and
hopefully, you understand the
bill a little bit better. I
would just stress, Mr. uh,
present colleagues, this is
about local control. This is not
your constituents. And so with
that, Mr. President, I now move
that Senate Bill 45 is amended,
do not pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate for the
record.
showed the role has been called
raise your hand.
Senator share voting now.
Sa Lanier voting no.
Senator Woods voting now.
Senator Tobiasin voting no.
Senator Steinborn.
Apologize, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Paul voting no.
Senator Boone vote now.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator Thornton voting now.
amended has duly passed the
Senate. Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. President,
members of the Senate, Senator
Steinborn. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
placing Senate Bill 290 as
just raises the cost of a
marriage license at the county
filing from $25 up to $55. It
would provide $15 to the county
additional $20 to the county
clerks. This legislation is
sponsored by the New Mexico
Clerk's affiliate and the New
Mexico counties and with that.
us down for questions.
much. Will the senator yield for
a question
or two.
Yes, I do. Senators, you have
the floor.
Mr. President, I do have a
Mr. President, I don't have a
real.
Clear explanation for that, but
I do understand from my, um, uh,
Sun is out.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. Can you tell me why some
of this money is going to go to
the Children's Trust Fund.
trust fund provides um uh
funding to prevent abuse and
neglect of for programs to
prevent abuse and neglect of
children to provide medical,
psychological, and other
abuse and neglect, so the
children's fund, that's the uses
of the money and they uh did
President, thank you very much
for that response. Are we not
helping our abused and neglected
children sufficiently, that's my
question.
Well, Mr. President, I guess my
question is, according to my
county clerk, they might need
we're um so the county general
fund is not increasing, but
there is an increase of $20 so
the county clerk's office has
they've got some very old
records that need to be
preserved and that $20 addition
would help them.
To do that. Well they're not
not amended.
Center is now.
Mr. President, thank you very
much. Uh, can you tell me how
much money is in the children's
trust fund at this time
but I do recall seeing a $20
million transfer from the trust
fund in our, uh, up in Senate
Finance as we're going over the
budget. I can get that answer,
but I don't have that answer
happened with the children's
Trust Fund. It was moved. Did I
understand that right?
funds into some of these
programs, um, so I, I'm assuming
that there's at least the 20
million there, but I don't know
the full amount of what's there.
is asked where it's gonna be
roughly $32,000 increase. It,
uh, that's why I'm reading this
right now.
But whenever we have records in
those records are preserved, so
Mr.
President and
Senator.
I was this just a
item you thought needed to be.
Thank you, Mr. President. The,
the, the purpose of this bill
was to raise the fees by $20 so
that the county clerks can get
go into the county general fund
and to the Children's Trust
Fund. There is no money
currently being given to the
county clerks for things like
records.
um, I, I, I have very highly
support the preservation of our
records that in many cases are
very old, but this legislation
Children's Trust Fund has always
been a part of the money that is
paid when you get a marriage.
surrounding states are charging
for marriage license.
Mr. President, I would ask
unanimous consent to bring my
expert witness in.
Thank you, Senator. If you can
state who your expert witnesses.
allow the expert when it into
the chamber saying no objection.
Sergeants, if you please escort
our expert witness into the
chamber.
So as I once she gets situated,
if you can restate the question.
Mr. President, thank you very
much, Senator Trujillo. My
question was, can you tell me
what surrounding states such as
tell you that, uh, Colorado is
charging $30 for their marriage
fees. El Paso, Texas charges 81
Mr. President.
You do not owe me a cookie,
senator. You did not say the S
word, so you're OK.
I, I threw myself off my game
right here.
Mm
Do you think this would prove uh
Prove any sort of hardship on a
young couple that is wanting to
will, or actually it's an
additional $30 will prohibit
anyone from getting married.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Senators.
Uh, let's see, I'm seeing that
the on the FIR.
Uh, it'll result in additional
Senator,
Mr. President, yes, um, that is
correct and I will just point
out that if funding costs were a
deterrent.
marriage license, all they're
gonna do is cohabitate and not
get married, saving them the
cost of a divorce. Mr.
President, Senator, thank you
very much.
going to ask Senator Sanchez to
yield because I too have some
great concerns with this, you
know, my friend Senator Sanchez
has been a father 5 times. He is
$30 too. I know we can get
cheap, is going to discourage my
friend Josh Sanchez.
from finally tying the knot too.
So he conveniently stepped out
of the chamber, but Senator, I
think we need to give good
I will yield to Senator Brantley
if Senator Brantley had any
other further comments.
Well, Senator Sanchez please
yield, Mr. President Sanchez, do
Senator Sanchez, and the time
that we have been friends, I
have had to purchase a marriage
license and you went through
that process as I got married.
I'm, I'm asking you today,
Senator Sanchez, my concern is
President, I was thinking of
getting married in 2025 now, but
now that the rates are going up,
I don't know if I'm gonna be
able to afford it.
That was my fear. I yield
Sanchez.
Yes, I will, Mr. President, uh,
you know, it's been a long time
since I've been a county clerk.
It was 28 years ago. I can't
believe how fast time goes by.
And back then, the, the rate was
Mr. President, it hasn't been
raised since, uh, wedding
marriage licenses were put on
the books here in New Mexico.
think it's time for, for, for uh
lifting of, of that price, you
know, record preservation
whenever your county clerk is
very important and uh when I was
and, and, uh, you know.
I think that uh that uh system
that we put together needs some
upgrades now and hopefully this
will help out a little bit, but
that's all I have. Thank you
Senator Ramos. We do have
further debate. We have Senator
Brandt.
Thank you, Mr. President. With
the sponsor you?
Yes, I do.
Senator Mr. President, Senator,
I, I think if you're meaning,
how are they funded right now
just to function, it's through
President. Senator, is, is that
one of the jobs of the county
clerk?
Senator Hill, Mr. President,
yes, it is.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, are there any other
licenses that we're wanting to
raise fees or anything else that
the county clerk, uh, takes care
of, or is this just the only one
any other fees that they charge
isn't in our state law
prescribing what it would be.
They can change that or the
county can change that.
Senator Hill.
Mr. President, that's correct.
How much is it now?
Senator Trejil.
Mr. President, the fee right now
is $25.
Well, thank you, Mr. President,
So we're more than doubling the
is that correct?
Mr. President, that's correct.
We're adding $20 to go directly
to the clerks and 5 additional
Um, you know, I, I have filled
out a few of these for people.
I've, I've married several
people in the state of New
Mexico as I am a licensed
minister in the state.
Highway or byway and panhandle a
little bit and I'll probably be
able to afford it in a couple
hours because people just love
to give money to people.
But uh you know it just seems
like, uh.
Thank you, Senator Brandt.
See no further debate.
Senator here, we do apologize,
Senator Padilia Senator Padilla.
Senator Hill.
Mr. President, there is no
expiration for marriage
licenses.
Mr. I just want to clarify that
for the body because I know
Senator Trujillo to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr. President. um, as
I've said, the fees have not
been raised in over 30 years,
um, and what we're trying to do
records retention
responsibilities and really move
us into the future. I will
promise, um, and commit to
Senator Brantly that I will help
On the bill, please.
Mr. President,
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you all senators to
your seats, please. We are
voting.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senator Worth voting now.
Senator Thornton, Senator Lopez
already now.
Sam Munoz voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
By a vote of 27 in the
So.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate. The record shows that
all action for placing Senate
Thank you, Senator C, no
objection if you'll explain your
bill.
So Mr. President, uh,
Um
its model legislation just to
help make sure that we're the
same as we go across the
country. That's all it does.
Thank you, Senator share. Is
there any debate on the bill,
senators?
Senator Munoz.
Munoz, Mr. President, this cover
travel at the spaceport.
Mr. President, actually it does.
So when you come from California
sell this insurance on their
travel on their flights on
Virgin Virgin Galactic.
Mr. President, this is only
earthbound, uh, travel
Mr. President, once you leave,
uh, then I believe you become an
alien, and when you come back,
you're not covered anymore.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Any further debate, senators?
So thank you Mr. President.
Senator, I just, I actually had
to purchase travel insurance
recently, uh, when I went to
was bought online, um, would
this apply to online vendors and
if so, you know, how do we do
that when with the online
this is now done online. And so
again, this is just trying to
keep it so that it's uniform,
uh, as you go from place to
place, you don't have to buy
multiple sets of insurance as
you travel across the country.
You know, several different
types of travel insurance for
that, but I go on cruises
usually at least 1 or 2 a year,
um, and so would I be able to.
Would this apply to those that I
Uh, not all the states are in.
We still lack about 12, but,
but, uh, yes, the whole idea is
that it would be uniform
throughout the nation.
Centerbrand
Mr. President, thank you, and,
you're buying something online,
whether you're getting a
reputable. Thank you, Senator
Brandt.
See no further debate. Senator
guy goes wishes to be center
ego.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I
was just wondering in 1947
there's a really critical crash
in Rosville, New Mexico, with
those illegal immigrants be
covered by this, Mr. President?
that she is related to people
that were on that flight.
Uh, but now if she's now that
she's uh uh an American, uh, I
believe this travel insurance
you would be an American, Mr.
President, Senator?
Uh, Mr. President, actually no,
this travel insurance covers
anybody that's traveling through
bill. Thank you, Mr. President.
I thank you, Senator Galgos.
Seeing no further debate,
Senator sure to close on the
bill.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record showed the
role's been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Senators we vote and all
senators to your seat.
substitute for Senate Bill 168
has duly passed the Senate.
Senator share, is that your
first unanimous bill that you've
passed here in the Senate?
I believe it might be, Mr.
President. Yes, he's give a big
So, Mr. President, just for
Senator Munoz and Senator
Gallegos Nanu Nano.
We go to next item on the
calendar that's gonna be sent,
but yeah, thank you very much,
twice amended on final pass has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution.
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. So what Senate Bill
initiative this year. Uh, it's
designed to make New Mexico more
competitive for recruiting new
industry and investments to the
state, uh, it creates an
development projects so that we
can be competitive with
surrounding states in the
region, and Mr. President, I do.
have an amendment.
Thank you, Senators we are, we
do have a floor amendment the
Center by the to to move the
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
President. I move Senate.
Bill 170 is twice amended
Amendment number 1.
15, essentially we're looking to
strike owned or contracted, and
the reason that this is
necessary is it creates a very
even playing field and
competitive environment for
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
uh, unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Block from the chamber
till he returns or, or in case
of a call.
yield. Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, real quickly, owner
contractors at the owned land
owned by the contractor or the
contractor could be the owner
developer or the contractor can
Mr. President, Senator, so, so
utility can come in and own the
land and then contract with
itself to build that and then
that would be possible.
Senator Munoz, Mr. President,
Senator, how many cases do you
think this could happen with?
potential new project.
Senna Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President.
See no further debate, senators.
We do have further debate.
Senator Cio Lopez.
Or contract it does.
How does it, uh, what, what
problem is it solving, Mr.
President, but we, with the
the uh cabinet secretary come
and meet with her specifically,
so I thought we'd, I answer
that, but, but I'm happy to do
it again, uh, but essentially
what this does is it it ensures
you. That, that's what I
thought, but that's not what I
heard you say, so I, I, I really
appreciate the sponsor for
clarifying it. Thank you Lopez.
Seeing no further debate,
to Senate Bill 170 is twice
amended, uh, do now pass and ask
for a voice vote. Senators,
we're voting on the amendments.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Rosapo name.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, would you yield for
some questions?
Yes, Mr. President, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President.
customers on a quicker basis, 6
months.
So I understand this is to kind
of create an expedited, um,
process for
customers that we have a very
quick timetable and I guess what
I want to know, Mr. President,
is Senator,
Does this bill allow
Senator Pael, uh, yes, Mr.
President, uh, so on 0.1 on does
this expedite um uh utility
approval and what have you for
sites like this that would
thing done, and to get these
things done. What the
legislation does, uh, is it
shrinks that to something less
than 6 or up to 6 months or less
than 6 months, that puts us on
par and, and, and in line with
eternity, and we believe that
that's good, 36 months just
totally knocks us out of the
game. That's 0.1. 0.2 yes, there
would be a potential rate riders
for this particular uh type of
just the right way.
And just as timed process to
make sure that this is working
for us. So we can continue to
create those jobs and bring
those new technologies to New
Mexico, Mr. President.
Thank thank you Mr. President,
I share that goal. What I'm
concerned about with this
legislation is that when you're
talking about a rate rider, when
you're talking about um
financing infrastructure through
And I think what I would love to
see in this approach, if we're
going to move into the spaces, I
would like to see these
perspective industries footing
the bill
not ratepayers, or at least
would really, um, cover the full
cost of this infrastructure.
Center, Mr. President, I'll
answer that in two ways. One,
there will be rules promulgated
by the advisory board that's put
rate writer or the activity of,
of, of uh bringing the utilities
really just to the site and
bringing them on the site. The
developer, the, um, company
wanted to come in, the
innovative company to bring say
exception of maybe utilities
this simply gets it to the
property line to the door over
the line and then all of the
other dollars that need to be
expended to make it work on that
We approve something like this
and energy infrastructure is
funded and.
There's in cost to ratepayers
and then a company goes bust or
the deal doesn't happen. Is
Yeah, Mr. President, good
question, uh, but we can do what
ifs all afternoon and, and, and
we just don't know what those
would be, Mr. President, but I
would say that the utilities are
now at that site that makes that
making the Senate Bill 169,
which we passed out of here last
week out of the Senate, and then
this one put together, I think
you're gonna have 2 and 3 and 4
and 10 companies looking at New
Mexico for
site because New Mexico is gonna
look so much more attractive.
The other nice thing about this,
Mr. President, is it drags the
utilities, if you will, right to
that.
Mr. President, Senator, let me
ask another uh hypothetical
question. I think hypotheticals
are fair because, you know,
we've been around the block long
enough that we know these
proposal to create a site
readiness and say we want to
build, we wanna, we wanna try to
recruit that kind of a company
or that kind of enterprise to a
particular site, could they then
recruit a deal. Could that
happen? or does there have to be
a specific deal attached to this
type of a proposition.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
what the site readiness bill
developers are meeting with, you
know, potential, you know,
employers or companies uh
companies in New Mexico wanting
to expand even not just
companies coming from out of the
utilities are 1.3 miles away
from it or whatever, then that's
when this would actually
be triggered to do that kind of
work.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator. You know, I, I'm
just
this bill is, is hoping to do, I
do worry about, about these rate
riders and about creating
These kinds of responsibilities,
long term obligations on the
that there's enough in this bill
that would make me feel
comfortable about creating that
exposure for ratepayers, uh, but
I'll keep listening. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you, Senator Steinbar. We
Yes, Mr. President, I'll yield.
So, uh, Mr. President, Senator,
Who ultimately pays for all of
ratepayer for whatever utility
that uh utility serviced.
So Mr. President and Senator uh
PNM for instance, uh, covers
the, the, the customers of that
utility, um, all would
essentially benefit by the
economic development, you could
put a a business in Deming but
eventually a secondary possibly
in tertiary type of business
So, Mr. President and Senator,
um, this is a statewide economic
development expansion program.
Is that accurate?
wouldn't be paying anything. Is
that accurate?
Um
Uh yes, Mr. President, so we
did, um, uh, have a couple of
amendments along the way that
did include the rural electric
those ratepayers would be paying
the additional amount.
Mr. President, as our current,
you know, statutes uh call for
the projects that would be
development program, but it
really isn't shared statewide.
Uh, it's shared only by the
people within that particular
utilities district area and so
or in Southwest power or in any
of the other.
uh, rural Electric co ops if
it's not part of their area, you
know, do I, my understanding
correctly, Senator? Mr.
would prevent a utility from
adding new, uh, fossil fuel
generation.
Uh, Mr. President, the ETA that
the ETA does not prohibit adding
additional fossil fuel. I don't
think there's no prohibition. It
just has some targets for the
use of renewables.
So Mr. President, Senator, my
concern is that a utility would
put in additional fossil fuel
need to meet their next target
for the percent of renewables,
uh, that's a real concern. Now
most of the utilities, the way
things are currently structured
have not been meeting the
targets as they are, uh, yet.
current language and then about
how to meet current capacity and
yet this adds a whole new
paid for by
Individual ratepayers within
those utilities and that doesn't
seem fair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Souls, we
have further debate.
sponsor yield
I'll yield, Mr. President. Thank
you, Mr. President, how long
does it typically typically take
the PRC to approve, modify or
state of New Mexico is it's on
average about 36 months, Mr.
President, and that far out, uh,
exceeds neighboring states and
and this region of the country.
Entity, isn't that correct?
Mr. President,
uh, yes, Mr. President, that is
correct.
So we're
We're telling them that they
their part of the puzzle, their
ingredient in the, the cake to
stand it up just like there are
multiple other things that have
to happen, you know, you could
say that uh universities, Mr.
there. But uh the the fact that
that the um uh uh review and
approval process is 30.
6 months is why New Mexico is
just simply flown over whenever
these larger projects take a
look at us.
it's 36 months, um, isn't it
possible that we could work to,
um,
Lower this for everybody instead
of for these special projects.
Senator Padilla
that were already something that
was, was happening for our
state. This is incredibly
important. This totally puts New
Mexico in the game versus today,
Because Mr. President, these are
special companies that the
economic department certifies
will support reasonably
anticipated economic development
development. If you recall that
was a concern I had with the
last bill, Mr. President.
there.
Uh, Mr. President, I am gonna
Thank you, Senators. It's been a
unanimous consent request to
allow expert witness into the
chamber.
Sean
Sergeant Roger, you please
escort the secretary into the
chamber.
What guidelines are there, Mr.
President, to um for the
economic development project to
be identified as something that
is reasonably anticipated
takes 36 months to get through,
um, the PRC and the and now this
bill is gonna require them to
do.
We're it's gonna be us ordering
a constitutionally created
Thank you Saneria Lopez. Senator
Padilla, uh, thank you very
much, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, excellent question.
I mean, at the end of the day,
the, the, the objective is to
to do anything outside of their
current responsibility. We
simply want them to do it in a
manner and time that is, that is
quicker and that the satisfies
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator Celio Lopez.
Mr. President, I, um.
worries that I had before with
the other bill about the
potential for for corruption,
the parental the potential for
for self dealing and I just
don't understand how these
Any kind of business in the
state, the anticipation is that
they will be.
They will develop, you know,
have economic development, but
this bill doesn't refer to those
Thank you Senator C Lopez, Senor
Padilla,
thank you, Mr. President, but
yes, so essentially when a
project is actually identified,
uh, there's going to be a number
of due diligence steps that need
we have a handshake and, and,
and document uh delivery, then
suddenly the, the doc the
proposal comes together on, on
what we need that site to have
in order for that deal to be
closed. So nothing actually.
also satisfy what we need to do
to make those deals possible.
Senercia Lopez.
Mr. President, so these
companies will be able to get
With the lack of guardrails for
choosing these companies.
Senator Padil. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Well, I, I think
there might have been a couple
to. Second, on the ratepayers, I
don't want it to be lost in this
conversation, Mr. President,
that, uh, the, the, the area
that that company's gonna go
into is gonna benefit greatly
pay to provide those jobs and,
and all the things that happen,
schools, roads, you name it. So
I, I, I don't want that to be
lost, so it's not like you're
simply a ratepayer's, you know,
paying for this to happen, and
then they get nothing for it.
appreciate the, the amendment
that was made, um, to make, to
make it a level playing field
and I also do appreciate that in
the companion bill there is now
the bill stronger, but, um, I, I
just got a text that says.
That 36 months is not the case
now the PRC takes 9 months with
I, I, Mr. President, is that
Um, what do you say about that?
the day, this absolutely is
attempting to speed that process
up. Now we say speed it up, Mr.
President, but a lot happens to
us in life over 6 months and,
everybody that's an entire half
of a year to get their work done
on this, and I don't think that
that's too much to ask, uh, to
make sure that we deliver, say
5000 jobs down at the, the uh
a horrendous activity thankfully
they still selected us. But I
don't ever want to be overlooked
for projects like that ever
again, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator Lo Mr. President, I'm
this, um, I don't want to out
the person, um.
Thank you socia Lopez. So 62-96
says that.
Um
So Mr. President, uh, it's
actually 9 to 15 months. Thank
you, Senator Maestas for
grabbing that for Senator
Sadillo Lopez. I appreciate you
a reminder to go through the
chair. Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Mr. President. I, um.
This reminds me of when we were
debating the ETA and I had such
um.
Like I say, I, I, I have to ask
people to explain it to me in a
way that I can understand, but
what I do understand about this
bill is I am concerned about the
rails with regard to who gets
this benefit it turns out that
that benefit isn't as great as I
thought it's not 36 down to 6,
it's more like cutting it in
up to the economic development
department to determine whether
they get the benefit and I don't
see it's just a certification.
of reasonably anticipated
economic development, so I still
queasy when we're giving
benefits to businesses, um.
An industry and it's unclear
what we're getting in return.
someti you know, they're just
problems that we have to worry
about and the reason I stand up
and and say these problems is so
that the entities that make
are his um transparent as
possible, as fair as possible,
and that these certifications by
the economic development are as
fair as possible, um, and I
guess I have one last, last, uh.
I was president, yes, uh, much
like almost all of our
legislation that changes
something, there'll be, there
will be rulemaking that PRC is
going to need to do. There'll be
rulemaking by the Economic
these issues that I'm concerned
about the transparency, um, the
guard rails, um, the fairness. I
debate. Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President.
So,
We've got this deal called LEDA.
And I'm not gonna ask you, uh,
the senator to Yale.
But each one of these is funded
by the taxpayer.
And the economic development
I'm great for the concern
everybody has.
For the ratepayer, but the
taxpayer is one you don't seem
to have so much concern for on
some of this stuff.
It's a very small charge if you
spread it over the whole deal
and, uh, you know, when John
Arthur used to tell me all the
It's going to be an increase
that we demand.
But what's the difference
between that and
Funding
Leader
Inject.
may not be in your neighborhood,
and it may be,
An area
That has nothing to do with you
all the way across the state.
to get more electricity and
bigger line.
And creating more places for it
to flow.
You want to have charging
taxpayer pay for that.
The taxpayer can't pay for 8
$80,000 charging stations.
He can't put enough of them in
to satisfy what you want them to
Not by piecework.
This is probably one of the best
ideas I heard. I've been trying
How do you let a utility
increase its service size.
I love you, sir. I'll watch you
for real close.
Without a return on investment.
This is a small amount of return
done.
But
We're trying it. From what I
understood, I heard in there all
the time, Mr. President.
and sat beside that electric
charger.
We've got to have some other
kind of generation doing it.
The whole deal down there in the
oil patch right now needs
To natural gas generators.
They could save a lot of carbon
output right there.
But you're hung up.
this through technology, Mr.
President. This is just a dang
good start to get some places
where we can bring in industry.
And then that goes to the point,
8 times in the last 12 years.
For the average growth of rate.
Of 4000 people.
The the chamber needs to figure
out where they want economic
growth or not.
Whether they want
Our citizens to prosper.
Or they want them to be poor
from now on.
When we go to vote for, for a
roll call vote on this, Mr.
President, because I want to see
who wants economic growth and
who does it. Thank you, Mr.
President.
questions, and I will say that
um we can't keep doing business
as usual, Mr. President. We do
need to try new things, and
that's exactly what this piece
of legislation does. Uh, we did
creation sign when folks, when
companies and various
organizations look at New Mexico
and I think that's exactly what.
does, Mr. President. So I, I
with that I will uh ask Mr.
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands. Thank you, Senator
Roll call.
Thank you, Senator, Senators,
we're voting.
I'll send it to your seats.
There has been a request for a
Senator Bergman yes
Senator Bergman yesen Brant.
Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Brantley.
Center Charlie Bosent do hit no
center is.
Hamlin votes yes, Hickey votes
yes Sanmio.
votes no. Center.
Sannava votesin O'Malley.
Center Paul votes yes votes no.
Senator Pope. No. Senator Pope
votes no. San Ramos. Santo Ramos
centeredia Lopez. No. Cents
votes no. San Stephanics.
Yes.
By a vote of 31 in the
affirmative, 10, the negative
Senate Bill 170 is 3 times
amended has passed the Senate,
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
joint resolution 15 that Senator
Souls and Senator Scherer. So I
yield to Senator Soles and
share.
See no objection. We're still in
that order of business start
resolution 15 on final passage
has been taken. That's now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator so to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President and
are to pass all the way through
both chambers, they would go to
the voters for approval because
there are changes to the state
constitution. This particular
But what this particular bill or
um memorial or a resolution,
excuse me, I'll get the wording
right, the resolution does is it
leadership in education is
critically important for our
children to learn well and
effectively and in the time from
2004 when under Bill Richardson,
A number of different
secretaries of Education, most
recently, quite a number through
this particular governor,
education policy. What this does
is it tries to move back to
where we have more stability in
the 1st 30 to 40 years of having
a state.
Superintendents of schools.
This, yeah, you get your
language twisted all the time.
This moves back to where we
would have a state board.
In it
It lists
like to put out for
consideration.
Senator, Senator share did you
wish to.
Add to President, after the
amendment. Thank you. We do have
a floor amendment the reader to
Thank you, Mr. President. On the
amendment, if you're looking at
the bill on page 2, line 1314,
it says the board shall appoint
a qualified experienced New
amendment, all it does is after
New Mexico adds New Mexico
eligible licensed educational
administrator that would allow
anybody to come in to a national
search and be.
Senators were debating Senate
floor member number one.
See no debates on the amendment
center our souls to close on the
one, do now pass, and I ask for
a voice vote. There's been a
request to adopt Senate floor
amendment number one. All those
in favor signify by saying I.
Those opposed know.
Um, thank you, Mr. President. So
there's a couple things.
When we changed this, it's
because we thought that we were
failing in education and so
NAEP scores, that's the National
Assessment of Education
Progress. That's really the only
way to compare apples to apples
and oranges to oranges, although
there's a lot of other things
here.
Defense schools and so we're 52.
And
Before the change.
This was for 4th grade math.
Before the change, we were 33.
But we were 26 in reading.
Before the change.
And then 8th grade math, 52 to
32, or the other way around. So,
what this does is it puts us
back more like we were before,
and hopefully that helps
stabilize the leadership problem
because I believe with any
organization,
nothing gets done.
So the idea is to put stability
back into leadership, so that we
can make this thing go the
direction we really wanted it to
go.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
further debates on the bill,
we've worked so hard on
education and they're then we've
um.
I know there hasn't been a lot
Mr. President, do you
With a board that is going to be
constantly turning over with
these various appointments, um,
how do you think that's gonna
the members that are appointed
to this board could be appointed
for multiple terms they just
come up for reappointment every
4 years.
Senator Lopez.
be and Senator, I think it would
be far less political than it
currently is. Uh, the members of
the, that would be appointing
run for election who have no
understanding about medicine.
This would be a similar type
thing. It would be an appointed
board of
By of educators, they have to be
see this as many, the same thing
as many boards that we have, um.
Really it's connections that
that um affect who who uh you
board or appointed PED chair
where the accountability ends
with the governor's office. This
is gonna create another, another
superintendent in the past, uh,
the accountability ended with
the superintendent. The main
role of the 15 member board at
that time was really to
disagreement between the
The legislative body us and the
governor appointed Secretary of
Mr
President, that, that I guess is
my concern. I think it's diffuse
accountability because I don't
think the accountability stops
If it's like a board of regents,
there's a lot of politics on a
board like that, Mr. President.
So I, I guess I just don't think
that it's gonna take politics if
we've only had this that what we
have now, I believe we've only
had it for, well, Mr. President,
how long have we had this, um,
process with the PED head
Mister President, was because we
weren't doing well.
And so now we're still not doing
well and so we're gonna go back
to something where we didn't do
well.
consolidate more power in the
executive rather than in the
legislative or in the Department
of Education.
Senor Lopez.
Well, that's interesting because
that's not how um.
Uh, thank you.
Do you think it will be easier
to attract a national level
Mr. President, yes, I do, and I
think it would take some of the
politics out of it, depending on
who's in the governor's office.
We have a huge swings in
education policy. This would
different groups again, the
sheet, you know, we've got a
list of what those might look
like who would be doing the
appointments.
But that can't be in the actual
majority and appointment, House
minority and appointment, tribes
and nations and appointments,
superintendents association and
appointment teachers unions and
appointment and charter schools
and appointment. And again,
than political appointees. Mr.
President, what is an
educational background? How
would you define that?
Mr. President, typically those
would be teachers,
in the enabling language and is
not included in the actual
resolution.
Thank you center soul, Center
Cia Lopez.
So this, so this uh
constitutional amendment
for approval and then the
enabling language that works out
the deal, the details of
definitions, uh, who would
actually be on the board, those
Mr. President, if what I
understand from it is no,
there's an awful lot that goes
into who would be the appointed
member, the nine-member board,
representation.
Mr. President, I think you know
as we look at who, at least I
would envision, I think my
association, people who are
regularly working on education
issues and when it says
superintendents association,
that doesn't mean a
superintendent serves on it,
they would make an appointment.
Mr. Mr. President, Senator, I'm
not sure we can ever make
absolute assurances, uh, my
guests knowing educators is it's
important to all of us to that
since I guess since the Yazi,
uh, the, the Yazi Martinez v.
Martinez legislation, um.
I mean, uh, case law or case
the issues that were laid out in
that opinion, at least not in a
visible way of involving the
community in the decision making
with regard to their children,
where they are and I guess I
felt like
was being made on that in PED.
More, more recently and just
figure out what the Yazi case
means having a board start the
new board read the Yazi case,
decide whether they're going to
do about, do about it, what
search, of course, and then
we'll have to, we'll it'll set
us back, um, and so I, I can't
vote for this because I do feel
the bottom line is I feel that
progress, changing the rules is
just for me, it's not at the
right time, Mr. President, thank
you.
Thank you. We do have further
debate. We have Senator Trujillo
followed by S Lanier, Senator
co-sponsors are happy to take
questions too if it's
appropriate for them, so.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, my
questions are, are pretty much
inconsistency. Would that be
correct?
Center souls
Mr. President, I think that's a
President. So I just want to
put a little um saving grace for
my dear friend Veronica Garcia,
uh, and her reputation, she was
the only secretary of Public
was uh superintendent for our
secretary for most of the prior
administration, the turnover in
secretaries has really been just
recently and so I agree that a
had consistency in the past, and
I believe that we can find ways
to have consistency in the
future. Um, I do think that
there's other ways that we can
removed from office would be
through.
uh malfeasance or, um, you know,
uh, some of the other language
that we use for other positions
President, I would just ask, it
seems like another thing that
I've become aware of is the uh
lack of agreement with the
policies of appointed
Uh, my motivation is more of
the, the huge swings in
education policy across
administrations, uh, and trying
to get some consistency. I also
having an appointed board that
then has staggered terms.
Um,
your suggestion about a six-term
agree with, but then has 6 years
in there in opposition to the
current governor if we had it
still as a secretary.
Thank you Senator. So Senator
Trujillo thank you, Mr.
that we disagree with or they're
extreme on a side that we agree
with and, and I, I will tell you
that had I been still in the
house, um, what, 6 years ago now
people standing up and saying we
have got to do something to
change the way that we're doing
this, but I realized that that
really isn't the right way to
have come before me and the body
on the other side of the house
have spent a tremendous amount
of time.
Serving on the um LESC for the 4
underlying factors that we need
to have, and I just don't think
that changing from one governing
authority to another is gonna
get us to that point. I think
in a strong opposition to this,
but I appreciate the opportunity
to share.
my thoughts. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Senator Senator.
um, we had a, a state school
board before and then, uh, Mr.
Richardson's or Governor
Richardson took it away.
And then, um, I got to work on
Or you, your state schools for
that fact.
It, it bothers me that we're
willing to let, uh, someone in
Senate Senator Sher, do you
yield?
He did say the kind senator. I
was, I was going to ask if I was
the kind senator, but certainly,
Mr. President
Mr. President, as far as I can
tell, none of us have,
especially the members of this
uh, uh, the co-sponsors here,
all the members of the BS
Mr. President, certainly we
have, uh, done things and had to
undo them in the future, uh, and
I think this falls within that
category of something that we
can be a leader by having a
state board of education and
Superintendent who are made up
of stakeholders in education
rather than political
appointees.
Send in there.
know that governor Governor
Richardson had the, the best
intentions with this and, and
this legislature had a, a great
idea that this was going to work
having a board of education, uh,
where we can
Visit with more than just 1 or 2
people, um, not that it's hard
to get into a governor's office,
something right and so if this
bill will help clean that up,
um, I'm, I'm in favor of that.
I do have one more question for
For a Republican, if there was a
Republican governor.
In, in the office now, would you
still vote for this bill?
Send Mr. President, yes, since
Neville, uh, various other ones.
I think this is good government.
This is not because it's
Democrats or Republicans. I
think what this does for both
Uh, thank you, Senator Souls,
and, uh, Mr. President, same
question to, uh, Senator
Sheriff, if he will yield,
yes, Mr. President. uh,
uh, we supported it under
Senator.
Are under Governor Martinez, uh,
we supported it under Governor.
Uh, Lujan Grisham. So I think
that this is not a partisan
here in support of this bill
and, and I hope, and I encourage
the rest of this chamber to
agree and
To make sure that we are always
the sponsor you.
Sinner souls do yield. Yes, Mr.
President, I. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
souls and, and appreciate you.
Bringing this forward in the
And souls, Mr. President, yes,
that one I asked the uh floor
leader to leave lying on the
uh, very similar to what the
board had been in the past. The
problem with that is the charter
schools wanted to make sure that
the PEC still existed, which is
10 elected members of the PEC
The Board of Education, which I
thought was very confusing and
would be difficult. Uh, we also
know from those elections for
the PEC that most of those go
to that with a very strong
agenda either very far right or
very far left. This requires
that it would be educators that
are on the board making
education decisions about the
superintendent.
mentioned the, the, the, the
PEC, the, the public education
commission and that commission
has uh 10 elected members from
10 districts and right now one
Why would, why wouldn't this
board do that? Why would we,
with all due respect to the
commission, why would we need
the commission to remain.
And so,
board of education and we're
left with kind of not much they
to do and we decided to put them
in charge of the statewide
charter schools. As a result,
schools are meeting high levels
and standards and really have
done quite a good job with that.
We don't want to change that
portion of the charter school,
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator So
that explains why, why the bill
remain keeps them in or the
resolution rather, but it makes
back to uh a body to to appoint
the secretary or now appoint the
superintendent and then we, we
keep a duplicative board so that
that kind of makes no sense to
me. Also, secondly, Mr.
are uh unchallenged. It's
because, uh, of, of the task if,
if.
We had an elected board that
chose a superintendent, that
would get a lot of, a lot of
to be appointed, uh, but does
not uh list the appointees that
would be in the enabling
legislation of the sponsor, Mr.
President, suggests that that's
the way we do it. That's the way
the ethics commission portion of
the constitution as we put in
who appoints so we where there
is a precedent, Mr. President,
in our state's constitution with
These board members would be
what requirements would be on
the board members, Mr.
President, Senator Soles
in terms of qualifications, Mr.
President.
in New Mexico have knowledge and
experience with public education
in New Mexico and are appointed
as provided by law.
Thank you Mr. President, Senator
Soles and then also the
superintendent would have to be
a New Mexican, which is kind of
cool, but you we shouldn't limit
ourselves to hiring the best and
brightest person we can, uh,
throughout the nation the, um,
and lastly, Mr. President, uh,
49, 50th depending on what
matrix you use.
And uh we have to acknowledge
who's in, who, who's making
it and there's tremendous
leadership now but historically
it's been very rigid to change.
It's not conservative ideology
ideologically but it's
conservative in terms of
very difficult, uh, because the,
the educators are kind of dug
into their, their beliefs and,
and they have tremendous uh
credibility with regards to
those beliefs because they're
educators.
bureaucratic ways of thinking as
it comes to education, uh, the,
uh, the science of reading
other, uh, cutting edge uh.
Uh, educational proposals,
with with this point, you know,
and, and our educators are
tremendous, our teachers, our
principals, our superintendents
don't wanna take anything away
from them, but I think, uh, as
uh, a Frenchman from World War
One who he was a statesman and
prime minister during World War
One and he stated, um.
That that war is too important
to be left only to the generals.
the educators. I, I stand
opposed to the resolution. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator Maestas. We have Senator
Lopez.
Richardson, uh, proposed.
The uh you know, the legislation
for us to change.
And Mr. President, I was chair
of the Rules Committee at that
time, and I was the only person
who voted no.
Secretary Garcia was wonderful.
But
I think Mr. President, what's
missing is community input.
A good cross section from rural
and, you know, the larger school
districts.
To really see how we can
So I do have one question from
Senator Ses just to ask Senator
or Senator Sheer, whichever,
whoever wants to answer, Mr.
President, whoever you choose.
I
Mr. President, um, and senator.
I think my concern, you know,
and I was a principal under the
old system. I was an
Politics and public relations in
education administration, um,
and at the time we had just had
absolutely no experience in
education and another who was a
longtime educator.
Most of the people thought that
it was a shoe-in for the person
who was the longtime educator
and didn't do a whole lot of
And invited the newly elected
state school board member to
come in and talk to my class
about his thoughts and ideas for
told my class.
Don't take your children to
public health to get vaccinated.
That's when they implant the
microchips so we can track them.
questions. After about an hour,
they came back. It's like, who
is this guy? Why did you invite
this person? I said, this is
your elected state Board of
Education member.
elections at the time had no one
in opposition.
And usually flew way under the
radar which allowed people who
were unqualified in education to
high quality education. The idea
behind having an appointed board
instead of an elected board is
to make sure that the people who
explanation, um, Mr. President,
I know we're not supposed to
discuss other legislation, but I
know there's some other
measures.
Um, that I think will be
need to be able to elect just as
we don't go do for our local
school boards.
may not agree with them all the
time, but I think that's
imperative for communities to
get engaged.
have further debate with Senator
Nava followed by Senator
Cervantes and Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. President. I will
the sponsor of the, uh, Bill
statewide board would be better
than a Secretary of Ed?
Mr. President, I don't think
there's data for nor against.
There's a wide variety of
governance mechanisms across the
country.
No.
believe I asked a few questions
about the amount of secretaries
that served during Governor
Richardson's Martinez and Lujan
Grishams and I believe the data
Mr. President,
Yes, depending on if you count
interims and things of that
sort, the numbers might be a
little different, but yes,
essentially.
And another.
Mr. President and Senator, no,
this would just be for the K-12
space. Um, I was a psych major,
so let me see if I can channel
where you're going with this a
with as they also worked with
CYFD and various other state
agencies and things. And so it
doesn't keep, uh, this person in
any way or limit their ability
Senator Soles in reviewing all
the materials for this, uh,
Senate joint resolution, um, as
you all may know, I come to this
chamber as a mentee of former
versus the passage of uh the
implementation of the secretary.
And one of the things that she
mentioned that most really sort
Mr. President and Senator, no,
it doesn't. I was very active in
public schools as a principal
during the prior, uh, mechanism,
if you will, of having a state
within government as well.
Center Nova
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Soulles. uh, Mr.
President, Senator Souls, do you
have a comparison of the funding
only way that you might be able
to make comparisons because of
inflation and budgets and things
of that sort, uh, might be based
on what the percentage of the
approximately 50% of the state
budget was spent on K-12
education. It's now about 42% of
the state.
budget is spent on education,
uh, which would indicate a
was a superintendent or a
secretary, but to answer your
question, there was
substantially more percent of
the state budget went to
education under the old system.
the equity in terms of
secretaries, I am concerned
about ensuring that they have a
seat at the table and ensuring
that they're advocating for the
funding that's necessary, um,
around, um, but in doing the
contrast, I would also point
Mr. President and Senator, the
times are not the same. Times
are different and several
members have mentioned the
is not the same time the, the
political system right now is
not operating in the same manner
that it was back in that day and
I would caution folks to
reverting to a system that was
does not equivalent to um the
notion that this would happen
repeatedly, so I would
respectfully opposed to this
piece of legislation. Thank you
may want Senator Sher, who was
earlier in the debate to yield,
he referred to these NAOP scores
and me not being on the
education committee and involved
comparisons student scores.
Senators, Mr. President,
Senator, I, it's, I think
they're called the NAEP scores,
the National Assessment of
uh, they get the right term, a
representative sample of
students from each state, so not
every student is being sampled,
but it is statistically accurate
but 28% proficient in reading,
22% proficient in math, all of
those scores, that's what we're
typically talking about. Senator
Scherer indicated that back
President, if I would ask
Senator Sher just to yield on
those statistics just very, very
quickly. I just want to have a
good understanding, um.
I, I'm, I'm wondering with my
fifty-fifth or what, whatever it
may be, I'm, I'm, how, how are
we gonna work when we get in
Greenland, Puerto Rico, and
Canada.
Defense school system that
operates here.
So that's where you get the 53
from.
Uh, I do believe that the, uh,
Greenlanders probably speak
better English than most of us
Panama. So I was, uh, forgetting
about Panama as well too, but
I'm, I'm hoping that, uh, on a
serious note, we'll get beyond
the silliness that we see out of
Washington DC and come back home
that resonate with me still,
which is he wanted greater
account.
ability
And he wanted a greater
opportunity to affect immediate
change.
commissions and having served on
those and still serving on some
of those I've, I've got to say
that boards and commissions are
not where you affect.
Prompt immediate change.
And boards and commissions are
on a board or commission that
affects prompt immediate
effective, decisive,
transformative change.
But I've seen individuals do so
in fact, really to my dismay,
radical change taking place in
our country at the hands of
maybe 1 or 2 individuals.
And that that's maybe not a good
way to oppose this bill to
When they want to take the
wheel, and that's what I recall
about Governor Richardson's
argument at the time was he
wanted to be in charge.
And he wanted to be accountable
and maybe he failed.
heard the argument made here
today. We need stability.
And as a businessman and
somebody who's been around this
government for a long time, you
But when you're on the verge of
bankruptcy.
And you're losing year after
year after year. Sometimes you
got to change the coach.
coach.
I'm looking at you there,
Lieutenant Governor. You've,
you've coached a lot of teams.
It takes decisive accountable
leadership.
And
years ago, we said, uh, publicly
here in Santa Fe, we need a
moonshot.
In education
A moonshot
And that's something I would
It was the actions of.
Transformative leader.
Who challenged us to bring about
that change.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. So
we have Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. President. I do
Where New Mexico is now ranked
at the bottom of the nation in
education.
8 years in a row.
8 years in a row.
61%.
77% of our eighth graders cannot
do math.
We are failing our kids.
Everything else we're talking
about here doesn't matter.
We are failing our kids.
have now been 12 years in a row
at the bottom of the barrel and
so whether or not this is gonna
work.
Whether or not a change and
going back to the state board of
There's no way to cut it.
There's no way to change it.
And if you care about our kids,
we've got to do something
different.
But we also need accountability
and right now everyone in this
legislature is accountable for
the fact that we are ranked 50th
Um
With one of the senators yield
yield.
Yes, Mr. President.
remember right, from like 25th
to 33rd place.
Uh, before we made the change,
is that correct?
Yes, Mr. President, depending
Mr. President and Senator share
Do you know prior to that, had
we
Do you know how, how our our
So, Mr. President, I actually
was trying to do some, some
greater research, uh, the
rankings that I gave you were in
the 90s just prior to this
change.
Uh, I actually wanted to know
get it down here, but
I my feeling is that we were
doing better then. We were
always in the middle of the
pack. We were never on the top,
but we were in the middle of the
pack.
Senator Sheriff based on what I
have looked, um, those are the
numbers we were middle range,
uh, for decades.
to make it better. I think
that's what we all should do,
and I, and I have, I take no,
no.
Opposition with that, but I was
sitting here thinking.
Uh, Mr. President.
Uh, for school.
Systems.
And I was trying to remember the
last time that I had a
They are really knocking it out
of the park.
I haven't heard that.
For 10 years from 4 different
districts.
I haven't heard.
I, I really appreciate what
Senator Souls did in making the
change in his bill. He came to
the first couple of committees.
I was following the bill.
appreciate that because the
intent here.
is not
Well, it shouldn't be anything
but making the metrics of our
They will live with the
education that they've received
for a lifetime. That's a long
time.
To be 50th.
I think we have learned and
we're going to be better going
forward because of it.
I believe this legislation.
For students failing.
I do not believe we have the
worst teachers.
In America.
I don't believe that for a
second.
So instead of worrying about
whether this might work.
I think we have the
responsibility.
Senator Sher, do you know how
many states have school boards
today.
Um, Mr. President,
answer, but it's somewhere on
the order of 45 or 46 of the
states have some sort of a
school board.
Mr. President, Senator Soz,
Um, 45 states do this.
Now look,
I know we sometimes in the
Mexico want to
choice but to try something that
will work.
That has worked before.
And our children deserve it. I,
I'm like,
I would rather empower a group
to go make.
changes that will work.
When you look at
Charter schools today.
So, I, um, I'm in full support
of this piece of legislation. I
wish we didn't have to be here.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Sheriff. Thank you
Senators.
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
resolution 15, uh, comes with
mixed feelings, uh, Senator
Townsend and I got to meet with
Secretary Steinhaus years ago
during COVID.
nation.
And I do understand that we're
8th year in a row that we're at
the bottom of the barrel. I do
believe we politicize this.
Thank Mr. President, I just
wondered earlier I walked in and
serve mysis was talking about
me comfort that we would have
rural representation when this
is completed in the enabling
legislation, Mr.
President Senator Senator.
So, Mr. President, not in the
clarifies what, what the task is
and then the enabling
legislation makes it happen.
So
I think what we can do here is
governor's office.
The Senate majority, Senate
minority, each get one. House
majority, House minority each
get one. Someone representing
schools and so that would make
up the board, but
In this case, they could serve
as long as they were doing the
right job. So in this case, uh,
hey, this guy's still doing a
great job. We're gonna go ahead
and keep her, whatever.
So it's not
Uh, it, it, it
It gives you that diversity that
we were talking about. It also
Senator, thank you for that. Uh,
I do get a little bit of comfort
knowing that there's some.
Uh guidelines on who can be
appointed, uh, I sent out
concern, but one of them sent
out a note that says that his
biggest fears we do nothing.
If this bill doesn't pass now,
continue down that track, and I
truly believe, Mr. President,
Senator, as Senator Nova brought
up.
Earlier, about how many times
still right on the edge of a no,
but uh I look forward to more
debate. Thank you, Mr.
President. I ye. Thank you,
Senator. There he goes.
it's OK with uh Senator Souls,
I'd like to make some closing
comments and then let him
actually close.
So first, uh, Mr. President,
what I just read is not
the
The Constitutional amendments.
Uh
Or best if they're short and not
long drawn out with uh
Because even under Governor
Richardson, who wanted to take
charge and be, uh, JFK like and
I do think that the previous
Senator Nova and I disagreed on
this, just like the current
senator Nava and I disagree on
this, but
legislation eventually, and
that's where you, you talk about
that. This is a big conversation
in everything we do now. And
even in the, the draft of what
one of the members of our, of
our caucus happens to be there.
You will notice that.
At least a couple of members of
our caucus can play golf, but
not all of us, a couple of us
know how to fly an airplane, but
When we turned this over to the
governor.
It's because we expected
these last 20 years. And then it
was commented in there about the
Martineziai lawsuit.
Well, that really started in
gosh, we're just now starting to
do something, uh, well, 2014.
when that started, it took us.
More than a decade to get to.
school districts, we try to
figure out what's the
difference?
What's really the difference?
Some people say, oh, it's
poverty or it's ethnicity or
whatever.
It's when the superintendent is
changed frequently.
That the school district has no
guidance. They don't know what
they're doing. They just
flounder around as the as the
direction.
There was a question about.
Is this better or worse?
Now
Is it just because of the change
in school board versus the
governor?
Probably not, but that's
certainly part of it.
And I knew Mike Davis.
And I think he was a good uh
superintendent.
Of Veronica Garcia came in as
the first governor's, uh,
But somewhere along the way, we
lost sight of education and we
added politics.
And so when we do all of this, I
think that the effort here
Not on anything else,
non-political education focused,
and I want to end, Mr.
President.
With this quote
This is too important to be left
Uh, first, I think it was
Senator Maestas that was
concerned about not being able
to do a national search. Uh, we
had an amendment right at the
beginning of this bill that
included that is eligible for a
discussion about boards and
appointments of leadership, I
think in most cases,
is the leader of the team is
usually somebody who is
appointed by the board or the
than your local board of
education, local boards of
education meet up to 4 or more
times per month and are very
involved in the day to day
workings of
a year. Their primary focus is
on hiring the top official for
the public education.
position in the state. And so in
for a long time under the old
system and under this system
that I've seen the
politicization of education
state of New Mexico, but we need
to have stability, we need to
have stability across
administrations. We need to have
people who running education who
are there because they care
entirely to make sure we focus
education on students and
student outcomes and student
achievement, not on who's in
office, not on who's in.
the governor's office, not on
to this really, if this were to
pass the voters would be the
enabling legislation. I heard
several people very concerned
about whether there would be
other sort or other interest
group, that would be the
enabling legislation. What we
proposed is just what was in my
head about getting good
makes the appointment, um, I
think back, you know, and I
think as several of our very
good school districts in the
state of New Mexico.
right now and uh many of you may
I would absolutely support that.
And if some of the other groups
didn't, then I would recommend
that as an appointment from, for
instance, the Senate majority,
if that were to be one of the
President, I move that Senate
Joint resolution 15 as amended
do now.
Pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record or
that I asked for a boy, uh, a
And Senate Joint Resolution 15
as amended clerk to call the
roll.
Center Brandt votes, Senator
Brantley.
Senator Brantly votes yes.
votes yes.
Senators.
Gonzalez votes no. Senator
Senator Hamlin votes no.
Senator.
Maestas. No, no.
No. Senator O'Malley, Centra
Center Pope votes no, Santa
Ramos Santa Ramos votes yes.
No. Lopez votes no. Senator
Senators.
Center Stephanics.
Yes. Senator Thornton votes.
Senator Tobiasson Center
Tobiasson votes center Townsend.
Senator Bergman's.
7 in the affirmative, 15 in the
negative. Senate joint
resolution 15 as amended is duly
passed the Senate. Senator
souls.
Thank you, Mr. President, I very
much appreciate the wonderful
our kids. Senators to explain
his vote.
Mr. President, buddy, thank you.
Uh, I would hope that we'd hold
each other accountable during
any one of the three. It needs
to be across the board. I ask
that we remember our kids and
not stack the deck against them.
message from the house, the
reader will read.
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
Journal will show that the
message from the house has been
received. The reader to read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253 and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
has passed House Bill 68. House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113. House Bill 243. House
Bill 352 as amended by the
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa Martiz McCutchen,
chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk
will show the message from the
house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 13 as
show the message from the house
has been Senate Majority Leader
Peter wants to take us to that
next order business, uh, Mr.
President, unanimous consent we
President, your education
committee to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 434 has had
it under consideration and
Respectfully submitted, Senator
William P. So's chair. Senator
Souls.
I asked unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports we vote on
them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
Senate Bill 516 do pass as
amended the referred to the
finance committee.
Senate Memorial 19 do pass as
amended.
House Bill 167 as amended do
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee, respectfully
Yeah I have it. The community
report has been adopted and the
journal will show that they were
acted upon individually.
for House Bill 140 as amended
has had it under consideration,
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
conservation committee.
were acted upon individually
objection. The reader will read.
House Bill 143 as amended do
pass as amended and the referred
adopt report all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those are
the eyes have it. The board has
been adopted.
And the journal show they acted
upon individually.
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Linda M. Lopez, chair Senator
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
read.
Senate Bill 217 do pass and the
referred to the tax business and
transportation Committee.
that's referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 278 do pass and
that's referred to the tax
Senate Bill 443 do not pass, but
that Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 443 do pass and that
Committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Linda M.
Lopez chair Lopez
motion to adopt the community
report Senators, we have a
motion to adopt your report. All
those in favor signify by saying
Mr. President, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 78 has had
it under consideration. Reports
Sandra Thornton.
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
See no objection. Nice job,
Sarah Thornton, the reader to
read.
Senate Bill 302 do pass.
Senate Bill 3003 as amended do
pass.
Senate Bill 457 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee, respectfully
submitted, Joseph Cervantes
chair.
I moved for the adoption of the
the journal will show that they
were acted upon individually.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senate majority, or we do have
one more committee report, the
reader to read.
Mr. President, your finance
pass, respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz chair
adoption of the committee
report. We have a motion to
adopt the community report. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
President, unanimous consent, we
go to that our business
introduction of legislation.
There are no objection. We are
in that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Reader to read.
House Bill 253 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero,
substitute for House Bill 253,
an act relating to court
records.
Requiring the ceiling of certain
court records pertaining to an
eviction.
substitute for House bill.
253 haven't been read twice by
titles referred to the Senate
tax business Transportation
Committee.
Then send it Judiciary Committee
an act relating to electric
public utilities establishing
distribution system planning
requirements requiring dis
distribution system plans and
programs requiring annual
reports on beneficial
electrification.
Establishing the virtual power
plant program.
Authorizing the public
regulation commission to adopt
and utility cost recovery. House
Bill 1313. Have you been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax, I'm sorry to the
Senate Conservation Committee
House Bill 64 introduced by
Representative Chavez.
An act relating to higher
education, expanding the scope
of the nondiscrimination policy
for eligibility for
post-secondary tuition rates and
send the judiciary Committee
that's House Bill 6.
He appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113.
An act relating to animals
and dogs creating the animal
welfare program fund.
House appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113.
House appropriation.
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 113.
Is 243 introduced by
Representative Matthews, an act
with a licensure, enacting the
bylaws and rules with the state
records administrator. House
Bill 243 243 haven't been read
twice by titles referred to the
An act relating to children
amending the definition of
youthful offender to include
voluntary manslaughter extending
the time period for supervised
release.
Renaming this juvenile Community
Corrections Act to the juvenile
Community Connections Act.
And many of the juvenile
Community Connections Act,
renaming the juvenile Community
Corrections Grant Fund to the
operate programs that provide
services for adjudicated
delinquents, children or youth
establishing a local panel to
determine the next steps of a
delinquent child. Creating the
monetary stipend project as a 3
year pilot project to provide
monthly assistance payments to
demonstrate that a monetary
Providing for program
eligibility.
Program terms and reporting
requirements.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 255
having been read twice by title.
It referred to the Senate
Judiciary Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee.
actually they in the courts.
Closing magistrates circuit
courts in the McKinley, Santa Fe
Torrance, Donana, and Leak
Districts relocating magistrate
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Finance Committee,
House Bill 352.
House Bill 439 introduced by
Representative Lujan.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
House Bill 439.
House Bill 439 having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax business and
Amending, claiming exemptions
for veterans. House Bill 494 494
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
House Bill 571, introduced by
representatives Doo Andrea
Romero, Jonathan Henry, an act
relating to land use designated
municipalities that adopt
enumerating duties of the
Department of Finance and
Administration. House Bill 571
571 having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
Representatives Garcia and
Martinez and Senator Jaramillo
and act relating to
infrastructure.
Enacting the land grant Merced
in a seca infrastructure Act,
making appropriations. House
Bill 330 330 haven't been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Conservation
government.
Creating the Office of Housing,
Planning and Production.
Providing powers and duties.
Declaring an emergency, House
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Worz take us that next order of
business.
Mr. President, unanimous consent
we go without our business
and request the concurrence of
the Senate, respectfully
submitted Lisa Martiz McCutchen,
chief clerk will show the
message from the House has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
The Journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 357 and
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 340 as
amended by the House and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate, respectfully submitted
the San Martis McCutcheon, chief
Senate, respectfully submitted,
Lisa Amartiz McCutcheon, chief
clerk. Journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
in the house has been received.
Mr President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 269 as
amended by the House and request
the house has been.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed House Bill 209 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
has passed House Bill 192 as
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. So we'll be in
tomorrow at 11:30. So now is the
time for committee chairs to
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent to remove
Senate Bill 555.
From the tax business and
Transportation Committee that'd
be referred to Senate
proposed committee substitute be
posted for public viewing when
these changes have been made.
Thank you, Senator, if you.
Thank you Senator. If you can
give us the title of Senate Bill
Authority exempt from property
tax for so long as the authority
holds title to the property and
Seeing no objection.
So
We do, we are announcements of
miscellaneous soy to senator
10:00 a.m. we will hear from two
experts, uh, from, uh, on
brackish water, on the water
availability and treatment in
meeting is tomorrow at 10
o'clock, room 303.
Thank you center souls. Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. Your
you, Sandra Lopez, uh, Senator
Pope, followed by Senator,
Senator Pope.
Mr. President, uh, just would
voice, but as a reflection of
the pain, fear, and uncertainty
that so many are feeling right
now.
Well, I don't speak for everyone
in this chamber.
I believe I speak for a majority
criminals.
We see our LGBTQI siblings who
have fought so hard for the
right to exist.
We hear and see fears from the
disability community who fear
their rights are under attack.
And we stand with you.
We also stand with the bipo and
marginalized communities who
We have given everything for
this country.
who fear their benefits are
being cut and they will be left
behind.
We hear from federal workers.
assistants to fill the ground
shifting beneath their feet.
These are communities and every
one of our districts.
So for me, this is not a
partisan issue.
Mr. President, fear is heavy
right now.
But let me remind everyone.
Of something important.
We've all been here before and
risen.
Every single time we have fought
back, every single time we have
built something stronger.
And what that is is community.
official is going to save us. No
politician.
No bill, no policy.
It's going to come to the
rescue.
For our people
And the dangers that we face.
It comes from you, it comes from
us, it comes from the people.
It comes from the mother who
shields her child from hatred
that is spewed in the streets.
It comes from the activists who
to back down.
Who refused to stay silent.
Who refused to stop loving and
fighting for one another.
That's where the power lies.
Now is the time to build
networks of safety of resistance
of hope.
We must support immigrant
Fight for each other.
Because no one else is gonna
come do it for us.
Together as a community.
And they don't reflect our
values.
We believe in protecting our
families, uplifting our
communities, and ensuring that
every person
politics.
This is about people.
It's about our neighbors who
need health care.
Our children who deserve quality
education and our workers who
deserve fair wages and
protections.
Mr. President, we're stronger
together when we unite.
When we organize, when we
legislate, when we refuse to be
silent.
We can build a future that
Fighting for Rutt's right and
ensuring that no policy, no
administration.
And no agenda can strip us.
Of our fundamental rights.
The fight for our people, our
communities.
To my colleagues in the chamber.
In these last few weeks, let's
work on passing legislation that
reflects our values.
We see you.
We hear you
And we will exceed succeed.
Thank you Mr. President.
Senator.
Mexico red and green chilly
month, and then I uh proceed to
its next committee.
There's unanimous consent
request, saying no objection.
So.
debate here. I, I, I absolutely
agree that we are, we are
stronger together as New
Mexicans. We're stronger
together as Americans.
And yet so many times, even in
side, you know, why do we push a
bill so hard that clearly half
of us disagree with.
And yet, because there's more
than half in this room that want
it, we push it.
Open to what's going on around
us, and, and I know that right
now there's this fear, if you
just read the Santa Fe, New
Mexicans filled page after page
after page of fear.
mongering.
The Art of the Deal.
And he wins a lot.
By making some outrageous
claims, making the deal and then
all of a sudden everything seems
to fall in line because he made
a deal that was good for
But I also know that what's
going on is we're looking for
fraud, waste, and abuse or he is
anyway.
$34 trillion. And yet we look
around, uh, even in our own
budget here.
$11 billion budget.
anything? And right now on a
federal level, Mr. President.
While it can be.
Frightening for some to think,
A $34 trillion debt. How do, how
do you deal with that? How do
you take that down? And he's,
he's working on hundreds of
billions already.
We have an $11 billion.
That we're going to things that
weren't really supporting
Americans.
Or American issues.
Well, now that can come to us.
spend that money wisely as
opposed to squandering it.
Or we can just give it back to
the taxpayer.
Right now in this very chamber.
And we have twice as much money
in our budget.
As we had just 6 years ago.
And yet we're talking about
raising taxes here, and that's
So the goal here
is to help us as taxpayers.
Because no one should be
benefiting with our tax dollars.
Those are our dollars.
And it's the same here in New
Through the democratic process.
Both
National vote
And the Electoral college vote.
President Biden did things that
I did not like a lot, almost
every day.
And it's certainly OK to say
that policies are wrong.
But the fear that the fear that
I read in the newspaper this
morning, Wait a minute.
Now
But when we look at the, the,
the money, I'm gonna just start
with US aid.
That was
That's been bugging me for
Decades.
And so I'm, I'm grateful that we
have somebody.
It's ready to start looking for
that fraud, waste and abuse and
Other than cartel members.
I'm more than ready to uh to
allow an attack on them. I don't
see the rolling back of any
actually done.
I don't see it.
fear here.
Unless there's fraud, waste, and
abuse, and if we fix that.
They will benefit.
As will we.
I had this discussion on a bill
yes.
We are better together.
do it.
Let's stop that here in our
little neck of the woods.
days, would ask us in this
chamber.
To work more as colleagues.
And I know that there's members
And I believe that they consider
me at least worthy of talking.
So Mr. President,
But I also know that I don't
think to look at that.
And try to move our state by
working together for the state,
tomorrow morning. Recess to
11:30 a.m.
Tomorrow.
You the center Cervantes.
Thanks, I didn't get it. I
didn't get there fast enough to
announcement. Thank you, Mr.
President. Senate Finance will
go in tomorrow. I just want to
run through some stuff that's
really interesting in capital
outlay, they sent some
spreadsheets out, and I'm not
Uh, there's no way that
project's gonna get completed.
You got a project that asks for
200,000 and they got 400,000.
So we're underfunding,
overfunding, uh, this is
project and projects that didn't
need large numbers got
overfunded. And so we're gonna
look through this and and see
how we can help members, uh,
it's, it's very interesting how
