Center Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Doig.
Saintree.
Santer Hickey.
Saint Armio
Senator Lanier.
Santa Lopez.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Then a repinto.
Senator Scott.
Yes.
Santerid Lopez.
Senator.
Santoshando.
Senator Thornton
Senator Tobiasson.
Center Townsend.
Send her Trujillo.
Senators, we are lacking a
quorum.
All senators to the chamber,
we're lacking a quorum.
You do have a car, Mr.
President.
Saint Bede's Episcopal Church
here in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
I'd asked for everyone to remain
standing for the Pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
Senator Townsend.
That visions in Espanol to be
Oh Lord, our governor whose
glories in all the world. We
commend the state of New Mexico
to your merciful care, that
love of truth and of
righteousness and make them ever
mindful of their calling to
serve these people in that in
your fear through Jesus Christ
our Lord who lives and reigns
una nacion joos
in the convertar ihuicia
paratonos.
you to the Mexico Senate, and
I'll yield to Senate Majority
Floor Leader Peter Wortz, take
us to that first order of
business, Senator Worth, thank
you, Mr. President. Good
morning, or almost good
thank you, Father Lee for being
here, for your words, um.
We do need every prayer for
wisdom and strength that we can
get as worth, I think 3 weeks
Domingo Pueblo Day and suicide
Prevention Day, uh, at the
legislature. It's New Mexico
Athletic Trainers' Day and
Senator Campos has a certificate
and we will read that
infamous state prison riot in
1980 and that's Senator Fanics,
that one will be red, uh,
Senator Gallegos has a
certificate celebrating some Boy
really for all members, again,
LFC is holding workshops
tomorrow.
Room 307, 7 to 8 o'clock on the
following.
Uh, New Mexico voters first has
provided lunch from the Cowgirl
restaurants and the lunch is
just outside in the hall, so
homelessness, uh, at La Fonda
8:15 to 9:30 a.m. by invitation
only.
Uh, with that, Mr. President, I
yield to other members to
introduce guests and then we'll
go to the certificates.
Thank you Senator Wirth.
isn't here at the moment. Uh,
can we get some unanimous
consents? Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
allow cameras in the gallery and
on the floor. Thank you. Hearing
no objection. Cameras are
sitting up on the Diaz with you.
I'd like her to stand. She is
your honorary lieutenant
governor today, Jordan Apodaca.
cheerleading, and she's an
excellent student. She will
attend, I think this says New
York University and become a
lawyer.
Lieutenant Governor and
assistant.
Thank you Senator Hispanics.
Senator Werth. I'll yield to you
to take us to that next order
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, uh, Senator Padilla
is up in Senate Education. I
know that committee is still
working and so I'm not gonna
consent to excuse Senator
Sadillo Lopez, Sendo, and
Gonzalez until they returned to
the chamber. Hearing no
objection,
so
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Campos thank
you very much, Mr. President,
members of the Senate. It's
indeed an honor today to go
ahead and have uh a certificate
read if uh with permission, of
President, I ask unanimous
consent that the reader be
allowed to read. Senators a
unanimous consent request to
have the certificate be read,
saying no objection, the reader
to read.
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to February
12, 2025 as New Mexico athletic
Trainers' Day in the Senate,
whereas New Mexico athletic
it serves and whereas in Mexico
athletic Trainers Association is
composed of certified athletic
trainers from professional
collegiate, and high school
profession of athletic training
in New Mexico and whereas
athletic trainers have a long
history of providing quality
health care for athletes and
persons engaged in regular
physical.
and emergency care, examination,
assessment and diagnosis, injury
prevention, risk management,
therapeutic intervention and
rehabilitation of injury and
8 athletic trainers in New
Mexico.
And whereas the National
Athletic Trainers Association
and the New Mexico Athletic
Train Association celebrate
commitment to raise public
awareness of the importance of
the profession of athletic
training and the role of
athletic trainers in the
provision of quality health care
services, including those
engages in physical activity.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico.
The February 12, 2025 be
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator Pete
Campos, Mimi Stewart, president
pro tem.
Sherry de Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico state Senate.
on the sidelines of whether it
be a basketball court, whether
it be the field, whether it be
track and field, regardless of
where it is. They're the quiet
possible.
These athletic trainers not only
here in New Mexico but globally
continue to ensure that our
athletes are performing at their
is they're trained, they're
certified, they care about our
athletes and more importantly,
they're very dedicated to their
work. So with that, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, if there's anyone else
like to introduce, uh, some
special guests. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Campos. Thank you
for the certificate. I'll you to
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm
gonna do a little, little
because I understand that any
time we start talking about
training, uh, the good senator
puts me into one of the chutes
and I have to come out bucking.
I, so you, thank you. Senator
Munoz, thank you, Mr. President,
Senator, do we know how many
trainers are in the MLB right
go ahead and I'll get that list,
uh, right now, I understand that
uh the lists are available and
they're counting on their
fingers, so, uh, we'll get that
number to you, uh, unless you
I'll yield and give him the
answers. I, there is, let's see,
there's one at the Dodgers from
Santa Fe. There's one at the
Rangers from Santa Fe.
and I don't know where he's
from, but there's 4 main current
4 major league trainers in New
Mexico. There's some assistant
trainers and, and his expert
witnesses are giving him a
guys there, but there's Senator,
the expo tinnesses know of any
more? Well, so, uh, uh,
Mr. President, in fact, uh, like
I say, we were counting on our
fingers, we figured there were 6
and so there was 1 more with the
much information as possible,
but Mr. President, if I may to
uh our chair of finance, I wanna
thank you very much for keeping
up with it because oftentimes
people forget about, if you
you, Senator Campos. Senator
Munoz, you still have the floor,
Mr. President, Senator, do we
have any, I don't know if we
President, and we don't want to
go ahead and get into all the
specifics, but we don't really
have any for New Mexico, but,
uh, or in New Mexico, but
there's a couple of others that
information, that's, uh, my
response at that time or this
time. Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos, and Senator Munoz, if I
may ask a point of personal
by me, um, but you may know some
other major league sports that
that trainers in and then my
next question was Senator Compos
got expert witnesses, what
college
They go to athletic training
that.
Patriots, so I just wanted to
recognize uh the work that Moses
does.
So, so, Mr. President, and again
going back to the good chairman,
I'm gonna go ahead and say it
university. So if you notice,
Mr. Chairman, I'm kind of
keeping it on the low key
because I don't want to get, uh,
the chair of finance too excited
this morning.
to Major league game and I go to
a few a couple of times a year
that you can call people in, uh,
Here's a New Mexico boy and
And a few in the NFL. I don't
know if there's any in the NBA,
uh, but how important that is to
to our reputation is New Mexico
What would that be Senator
Munoz? Green chili. Thank you,
Mr. President. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Senator
Senator Campos, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President, and uh
That individual and I would
visit with him on a regular
basis and he was, you could tell
with his heart, with compassion,
with a passion that he uh always
presented in the work that he
walk into his office behind him
was a map of the United States,
and he had over 150 programs and
communities that were
about in, in an infancy uh
period. We're talking about
longevity, but especially at New
Mexico State University, we find
that people are taking this very
volunteering those services
going as an example from a
community to Las Vegas or from
Las Vegas to Springer to what
are these other areas to go and
because they take this not only
serious, but as they deal with
it, they want to ensure that
every athlete is going to be as
healthy.
healthy as possible as they move
certificate. We're ready then to
go ahead and close and introduce
uh the guests that we have with
us.
Thank you Senator Camposin and.
Senator compost to close. Thank
is, uh, February 12, 2025, New
Mexico athletic Trainers' Day in
the New Mexico State Senate and
with that, uh, Mr. President and
all of these athletic trainers
throughout New Mexico today and
they're uh sitting behind me,
uh, here where I'm uh located in
the Senate chamber.
have the president of New Mexico
Athletic Trainers Association
who is a 1998 graduate of New
Mexico State University and
athletic trainer at Gadsden High
the New Mexico Athletic Trainers
Association.
Graduate of UNM and operations
officer and athletic trainer at
Southwest Bone and Joint
ladies and gentlemen, today is
athletic trainer Day in the New
Mexico State Senate show your
round of applause to the people
that represent this fine group
Thank you Senator Campos we're
still in that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Senator Hamblin
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senate body. I would like to
empowers families by ensuring
that every child has the
foundational literacy skills
needed to succeed in school and
beyond. At the heart of their
By fostering early literacy, we
break cycles of educational
inequity and create brighter
futures for children in our
community and when parents read,
teach, and engage with their
readers, so send a body and
Senate family and Mr. President,
please welcome Jude Hickey to
the Senate chambers.
some of the uh scouts that we
have in the rostrum this
morning, uh, just wanted to give
you a little bit of history of
the body so they understand
where these uh youth are coming
1916 in his longest continually
operated troop troop 2.
Rosal was established and
continues to serve the youth of
today. These are, are part of
southeastern New Mexico, United
to form the eastern New Mexico
Council.
Which was renamed Conistra
America.
And they also the council helps
youth in developing skills and
leadership, citizenship,
headquartered in Roswell and
serves youth and families in 7
Southeastern communities and
they are Chavez Curry Debaca,
Senator Scott helped me also,
but we'll start with the first
list of 7, then I.
to sinner Scott, uh, I'm gonna
ask the Charles Moe, which is
executives and is in troop 228
in Artesian and he's 11th
grader. I'd ask him to stand,
uh, stay standing, and we'll get
everyone up and we'll, uh,
welcome you all together. Next I
light rank is also true 228 in
Artesia is a 5th grader.
We also have Cooper Morris.
Scouting America has earned
light rank troop 228 in Artesia,
another 5th grader.
Ryan William uh Scouting America
venturing crew 127 Winnipeg
Mountain Camp, which is a 10th
grader.
And then uh we have with me on
behind me and I'll stand to the
Thank you, Senator Grego.
Senator Scott.
Uh, Mr. President, I'd like to
present 4 names to the body,
have Jeremy Kern, alumni chair
scout executive for the
Conquistador Council, and I have
Michael Beaumont.
Conquistador council program
director.
Gallegos, I believe, has one
more name to Senator Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you, Senator Scott. Thank
you, Mr. President, body. I did
want to recognize the Cub Scouts
yield to members that they may
have scouting stories for us,
Mr. President, Mr. uh, I'd ask
somebody to, um,
acknowledge him.
wanted to start out and, and
they can be seated now, um, I
actually started out in uh Boy
Scouts back in Denver, Colorado,
And so I was only in Boy Scouts
for like a week, but I just
wanna tell you I appreciate what
they do, uh, fulfilling some of
the, uh, training that they do
for the youth, and I do know I
President. Thank you, Senator
Gallegos and Senator Scott. I do
believe we have some, uh,
scouting stories and we'll start
with Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
The
are all working to better
themselves.
And it is, I think, important to
every one of our communities to
Um, I've watched Jeremy work for
years.
And the
Number of lives that have been
touched.
Changed and impressed upon is
individuals and these youngsters
are here today, and I just thank
him for being here. Thank you,
sir.
Thank you Senator Townsend.
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
I remember many years ago when
uh the scout leaders, if you
will, are adults would put us in
charge and they put me in charge
to work very closely with, uh,
months.
But, uh, with all of the due
diligence and following, if you
will, my oath and the other
things to the uh to the Boy
Scouts.
Uh, they decided to go ahead and
hold court and so they took me
out to the plank and, uh, they
indicated, uh, because you are a
leader, but these are the things
that, uh, that you've done, we
got up, went back out, and I
indicated to all my uh fellow
Boy Scouts. It's time for us to
get back to business, so the
whole point with all of it is as
we go through it in leader.
Uh, Mr. President, I just want
to go ahead and uh recite the
oath on my honor, I will do my
best to do my duty to God and,
uh, my country and to obey the
Campos.
Any further?
comment on the same Senator
wanted to close up talking about
a few people that have gone
through, uh, scouts. I have a
couple of young people that I've
really known that became Eagle
that. And I have a personal
friend, Bob Parish in Hobbs and.
Person, uh, most of y'all will
remember from Artisia Peyton
didn't start problems early on.
I think what they do for these
youth is incredible, and I look
forward to serving and helping
these, uh, young scouts as they
go forward with that audio, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
yesterday a bill was introduced
by myself and a few others, uh,
Senate Bill 346. Um, it is a
that bill, um, 2 projects, uh,
is all we're gonna allow and a
total of a million dollars
questions come by my desk, uh,
Thank you, Mr. President. Sorry,
I'm.
We're just getting back out of
committee here. I, I would like
to uh introduce some special
guests that we have here today,
Uh, the youth and government
gives middle and high school
students access to uh or across
all New Mexico a wonderful
learning opportunity to
understand the processes of
state government.
conference event held right here
in the roundhouse each spring.
The program also helps young
people build confidence and
important civic skills such as
nonpartisan, uh, group, and this
year we count more than 300
students participating for many
parts of our state.
Mr. President, two of the
With aspirations of pursuing a
career in criminal investigation
or criminology. McKenna is
dedicated to making a positive
impact on society through
justice and accountability.
academic leadership pursuits,
McKenna is working toward an
associate's degree in psychology
and is an active athlete. I'm
sure she could beat me in
anything she tries.
lieutenant governor, so she's
going.
She's going after your seat, Mr.
President.
In Pearl's 4 years in the youth
and government legislature she
has authored bills on issues
She aspires to be a medical
provider dedicated to improving
the health care access and
addressing disparities in
patient care.
She enjoys playing the piano.
leaders, McKenna and Pearl to
the Senate. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Thornton.
clubs of America offer a variety
of programs to help young people
develop their skills, confidence
and sense of belonging, you
know, and while I was never a
member of Boys and Girls Club,
introduce Rick Lamb, who is a
CEO of Boys and Girls Club in
Chavez in Lincoln County. I'd
like to.
introduced Sofia Casa from Santa
Fe.
Ella Getler from Santa Fe.
then we have Jarek Martinez and
he's from Carlsbad and so if I
could just have the body give uh
my guests a round of applause
and welcome them to the chamber.
Seeing no further announcements,
I'll yield to Senate Majority
Floor leader Peter Worth to take
us to that next order of
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Well, we're still on
have your attention please, um,
I would like your attention and
to keep the conversations down
to minimum.
As this certificate is presented
and it's red.
New Mexico 5-seventh legislature
for session 2025. The New Mexico
State Senate does hereby extend
its recognition and
riot in United States history
took place at the penitentiary
of New Mexico near Santa Fe on
February 2nd and 3rd, 1980, and
whereas according to the
prison riot 33 inmates were
killed by other inmates with
many tortured and mutilated
because they were believed to
have acted.
as informants to prison
survived, but were tortured and
suffered horrific injuries, and
whereas after the riot ended on
February 3, 1980. Correctional
the Senate, the state of New
Mexico, that recognition be
extended to the penitentiary of
New Mexico, correctional
officers who served with bravery
during the 1980 prison riot.
Victor Gallego's correctional
officer.
Elton and Curry, correctional
officer.
Juan Busto's correctional
officer.
officer.
Antonio Vijil correctional
officer.
Larry Mendoza, correctional
officer.
Edward Ortega, correctional
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanis.
Mimi Stewart, President Pro Tem.
Panics. Thank you, Mr. President
and Mr. President, um, many of
us know people who have worked
in our state prisons and this
state the main state prison
riot. Very few were involved in
the riots, but um it was.
a very gruesome time and the
people who work there showed a
lot of bravery and we have a, a
individuals and their bravery
during this entire time and Mr.
President, I would welcome any
other comments. Thank you,
Senator Stefani, for bringing
this certificate. We do have
members who would like to speak
to thank my colleague and
friend, Senator Stefaniks for
bringing this history into uh
the chamber here as well as
Guard, the negotiators, the
first responders who saved the
lives of our hostages that those
faithful fai
country don't know what
happened, uh, in those tragic
days, but let us never forget
and um and mourn those lost and
would be appropriate, uh,
because he is living history
here in New Mexic.
ago and once again, I want to
thank my colleagues Senator
Stefaniks and um those that
supported this. Thank you, Mr.
out and do a tour of the
facility in the main prison
facility that exists today and
of course the next to it is the
facility where the riot
correctional officers.
Have, uh, each and every day,
and we don't stop and thank them
enough for what they do in our
prison system, uh, my wife
you can ever get. So it is
important when you have
something like this to.
Not forgets, and so I also thank
Mr. Pepperres for bringing this
This was definitely a hellacious
time in our.
In our state's history and those
people that followed the
Events during that period of
time, you that.
individuals who were there that
were providing, if you will, the
services to the inmates, to the
inmates themselves.
And within that, the negotiating
evolved as changes to our
correctional system.
That that was part of it as
well.
Within that there's still people
And to many family members who
relive, if you will, almost on a
daily basis, the stories of what
About 3 decades back as a member
of the Fleming Fellows, we
traveled across the country.
And one of the things that uh we
did.
the justices for people that are
incarcerated and those people
that serve to provide, if you
will, the security and the
safety within these facilities.
as a member of the legislature
was, we want to work on the
rehabilitation.
We want to ensure as we move
forward with behavioral health.
That behavioral health is for
paramount because when they are
released.
It is going to be them and their
families that will continue to
go ahead and live through, if
you will, the stigmas that
those people are going to return
home.
And in this the Guadalupe County
Correctional Facility.
When that was built,
Almost immediately when we lost
were in there.
And they weren't too sure what
was gonna happen with their
lives.
We just don't know what's gonna
happen as we move forward so the
that provide, if you will, the
security in the facility and the
people that are providing that
security and safety on the
outside as well.
important for us to continue to
make the improvements.
And in particularly as we see
Senate Bill 12 and 3 making its
way through the session.
facilities. So again, Mr.
President, members of the Senate
and in particularly the Senator
Stephanics, thank you very much
for recognizing the people who
gave their lives and the people
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. Senator Maestas.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Stefanis for bringing this
forward and invoking tremendous
decades of PTSD and stuff, that
particular instance, Mr.
President, uh, strikes, strikes
a personal chord with me, my
uncle was a Dwight Duran. My
that that that the prison was
about to explode that it was a
powder keg, uh, he got paroled,
uh, Mr. President, Senator, uh,
Stean actually got paroled a
cartoons and, um, the phone rang
and uh it was the governor.
Uh,
you know, trying to get a hold
of my uncle and I've never seen
anybody leave the house so
leaders, gang leaders and other
leaders in the prison and put
the word that that is not to be
tolerated and also no inmate was
killed by a state employee as
shout out to my, to my uncle for
the role he played in in helping
the, the guards and also
emphasized to the rest of us
that the concepts of good time
meritorious good time, uh,
those environments and so that's
the policy reason behind those
things.
But this body uh as emphasized
by Senator Campos, Mr.
President, Senator, uh, Stefani
should should never.
And thank you to the families
and the workers that were there
that morning. God bless them.
Thank you, Senator Maestas. We
have Senator Trujillo, followed
by Senator O'Malley, followed by
many of the individuals and
families in my district were
impacted by this and continue to
be impacted by those memories,
um, and so I just stand here in
Um, I will say that, uh, the
National Guard, my husband was
in the National Guard at this
time and his unit was called up
thank God literally, um, that he
did not have to go into that
because of the horrific event.
that happen. So again, thank you
and thank you to the brave, uh,
lives to keep safety, to keep
peace, and to help with
rehabilitation, so thank you,
Senator appreciate it. Thank
you, Senator Hill, Senator
O'Malley.
This also uh brings back some uh
memory, um.
Of this horrific event, uh.
Unfortunately my second cousin
known state he was the president
of the Electrical union, uh,
Antonio Werner.
Um, I, I too want to, um, I mean
add my thanks to the uh brave
correctional officers that, uh,
went in there and um.
You know how to deal with all
this. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley. Senator
an option to go into the prison,
the old prison, and to see some
of the tragedy, not firsthand,
but just some of the remnants.
Uh, I took my younger daughter
the riots we had ladies.
was giving us a tour and my
daughter would explain to her
what they'd learned and it was
correct, but to see the uh the
Senator Campos and, and talking
about the first responders and
those were there in the safety
that we provide through
Through their means on how they
will ever forget what happened,
so I thank you for you bringing
this forward. I think it's
something we truly need to
remember and make sure that we
make some brief remarks on this
also. Thanks, Senator Stefaniks
for always making sure that we
never forget about this very
important.
History lesson here in New
Mexico because it truly is, Mr.
that took place there, but I, I
just want to remind the body
that, you know, we don't just
have children and and um of the
survivors or the folks that lost
there and perished and lost
their lives. We have
grandchildren and great
forever affected by it and so I
just wanted to thank Senator
Stephanics for doing this and
also on my own little piece of
this, acknowledge the
constituents that I represent
remember this event and we in
the Senate have an individual
who was working there at that
time. He was not directly in the
him in all the names that were
read as the correctional
officers.
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
I yelled to Senator, uh, Senator
Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Effected yesterday afternoon.
One of the committee analysts.
Specifically, the committee
analyst.
This firing occurred.
Because of an inadvertent.
With identifying characteristics
of this person.
That should not have been in the
There was no option to explain.
There was no opportunity.
To do anything.
But gather up.
Mr. President
This person.
was a good writer.
It was timely.
Presenting those bill analyses.
Of that committee.
A valuable providing a
great service.
I believe this was a miscarriage
of justice.
chamber holds very little sway
with a full staff.
And now we are forced.
To
help.
Mr. President, I respectfully.
Request
That this decision.
Be reconsidered.
chamber. And thank you, sir, for
the opportunity to come in.
Thank you. We're selling that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous.
Senator Stewart
About what they can and cannot
do, um, it's through our chief
clerk's training, it's through
the ethics training. It's
analyst in exactly the same way
for exactly what wasn't the same
uh posting but for the same
thing so it happens to both of
do what they can't do here, and
so uh I certainly am willing to
chat about it, not on the floor.
Uh, with the gentleman, but
it's, it's not a partisan issue.
Uh, excuse me, thank you, Mr.
President.
You know, the, the way the
analysts are divvied out here.
Um, Certainly our side doesn't
understand what, what was done
by the chief clerk.
I understand what the president
pro tem is saying about this.
And
Those are all true.
have the same number, we don't
have the same uh ability to
analyze bills as the other side,
uh, they have their own partisan
analysts then they have
a gut punch to us to lose such a
qualified analyst yesterday, and
I just wanted to share that,
that, uh, certainly, uh.
Senator Scott.
We need to be a little bit more
careful, all of us.
But
Don't hit us again.
In
There's already enough votes out
Thank you Mr. President. um,
today I would like to honor
Doctor Harold Bailey, uh, his
services are happening today in
Albuquerque, unable to make it
Bailey's passing leaves a void
that cannot be easily filled,
but his legacy will continue to
inspire generations to come.
His life's work at UNM, his
unwavering commitment to the
His impact on my life, the lives
of African Americans in New
Mexico and all people who strive
for justice and equality is
immeasurable.
Doctor Bailey's career at the
landscape of countless students,
particularly those in
underrepresented backgrounds.
Doctor Bailey's efforts were
part of a broader movement at
UNM to establish and expand
African American studies and in
Over the decades, the program
evolved to become African
American studies in 1982 and a
degree granting program in 1983.
Today it is known as Aic Studies
UNM.
His ability to bridge gaps
between diverse communities,
help create a more just and
equitable academic environment
for many students, including
myself,
Doctor Bailey's commitment to
civil rights were unwavering. He
was an active member, chapter
president, and a state director
of the NAACP. He fought
equity and his leadership helped
bring about meaningful change in
housing, employment, and
education policies across New
Mexico. His work with the NAACP
young activists to continue
their fight for justice. His
belief in power in the power of
collective action and civic
engagement has left an enduring
that directly impacted black
communities throughout the state
under his leadership, the office
became a driving force for
change.
Advocating for better
educational opportunities,
His efforts led to an expanded
access to health care services
and greater representation of
African Americans and state
leadership positions.
Doctor Bailey's impact extends
countless to countless African
Americans across New Mexico. He
provided hope where there was
despair. Opportunity where there
racial and cultural divides.
As we mourn the loss of Doctor
Bailey, we must also celebrate
his life and contributions. His
work is not done.
It is our responsibility to
carry, carry forward this
vision.
To fight for the principles he
held dear and ensured that his
legacy continues to shape the
future.
community and asser dedication
creating a more equitable
society.
will never be forgotten.
Rest and power Doctor Harold
Bailey.
My colleagues and those in the
chamber would please stand for a
moment of silence.
Thank you, Senator Pope. There's
been a request for a moment of
silence for all members and
those joining us in the gallery.
Thank you.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. President.
miscellaneous I yield to Senator
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So we are gonna go to
3rd reading of legislation just
for the members. We're gonna do
item number 3. So, Mr.
President, with that unanimous
consent, we go that our business
3rd reading of legislation, and
I yield to Senator Doig for item
number one, Senate Bill 124.
was amended. Thank you,
senators. We're on that order of
action for placing Senate Bill
124 on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. Hearing no
objections. Senator Du to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Ah and she needs to have the
tools that allow her to, to do
her job. What Senate Bill 124
will do, we'll give her.
this because she needs to get
information in order to know if
she is going to to to issue that
notice of contemplated action.
So, Mr. President, this bill
we're debating Senate Bill 124
as amended. Anyone wishing the
debate.
See no debate. Senator Duic to
close on the bill. Thank you,
Mr. President. I move that
Senate Bill 124 do now pass and
senators, we are voting all
senators to your seats.
item that's gonna be item number
2 and that's gonna be, I
believe.
Senator Steinborn or Senator
Ramos who's presenting the bill?
Um, has been taken.
And that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. Thank you,
senators, uh, uh, Senators say
no objections. Senator Steinbar
to explain the bill. Thank you,
and governing boards of
community college in the 1st 6
months of being appointed.
And I do have a floor amendment
as well, Mr. President, at the
The Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19
amendment sponsored by Senator
Jeff Steinborn.
Colleagues, we heard some
feedback in the committees as
the bill was being put on,
people said, so you're requiring
training, but what do you do if
they don't get it? So, after a
lot of careful thought, and I
You know, tweak to make to this
bill and basically what the
amendment does is it would
require that number one, the
higher education department
tracked the progress of the
There would be a record and they
would be able to follow up with
the higher education department.
That's all the amendment does,
and with that I stand for any,
uh, discussion present. Thank
you, Senator Steinburn. Senator
Steinborn, I believe that
Before we go to debate,
senators, we're debating Senate
floor amendment number one is
Senate Education Committee
this amendment. I saw this bill
come through committee and I
think the information is
actually specifically helpful to
members of the Senate when it
comes to regent confirmation is
get that out. So thank you so
much, Senator Steinborn, uh, Mr.
President, for the, uh, for the
courtesy of including this.
final bill. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Brantley. Senators,
we're still debating Senate
you again, Senator Brantly for
your suggestions and working
together on this and, and I, uh,
now move, gosh, what's the
motion here? Uh.
What's, what's motion on, on
you, senators has been requests
that we adopt Senate floor
amendment number one. All those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Those oppose.
See no debate on the bill,
Senator Steinborn.
To close.
Thank you, Mr. President,
colleagues, I'm now move that
Senate Education Committee
a show of hands. Senators, we're
voting all senators to your
seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
colleagues. We're going on to
item number 3 on today's
calendar that's gonna be Senate
Bill 85.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President and members. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
Senator to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. Um,
I'm sponsoring this bill with
Senator Bregman, so I'm gonna do
a kind of a joint opening here.
Senate Bill 85 relates to
new members, uh, in 2009, my
first year in the Senate, uh,
Senator Dede Feldman and Senator
Clint Hardin and I all worked on
Bingaman and Senator Doinici had
limits of $2400 for an
individual, yet that individual
could give me.
and unlimited contribution.
So we finally got the limits in
finance, uh, both at the state
and federal level on its head by
creating a new category of
donors known as independent
expenditure committees that can
Do was require disclosure of
donors, and since that decision,
we've been trying to close
loopholes and require as much
disclosure as we possibly can.
bill Senate 85 is a
continuenuation of that effort.
I'm gonna talk about the
disclosure provisions, and then
I'm gonna yield to Senator
Bergman's to address the cleanup
provision.
and some new reporting
independent expenditures are
reporting, uh, in the
constitutional windows. There
was a loophole there that got
them out of some of that
reporting.
then arguing, well, the donors
said they didn't want it used
and then not reporting. So we're
creating a new segregated bank
account, uh, to make it very
clear uh when someone doesn't
campaign. So if you loan your
campaign money, uh, Section 5
says you cannot charge interest.
Uh, and then pay yourself back
interest using contributions.
requires the terms of the loan
to be disclosed, uh, I think as
Senator Doig correctly pointed
out in the Senate Judiciary
Committee, uh, we wanna make
sure that there's transparency
24, and 7, and then I think we
have some amendments and we'll
work our way through those. So I
yield to Senator Bergman. Thank
you, Senator War. Senator
Bergens, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President.
adding.
Electronic communication for
today's modern world.
Section 4 slightly changes our
current candidate campaign
It extends the prohibited period
to currently during the
prohibited period which we're
in.
essentially candidates and
elected officials that are in
the roundhouse cannot also
accept a contribution from a
lobbyist lobbyist employer.
And a few other
we have some amendments coming
unanimous consent to bring in an
expert, Lindsay Bachmann from
the New Mexico Secretary of
State. Thank you. There's been
unanimous consent requests to
bring in an expert witness.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 85 amendment
Senate Bill 85. There are no
objections, senator. She to
explain what the amendment does.
So Mr. President, there in the
FIR there, there was a, uh,
That the term campaign
reporting.
It proposes adding an electronic
communications in in this bill,
but it's not defined and so all
of communication that is
broadcast transmitted, stored or
viewed using electronic media,
so it would be email or a
Facebook post. And so that's all
it does is define uh
Senator Wirth.
Sanor amendment number 1 see no
further debates on that
bipartisan.
Acceptance I'll yield to Senator
Sher to close on the amendment.
To adopt Senate floor amendment
number one, all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those are Po, the eyes have it
We are back on the bill.
We do have another floor
amendment while it gets handed
out.
Senate floor Amendment #2 to
Senate Bill 85 amendment
sponsored by Senator William E.
Sher.
Send her share to move and
explain the amendment.
Mr. President, this is a.
Uh, a transparency bill. The
whole thing is about
transparency and, uh, you know,
the, the bill passed committee
here, a sitting legislature's
legislator shall file a report
annually of all payments of
money that the legislator
received during the preceding
whatever income from anywhere it
comes from, could be from, uh,
Social Security, it could be
from military disability, it
could be whatever it is. That
all goes on the financial
disclosure statement right now
And you know what we're really
looking for is, you know, the,
the, the kind of NASCAR thing.
Who's sponsoring us, you know,
so we just put the, put the
badges right on us so we know,
uh, and they, and they pay me
$300 to do that.
I should report that I got $300
to replace the door, and that's
all this really is. It's getting
down to the nitty gritty of
I think Senator Scherer is 1 for
2.
The, this one, this is a
different issue from what we're
doing here in this bill right
expenditure, uh, reports come
from.
Um, uh, this new section would
be something.
Different to our disclosure
we're debating Senate floor
Amendment #2, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President. We'll,
uh, the senator yield for a
question. Which senator, uh,
would be all sources of income,
but not all.
Of the relevant, all of the
dollars associated with that
is, um, report annually all
payments of money that the
legislature received, so I
currently don't report neither
do you, how much money are we
make in our business from our
So, Mr. President, Senator.
My expert witness has pointed
out.
of the person or entity to whom
the expenditure was made, so
forth, uh, the occupation, uh,
the amount of the, uh, income,
the purpose and the date.
all of this information,
including the amounts would be a
part of this report.
What did I hear that correctly?
In share
floor. Amendment #2. Anyone else
wishing to debate?
Senator Woods
It is due time that, that
everybody uh has or had a lot of
transparency in this building
mean, most of us have a, a
full-time job, right? That, that
we, uh, work at.
And why would it hurt for people
well, what does so and so do?
And I said, well, I really don't
know, Mr. Chair, and this would
make it very obvious that, uh,
this is what you making your
that damn Munoz has got me all
screwed up.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
We do have further debate,
Senator Steinborn.
And the Senate majority leader
kneeled for a question. Senator,
do yield.
Uh yes, Mr. President, only if
Senator Wirth does with me
though.
Senator Steinborn, thank you,
amendment references campaign
finance. It doesn't actually
amend the section of law, the
deals with, um, campaign, uh,
sorry, financial disclosure.
question that this bill, as I
stated right up front.
Related to campaign finance.
And campaign finance are the
donations that our campaigns
for, for the new people that we
are not, when you look at the
bill, there's what they call a
relating to clause. It's the
first few words in the bill and
it says relating to campaign
finance and what they will
discourage you, in fact, it's
relating to campaign finance.
What the amendment deals with is
finance um personal income
disclosure for a sitting member.
It's two different things. We're
not talking about finances to a
probably support it, but, uh,
but I don't think we can do it
in this bill. So just wanted to
point that out for the body when
you did yield to Senator Sheer,
so yield to Senator share.
giving money to uh any kind of
campaign but also in here on, on
page one, line 21, we put as
part of the amendment requiring
a city legislator to report so
Who is paying us to do what?
In this body and so while um.
And actually being influenced
because we're working for them.
So you know, it could be a
nonprofit, it could be your own
business or whatever, uh, and so
that, that is why it is truly a
it so that it was inclusive
without the log rolling issue
because this still is about.
Who's trying to to help us out
doing whatever it is we're
Campaign financing thing.
Thank you Senator share.
Senators, we're debating Senate
floor amendment #2. Anyone else
wishing to debate Senate floor
Amendment #2.
bill and a transparency
amendment, uh, I now move Senate
floor amendment number 2 to
Senate Bill 85 as once amended
and ask for a roll call vote.
Senators, we are.
So for the new members you do
Center block votes yes.
Senator Boone.
Senator Boone votes yes. Senator
Brandt.
Center Cervantes votes no.
Senator Charlie. No. Senator
Charlie votes no Senator Do
Hicken boats no.
Center.
Centacos votes yes. Senator
Gonzalez. No. Senator Gonzalez
votes no. San Hamlin. No.
Senator Hamlin votes no. Senator
votes yes. Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez votes no. Senator
Maestas no
Senator Maestasest votes no.
O'Malley.
Senator O'Malley votes no.
Senator Padilla.
Centro Padia votes no.
Senator Paul
Santa Ramos. Santa Ramos votes
yes. Senator Sanchez.
Sanchez votes yes. Center Scott.
No no
share votes yes.
Santoshendo.
Centricendo votes no. Senator
Souls.
Center Stewart.
Senator Stewart votes no.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Thornton votes yes. San
Senator Wirth.
Centeror votes no. Senator
Woods, Senator Woods votes yes.
affirmative, 25 in the negative.
Senate floor amendment number 2
fails to pass the Senate.
Senator Sher.
Uh, Mr. President, thank you. I
want to thank the vote. I am
heartbroken that my partner all
for Senate Bill 85 as amended.
Anyone wishing to debate on the
bill.
See no further no further
debate, Senator Bergman's.
Soberry wants to close.
that the records show that the
role has been called and that
all those president voted voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Thank you, Senator, we
By a vote of 42 in the
affirmative 0 in the negative.
Uh, with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent, we go to that
order of business committee
reports. Hearing no objection.
We're in that order of business
committee reports.
The reader to read.
Under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended and then
referred to the finance
committee respectfully
submitted.
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually objection,
the reader will read.
committee.
Senate Bill 101 do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Listefanos,
chairs,
Mr. President, I move adoption
of the committee report.
Senators, we have a motion to
adopt the committee report. All
those in favor signify by saying
Mr. President, your rules
committee has approved the
following certificate of
condolence, certificate number
2, to the following family and
Senate, respectfully submitted
Katie Doig, chair.
Senator Do, Mr. President, ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports,
that we vote on them with one
Recognition certificate number
22.
Certificate number 23.
Certificate number 27.
Certificate number 28.
Certificate number 29.
certificate number 32.
Certificate number 33.
Certificate number 34.
Certificate number 37.
Certificate number 38.
as amended and thence referred
to the judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 218.
Senate Bill 283 do pass and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Katie Doig, chair.
it. The community port has been
adopted and the journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read.
Mr. President, your tax business
pass as amended and thence
referred to the judiciary
committee, respectfully
submitted Senator Cary Hamblin,
chair. Senator Hamblin, Mr.
President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Senate Bill 92 do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 112 do pass, thence
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 126 do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill 219
adopt community reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those pone, the eyes have it,
the current reports have been
adopted and the journal will
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
Unanimous consent we go our
business introduction of
legislation. Hearing no
objection, we are in that order
of business introduction of
legislation.
Reader to read.
Representative Armstrong.
An act relating to child welfare
enhancing the state program
administered pursuant to the
of safe care, providing for rule
making. Senate Bill 42 Senate
Bill 42 having been read.
Pw by title is order printed.
Senate Bill 354 introduced by
Senator Campos an act making an
appropriation to the Board of
Regents of Northern New Mexico
State School to contract for the
Education Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee that sent a
bill 354.
Senate Bill 355 introduced by
Senator Wirth, an act relating
Administration.
Senate Bill 355355 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Pino Lopez Cedo Lopez.
And Pope
An act relating to state
personnel.
Enacting the diversity Act.
Creating the workforce diversity
and inclusion council.
Providing duties.
state agencies shall implement
such policies requiring an
annual report.
Making an appropriation. Senate
356.
Senate Bill 357, introduced by
Senator Hamblin, an act relating
to utilities, creating the
residential purposes. Senate
Bill 357357 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business transnsportation
An act relating to equines,
amending provisions relating to
the equine shelter rescue fund.
Reestablishing the equine
Senate Conservation Committee
the Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 358.
Senate Bill 359.
Introduced by Senator Brent.
request the removal of an
unlawful, unlawful occupant from
real property.
Providing procedures for law
enforcement to remove unlawful
Amending the classification of
the crimes of criminal damage to
property and fraud.
Senate about 359359 having been
Center bell 360 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
And act relating to the safe
haven for infants Act.
Allowing a parent or a parent's
designee to relinquish an infant
in certain circumstances,
allowing the installation and
operation of infant infant
safety devices for the
relinquishment of infants
Providing requirements for
installation, operation, and
monitoring of infant safety
devices, providing limited
immunity for a safe haven site
and the safe haven site staff.
Defining terms, sent about
36,060 read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, the Senate Judiciary
requiring the Child, Youth and
Families Department to issue a
request for proposals and
contract with an independent
expert to assist the
department's programmatic
The Senate Finance Committee,
Senate Bill 361.
Senate Bill 362 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
An act relating to children.
of a child. Senate about 362
Senate Bill 362 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 362.
Authority Act.
Creating the child protection
authority.
Prescribing duties sent about
363.
Senate Bill 364.
Introduced by Senator.
Nava
An act relating to law
enforcement, amending
qualifications for the
appointment of law enforcement
officers to include
authorization to work by the
United States citizenship and
business, Transportation
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senate Bill 364.
Then I built 365 introduced by
Senator Lopez, an act.
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, Vince Senate Finance
Committee's Senate Bill 365.
and Family Justice to continue
the work of the Children's code
re reform task force sent about
366366 having been read twice my
Introduced by senators Lopez
Cedillo Lopez, and Hickey.
An act making an appropriation
Senneel 367367 having been read
twice by titles or Princeton
referred to Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee, the Senate
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
367.
An act relating to cremation.
Expanding the definition of
cremation to include reduction
by chemical agent or biological
Senate Bill 36868 having been
read twice by title is ordered
Prince and referred to the
Senate tax business
Transportation Committee.
The Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Bill 368.
An act making an appropriation
to recognize the 400th
anniversary of winemaking in
America.
Bill 3070 introduced by senators
Doig.
And Cervantes.
250%.
Making an appropriation.
Sented about 370.
Senate Bill 370 haven't been
Senate Bill 371, introduced by
Senator Scher, an act relating
to healthcare increasing the
safety requirements for
reproductive health care.
Saniel 372 introduced by Senator
Cedillo Lopez and Representative
Dixon.
gross amount paid on certain
tele telecommunications bills to
51 cents.
51 amending the
telecommunications Access Act.
Transportation Committee then
Senate Finance Committee, Senate
Bill 372.
Then I built 373 introduced by
to a designated authority of the
military installation if a
person involved in an allegation
of child abuse and neglect or
domestic abuse is a member of
the United States military and
Requiring that the court allow
remote allow remote appearances
in a hearing for a domestic
violence order of protection
United States military making
conforming amendments. Senate
Bill 373 373 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and.
Senate Bill 374 introduced by
senators Jaramillo.
Campos
And Gonzalez.
An act relating to
infrastructure.
Fund.
Creating the land grant Merced
infrastructure project fund and
the Asea infrastructure Project
fund.
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee's Senate Bill
374.
Then I built 375 introduced by
Senator Maestas.
An act relating to probation.
certain circumstances,
clarifying projected release
dates for meritorious.
Deductions upon admission to a
correctional facility.
Bill 375.
Senate Memorial 6 introduced by
Senator Lopez, a memorial
requesting the Department of
Health to study a proposed
Memorial 6, having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate Rules
Committee, then Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee, Senate
Memorial 6.
business Committee reports, the
reader will read, Mr. President,
your Indian rural and cultural
Affairs Committee, to whom has
been referred Senate Bill 163,
Senator Lopez
I'm sorry, Center souls.
with one motion.
See no objection, the reader to
read.
Senate Bill 209 do pass and then
submitted Senator Shannon De
Pinto, chair.
I move adoption of the committee
report. Senator, there has been
a motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those oppose me, the eyes have
it. Community report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
they acted upon individually.
Senate Majority Floor Leader
Peter Wars take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
committee reports to come down
from Senate Finance on Senate
bills 12, and 3. We do want to
get those red in, so, uh,
everyone sees him on the
calendar and we're probably
will come in at 11:30 tomorrow.
I do want to make one
announcement though with respect
to Rios, reauthorization of
capital outlay, those forms are
year and there's only 130 forms
upstairs, so I just really
encourage members to be on top
of your cap.
outlay, and if you're interested
and, uh, Mr. President, I might
yield to Senator Munoz who I
know has some thoughts about
that. Thank you.
Uh, I'm glad to see the majority
floor leader smiling to talk
about Cat Outlays and Rios.
And so that hasn't happened and,
and well that hasn't happened,
we've grown our capital outlay
to $5.9 billion sitting there.
That tolls roughly I think 124
million.
78 million that just has had no
spending at all. Some of those
projects, I mean, you can go
from, uh,
centers, there's 4 million
that's unspent.
Uh, you can go to the Department
of Transportation funding
complete.
I'm gonna get there.
It's a lot because I keep
scrolling.
$59 million in unspent money.
ourselves. We give enough money
or we try to piecemeal money,
oh, here's 100,000 here. Here's
250,000 there, and then 3 years
this is a discussion in our
committee the other day has 70
$70 million to, uh,
To fix dams and decommission and
state conscious has state park
problem too. It's not just.
Just everyone else, uh, we fund
when we funded capital with
STBs.
penalties because we didn't do
our job.
And so, Mr. President, uh,
There's so many things that have
been reauthed more than once.
couple outlay process and
members will pay attention.
We're gonna be looking at, they
trained your staff, they sent
you a scoring sheet. They asked
to hit $6.4 billion.
Mr. President, and so if you
take $6 billion and you put it
in the bank and invest it and
capital program. We're booking
5:25 right now. We can almost
fund our whole capital program
enough engineers. There's a
shortage of contractors, there's
a shortage of prioritizing jobs.
They asked for partials. They
don't, we can't complete
gonna start changing or we're
gonna be in even bigger trouble.
Everybody wants money for their
pet projects. Well, you know,
we're gonna start saying if you
want a water project.
requests annually. So this for
the first time, they'll be able
to come back and complete
projects
in the, in the water trust
board.
come in here and say I'm gonna
go get Capala outla first and
not do the do the work to go get
free money and complete a 1020
$30 million dollar sewer project
You cities and counties, you
know, there's other places where
you can get money at a 1% loan.
And if you want to go to and
apply to those, then we'll make
projects, uh, what is the total
cost of the construction project
and not just give me planning,
design, furnish, equip.
Uh, and everything else to do
monitor correctly.
How we can use that money and
how we can make sure that we can
complete projects because I know
Senator Wirth loves to go put
the golden shovel on the ground.
the executive out and get some
more room in the Capitol. I
mean, we have people working in
committee rooms.
Uh, right now, and they're doing
need more staff room for LFC. We
need more staff across the board
and with new legislative staff,
so as we lecture and talk about
Rios, we talked about the new
And then Senate Finance is gonna
get pretty busy and, and we have
a lot to go through this year.
So with that, Mr. President, I
think, uh,
we'll come back to announcement.
Senator Peter Ward, take us to
that next order of business.
Yes, Mr. President, I think
we're waiting for some
additional attachments to those
Senator Jadameo, Center souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. Just a
reminder for those interested,
uh, basketball practice tomorrow
morning at 6 o'clock. Uh,
join us so we can play over the
top of those shorter, uh,
Shorter House members and show
them what it means to be a tall,
um,
some exercise. If you don't
play, come and watch a little
bit, work out on the ellipticals
or the treadmills over at Fort
Marcy. There's a special
sign-in, just sign in for
We do have further
announcements. I'll go back to
Senator Munoz to announce this
committee, and then I go to
Senator Jaramillo. Thank you,
Mr. President. What do you think
the the spread would be in
DraftKings on the Senate House
the elevation of play that
Senator Paul brings to the
chamber. Senator souls.
I'm not one as a math person
statistician, I'm not one that
does a whole lot of betting
money on the house, I hope
you're getting really long odds.
Thank Senator Munoz. Thank you,
Mr. President. Senator Paul Yi
for a question that I want to
see what yield.
And maybe tell us your
experience with basketball.
Paul.
Thank you, Mr. President, you
know, I don't have, let's wait
till after tomorrow and I'll
uh, former senator or rep Pat
Lyons, and correct me if I'm
speaking wrong, but uh he said
that he's held the scoring
record for the House Senate
think that, uh, we can beat that
and uh the house better be
ready. They better bring it.
Thank you Senator Paul. Senator
Munoz, Mr. President, what about
Senator Thornton, uh, he's right
behind him and they're about
we're gonna be the twin towers
except I'm gonna be the one on
the side that's falling down,
uh.
But I think the spread will, I'm
gonna give us 20 points easy.
Oh
sure I played that game many
years. I'm not sure 20 points
is, is possible for both teams
to even score, but, but I do
think that uh you're right on
that the Senate has a heavy
time, so uh just so the members
know, Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. Senate
Finances will go in, uh, 30
minutes after the floor, maybe
about 2:30, uh, still hearing
there.
And, and so, uh, that was a big
debate and, and agencies are
coming over from the house.
They're, they're doing pretty
well. I mean, they're, they're
leveled off. Uh, we still have
of work to do is is house bill 2
comes over and we start hearing
some of that stuff. So, um, we,
we piled money everywhere over
the last 3 years and, and now
we're knowing that agencies
aren't spending it and they
can't move it and
what's happening under, under
the new president, uh, they're
looking at Medicaid and we're
monitoring that very closely,
uh, because that is the biggest
cost to the entire state budget,
2, Mr. President?
You know, I, I'm pretty
optimistic that that's the
constitutional requirement of
the Senate and the and the
House, so I'm betting 100% on
list for announcements. I think
Mr. President. Mr. President,
you know, yesterday was Hispanic
Cultural Day, and we appreciate
all of you celebrating that as
part of our tradition. Uh, there
Cannada.
Now, the problem is that the
bill did not have an ene in
Cannada.
So the way it actually reads is
Santa Cruz de Canada.
I was very concerned with
Senator Jaramillo's bill without
Daniel, because without the Ea
it's Santa Cruz de Canada and,
and so I asked, uh, Senator
County, which should have an end
yet and Mr. President, I'm
disappointed, especially on
Hispanic culture they to learn
the legislative council says
they can't do it in you.
gets to 4, you will have
resolved the problem that we may
have that in the future we may
need legislative counsel to help
us a little bit with getting Ea
with, with the request that he
comes maybe when his bill gets
to the floor, then we've got
this EA problem resolved.
Senator how do you yield. I
yield, Mr. President, and I want
Valley, the Dioma de espanol
that I speak and the land grant
Santa Cruz de la Cannada that I
brought forth so the tilde is
very important 100 years from
now, Senator.
Cruz de la Canada that the tilde
that E is an important part of
legislation because it defines
who we are as Nortenos, who we
are as revo Mexicanos.
Boraga, and we've got latest
counts, but, you know, I mean,
it's fun and we're all smiles,
but it's also important, uh,
here to recognize that we do
have some letters that are
Vocabulary, our language and our
text, Mr. President, so I
appreciate Senator Jamil's bill
is the opportunity for us to
start doing that.
Thank you, Senator Cervanta. Mr.
President, on a different but
Changing the gulf of Mexico to
the Gulf of America.
And we're giggling here in the
chamber. And, and, you know,
it's, he's kind of funny
Now the Treaty of Guada de
Guadalupe de Hidalgo establishes
the boundaries of the territory
acquired by the United States
from Mexico as part of that
treaty.
Now, if the president has
eliminated the Gulf of Mexico,
there is no longer any boundary
between the United States and
States has eliminated the Gulf
of Mexico as a geographic
reference then by the Treaty of
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
there is no longer a border or
either one of the two
principalities, the United
States or Mexico without the
consent of both.
So in the absence of consent
from Mexico, the good news is
which has certain repercussions
including treaty uh conformities
and, and potentially war between
the two countries because it
specifies what happens in a war
do, uh, with no disrespect to
the Republic of Mexico, but, but
the president would probably be
advised and my guess is he
probably doesn't study a lot of
very concerned that there will
now be a movement afoot to
change the name of our state
from New Mexico.
God knows what, uh, but, uh, I
think we can make light of this
constitution section 5 says that
the rights of the citizens of
New Mexico pursuant to the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo are
inviolate.
Uh, our own state constitution
at times that we see out of DC
we have to recognize there is
some seriousness to our
predecessors who affirmed that
treaty and used to take the
governance of our two countries
Yes, the judiciary Committee
does some work too. We're we're
looks like we're gonna take a
little bit more time here on the
floor. So we'll say 3 o'clock
we've got a long debate and
discussion on some water bills
Thank you, Mr. President. The
Senate Democrats will have a
caucus meeting tomorrow
immediately following the floor
in the Senate lounge and I'll
make sure to stay in contact
with the minority caucus chair
announce we will be the
Republican caucus will be
meeting and caucusing at the
same time in order to be able
oh.
My floor leader saying
immediately after theirs. So
objections, Senator proceed. Mr.
President. Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee will be
meeting about 30 minutes after
you get off the floor, we get
Conservation Committee for the
Senate will be meeting at 9 a.m.
in room 311 tomorrow morning.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Fanics.
the Democratic caucus meeting
tomorrow, uh, we'll be meeting
30 minutes after the caucus
ends, and so I'll keep you
posted on that. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Hamblin. Any further
Hearing no objection, the reader
will read.
Mr. President, your finance
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 1 has had
it under consideration, reports
Mr President, I moved adoption
of the committee reports
senators.
We have a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
it under consideration, reports
same with the recommendation
that do not pass, but that the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2 do
vote on them with one motion and
the general reflect they were
acted upon individuals.
Hearing no objection, the reader
to read.
Senate Bill 3 as amended, do not
submitted Senator George Munoz's
chair.
We've adoption the committee
reports. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I, those
next order of business. Thank
you, Mr. President. Unanimous
consent we go without our
business announcements and
miscellaneous hearing no
objection. We're on that order
of business announces
miscellaneous.
to do 3rd reading and for the
newer members, you know, we
don't go through every bill
that's listed on the calendar. I
do try and take them in order,
Make that announcement. With
that, Mr. President, unanimous
consent. The Senate stand in
recess until 11:30 tomorrow
morning.
See no objection to Senate to
send a recess to 11:30 tomorrow.
