Santa Figueroa.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Minos.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Nova.
Santa Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scott.
Santeridia Lopez.
here.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
You're lacking a quorum, Madam
President.
Senators, please come into the
Madam President, you now have a
quorum. Please stand for the
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
by Senator Souls.
Good morning, Lieutenant
Governor.
And good morning senators.
And good morning.
Special guests.
You just send it.
And uh now I was speaking my own
native tongue.
I
it's
He had
That the may our Lord give you
the
guidance and the wisdom and the
blessing to do well for.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Uh
America.
And.
One nation.
Huo felida a la bandera de la
Unidos de America
Huo felida a la bandera de la
Unidos de Americailla republica
in the libertas.
Good morning, everyone. Senator
Michael Padilla.
senate.
Seeing no objection, it
disordered. Senator Wirth. Ah
thank you, Madam President,
unanimous consent. We go to that
our business announcements and
thank you, uh, Mayor Abeta for
being here for your words. Uh,
it's our privilege to have you
here, and it's just beautiful to
have to hear the invocation.
to have guidance, your guidance
and blessing to us as we really
are now in the home stretch, uh,
as much needed, so, uh, thank
day, and I'd just like to have
him. He'd asked to share a few
words and if we could do that.
Seeing no objection, we'll hear
from.
honor for me, and we brought
voices in from across the state
in many different faiths, and I
hope those invocations brought
some peace to this place. And so
great thanks to all of you, to
Let's give him a big round of
applause for what he did. Thank
you, Reverend.
you, Madam President. I'll start
with the unanimous consent to
allow cameras on the Senate
floor and in the Senate gallery.
See, no objection. We so
orderener Padilla thank you very
for the purposes of a call.
See no objection, we will do so.
Thank you, Senator Senator
Woods, good morning. Good
morning, Madam President. How
To excuse Senator Brantley.
Senator Lanier, Senator
Senator Gallego, Senator Boone,
Senator Sanchez, and Senator
Brandt from the chamber until
they returned, except for the
purposes of a call.
Mexico Technology Day at the
legislature, and I'm not sure if
anyone has any words on that. I
always look at Senator Padilla.
today was just a, a great
morning for veterans in New
Mexico. Uh, myself and um a
couple other legislators were
on. I was looking for more, but
I got off pretty easy. So, uh,
that was passed today. The
governor, um, had, uh,
uh, some nice words to say about
governor signed the bill for the
property tax exemptions for our
veterans today based on their
federal disability, uh, uh,
ratings, which was huge, uh,
Uh, one week before it is
National Vietnam War Veterans
Day, as you know, on 29 March.
This is a very, very special,
an incredible book out, Madam
President, and it was written,
uh, by a friend of mine, uh,
Lieutenant Colonel, United
States Air Force retired. Jason
trying to evacuate from Saigon
in April of 1975, April 30th,
uh, to be precise.
And uh Colonel Knton wrote that
down and took South Vietnam and
uh a lot, a lot of people died,
um, after the communists took
over South Vietnam. So I want to
thank, uh, Colonel Knowton for.
and I wanna say, uh, welcome
home to our Vietnam veterans. In
fact, Madam President,
can pack a punch.
And I'm honored to have 2 of
them with me today.
Um, stand up, Jerry. One is Mr.
Jerry Martinez.
And then, uh, for some reason
after the Marine Corps, he
joined the army from, uh, 1982
to 2001 and Jerry is part of the
Vietnam Veterans of America.
50% replica of the wall in
Washington DC that has the names
of over 58,000 of our fallen.
And the governor was talking
go and see the names on that
wall because there are a lot of
New Mexicans and New Mexicans
have played a proud, proud part
The other, uh, veteran here
today is, uh, Mr. Neil Heis.
Neil is a, uh,
Uh, very special to me. He's
Uh, doing some great things for
the country from 1966 to 1967.
In fact,
Neil was kind of an older guy in
And I want to honor Neil and
Jerry for their service and Neil
has done a lot of things for
veterans. He, uh, was part of,
been recognized for his help and
support of veterans for many,
many decades, as well as hiring
veterans that is uh crusher
company down in Berlin, Semco
Vietnam War.
I think it's important.
That we welcome these incredible
veteran's home who quite
frankly, did not get the welcome
He was spit on.
And I think we
Should applaud what our Vietnam
veterans did because they were
them and we respect everything
that they did for our country,
and we will never forget them,
nor the names of those 58,000
Uh, seeing none.
Uh, Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Please take a look at those, uh,
concurrence. Make sure I get the
numbers right. Concurrence
number 5 will be Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 115, as amended with the
we'll do the work up on the
table.
Go to the concurrence and then
I'll let uh everyone know kind
of what the direction is, uh,
Madam President, unanimous
consent. We go to that on our
business messages from the
governor.
Senate executive message number
10. The Honorable Mimi Stewart,
president pro tempore and
members of the New Mexico
Senate.
President
clause and Senate Bill 199
enacted by the fifty-seventh
legislature, first session 2025,
Oh sorry, Senator Worth, we're
still on that order.
Reader to read.
steward and members of the
Senate. I appreciate the
legislature's efforts on Senate
Bill 5 as amended SB 5, which
enacts substantial reforms to
coordinate.
branch of government SB 5 has
spawned a serious problem that
threatens to cripple the state
game commission. Currently,
members of the commission may be
As drafted, it appears SB 5
requires that commissioners may
only be removed from after the
state ethics commission files an
action in district court with
given the many pressing matters
addressed by district courts and
the Supreme Court. It would take
years to remove even the most
blatantly incompetent or corrupt
individuals, allowing
lengthy judicial proceedings for
removal or determine the
existence of a vacancy could
paralyze the commission's work
in situations where prompt
action is needed to address
manner.
As our Supreme Court observed
long ago.
The Constitution makers thought
that a person who could be
trusted to fill the office of
arise where prompt action, take
action was necessary for the
public good and that it was not
wise to tie the hands of the
governor when such action might
well work to the detriment of
the state.
NMSC 06041 32 NM 265, 255, page
1077.
I agree
Rather than tie our hands with a
lengthy and complex legal
the Constitution Article 54 to
promptly hold members of the
state commission accountable.
To be clear, this concern has
nothing to do with me as I am
served without confusing,
lengthy and costly removal
process contained in SB 5.
Thankfully, it is unnecessary to
Constitution. See letter from
Elizabeth A. Glenn, Deputy
Attorney General to Raul E.
Bursaga, director of Legislative
council Service, March 16, 2011,
Bill 5 as amended, enacted by
the fifty-seventh legislature,
first session 2025, except the
following item or items, part or
parts, which I hereby veto
following the semicolon on line
4. All of lines 5 to 17 and the
word appealed through the word
court.
On line 18.
SB 5 into law. My signature on
SB 5 is contingent upon the
effect of effectiveness of this
line item veto. If there's light
item veto is determined to be
invalid or void by a court of
The journal will show the
message from the governor has
been received.
In Senor.
the house, the reader to read.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 41 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the House and request
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 48 as
amended by the Senate. Senate
Bill 124 as amended by the
Lisa Martiz McCutchen, chief
clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Finance
amendments respectfully
submitted, Lisa Martiz
McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The show the message from the
House has been received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marti McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message from the House has been
received.
Madam President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191.
House Bill 233 as amended.
House Bill 298 House Bill 532,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Amartiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
and engrossed copies of house
commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10, House Bill
155, House Bill 180, house
appropriations and finance
read in full and signed by the
officers of the house and open
session and.
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to House Bill 54 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
amendments to House Bill 143 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The message from the house. The
journal will show the message
amended by the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journalist show the message
from the house has been
received.
clause and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
Journal show the message from
the house has been received.
Joint Memorial 6 House Joint
Memorial 9 and request the
concurrence of the Senate.
Respectfully submitted Lisa and
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will show that the
Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We go back to that
well.
Back to that order business
message from the governor.
See no objection. We are back on
that order business messages
President pro temporary Stuart
and members of the Senate
pursuant to my authority under
Article 4 Section 22 of the New
Mexico Constitution. I have
state to make sure that federal
benefits for children in foster
care are maintained for their
future use while the Children,
Youth and Families Department
already has policies in place
that limit the use of these
yours, Michelle Lujan Grisham,
Governor.
The Journal, so the message from
the governor has been received.
Sa majority floor leader Peter
Mr. President, your conservation
committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 431 has had
it under consideration and
reports the same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
I move adoption of the committee
report. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye. Those
pose, the eyes have at the
community report has been
adopted. The reader will read.
with the recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz, chair.
Center Shindo
We have
aye.
Those oppose me, the eyes have
it. The community port has been
adopted. The reader will read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
the same has been duly enrolled
in a gross preparatory to
signing by the office of the
Senate, respectfully submitted
Senator Cary Hamlin, Senator
Heather Bergmans, Senator
Nicholas A. Paul co-chairs.
Those are Poney, the eyes have
it. The community report has
been adopted. I'd like to
announce to the members of the
body that the officers of the
Senate have signed an open
session Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended.
it under consideration reports
that the same has been duly
enrolled in and gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Kerry Hamlin, Senator Heather
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
the community board has been
adopted. I'd like to announce to
the members.
That the officers in the Senate
have signed an open session
Senate Bill 47.
referred Senate Bill 57 has had
it under consideration and
reports that the same has been
duly enrolled and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted to
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
the community port has been
adopted and uh.
Mr. President, unanimous
consent. We go our business
introduction of legislation.
and revenue Committee substitute
for House Bill 450.
An act relating to capital
expenditures authorizing the
issuance of severance tax bonds,
certifications to the Department
of Finance and Administration,
establishing conditions for the
reversion of unexpended balances
directing the expenditure of
House Bill 450.
House taxation and the revenue
Committee substitute for House
introduced by representatives
Herrera de la Cruz.
Johnson Syspanski and Senator
Hamlin, a joint memorial
and the interim. House Joint
Memorial 2 joint Memorial 2
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate Rules
memorial requesting the New
Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology to study the benefits
and costs of direct air capture
technology and report
recommendations for statutory
been read twice by titles
referred to the Senate Rules
Committee House Joint Memorial
for.
Has Joint Memorial 6 introduced
by representatives on on you.
United States and between Taiwan
and New Mexico in trade,
education, exchange of visits by
officials and Taiwan's
participation in international
organizations.
titles referred to the Senate
Rules Committee, House Joint
Memorial 6. House Joint Memorial
9 introduced by representatives
create a special interim
committee dedicated to examining
issues presented by artificial
intelligence technology and
developing legislative proposals
Committee House Joint Memorial
9.
inworth, uh, Mr. President, so
we're gonna do the two
concurrences, concurrent
calendar number 5 will be
Senator Padilla and concurrent
calendar number 6 will be
Bill 115 as amended with the
emergency clause. no objection.
We are in that order of business
concurrence Senator Padilla. Uh.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
Mr. President, I move that.
See no objection center but if
you'll explain those amendments
thank you very much, Mr.
President. It's a very simple
concurrence that we need to do
here, Mr. President, uh, with
this piece of legislation, these
happened here is the the
applications open up in the
middle of October and they're
accepted all the way until we
come into the session, Mr.
President, so this does happen,
uh, just about every year that
we have to do this. There was a
project added.
concurrence.
To the House amendments and I'll
yield to Senator Woods.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask for
unanimous consent to excuse
close. uh, thank you very much,
Mr. President. I urge the body
to vote in favor of the
amendment that was made in this,
in the house, um.
By voice vote, Mr. President, 13
years, you think I'd have this
down by now. It happens,
Senator. I understand it
happens.
Senators, there's been a motion
to concur with the House
The Senate has concurred with
the House amendments to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 115 as amended with
the emergency clause.
Senate Bill 41 as twice amended
with House amendments to Senate
Bill 14, that's twice I'm
repeating myself. Let me start
all over, Mr. President.
twice 41 as twice amended.
Senator, if you'll explain what
those amendments were,
Mr. President, this is a
overwhelm of the alert system
going out, um, what we did
specifically, you'll see they're
the missing person, um, and with
that, Mr. President, I stand for
debate. Thank you, Charlie
Sanders. We're debating the
concurrence.
Of House Amendments to Senate
Bill 41 is two times amended
call no objections.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senators we're debating.
See no debate. Senator tried to
I move the the Senate do concur
with the House amendments to
Senate Bill 41 is twice amended.
The eyes have it. The senators
concurred to the House
amendments for Senate Bill 41 as
two times amended. Senator
Charlie, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you,
President, now being 11:59 a.m.,
a move we adjourn until 12:01
p.m. The Senate will come to
order.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
ask consent that the rules be
suspended, the journals show all
those present in this morning's
full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. Hearing no
objection. It is so ordered.
Senator Werth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So here is a road
Schendo, uh, Senate Finance
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 425, item number 3 is
Senator Lopez, Senate Bill 426,
believe that'll be Senator Munoz
when he gets here, uh, and then
we're gonna jump to item 23,
which is, uh, the substitute for
on. Also, uh, Mr. President, I
just want to give a heads up
that we are going to put
together uh a.
Consent agenda with two Ds and
two R's, there's a lot of bills
Senator Scher and we'll figure
out who exactly is going to be
on that, uh, and we'll let folks
know, but and, and there's a
process and, and I know Senator
Campos has will be part of that
Mr. President. Uh, I asked for a
point, uh, a personal privilege
here. We've had a, a house
member that was kept off the
and, and conduct business in the
chamber. I asked for unanimous
consent to
the dress code to allow a
Mr. Chair, Mr. Senator Woods. So
for the uh members information,
uh, the Senate does have a dress
code. Um, we did send out a
letter I sent out that letter
personally it was approved by uh
we did mention that I see see uh
members in the House leadership
in the House on both sides of
the aisle. And so I believe that
there's plenty of notice that
was sent to uphold the dress
code that we do have here in the
This is a common practice we
have done in the past.
I realized that, that, that
maybe it was notified.
To redress for the day. This is
a very busy time for these guys
and for us.
unanimous consent request. There
is a discussion on that,
Senator.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator
Woods, let's just hold off for a
minute on this. Um, I'd like to
Montoya to give him a heads up
and the speaker, um, again, if
there's meetings that the House
members want to have with a
member of the Senate, I think
that and see if we can't make
this, make this work. It is,
this is a new thing and again
the House has made a decision to
allow genes around the clock
lieutenant Governor did want to
send that message and wrote the
letter, which again was
reviewed.
By both sides, so let's just if
we could, let's hold off for
just a minute and let me visit
announcements and miscellaneous
any further announcements?
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. President. Um, I
second most, my kiddo is, um,
the second most important person
in my life, tied with my kiddo,
Cynthia Augustine is my mother,
and told me that I could, told
me that I should, as a matter of
fact, when we were little, we
had a motto in the house, don't
here today. Um, it's because of
the work, the sacrifice, and the
love of this woman standing next
to me. And so if the body would
be so kind
is to um help me introduce my
Do we have any further
announcements, senators?
Seeing of further announcement
we'll just stand in place for
President, during the
announcements earlier, you did
hear that today is a Technology
Day in the, um, state
legislature and while we've had,
you know, a little bit of
session to the people and so
with, with all of that, we
worked very hard to
Make sure that there's broadband
across New Mexico so that you
can participate in your state
yourself all the way up here, if
you could even do that to
participate in the legislative
process, so I think that we've
come a long way and just even a
decade, and I expect this to
come a long way, uh, beyond that
Mexico down on the border, the
border plex we have quantum
physics, um, that we're trying
to build a quantum economy and
their their estimates, Mr.
President, that that is a $2
quantum physics, um, uh, you
know, information that we're
working on this year for this
session.
We also need to make sure that
with all of these things going
on that we have um enough uh
our leader now. Thank you, Mr.
President thank you Senator
Padilla.
Senate majority leader Peter,
uh, thank you, Mr. President,
and thank you, Senator Padilla.
reading legislation.
I know that there's a lot of
activity. I know there's a lot
of discussions, especially this
late in the game. I would just
remind all members during the
debate that we can uh give the
Senate Bill 197 on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate or amendment
or substitution no objections.
Senator Campos to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President,
act uh for funds to fund
revenues and to enable local uh
EMS departments to pledge
revenues for debt service that
the bill allows EMS bonds to be
Uh, right now as an example to
purchase an ambulance with uh
everything that goes with it.
It's about 280,000 along with
that, when you order an
help uh bond and to purchase uh
ambulances for so many of our uh
districts, our EMS districts
throughout the state. In
essence, that's what this bill
does, Mr. President.
Senate, I move that Senate Bill
197 do not pass, and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The records show that the role
has been called and all those
present vote in the affirmative,
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
By a vote of 31 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative
Bill 425. This does have an
emergency clause, senators I you
to Senator Schindo. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President.
Oh shoot.
unanimous Senate of the Senate
that the record showed that all
actions were placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 425 with the
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 425 reauthorizes uh 423
capital projects authorizing
previous years from the various
funds.
questions.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Senators, we're debating Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 425. It does have an
he's put forward in the course
to the LFC staff and others, um,
here's another concern that we
continue to raise as we move
forward with resources that are
a part of that. So with Capital
Outley we have 5000 projects,
about $6 billion that's being
held in abeyance.
Now we have in this
Again, the concern continues to
be the efficiencies and how
we're going to develop the
system that is definitely going
to work when we start talking
there before us. So again, Mr.
President, and to uh Senator
Shindo, I applaud his efforts to
continue to help us not only to
pare down, if you will, uh,
these projects, but also to.
efficiently, uh, spent as well
and more importantly, as we go
forward, we want them to go
ahead and uh meet the intended
purpose if we do this within the
next few years as we continue
investment.
to the people of New Mexico.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, and again, thank you
very much to Senator Shchindo.
Thank you, Senator Campos.
Centers
Center and the yield, Mr.
President, yes, I am.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, I'm
curious about how many times the
ask for expert witness.
Or unanimous sent to have an
expert witness on the floor.
Senator, if you'll explain or
question again so that uh my
expert witness can hearen Scott.
Uh, Mr. President, my question
is with regard to, uh, how many
these been reauthorized also how
many are there in these old
ones.
Uh, Mr. President and Senator,
my expert with me tells me that
six years. Is this a partially
completed project has not
started yet. Can we, can you
describe what the circumstances
are.
ongoing and that it is expected
to be completed, uh, this coming
year.
OK. Is that the, is that's the
oldest do we have several others
Thank you, Senator, for your
answers and I would certainly
agree with uh Senator Campos
So we do have further debate.
Senator Woods, do you wish to
debate?
no see no further debate,
Senator Shindo to close on the
bill.
OK
the Senate that the records show
that the role has been called
and all those present voting in
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
Senators, we're voting all
senators to your seats please.
Thank you, Mr. President,
members of the body. We're going
to go on to item 3. That'll be
Senate Bill 426 and I'll go to
Senator Lopez.
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator Lopez to explain.
Uh, Mr. President, members, Mr.
President, members of the
School for visually Handicrafted
to the blind administrative unit
of the of the vocational
rehabilitation division.
That is found in the New Mexico
uh public education department.
I'll stand for questions. Thank
you, Senator Lopez. Senators,
we're debating Senate Bill 426
see no debate, Senator Lopez to
close on the bill.
been called and all those
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands. All
senators to your seats, please.
We are voting all senators if
you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Worth, unanimous consent we go
out of business announcements
and miscellaneous no objection
on that order business announces
miscellaneous senor, uh, Mr.
President, I'm just gonna yield
President, uh, we have a true
opportunity right now if you
take a look, as I was mentioning
before on uh items like quantum
physics and we are attempting to
set up.
chairs in our research
States, and I really believe,
Mr. President, that this is
going to become probably far,
it'll it could literally eclipse
our entire economy, Mr.
things like data centers, um, we
have become so far we have here
in New Mexico organizations like
uh Addison Technologies, Mr.
President.
centers are actually about half
the size of mine in the majority
leader's desk, if you can
believe that, and the, the power
usage actually starts to
generate itself, uh, if you put
this, um, filtration system that
has the specialized oil in this
water, and what it does is it
takes the water and it cools the
data center and it reduces by
lifespan of a of a data center
that that you're looking at now.
So when you see these mega
warehouses and things of that
nature on on um social media or
in the news today.
in terms of what data centers
talking about here in New
Mexico, Mr. President, we're
going to see those data centers
eventually are going to be the
size of this cup I'm holding
here right now, and that amount
of water, that amount of power,
and it'll be powering.
high school that you, that you
played basketball in Mr.
President in high school, can
now be the eventually the size
of my desk and then eventually
it's gonna be the size of that
coffee cup there. So it's pretty
jobs. Nobody will work in this
industry, Mr. President, making
less than $90,000 a year. It's
really quite amazing when you
think about it, and that will
truly turn that economy down in
and so those are things like uh
fabrications, they might be, um,
research facilities, you name
it. So with that, Mr. President,
I really believe that New Mexico
needs to grasp this.
Senator Munoz who's gonna
present item number 21 House
Bill 71A, while we wait for him,
we're gonna jump down to item
number 23, house taxation
revenue Committee subsid for
substitute for House Bill 14 as
amended. See, no objection. We
are on that order of business.
3rd, we need legislation.
Senator Hamblin.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
substitution.
Senator Hammond to explain.
Thank you, Mr. President. As we
all take a deep breath and
buckle in. House Bill 14 as
amended, comes to the floor
depending on whether or not we
had the capacity. We heard those
bills in committee debated them,
and then held them for
consideration if we got word, we
would have capacity.
Then once we were informed of
the 58 to 69.5 million in
spending capacity for the Senate
tax priorities without raising
additional revenue within the
package. After communication and
portion to the earned income tax
credit.
The provisions we have added in
the Senate Tax Committee
collectively strengthen public
services, economic development,
started off as 400 million and
then dropped down to 250
million, then dropped down again
to 150 million, and I understand
that there is an amendment that
I look forward to discussion
Here are the tax package
breakdowns. Foster parent and
guardian tax credit, which
recognizes the financial burden
of fostering and encouraging
stable supportive homes for
vulnerable children by providing
positions New Mexico as a leader
in cutting edge quantum
technology, attracting high-tech
investment and job creation.
The health practitioner
coinsurance deduction, which
reduces financial barriers to
extends the sunset for copays,
deductibles and co-insurance
deductions from physical year 28
to FY 30.
to train and retain healthcare
practitioners, and this creates
a GDRT distribution to a newly
established UNM school of
medicine fund to help pay for a
new school of medicine and
Also, volunteer EMT and
firefighter income tax credit.
This recognizes the essential
public services provided by
volunteer first responders
very small, but impacts a great
deal of people, encourages
volunteer participation in life
saving rescue operations. This
establishes a refund tax credit
for search and rescue volunteers
for informed communities and
democratic accountability.
The local news printer tax
credit, which helps sustain
local print journalism
infrastructure, ensuring access
existing programs. And lastly,
the disaster area gaming tax
exemption, which supports
economic recovery for a local
employer impacted by the
wildfire, helping maintain jobs
and regional stability.
debate, Mr. President, I want to
thank the Senate Tax Business
and Transportation Committee,
especially our ranking member,
uh, Senator Sanchez and minority
floor leader Senator Scher. I'm
Thank you, Senator Hamblin.
Senators.
We do have a floor amendment.
The Reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number 1
Center share Mr. President, I
move Senate floor Amendment
number one, which is 2, 32111.1
to house tax, uh, revenue
strikes section 1 through 7,
which is the.
The, uh, oil and gas
the, the section that creates
the oil and gas equalization
surtax section, just strikes all
of that. Thank you, senators.
I'll give a moment for you to
review the amendments and just
Mr. President, I appreciate
Senator Sheer's thoughtfulness
on this, and there's been a
great deal of discussion. This
amendment is a friendly
amendment after conversations
with multiple entities involved
in this.
Mr. President, I now move
Amendment number 1 to house
taxation and Revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 14 as
amended and ask for a voice
vote. Senators, there's been a
The eyes have it send for number
one has been adopted to the
bill. We're back on the bill,
senators.
We have Senator Padilla followed
by Senator Steinborn on the
Senator Hamlin, do you yield?
Yes, Mr. President, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. I just
want to make sure I heard
everything correctly that in the
introduction, Mr. President, uh,
going to face when they be uh
contemplate bringing a foster
child into their home. This is
something that New Mexico has
decided to do, uh, sponsored, I
sponsored this legislation in
partnership with the governor to
tax credit fare, Mr. President,
Mr. President and Senator, I'll
do my best to answer, but I
might need to bring in my um
expert witnesses, but um from
That is up to $3000 annually.
And Mr. President, uh, you did
fantastic, Mr. President, on
that. Thank you so much for that
that description and explanation
fostered there were like 6 of us
in that home, and I think
there's an average of 2, 2.5, is
it per child or per home?
Mr. President, and I appreciate
the question from Senator
Padilla. I want to make sure
and also Jennifer Fabian who is
also from Legislative Finance
Committee. There's a unanimous
consent request to allow the
expert witnesses into the
chamber.
See no objection, Sergeant Arzer
and if I may ask, just to
confirm with the uh with Senator
Padilla asking if this is per
child. Am I correct, Mr.
President, Senator,
yes, Mr. President, I just was
curious, is this per child or
Yeah, thank you, Mr. President.
I think that's fantastic as
well. I, you know, that anything
will help, you know, these,
these homes, these families,
when you're fostering just just
of $600 to $700 per month. So I,
I really appreciate the tax
committee's hard work on the tax
bill and this item in particular
I think is gonna go right to the
heart of helping, uh, more.
and all of that. So thank you,
Mr. Perez. I had another
question related to, uh,
Quantum. I was talking quite a
bit about that this morning as
today is Technology Day here in
the legislature, Mr. President,
does is this offers a 15% tax
credit for investments of at
least 3 million in quantum
technology infrastructure that
is up to 10 million per facility
facilities, buildings, etc. What
about the, that and, and what
about technology as well, Mr.
President and Senator, that
actually covers all of that, all
of those different elements in
that question.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
bill that they have there in
that committee. I know they work
some many, many long, many, many
long days, but thank you, the,
the quantum, uh, topic for New
Mexico is something that's gonna
A $2 trillion economy and I want
New Mexico to be the center of
that, and I think with the, the
work that the tax committee did
to make sure that that comes to
New Mexico is very important.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. Uh,
with the sponsor please yields
for a question. Yes, Mr.
President, I do yield. Thank
you, Mr. President. Thank you,
tax credit also extend to foster
parents who are certified by
sovereign nations.
certification is on tribal land
that also pertains to them.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
don't have any more questions.
Senator Steinborn
the tax committee for this tax
package, and I wanna thank the
professionals sitting behind
her, Izzy and Jennifer and also
the uh tax and revenue
Department, um, there's an
And one big thing we set out to
really understand and do this
session was to relieve GRT from
medical providers. New Mexico,
nightmare for them to do the
accounting. So we put together
some comprehensive legislation
to remove it all, and many of
you co-sponsored that. And we're
hoping, you know, at the
So with that being said, I just
have a kind of a clarifying
question or two about it, Mr.
President, Senator, number one,
I'd heard you say we're
you, Mr. President, Senator, we
extended that by
Basically 2 years, is that
right?
Correct, Mr. President and
Senator, yes. OK. And then we
the same time. Is that correct?
And on the co-insurance, Mr.
President, Senator, is that
Right. Very good. And that, by
doing that, that made it
affordable. Um, and that's super
important, and those are the
folks that need the help right
now, Mr. President, Senator,
President, we had 3 people that
needed to be rescued in the
Oregon mountains. Literally, as
we were debating legislation to
help search and rescue. These
are the most extraordinary
public servants, they're
volunteers, they
the line and they're volunteers,
so we have a tax credit to help
them with some of their
equipment, and that's just the
right thing to do to invest in
them. Um so thank you for
including that.
Try to develop a more
comprehensive understanding of
this issue, a provider, um,
recruitment, not just looking at
Medicaid rates is one of the
best things we can do, and I
know we're doing that as well,
and that's a huge story coming
out of this session, but, uh,
certainly some of these other
things, I hope that going into
the interim, we can have
hearings on this. We can really,
approach going forward. So thank
you, Mr. President, and thank
you, Senator, and thank you to
your, uh, the team behind you.
Thank you Mr. President and
Senator, if I can just expand on
that. I agree with you because
we, uh, we are starting that
differently. I believe that the
UNM School of Medicine fund
distribution along with the
health practitioner coinsurance
deduction is a start because we
talk about, uh, recruiting and
happening, uh, so that we can
really help build a solid
foundation for the next
generation of doctors.
Thank you, Mr. President, I too
want to thank the, the committee
and thank the chair for all of
the hard work, um, and also
putting together um this bill so
house tax bill over uh for our
consideration, um.
There's a group of us have been
working on
To affect consumption and that
bill did not make it over here
and I'm very disappointed about
that. I do see there is a slight
in the future we can move the
needle in this state by taking
on the issue of alcohol
consumption trying to reduce
consumption and increasing
to move the needle in this state
on education or any of the other
issues until we address the
substance abuse problem, um, but
again, I think the, I thank the
committee for their hard work. I
Thank you, Senator. Seeing no
further debate.
Senator Hamblin to close on the
bill.
communities and although our
capacity has changed, we have
the opportunity to create some
lifelong changes uh for our
those present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands. to your seats.
Senator Thorn, are you voting
no? Senator Thorton voting no.
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
House tax revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 14 is
twice amended is duly passed the
Senate. Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senate body.
I'm just waiting for the crowd
to leave a clapping applause for
that bill. Uh, Mr. President,
uh, unanimous consent to release
a Senate Bill 510, uh, it's
President, there's a unanimous
consent to release Senate Bill
510.
See no objection.
So ordered
Senate Majorityloor Leader Peter
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session. There
are no objection is so ordered.
Mr. President, I ask you to
consent that the rule the rules
be suspended that the records
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth. Uh, thank you Mr.
President. So we are going to go
back to the calendar to do item
number 21, House Bill 71 as
you Mr. President. I asked him
to ask the Senate, the record
show that all action for
placing, uh, House Bill 71 as
amended.
I'm double checking waiting for
That's twice, uh, House Bill 71
as twice amended, uh, Mr.
President, is now subject to
debate amendment and
substitution. Thank you, Senator
Muno. Senators, Senator Mu you
ask you to explain what your
allow our expert witness onto
the chamber see no objection.
He's scored an expert witness
into the chamber.
Thank you, Mr. President, while
he's coming on this bill, House
Bill 71, is amended allows, uh.
can increase the, uh, amount of
child care that we're doing in
the state of New Mexico. The
Senate Finances amendments did a
couple of things, Mr. President.
childhood trust fund. This is
how this bill got from 350
million.
to 9.5 billion today, uh, those
revenue streams due to oil and
gas in there. Thank you for
that, have increased, uh, that
taking 100% of either one we're
taking 50% of the two revenue
streams.
For 3 fiscal years, uh, with
triggers in the bill that says
the end of 2029 or 2030, uh,
when, when the two funds that
we're funding with the revenue
streams or the behavioral trust
fund and the Medicaid Trust Fund
As we project a billion dollars,
almost in maybe in total, uh,
but we reject those funds are
going to reach their capacity,
uh, those revenue streams will
stand for questions. Thank you,
Senator. Senators, we're
debating House Bill 71 is twice
amended on ULT center, but yeah.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
President. Um, you know, I, I
here in New Mexico to set up our
children for the future and to
focus on early education. I, I
will say that, uh, the chair of
finance did a great job, I
think, of actually listening to
intended for, so for that, that,
uh, reason, I do want to stand
in support of of House Bill 71
is twice amended. Thank you
Senator Padilla. Do we have any
further debate, senators?
move that House Bill 71 is twice
amended. Do now pass and it's
NASA in the Senate. The records
show the roles being called and
all of those voted in the
affirmative except those voting
seats if you wish to vote no,
please raise your hand.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
We're on that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President. So just for the
members, uh, we are gonna do a
calendar a little bit. We do
need to take a break.
Yeah, we.
We do need to take a break for
capital outlay, so we'll send
We're on that order business to
read legislation send a share.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
move.
Uh, that all actions for placing
Senate Bill 510 on final passage
Send a share to explain, um, Mr.
President.
Was there a judiciary committee?
Substitute for this?
I don't see anybody from
Senator She explained the bill.
All right, thank you, Mr.
President. I now move the Senate
And it's now ready for debate
amendment or substitution.
Senator, why don't we get our
script and start from the top.
You know, I said it perfectly
just a second ago, Mr.
President.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 510 on final passage it's
been taken, it's now ready for
debate amendment or
substitution. No objection.
Senator Sheriff, you'll explain
the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
uh, at risk of harm to
themselves or harm to others,
and it's simply a way to keep
the most dangerous people off of
our streets for a little while
until we can figure out what to
do with them.
Thank you, Senator Sher.
See no debate. Senator share to
close, Mr. President. I move
this Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 510
do now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate, the
record shows that all those
present voted in the
Senator Pope voting no.
Senator Cio Lopez voting no.
Hope to Senator Pope to explain
his vote. Thank you. I like that
name, uh, Mr. President, I, I
just had a vote no. It was just
pushed down to the floor from
the committee. I don't see much
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Worth, uh, Mr. President,
unanimous consent. We go that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous, and I yielded to
center Munoz. Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. President. I
consent. We expunge that
committee report and there's a
new one down for 63.
There's been unanimous consent
request.
See no discussion, no objection.
Some
consent. We go that our business
committee reports and I yield to
the reader.
Reader to read Mr. President,
your finance committee, to whom
George Munoz, chair
adoption of the community
report.
There's a motion to adopt the
community report. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
Uh, Mr. President, uh, uh, we've
got to build a capital outlay
bill today. Senate Finance is
going to go in, uh, we're gonna.
send up finance say maybe 5 or
10 minutes, uh, uh, as soon as
we get released from the floor,
and that finance members will go
in in about 10 minutes as soon
as we're released from the
floor.
goes up to do the capital outlay
bill and then the plan is to
come back down and uh do the
capital outlay bill on the
floor. So Mr. President, uh, if
there's no other.
Announcements, unanimous consent
Leader, you know, when I, I had
my guest, there was uh one very
special Vietnam veteran that I
forgot to mention and, um, it's
our own president, his father
Henry, uh, was a great veteran
President, we do have another
announcement, Senator, Senator
Charlie, apologies, Mr.
President. I um wanted to
introduce Senator Nova's guests
on the floor today because she
is in the House Judiciary
they do a myriad of work on
behalf of community but
particularly Indian students by
providing lots of
technical assistance and so
Thank you Senator Charlie see no
further announcements, Senator
Wirth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Block for doing the shout out
for Lieutenant Governor's dad.
There's a beautiful picture up
those moments, so Senator Block,
thank you for doing that, uh,
with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent the Senate
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair.
