Center is.
Center Figueroa.
San Gallegos.
Santa Lopez.
Senator Maestas.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Nava.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scott.
Sania Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
President.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning by
Pastor Clyde Davis from the
Senator Lanier, the pledge in
Spanish to be led by Senator
Jaramilo and the salute to the
With you and among you who make
decisions for our state.
So before we get into a formal
prayer, I'd like to take a
in our hearts, praying for all
who are elected to represent.
unknown.
And that has to be enough for
us.
You know what is coming, you
know where we are going, and we.
Moving trust.
We don't always know what the
right thing to do is, Lord.
We don't always know.
Which way to go.
And in that seeking to do the
best with our imperfect
understanding.
That you believe in us.
As we believe in you.
We can't even grasp it.
And particularly in the beauty
of our state.
Help us to find your presence
In the working together.
And in the beauty of nature that
surrounds us, the mountains, the
forests, the streams.
after it.
We pray that you will bless
these leaders.
With the mantle of wisdom.
Compassion
them to keep a sense of humor.
Hear us as we pray in the name
of the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit.
Amen.
indislibertarihuicia paratodos.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the Zia symbol
Good morning, everyone.
TGIF.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
additional prayer for us, so I
would just yield to Senator
Charlie and she can tell us who
we have and then we could do
that and then we'll jump in.
Senator Charlie, thank you,
can't get enough prayers
sometimes in here and they're
gonna lead us in just one more
prayer. So if our students would
stand up.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let's give a round of applause
to these great students.
President, good morning, uh,
unanimous consent, we go without
our business announcements are
miscellaneous.
See no objection were on that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Wirth,
really important thing to just
pause and uh Pastor Davis, thank
you. It's an honor for us to
have you here and for your words
and talking about how we are
appropriate. Thank you again for
being here. So Madam President,
I'm gonna.
to Senator Padilla for cameras
and excusals then to Senator
Woods, and then we'll go through
what we're gonna do this
morning.
Senator Patilia, uh, thank you
very much, Madam President, uh,
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Pinto, Senators Pinto,
Sendo, and Munoz until they
return to the chamber.
thank the, the pastor and, and
the, the, our kids up front here
for a, a double helping of favor
from God today. Thank you, sir.
today. They're not in their
seats at this moment, but I
guarantee you,
They'll be here when we need
them. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator Woods. We
look forward to them returning.
different. Uh, today is hunger
Action Day, sponsored by the
Road Runner Coalition and Hunger
in New Mexico and its city of
Las Vegas Day at the
legislature. Uh, Senator
when we get through with
The guests will go to you first,
uh, Senator Maestas has a
certificate for ALS Awareness
Day. Both the certificate of
will be read as well. Uh, just
one, announcement regarding
events tomorrow, uh, the Senate
Education Committee will be
Uh, just in terms of, of what
we're gonna do after we get done
with the introduction of guests
and the certificates, uh, we
do item number 10 on the
calendar, which is house
judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8. This is the,
uh, criminal competency bill and
crime package from the house,
Thank you, Madam President, I
have 2 students with me today.
The first is Joaquin Rose, who's
a junior attending Taos High
School. He's a member of the
Angelica Vigil, who was born and
raised in Las Vegas, New Mexico.
She's a junior at New Mexico
Highlands University working on
a BA in political science. He
anticipation of graduation is
4th judicial judge, Matthew
Sandoval, who we lost in 2019
after 50 years in a career of
various legal capacities and
Helia having known her
involvement inspired her.
to pursue her education and put
a political science. Her hopes
are to make a positive impact on
society as she felt her
Thank you, Senator Jaramelo.
Senator Charlie.
Saint Joseph's School, um, these
precious little ones, these
smart little ones, these future
little ones are all joining us
today from Saint Joseph's School
and San.
Dell in the northwestern part of
New Mexico. Education that began
in 1644 at Stan Esteban Mission
grandchildren there to be
educated.
Saint Joseph's alumni include
high school valedictorians,
salutatorians, accountants,
The current, um, which currently
include Ama's governor Charles
Riley and Laguna's first
lieutenant governor, Ronald
Saracino, Saint Joseph's School
the Western Catholic Education
Association and Madam President,
to your right on the rostrum,
um, if you'll stand and hold
applause.
behind me we have Isabel Riley,
who was a babysitter of mine
when I was a little girl.
Thank you, Senor Charlie. Next
we'll go to Senator Nava.
for today, uh, with me I have uh
one of my constituents actually
to my left, if you want to
stand, Joel Aldebas, he is at
Cibola High School. He is a
interested in philanthropy and
really wants to help his
community, especially young
people. He plans to attend UNM
and pursue a degree in
psychology and then looking at
And to my right, I have two,
brave individuals here who are
also with National MS Society
trustee and Living with MS, if
we could please help you walk
them to the chamber.
legislators here, freshman
senators in the upper chamber as
our wonderful chair Luhan
reminds us often, um, I want to
senators in New Mexico and again
I deeply believe that
representation matters and
having this woman.
the chamber has made me very
proud, Madam President, and this
had flowers. She was not there,
and they told me it was her
birthday, Madam President, so I
would like to ask the chamber to
join me in singing Happy
birthday to Senator Angel
Charlie, if that is allowed.
Happy birthday.
Dear Senator Angel Charlie.
Senor and Madam President, I'm
told there is a birthday cake in
the lounge for all the members
to honor Senator Charlie's
birthday.
Is it gluten free?
birthday. We'll hear from
Senator Padilla.
All right, thank you very much,
Madam President, and I'm sure
the frosting will be delicious,
with us today. Um, I mentioned a
little bit about her the other
day, so I won't go into too much
detail on her resume, but again,
started in the classroom, much
like you, Madam President, and
uh she has a doctorate and a
officer.
Uh, and she's also, as I
mentioned the other day, an
accomplished violence. I learned
so much about my amiga here
every day. Did you know that
she's a championship golfer
Equally as special guest today,
I have Stephanie Ayala who is
from Arisco Heritage Academy
High School, and you're gonna
love this, uh, 10th grade and
she's already power lifting vice
fashionable today too, um, and
she's also the sophomore class
vice president and she's part of
SuperSA and her future plans are
to attend college uh out of.
please welcome my two guests.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
today, uh, President of her uh
student body at El Dorado High
School, Misha Hedges.
Misha is a, uh, also on the
learning over the last couple of
years with elections and what
have you, how, how to make those
actually work, and she's
passionate about the arts and
peer mental health group, an
incredible program that was
pioneered at El Dorado in is
catching on in so many other
standing right here are people
we can turn to in the future to
really help us despite
Along with our bills really help
us improve the mental health of
Thank you, Senator Nex we'll
hear from Senator Hamblin.
Thank you Madam President, and
we've got a bunch of Aggies in
and represent her home state as
the bad volleyball player that
she is, uh, she hails from the
great city of Las Cruces, where
first team performer. The Aggies
volleyball season culminated
with a 1914 record. NMSU played
their way to the conference USA
championship game and finishing
when it came down to getting
that, that title. Tess is
studying kinesiology and she is
what we call a crimson scholar.
Meaning she is a very, very good
student, so members of the
Thank you, Senator, uh, next
we'll hear from Senator Lopez.
Grande Ravens go ravens, who,
um, the first person I'd like to
introduce, um, is the vice
president of her junior class at
Rio Grande.
seal a
ala espanolligumentemo muchosos.
Um, she's also involved in the
Senate and is an artist and of
course one of her favorite
haven't forgotten the excitement
of being a senior in high
school, getting ready to
graduate. Um, he's also a member
of SuperSA. He, um, is involved
in the Senate.
And um talking to them this
morning, Miss Madam President,
was exciting. These are our
future leaders.
These are the persons who are
Thank you, Senator. Next we'll
hear from Senator Sidia Lopez.
development director for me, uh,
when I was the executive
director of El Lase Communitario
and and we now serve together on
Casa Fortaleza, which is an
of agricultura.
Network, which is also part of
La Cosecha and today she's here
and many of you probably got
visits from the coalition to end
Thank you, sinner. Next we'll
hear from Senator Figueroa.
Thank you Madam President, I am
athlete who plays basketball,
runs track and cross country,
but he's also involved in
student government and building
business skills through DECA.
Bari and welcoming Joseph also
known as Joe Bob and Joe Buck.
stack is the superintendent
student advisory council at my
local school district, uh,
schools, which has 13 high
schools, so there's 26 top
attending UNM and New Mexico
State respectively in the fall.
Please welcome my guests. Thank
you.
I, Senator Worth had mentioned
earlier but this Saturday we
have a great opportunity. There
is a new film we get a sneak
preview of it. The film is
called Counted Out Math is
11 to 12:30 in the Senate
Finance room, which is room 322
and let me read you briefly the
Uh, flyer about it.
the education we have access to,
the jobs we get, all of it is
underwritten by an invisible
layer of math that few of us
understand or even notice, but
Power. Uh, it's a powerful film
that will get you to understand
why math is so critical in our
public schools for our students
to understand how data works and
We have a math tax that you have
to pay because other people who
understand math take advantage.
You have to pay somebody to do
your tax returns, for instance,
when you go and negotiate for a
car.
in the Senate, uh, finance room,
room 322, 11:00 a.m. to 12:30
for this important, uh, viewing
of counted out math is power.
Thank you Madam President, yes,
if you don't mind, I'd like to,
to say a couple things on
Braille, so, uh, Madam
President, President, members of
the body, uh, today I'd like to
pledge in Braille along with a
symbol, uh, tactile braille
version of the Za symbol, um,
today myself and, uh, Madam
centuries. I did not know that
myself. I did not realize it was
that old, so I was surprised in
years gone by when I had learned
that, um, but it's more than
just a series of dots. It's a
visually impaired in my hometown
we have the main campus of the
New Mexico School.
the blind and visually impaired
in, uh, Madam President's
impaired continue to do great
things throughout our state, um,
in addition to the main campus
in Almogordo, these items were
could be lesson plans, could be,
you know, just different items
and so they'll distribute those
at the request of those
throughout the state of New
Mexico, so I'd just like to uh
provides, uh, to our state and
to the members of our community.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you so much for doing that
for me also. You, you can take
over any time you want.
have something on the table
before we go to the certificate
that I'd like to bring up, Madam
President, in in body on your
desk, you have some place mats
table today and the acronym of
NMCEL and the organization is
made up of 2 affiliate members,
including the
Mexico school superintendent
facility Manager Association,
the Association of Bilingual
Education, uh, educationers of
New Mexico and the New Mexico
happening to them every day in
NMCEL wants to let you know that
when adjusted for.
Poverty we are in fact not
ranked 50th in the nation we're
Senator Gallegos right back to
work. Uh, the first certificate,
which will be read, then Senator
Maestas has a certificate for
ALS Awareness Day that's gonna
Senor Gallegos. Thank you, Madam
President, today I just want to
start off by talking about the
Senate family that we have here.
We had a loss one of our members
husband passed away this week
Seeing no objection, the reader
to read the certificate.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
condolence and sympathy to the
bereaved family and friends of
the deceased, and whereas Jay
Gross close passed away in Santa
a bachelor's degree in civil
engineering from New Mexico
State University.
And whereas after college, Jay
worked for the blackened Beach
engineer and designed the Santa
Fe water wastewater treatment
plant and whereas Jay went to
work for the Interstate Stream
Commission as a civil engineer
University's Academy of Civil
Agricultural and geological
engineering.
And whereas after his
retirement, Jay coached Little
League Baseball and youth
And whereas in 2020 and 2022,
Jay ran as the Republican
candidate for House District 46
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that condolences be
extended to the family and
friends of J. Gross Clos, a
loving and devoted New Mexican.
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk,
New Mexico State Senate.
Senator Cayos.
Thank you, ma'am. President,
thank you. Speaker, reader, uh,
60 day or even a 30 day to be
able to support us. Everyone in
this facility is important to us
and as we've lost a member of
the family, I'm going to ask
years, we also have our son Josh
with her.
And I have her his Jay's sister,
Jerry Bethany and her husband
Darryl from Roswell. I'd like to
loss in uh the family being here
and present.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam President. Uh,
take time away from their
family. They, they
worked for us. They, they
They're at our beck and call for
and their sacrifice family time
to do that and I just want to
make sure.
Eline and her family understand.
other folks that wish to make
comments.
It's not Madam President.
Sir, I did not see you
apologize, Senor Lopez, Senor
Elene has been also working, uh,
to support the committee, um, so
sending our condolences and
love, uh, to you, to each,
everybody in the family, thank
you.
Her lane, we miss you.
And certainly understand.
The absence and loss of your
husband, we offer our
condolences.
Please.
Block.
Thank you, Madam President. um,
to the gross Klutz family, I
just want to express my deepest
condolences as well. I've known
your family for some time now.
inspired others to be like him,
and I just wanna, uh, with his
unexpected passing. I know so
many people have offered you
dinner over at the El Dorado and
um.
I guess, Madam President, uh,
what I would say is
And uh I think that's a lesson
for all of us is we all seem so
busy sometimes just passing
people by in the hall and saying
hello and small chit chat, but
those that we, uh,
Thank you so much, Madam
President.
Thank you
Singer guy goes to close on the
certificate.
those in this chamber, uh, thank
you and I yield back. Thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator, let's see, Senator
See no objection, the reader to
read the certificate.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
18, 2025 be recognized as ALS
Awareness Day in the Senate,
whereas a myotrophic lateral
lateral sclerosis, ALS is also
capacity so the patient remains
alert and aware of the patient's
loss of motor functions and the
of the inevitable outcome of
continued deterioration and
of the anterior horns of the
spinal cord, and whereas ALS
eventually causes muscles to.
Atrophy and the patient becomes
a functional quadriplegic, and
in the military and whereas ALS
ALS, an estimated 150 New
Mexicans are living with the
disease at any given time.
Grange was diagnosed with ALS,
making him the youngest ALS
patient in New Mexico.
And whereas despite fighting
this terrible disease as hard as
state capitol and whereas the
Grange family has supported
numerous New Mexico families
affected by ALS over the past
decade in collaboration with ALS
that supports on average 130
people living with ALS and their
loved ones.
And whereas ALS New Mexico
Mexico Hospital and providing
adaptive equipment free of
charge.
And whereas ALS New Mexico helps
many families affected by LS
through funding and providing
bringing awareness of ALS
through educational
opportunities to New Mexico
residents and whereas ALS
Awareness Day will increase
public awareness of illness
community and recognize the
services being provided to
families affected by ALS and the
research being done too
eradicate this horrible disease
families in New Mexico who are
affected by.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that February 18, 2025,
Leo Jaramillo, Senator Antonio
Maestas, senator Jeff Steinborn,
Mimi Stewart, President Pro Tem,
Sherry Du Luhan, chief clerk,
serve on the board a few years
back and it is a tremendous
leadership team. It's a very
active board. They do wonderful
work. They have an awesome golf
tournament, uh, fashion show and
president COO of ALS New Mexico,
Jesse Hobby, LLS team member Ed.
Ed Chavez, former Chief Justice
of the Mexico Supreme Court and
Robert Ramirez, who are two
uh, they had a couple of them
have ALS and we're having a
tough day, so they're watching
online so please uh welcome my
guests, the leaders of ALS New
Mexico.
a wonderful bracelet and uh and
there's a piece of paper you can
fold out and learn about ALS,
uh, this organization does a
tremendous uh work on behalf of
the families and it's a
that you do on behalf of ALS
patients and their families.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Maestas, uh,
uh.
Senator Steinborn.
much for the work you do and
Judge Chavez, it's so good to
see you again. Thanks for all
your leadership here in New
Mexico. Those that don't know
you were uh one of the leaders
in the redistricting independent
disease, um, that we, we need to
do all we can to fight for a
cure and do research and support
those dealing with it. Um, uh,
very happy to support it with
really helpful with things like
retrofitting people's homes and,
right, and other kinds of
support and that money got used
up very.
quickly. And so to the extent we
can appropriate more funds this
and hopefully we can just keep
doing research for the cure.
That's the thing, you know,
that's, that's the dream, but
thank you all again and
Appreciate y'all and thank you,
was really struck by this sheet
that said veterans are about 2
times more likely to develop
ALS. I think we need to figure
out why, um, I just wanna thank
continue to have incredible
leadership on important issues
facing our state, um, thank you,
Madam President.
Thank you. Any other comments?
For multiple sclerosis advocacy
day.
Senator Nova
Thank you Madam President,
unanimous consent that the
reader be allowed to read the
certificate seeing no objection,
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to February
21st, 2025 as multiple sclerosis
action day in the Senate,
and the body and can impair
mobility.
And whereas every hour in the
United States, someone is newly
diagnosed with MS, and whereas
generally strikes young adults
between the ages of 20 and 50,
attacking them in their prime of
their lives and whereas MS
tingling to blindness and
paralysis and the progress
severity and specific symptoms
of the disease cannot be
advocate on behalf of those
affected by the disease and is
planning several statewide
fundraising events and
educational program to raise MS
across the state and whereas the
Arizona Mexico chapter of the
National MS Society supports
programs and services that
enrich the lives of those with
multiple sclerosis in New Mexico
and the Arizona New Mexico
chapter of the National Multiple
Sclerosis Society be recognized
on February 21st, 2025 as
2025, be recognized as multiple
sclerosis awareness week in New
Mexico signed and sealed at the
capital in the city of Santa Fe,
Madam President, thank you very
much. I am very proud to stand
in support of the certificate. I
want to uplift the voice of one
of my deepest, biggest mentors
chancellor at the UNM Office of
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion,
and she now serves as vice
president of institutional
engagement at the National
Organization Excellencia and
Education.
lifelong mentor and I just want
to uplift her voice. She's not
able to join us here today, but
I want to uplift her and
everyone who is joining us here
today from the MS Society as I
mentioned before, Madam
to ensure that we invest in
research and also with us, Madam
President, I believe we have
some folks in the gallery who
are joining us. I'd like to
acknowledge them. If we could
please welcome them as well.
want to add anything on this
certificate.
Thank you, Senator Nova. Senator
Padilla. Uh, thank you very
much, Madam President. I do, I
rise in strong support of this
know personally I, I have family
members that have dealt with
this in in a great deal and uh
this is a tradition that we
honor here in New Mexico and we
honor here right on the floor of
trouble here. But, uh, but Madam
President, this is something
that comes on to folks after
having a good portion of their
life, and then it just totally
I, I don't want to, well, I'll
just use it. It wrecks their
neighbors and our family
members, and I want to thank
Senator Nava for doing this
again this year. I've done this
a couple of times and I have to
tell you, it's a very special
group that comes to Santa Fe to
educate us, and I wanna thank
them as well. Thank you, Madam
President.
close.
Thank you, Madam President,
thank you very much, uh, Senator
Padilla and members once again,
I just want to uplift the voices
learn more about MS and how we
can be of support. Thank you,
Madam President. Thank you,
Senator Nova. Senator Wirth.
So Madam President, I think that
is it for guests and
it out into the hall, uh, we are
gonna recess here and uh Senator
Harmi, I'll just do this right
from here. The Senate Democrats
are going to caucus in the
yield to Senator Geico.
Geico. Thank you, Madam
President,
the Senate Republican Caucus
will be meeting in room 326, and
Center work.
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much, Madam President. Unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
O'Malley for the rest of the
day.
Or until she returns to the
unanimous consent to Senate a
recess until 1:15. We'll be back
