at least so that we may begin
today's.
Business?
Senator Boone, Senator Brandt.
Santa Brantley.
Senator Campos Center Cervantes.
Santa Gonzalez.
Senator Hamlin.
Center Hickey.
Santer Mignos.
Senator Nova
Centra O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Santa Sanchez.
Senator Scott, Senator Sadia
Lopez.
Senator.
Santer Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you everyone please rise
for the invitation to be led
today by resident teacher Don
Hendrick
and even nor Norling Buddhist
Center here in Santa Fe.
Good morning, everyone. Before I
recite this prayer, I just want
to share with you that this is
one of the favorite prayers of
His Holiness the Dalai Lama, who
May all beings everywhere plague
by sufferings of body and mind,
obtain a notion of happiness and
joy by virtue of our good deeds.
May no living creature suffer,
May the blind see forms, and the
deaf hear sounds. May those
whose bodies are worn with toil.
Be restored on finding repose.
May the forlorn find hope,
constant happiness and
prosperity.
May there be timely rains and
ailments. Whatever diseases
there are in the world. May they
never occur again.
May the frightened cease to be
afraid, and those bound to be
as long as sentient beings
remain.
Until then, may we assist to
dispel the miseries of the
world.
Amen.
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. Good
morning. Uh, unanimous consent
we go without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
He no objection. We are in that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Worth.
being here, for sharing those
beautiful words and just as I
always say,
It's very nice to pause and
absorb and realize that there's
Padilla, then Senator Woods, and
then if you come back to me, I
can go through the events. Thank
you, Senator Michael Padilla.
Uh, good morning, Mr. President.
uh, unanimous consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor and
consent to excuse Senator
Hickey, Senator Stephanics,
Senator Sidillo Lopez, Senator
Cervantes, Senator Charlie,
Senator Hamblin, and Senator
Pope until they return to the
chamber.
minister to coming in today, um,
There's been so many times that
uh I've said this, but I will
say it again.
So, Mr. President, uh, I thank
you today. Uh, no one is asked
to be excused on my side, so I'm
going to have to
Thank you for recognizing me.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senators, we're on that order of
business now since miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Thank you Mr.
President, just a couple of
upfront announcements. We, we
are gonna have a joint session
till we get back afterwards. Uh,
today a Santa Fe Indian School
Day in New Mexico 4 H Day at the
Capitol, and we will have a
certificate, uh, Senator
Townsend and Senator Riel, uh,
naphropathic treatments, and I
highly recommend for the new
members, you go in and check out
his services. He does a terrific
sing his praises. We got a bunch
of guests, uh, in terms of
events, conservation voters is
having their legislative
reception at the Drury Hotel,
5:30 to 7:30 by invitation.
legislative reception is at La
Fonda Lumpkin's Ballroom 5:30 to
7:30 by invitation. And then for
new members, uh, again, and
anyone, any members who want to
attend.
services, juvenile justice, and
behavioral behavior health. Uh,
Mr. President, with that, I
would yield, I think first to
Senator Bergmans, who's got some
guests and then other members,
Uh, I hope you all are looking
forward to the joint session
today because it is Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian day in the
roundhouse. It's been amazing to
Senate Prote Mimi Stewart, House
Majority Leader Sipansky, the
Asian Business collaborative,
the New Mexico Asian Family
Center and Talent Asian Market.
Jung, and I hope everyone enjoys
it. Happy AAPI N H Day.
Thank you, Sandbergs. We have
Senatorrigos.
across New Mexico and for the
institution of the legislature
as the body knows I've been on
school board in Eunice for over
23 years. And yesterday, the
This is a win for the local
school district is it allows
them not the Santa Fe
bureaucrats to make decisions
for the community school
calendars.
School board members and
for the legislature since
proposed rule by PED represents
direct attack by the lec uh
executive branch on the
days, and we reiterated our
intent last year in general
appropriation Act when we passed
language to prevent.
PD from spending funds to
enforce their proposed rule.
they ruled it invalid. If you're
a fan of local control or the
defender of the legislature
yesterday's court determination
is my honor today to introduce
to the Senate our um.
Acting New Mexico lieutenant
School here in Santa Fe and she
likes to read and she likes to
do her Bible studies. She also
wants to become a doctor, so
let's cheer her on because we
Thank you so much, Senator Hill.
agricultural Leadership Program,
and this program is designed to
foster leaders in the egg
industry, networking, and, uh,
increased awareness about the
office at NMSU Aaron Romero,
American egg credit. Anthony
Collin from the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture,
and NMSU, Marissays from the egg
Trust Farm Credit and Christina
Wilson, New Mexico State
University coordinator of the
New Mexico Agricultural
have with me who's shadowing me
at least through the floor
session, a student who is a
graduate student in social work,
uh, that is interning with uh
on macro social work policy. So
if everyone will help me in
welcoming Sarah.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Senator Block.
Uh, for those of you don't know,
my wife is actually from China.
She couldn't be here today and
uh we enjoyed the celebration in
there in the Smiths, uh, uh, uh,
mall.
Uh, Mr. President, I'd also like
to welcome a very good friend of
mine here, Mr. Dean Reed. uh,
distinguished alumni, if I'd
missed anybody, I'm sorry, but
Senator Ramos is, uh, one of
them and you, sir, Mr.
President, are also one of them,
as well as Mr. Reid, who got his
the of the alumni chapter at
Western. He's also president of
the Albuquerque chapter for
Western. He worked 40 years in
healthcare, including the Mayo
Clinic, uh, helping out a lot of
multi-generational Reed Mustangs
out there and I'd like.
to give him a Senate warm
welcome to one of the best
Mustangs, no offense to anyone
else, but one of the best
Thank you, Senator Block. We
have Senator Ramos followed by
Senator Sanchez, Senator Ramos,
thank you, Mr. President. I
thank you so much for, uh,
allowing me to speak and I wanna
his year this year because we
have a lot of insurance uh bills
coming through so I'm gonna pick
his brain and, and see if he
can't help me out and, and uh
hopefully we can, we can pass
that is retired as of now and
again they are from Luna County.
It, it is Silver Spike's day to
day, so we have a bunch of
people from LuA and uh uh please
Thank you, Mr. President, and
good morning to everyone. I
would like to introduce my
guests here today, Mrs.
McIntosh, Braden McIntosh, and
Adeline McIntosh, and they
And uh I see uh Senator Stewart
looking over here, and she made
me sing go fishing in the dark
after I passed that bill. It was
a game and fish bill, but, uh,
uh, Braden gave me a little
everything we've raised $50,000
and we've helped 10,000 kids.
Uh, with that bill that we
passed a few years ago and
Braden has made these wonderful
Thank you Senator Sanchez.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Lieutenant
hosted 2004 Hers in his office
this morning. So thank you for
introducing them to the
Roundhouse. I'd like to
specifically introduce some
guests that we have from Hidalgo
County up on the rostrum for
you've traveled the furthest.
Behind me today from Socorro 4H
is Tatum Mosales, Maddie Adams,
Chloe Griego, and somewhere in
the building, I think the
majority of them are in the
agriculture. In fact, it is in
every single county in New
Mexico. It is housed within your
cooperative extension agent of
every and in every
every county and they have a
high impact in growing
building roots into these kids
to make sure that we are growing
the next generation of leaders.
And so welcome everyone to the
Roundhouse, and if you would
please give them all a round of
applause for joining us.
like to also introduce my guest
for today who is one of my
constituents from Corrales, uh,
I'd love to introduce you all to
for jobs right now, but just
letting you know she is
incredible. She's very
dedicated. She's in 6th grade at
the Albuquerque.
Academy, she plays soccer and
area. Help me welcome Miss John
B please.
Thank you Senor Nova.
Any further announcements,
today is a very, very important
day for, uh, one of our members
and uh so it's Senator Boone's
birthday. Uh, he told me just a
little bit ago that he just
I was gonna, well, come on over
here, Senator Stewart so that
you can sing Happy Birthday to
Senator Boone.
Mr. President, since no one is
gonna do it, I volunteer you to
And singing a wonderful happy
birthday for our very own
senator, Senator Boone.
Happy birthday to you. Happy
Senator Boone, would you like to
have the floor.
it's kind of a scary thought,
and I don't really know what
relevance it has, but I turned
the number of years old today of
the year I graduated from high
school.
people that I am and, and thank
you very much. I appreciate the
sentiment.
Thank you. Happy birthday,
senator.
Any further announcements,
you, Mr. President. So while
we're waiting for our friends
from the house to let us know
about the joint session. We'll
do a little of the workup on the
table, unanimous consent. We go
that our business committee
reports.
committee, to whom has been
referred Senate Bill 8 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the finance
Thank you. Move adoption, Mr.
President. Senators, we have a
motion to adopt the community
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those opposed, the eyes have it.
The report has been adopted.
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
tax business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
Those opposed, the ayes have it.
The report has been adopted.
Mr. President, your health and
public affairs Committee, to
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted, Senator Linda Lopez,
chair Senator Stewart, Mr.
President, move adoption of the
committee reports we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President, you said we go that
our business introduction of
legislation. There is no
Senate Bill 275 introduced by
Senator Thornton.
And representative Lujan.
An act relating to public
property.
Changing the threshold for state
board of Finance approval on
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Rules Committee, then
Senate Finance, that Senate Bill
274.
275275 having been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the Senate
Taxusiness Transportation
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, Senate Bill 275.
Making an appropriation to the
uranium mining reclamation
revolving fund Senate Bill 276
276 haven't been read twice by
Senate Bill 277 introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to insurance, amending the
insurance holding company law,
adding definitions.
printed and referred to the
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee, then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill 277.
Senate Bill 278 introduced by
prohibit cost sharing for
coronary artery calcium
screening broadening eligibility
for coronary artery calcium
having been read twice by titles
order printed and referred to
the Senate Health.
Public Affairs Committee, then
Senate tax Business
Transportation Committee, that's
Centerville 278.
Senate Bill 279 introduced by
senators O'Malley and Bergmans.
An act relating to firearms
enacting the gas operated
semi-automatic firearms
Exclusion Act.
prohibiting the importation sale
manufacture, transfer, receipt,
or possession of gas operated
semi-automatic firearms
a fire of firearm of a firearm
or a proximate.
The approximate the action or
rate of fire of a machine gun,
prohibiting machine guns and
semi-automatic firearms
Exclusion Act.
Requiring the certification of
semi-automatic firearms.
Providing exceptions.
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 279.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter wants to take us to that
we'll do here, given that we're
chance to do that today, so
go over here the joint session,
we'll come back, finish up the
work and be done. So give me
just two seconds.
February 3, 2025, Senate
executive message number one.
The Honorable Mimi Stewart,
president pro tempore, and
members of the New Mexico State
Senate.
following nominations for
appointment.
Dolores Lila Gurule for
appointment as the student
member of the Northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents
reappointment as the student
member of the University of New
Mexico Board of Regents for a
term commencing January 1st,
2025 and expiring on December
a term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
December 31st, 2026.
Robert Bush for reappointment to
the Mexico Renewable Energy
Jeremy Lewis for reappointment
to the New Mexico Renewable
Energy Transmission Authority
for a term commencing December
commission for a term commencing
January 28th, 2025 to be served
at the pleasure of the governor.
Respectfully submitted, Michelle
Duhan Grisham, Governor.
President. Unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
He ain't no objection. We are in
that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Worth. Thank you, Mr.
President. Just got word it's
about 5 minutes, so we're
income, uh, this was, uh, it is
an appropriation bill. It's a
study.
with an $80 million
appropriation. It got read in as
but clearly it needs to be in
Senate finance. So I'd ask you
to Hannaented the referrals be
switched.
There's been a request unanimous
consent request.
For the committee referral to be
returning to work, uh, Senator
Stewart is signing on as a plus
sponsor and I'd ask unanimous
consent that the record show her
as the lead sponsor on Senate
Senate expert on education on
this and so we're gonna switch
the order on.
that and go together. So
unanimous consent to to make
that switch. Senators has been
unanimous consent request to
change lead sponsor on that
of the whole Senate, uh, for
purposes of tending the joint
session, we might want to just
stay here. I House members will
come over and make that
announcement, then we'll follow
the pro tem and that we return
Say no objection.
