First off i'm gonna yield to a
senator compose who is going to
help us steer through a couple
of certificates for members that
are not coming back and we want
afternoon session we're going to
work our way item fifteen
through twenty one and so just
in terms of sponsors item
ninety one that'll be senator or
teasy pino house bill one thirty
four will be senator schendel
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
and then senators defanicks will
do house bill seven as twice
amended and will wind it up this
morning with house bill one
ninety five that senator padia
into the chamber to do those
certificates.
Thank you so worth we're in that
order business announces the
The.
The.
know so we go there our business
messages from the house see no
objection that order business
messages from the house the
reader will read
february fourteenth twenty
twenty four message from the
amended house today committee
substitute for a hospital forty
one house appropriations and
finance community substitute for
house bill one ninety six have
been red and fallen signed by
respectfully submitted lisa am
or teased with cution chief
clerk house of representatives
journal show that the message
from the house has been received
and i'd like to announce the
members of the body that the
house bill one ninety six.
Said a majority for the repeater
worth thinks that next order
business I thank you mister
We're on that order of business.
To me reports.
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted senator
gerald or these peno chair in
our decision you know I move the
adoption of the committee report
said a majority for leader
peters
thank you mister president you
know success we go back that our
business announcements are
mislenious hearing no objection
were on that order of business
through uh the run of show up
front and you said there were
before I yield to send a
composer many of the senator
gones senators and thank you
president i'd like to make a
Send a government and thank you
very much mister president
members of the senate as you
know as we recognizing our
colleagues who uh for many
a certificate that recognizes
these individuals
accomplishments we're trying to
do this within a thirty minute
period and what i'll be doing is
excuse me.
just ask that as the members of
the senate provide the
information they're actually if
you will even personal
experiences.
timeframe and and I know that's
not really well explained but
every time we get into this
becomes a little bit more
emotional because these
because these people definitely
are loved and they'll be missed
so without mister president
members of the senate but i'd
like to do is to uh first of all
go to you mister president in
certificate and then we'll just
let you ask the reader to read
and then from there go back to
the sponsor of the certificate
and then we'll get into the
to begin our but i'd like to do
this to go ahead and defer first
to the minority leader senator
backer I understand that he has
picking mister president today I
have a certificate honouring our
own senator mark mores if the
reader would read the
certificate of objection the
reader to read
learned of the contributions of
senator markbowers to the state
of new mexico does hereby extend
its appreciation and where as
senator martmores was first
and the senate rules committee
and whereas during his time in
the senate senator moores has
championed by partisanship and
successfully sponsored animal
member my freshman term when I
introduced a bill I was
convinced would make the mexico
safer better place in about half
way through the committee
hearing as the members toward
learned and whereas the most
better member ball event to
senator more was the time there
was a call to the senate and the
entire senate basketball team
showed up in their shorts and
start of my first term to make
friends across the aisle because
once I did that it was a much
more enjoyable experience and
whereas what senator moores will
always remember about the send
to this day and whereas senator
morris has announced that he
will retire from the senate at
the end of his term now
therefore be a resolved by the
senate district twenty one
signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of south affair
senator gregory a bucker mimi
that I stand today to recognize
senator mark moores and for his
contributions to this chamber I
know for me I met senator
that and he drove down the last
leadness to meet me and and I
have to say that the
encouragement he gave me their
pushed me to continue and and
the years is his conduct within
the committee really has just
inspired me his ability to go
and and speak to people across
days are I I hope to be at that
police like years to have those
types of relationships in common
conversations the other thing uh
about senator morris is is the
made makes and if he tells you
that he has your back
he will have your back even when
the ad at the personal farm and
I got to know his lovely wife
leased time she has become
friends with my own wife
synthetic and we become friends
and welcome his new board that
we've had here all year in
addition to the morris family a
little marquind it's been a
treasure to have him uh around
has a lot of love for this day
this chamber and I know free to
each one of you in here and so
uh uh I want to return that and
reciprocate that same love back
thank you mister president I
also very much rise in support
of this certificate and want to
thank senator moores for his
service to the state and the way
about a certain bill but at the
end of the day he kept his word
and he had said that that was
something that he would support
with that amendment on their any
brought along the rest of his
caucus and that's a pretty cool
over the years when you're
carrying a bill bipartisan bill
in the middle you know some on
the laugh some of the right
don't particularly like it
they're a little bit
uncomfortable about what you're
killing bill and when we passed
that bill late at night I went
home and we have a hot tub I was
sitting out in the hot and all
the sudden all the coyotes went
willing to go where he felt his
constituents were and that's the
other thing we all represent
different districts and
sometimes that the
representation takes you out of
course to your new family what
an extraordinary extraordinary
thing and what joy thank you so
much mister president thank you
said where it send a rent.
They missed president mark and I
came into this body together and
and now since last session you
know how do I think about mark
without thinking about
beastiality but
but mark I I will mess you
you've been a good friend and
i've thoroughly enjoyed serving
with you
how to do things we may have to
reach out to you sometimes on
those types of things still but
I think you're doing the right
thing for you and your family
and you have such a beautiful
store.
Thank you mister president
so i've just thoroughly enjoyed
him and both rules in judiciary
I would can best when he's
making jokes and allow things
just kidding
so i've just really enjoyed
getting to know him and yes
there is an all that full
splinder up when he was at unam
don't know he'll remember but uh
I think it was october tenth of
twenty thirteen now the reason
why
I know that date was it wasn't a
good day for me
funeral I needed a root canal
and I was hurting and I have got
on the phone and as it more
google
when you need something as bad
as I needed that dentist
I really remember that I
appreciated it and it's little
things like that that make a
band and we've been close
job because I was hard to do in
it and anyway I appreciate mark
and he's a he's been a great
asset to our um to our carcass
certificate on can't look.
This direction gaza I know it'll
happen but
I think my favourite was during
coverage and we had these
attention to what was being
presented to us
so much attention mister
president they were to talk
about it and so
there was very seldom a time
when we didn't have something
and that's what this place is
about you know we sometimes we
take a little too serious and
that's why we have debates that
end up like they do
speak of and some that that i'll
never forget and
you know it's it's unfortunate
that that we have to do this
disappearable in center mechanic
and senator steinborn to name a
few
center every sudden.
Thanks very much uh mister
president
and eight years of different
ship.
The first four years
of really very constant
antagonism.
out to my first relation and and
and mark was one of the people
who decided that
that the majority in the senate
might change him and that the
Feel that one of the where the
year after I forget which.
I think there's that next
legislative session we had a
bill
in the senate rules committee
and which then congresswoman
michelle congress from test
fight at a next two
money and politics is it makes
it difficult to work together
after a campaign
and that there are someone on
that same panel.
In the rules committee.
and breaking breaking the corn
center more
without getting recommend said
yeah but kicked our ****
them the senator
and and and at the next hearing
today's later.
Center lovers are are center
and a card and the card said to
the veteran other spoils.
What my journey in this chamber
what happened like without.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you center every sort of
senator dispino.
this body if you're not here
I won't know cause I won't be
here either but
commitment to your heritage and
and how it is meant so much to
you and how you've shared that
with this and and how.
and into the athletes that UNM
and to their assistance there
mental health their physical
health and their financial
endorsement act which opened the
door for name image and
licensures that would like but
likeness name and image and like
knows that there's million
billions being made after the
name image and like this of
these athletes and they are to
be able to share in a bit of it
and and your commitment to your
appreciated and I think in
history that's what you're going
to be remembered for more than
anything else you've made some
incredibly funny statements on
the floor we'll forget all that
Thank you mr president um thank
you senator morris for.
Your service and your
folks may not know this but
senator moores was my senator
from two thousand and twelve to
keva called the round house and
one of the bills that I was
really
a very eager
I have to say mister president
and senators
would something worth something
beautiful about our legislature
is how excessible the
advocates they never shoot us
away they knew how important
that legislation was to us and
so with that i'm gonna always
phone calls and at your door but
thank you sir.
Thank you mister president thank
you send a mechanic we do have
center steinboard followed by
center how to meal senator many
mark man it's a tough to find
the words because there's so
many of them in so many cool
things I know we all want to say
one good thing about you i'll
Polished helpful not damaging
comment and you be like well we
were sharing one funny story the
other day we had our where a
and market just arrived he goes
a lead bullet
lad poisoning yeah but uh and we
had to be there but trust me it
was really it was really down
funny
but
mark I really admire your
independence in your intellect
and I will tell you the first
time I met mark more as I was a
house member and I passed a bill
that was really kind of a
paradigm chef that would give
seventeen year olds a right to
eighteen in the general and in
some other states did it and
somehow they're trying got it
through the house against his
synan into the rules committee.
And i'm in you know that the
senators very insular and
again says yeah I think no big
deal we did that in minnesota
where I was from maryland and I
was like oh my god it beam of
because you did senator that
bill passed and I want to say
that we.
That actually thanks to center
i've been so till actually
because was a little unclear
when the law became effective
politics and might become life
for existence but thank you
senator your part of that and
then of course we work together
on the couuty killing band which
was county killing composition
which was also
passionate about transparency
and ethics reform issues in the
state and every question he
would always ask is discloser
campaign contributions what
connections do you have
and I hope that we can continue
those traditions in those
questions that you kind of
embedded in us and a beyond that
though um
yeah we're gonna miss your
better stuff so and we're still
going to be here if we can ever
support the only ideas you have
self anyway thank you mister
president and thank you for
bringing this certificate so we
Center had a meal.
Mister president i'm gonna speak
until one nineteen which leaves
the one minute for everyone else
person who have connections to
the especially valley and
believe that or not his mom
lives in my neighborhood but the
one thing i'll always remember
about center boards is the pride
he has for the university of new
during my second year to support
mental health services for
students at the university of
your mexico but there's one
thing I want to leave you with
senator is i'll always think of
you are definitely a loyal son
not only of the university of
new mexico but to the state of
new mexico and I have been
less to know you my friend and I
hope that you stay in touch with
Thank you mr president I think
we start off the word not was
standing
I think he helped me more to get
that removed from the budget
Smartest decision you'll make in
your life that young child will
need you every step of the way
right thing I think is a young
family is a business person this
place will always be here it
always be part of you you'll
always be part of us.
done in all the debates and and
I think him and I am the only
one that really like to give
money pathetics
yet that's just that's something
I mean we believe but III
come back and see us bring your
kid when he's all older and will
throw medical throw balls from
the third floor to cross the
other floor and in charge to get
on the elevator all the funds to
have kids should do in the
I met to send her more as he was
just mark and he was sitting up
there right next to where you
are right now and he was so
walter bradley's keeper may be
like that picture than he does
now
and he was
he was a force just because he's
a giant he was a four sitting up
there that you could you could
happened to him after that but
I got to tell you he's still a
force he's a fun force but if
there's something that needs to
Thank you share senator lovers.
The.
The.
Thank you very much mister
I know that you have much
experience in the world of
government here and a course
back in dc
but when you first showed up in
rules committee.
years mr chair I wish you well.
In your newest endeavour
and as a mother who's had a
child rate in my older age
difference and it it brings you
smiles
it'll bring you new challenges
we've had but I think it's it's
part of what this process is all
about and I know the renzo when
I told him to that you were not
going to be here any more use as
well my fellow football person
enough is.
Thank you mister president very
very first early days of covered
senator mores got a test for me
tested me in my office did this
two days in a row and assured me
that I didn't have positive for
and I know that you will enjoy
this next chapter of your life
whatever it turns out to be and
I know will be very rich with
that little bit when in your lap
when I was located I met a bunch
of lowball football players and
the growth man when I meet him I
still get kind of a getty
wonderful sensation except when
but about ten years ago playing
basket of all the house actually
won and I was dribbling it out
the last seconds you know just
celebrating and end up getting
most I just got more simply most
that her my feelings I must
admit not not emotionally it
hurt every single feeling I had
in my body um
so they senator was not my
ingenuity and we got to do the n
I l bill together mister mister
president and and I l.
Just to reduce what center or
these penalty said california
did its n I l in two thousand
twenty one and so on july first
twenty twenty one when new
mexico was going to be the first
state to go nil along with two
or three other states the a
approximately one point one six
billion dollars going to and I
all students in this country
because of you center more
because of you sold we can ever
forget that um
game together best wishes to you
and your family and then also my
up I asked my son what do you
like about what do you like
about being on my estates
because center moors is a
luck to you and descend that a
message center branding thank
you mister president I I think
marks okay like I think is he's
fine he's okay there's and wrong
with mark morris but I want to
lot of time with them she has
never said a harsh word about in
you when she is always happy
they have a newborn baby and she
is she is always a joy to be
it that mark must be asked them
to like you like he's got such
an amazing.
Wife and so he has done such a
great job I want to echo kind of
we leave this place the most
important work we will ever do
is back at home he is always
really interested that I mean
you shared that story with me
had shared that that story but
mark mark is never really been
wrapped up in the identity of
this I appreciate that he's
putting family first into
congratulations mark lisa you do
and the babies we're gonna miss
you guys all of you
think you're sender bantley
synergy
thank you mister president so
by but mister president what
what I will miss is that
always the second we walk out of
that that committee rumor off
the floor
Leak over into a
just being human beings with
each other which i've always
really really appreciated and
and will definitely mess thank
you.
Thank you senator center but.
so many things that have
happened
with mr moores on the floor in
fact i'll take a few years ago
the person issues going on in
trial going on coaches a d the
holding yards
budget had to eliminate a few
programs and had a few people
sacred program so I can't I hit
the hands.
Hey mark.
I got a couple of guys and want
to know if you would help us get
the socket program gone on in
me because they start and want
to talk to him about it but I
will always meet but the thing
that I will remember about that
experience is about twenty four
problems they were having and he
he wanted to make sure that that
was correct so he did come over
and say uh he apologizes and in
We just really appreciate your
mark in your perspective on
things and
the way you respond to people in
already were working on a soccer
scholarship for your son so I
just want to know that
there thank you more god bless
you thank you we have set a guy
goes.
senate you've done a great job
for the caucus it's one of those
things that uh to watch you melt
your mountain of a man who in
some was so big so so strong so
loud would go straight to their
little boy and melt
quite the inspiration and did
want to tell you that i'm gonna
you're stand up of man we don't
see i'd I
think I see I had a belly button
but I appreciate everything
support of this certificate in
honoring of our great senator
morris you know when I first
started here or my first medium
held various positions she's
death herself and
she felt held positions like
principle and I can't remember
that have hearing impairments
and so on
and I remember one time when I
was sponsoring a bill I have
protecting an and helping with
could look at me so I could tell
no i'm not against def people I
am for helping him you're not
reading it correctly it's it's
not that you know here we are
on the same page and so any how
any time I had anything to talk
about that had to do with death
children and so on a went to uh
to market his dad spent his life
mister chairman thank you
senator senator greggs.
Thank you for president and in a
market it's getting where
there's kind of a finality to
this right now but you know.
cliff me
daniel joe bill benny bill and
michael.
lisa and lee were also part of
it that group have pretty pretty
large and number that came into
the senate at that particular
and I john ryan clive we shared
the an office sweet it's it's
four sixteen it's where a lot of
that that we won't talk about in
those in those offices that that
were able to discussion and.
Yeah we all kind of grew up a
it's you know we change when
when crystal came in and market
in left crucial live in the
plays up quite a bit more than
mark but
with dave accomplished what they
were interested in.
Market I did have the
opportunity to be on opposite
side on the on the famous call
him to come down with gordon for
some stuff so maybe all that
will happen but buddy it's been
a lot of fun thanks
thank you celebrity except
rounded it out we have searched
center more is I really
appreciate the conversations
that you have in committee and
it gives me a different
perspective but also during
covered and the pandemic I had
so I have really appreciate your
doing this for all of us whether
it's the denise direct covered
testing or whatever and you are
a great friend to all of us
pleasure to work with that with
mark mister president yeah
whether it was racing literally
literally racing down to last
crucials a couple of times
to this into this chamber and we
had a representative that came
in that year named parpachiko do
you remember paul potico and mr
president I kind of pride myself
group of I don't know any town
new mexico elementary students
you I don't know if you remember
this or not they see a senator
more coming up at them on the
stairs and the all just kind of
back up a little bit like that
my head there so I I just thank
you so much for that central and
and the last thing i'll mention
so I know the the alarm bells
about to ring is he may not know
dorthy my assistant who
everybody knows and loves here
in the roundhouse I get my rear
end here as fast as humanly
possible cause I know he was
probably gonna do something very
and my sons were in high school
when I got here you probably
remember them they were about
this high now there about a foot
taller than me both of them and
one was here just the other day
center by the center of onto.
Thank you president mister
president again I know we could
go on and on and I know our time
is short but I want to let all
right and they're going to be I
know enjoying last cruises they
have been for quite some time
it's been good to see the two of
you there for a beer once in a
while in the home town and I
wouldn't be surprised that we
business people and it it's
exciting to have you joining us
and I welcome you to do so when
I may show judiciary for reasons
you know well but they have the
feeling you'll be staying in
touch with us so we'll see lots
Thank you so much at a center
morning just want to see just
thank you as I brought you up
yesterday and that we had a
discussion as sure that it's
going to be extremely difficult
precident officer to make sure
that I do it according to korum
according to script you are
always there and I can share
many memories of us together one
of the memories that really
stands out to me as well we were
his feet was just kicking
fortunately you set up for you
and I just want to say thank you
certain more is for all that
process scolded more article
more had fights more brought up
to the principles office more
than you
but I won't have it any other
way because you truly have a
heart for the people say in
Yeah.
I'm thinking mister president uh
uh I appreciate all the words
that were said for senator
Cinemart.
You know there's a hug fan ender
time saw your head of sit
through their funeral and here
all their acculates and
this is very beautiful
but I love these two more
and I got a hopefully I got
thirty years left I mean i'm
going to spend every moment I
can withdraw
So that is why I am living the
state senate and has been every
moment I can with our children
and a lot of my life and but I
critical for this republic in
what you guys take to good hours
to move forward with it love you
all thank you mister president.
Send it a picable thank you very
much mister president as we all
mr president members of the
senate were moving right along
we have one more recognition
that would like to conduct this
afternoon and i'm going to yield
to send it a share sender a
share place.
my pleasure to recognize senator
steven ville and if we can get
the reader to read his
certificate mister president.
Thank you seen the objection
stephen peanubel to the state in
mexico does here by extend its
appreciation and whereas senator
stephen penaville was first
senate conservation committee
and where as entered in a bill
also serves that mexico
legislative council and the
legislative finance committee
and where as centered available
thousand seventeen which allowed
all terrain vehicles to use
public roads if allowed by the
local authority for which he
received hundreds of thank you
karaoke in a bar in portland
oregon with then president
protemporary temporary senator
mary k papen and oh senator bill
end of his term now therefore be
a resolved by the senate at the
state of new mexico that
appreciation be extended to
senator stephen penaville for
william e share mimi stewart
president protem sherry de luhan
chief clerk new mexico state
senate.
The.
started with new mexico state a
university government but I
actually heard that in first
grade he ran for student body
president and then he actually
had a coup in middle school and
mexico state a university then
he became
a city commissioner for the city
of astec then a san juan county
and the thing that
um
that's most interesting is he
sits over here in the corner of
just quiet hardly ever says
time here and we will miss him
because he does know how to make
things happen and he does it
while sitting in that corner all
quiet shy so mister president I
yield to other members to
and and speak to center villain
his wisdom in this chamber you
know I I didn't know a lot about
center novel when I got here I
just know that when he would
I grew through here I came to
learn why and it's just exactly
what from what senator share
said
the experience in institutional
knowledge from coming up through
develop without that experience
and institutional knowledge and
I I think this chamber next
session might look very
and can put it together to serve
the people of new mexico and
certainly advocate for his
district which he has done a
fine job of doing over his
tenure thank you mister
president thank you center
face for the last thirty minutes
but you have been assured
gentlemen for all these many
years i've known you and and I
think it was just mentioned I
think a lot of us forget who
have that experience of working
on the county commission in the
cities and a lot of I can I
can't count the number of times
or we'll be talking about these
issues and the on you'll print
is something that we need to
work on to make a government in
services for the state and for a
constituent to work and you have
always protects a voice chair
state perspective that you print
gentlemen in a great friend so
thank you I thank you for behalf
of new mexico personally for me
and my family I appreciate you
very much thank you make a
center more center personal.
Those those times in carcus
whenever
in a lot of us wanted to charge
the hill he had a way to see hey
is this is this really what what
listen to some steve cause he
was he was actually right but I
can't tell you one time that
i've ever seen a mad say in ill
word
senator but you know this this
place is is something we're all
gonna leave some day
some on our own according and
some in an election
forever and I think that's very
important to take away not
senator available but stephen
ville the person
and and he's somebody that we
should all look up to
Thank you mister president and
senator nevil and I came the
same year we we both came we
report of a freshman class that
just over just so impressed with
with his
statementship is the only word I
can I can think of his his
ability to calmly listen to
issues and to make his own
to rose will a petty jennings of
tim jenny's wife had passed away
and and the arrangement was for
that we.
Recess from the legislature for
and I by accident I happened to
sit next to steve for most of
that trip and we had great
conversations I didn't realize
he had grown up in stanley
right near galestia which is
realize that if steve says
something about how this is
going to impact the county or
local government of any sort of
better pay attention because he
really knows his stuff thank you
president and you send our
disappearance in our worth thank
you mister president and thank
you steve for an incredible
together and just sitting here
thinking about what you and i've
worked on
areas that have been certainly
challenging that p r c reform it
the other big one that is
something that really will be a
a legacy for you is the land of
enchairment fund and the two of
us had that bill and
were dealing with and then
holding together and not not
getting pauled towards
amendments that would have made
some group happy but would have
killed the bill.
that really will for outdoor
programs and forests and rivers
something that I certainly in
proud of I know you are as well
so wish you the best and just
Thank you is president and in
one of the things that I think
is is special steve steven I
understand local governments on
in the impact that that decision
we make
have on them and stevers steve
and often times with a with
bipartisan ship in in doing
those to make uh to make the
state of new mexico better not
council tribes and meetings and
the things we were able to learn
and talk about and and vision on
our are things that i'll keep
i'm just being really honored to
to serve with you and I
appreciate all the things you've
done for your state so strangely
thank you center cricks center
breadthy thank you mister
huge influence and your district
in your area in your home towns
are very very proud of you but
the work that you've done here
in the new mexico senate has
resonated statewide and so far
flourished around the legary and
so the influence that's just one
of many many examples you're
investment in natural resources
and your agricultural
economic development drives and
helps our community and for that
we think you're for so much more
thank you for the impact not
just sugar sacrifice and service
to your district but to the
Bird sydram in yos.
Center consolidation over the
rigors and list sender woods as
well and we do have till two pm
I just want to talk about when I
first went into the to the house
and sorry make some of the uh
trips out out of state a hintami
you this the real
shows you the real view of of
the man in and a couple in
stephen tami wherever we saw
leaderships baby setting me a
amount to communities with
steven avail and I think that
sort of to guide and correct me
keep me out of trouble but he
that he is his own person is
task for his constituents and he
knows how to get a bill personal
astend in sport and I know we'll
steve of always learned so much
from you in the last twelve
years and
the job that you have done when
you were our caucus chair as
well as uh going on the energy
every one of us who've come
after you
thank you for what you've you've
done and I I hope you will enjoy
your retirement and
our age so thank you thank you
senator brance in your woods.
The.
Thank mr president in and our
two one thanks de for the many
a godsend to me because our keen
mean as green as green could be
in it was always nice to have
And visit about terms on the
mass back in the day.
And the his heart is truly a a
great man in a really appreciate
I think a lot of it has been
said about what I will say is I
talk a little bit yesterday
about men tours that i've had
steves of chocolate holly
the secretary used to put out
little balls of of chocolate but
he's low picky.
think even to the point right go
steal from getting current and
when when she was looking but
I always had a lot of phones
steve we go on
on
individual items within the
government but more importantly
how bills are working through
the system and in suggestions on
you're going to be missed more
than unknown mister devel and I
greatly appreciate our
friendship we have that diming
connection and that new mexico
you send him when you ask
followed by senator.
Gonzalez in center of the rigors
to round it off send him when us
thank you mister president you
know when you come in and you're
direction to kind of going and
he was a ranky member of of l of
c then for a long time I how
many years it was a ranky member
a member how many years and then
there and calculates what he's
going to do he doesn't carry his
big bills but you don't really
hear a lot about them until
after the fact the prc the
legacy
send it pops in lake well that's
that made a big change in so
center well that's what you did
you made big changes quietly.
shoot some of those birds I know
that you've got in center former
center pain and when a couple
times and you go to north
carolina and I go to south
carolina it's right on the way
cabinet in southern california
on the lake in in doing the
things you enjoy doing but just
remember they had told
ceremories your part of the
as the migo involved pricey on
the meal trip to so we'll still
have contact just know that that
you will be missed.
That the way you lead in the way
and enzoy thank you thank you
for helping year region in your
constituents and ten one in
those four corners area.
Thank you center when your
center.
and so we are we have hit it off
since the very beginning they're
there seems to be an affinity
because we we know what it's
like to be county commissioners
associated here truly senator
you have been a wonderful
senator a great human being and
i've enjoyed working with you
and learned a lot from you thank
you very much we're gonna miss
background with the soil and
water conservation district and
with the legacy endowment fund
has been extremely important to
our state has set up something
that while last for a long long
time and I don't want to say
forever because things here in
the state change but his soil
and water conservation district
background really has been an
asset in a skill that's been
brought to our committee thank
words or steve just really have
enjoyed your your precedence
here comma
you know we have gone to.
You know share a lot of thoughts
were in cloud craft in the got
up very early to go to my car
and so did your wife and will be
met up with a some dears than
and we were afraid to get to
better again thanks thinks a lot
for all the work that you have
done for the state thank you and
to your family thank you center
gonzalez and we have under a
minute and the fight asking
you for the moment that I came
in you've been a mentor and i'm
often reminded of the the agreed
quote I think it was dends out
washers in I would say that
latest person in the room was
hope that legislative council
would bring you in when new
legislators are coming in for an
orientation like I was fortunate
to sit in with you as a new
senator and the words that you
when the sun is shining you're
going to go home after going
through all that you've gone
through and people are gonna say
where have you been not even
realizing that you've been gone.
been an argued serve in the
finance committee with you has
been honored to serve here in
the chamber with you thank you
for the quiet leader but
effective leader and powerful
leader that you've always
demonstrated to be.
on the energy council forever
and he was even the president of
the energy council so not only
has he had an effect on the city
of astakin in san county and the
things that are I wish we could
forget about those the a t v
bill because he needs to slow
down when he comes around me
and then finally
his office and read some of his
literature and so with that
mister president please let us.
You want to talk oh yeah mister
president
be a laying out on my desk so
we'll we'll have to go check it
out
it's not without some
regret that i'm going to leave
here
do such insurance a trip per
take a flight somewhere or
whatever and I said yeah but
i've got a committee meeting and
i've got to do this and i've got
to meet with somebody so we end
your family has to pay a price
and I want to say I have a great
wife and I want to thank her I
don't i'll have to pull this I
didn't know this was happened
when this was happening but i'll
in
I will miss this it's going to
be something that all it'll take
me some adjusting but I did book
a phishing trip next january so
words and then
i've got a little reading to go
do so i'll leave it to you guys
and thank you so much for all of
it and i'm going to miss all of
you thank you thank you senator
senator steve never I persistent
professional positive national
and state policy leader
mister president I turn it back
hearing no objection around that
order business messages in the
house the reader will read
february fourteen twenty twenty
four message from the house of
representatives mister president
open session and return same
here with respectfully
submittedly some cut or
teasement cut and chief clerk
journal show the message from
said a majority floridator peter
were to take a set next order
business and thank you mister
president you name is consent we
go that are business committee
reports.
See no objects shore on that
order business committee reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
joseph servant is chair.
Senator mister president I move
the committee report and there's
said a majority for leader peter
worth to take a send
extraordinary business thank you
mister president so I just want
to again go over the order we're
going to do here and afternoon
pino seventeen house bill one
thirty four senator schendo
eighteen house appropriations
substitute for house bill five
center padea
twenty one on a counter house
bill one ninety five that'll be
sure d and as I mentioned a
product me there other bills
they come out of committee we
may well do supplemental
center share thank you mister
president so behind us up here
somewhere we have students from
central consolidated school
district they're part of the
equity council asked integraty
school nevia who's a sophomore
curling high school allison
who's in eighth grader at a
curtain middle school then we
have danica whose senior at
leaders up their doctor el frida
harvey
sharol banaley and jerry noble
up in there's another one here
the reader johns.
That I miss anybody else up
there
house bill two thirty two is
amended services around that
order business third reading and
legislation center accomplish
thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
I ask you names can send to the
here in no objection center
companies to explain the bill
thank you mister president event
centrally house bill two thirty
two as amended creates the
infrastructure planning and
development division within the
capital projects plans and to
coordinate with a fellow grants
bureau to leverage state dollars
and identify federal funding
that's what this does mister
president thank you center
woods.
But thank you mister president
just quickly.
what again why are we doing that
mister president and and
senator thank you very much
mister president thank you
senator woods were doing that to
that they'll also be able to
leverage additional dollars from
the federal level and then more
than that to ensure that we can
not successfully complete this
project thank you mister
president.
it it are does it help the
planning of those projects they
are we extra scrutiny here
somewhere ex- exactly why we're
with president etc and thank you
very much mister president thank
you senator woods and essence
what it does is it'll this
particular division will assess
seek federal phones and at the
same time as they move the
projects forward at the state
level thank you mister president
I guess entered a cop us selling
responsibility mister president
of the senator I do yield.
As part of the sponsor o senator
I was going to ask so early on
and I heard you say that you
create the ip dd in dfa by
transferring the rural equity
and budget and I was wondering
mister president center why they
we're focusing more on the
infrastructure of our local
communities and in moving we
also have seven hundred and
fifty thousand in each between
in order for us to move this
planning with the resources in
the leveraging of dollars so
they can maximise if you will
the full resource to complete
or worked with the rule equity
and budgetment but I like the
idea that they had that
opportunity and can you tell me
as president center how much
financially we are transferring
basically what we're doing is
using the title but within house
bill to that's where we have the
seven hundred and fifty thousand
to establish if he will this
particular division so it'll be
yield thank you for your time
thank you center game we do.
Saying of further debate.
Senator accomplished to close on
the bill thank you very much
been called in all those present
board in the affirmative except
those voting and the negative by
a show of hands senators we are
voting all senators to your
seats please i'll send us your
By vote of thirty six in the
affirmative zero the negative
item number sixteen that's house
bill nay one is amended all
yield to similar these if you
know thank you mister president
and I ask unanimous consent of
the senate that the record show
or substitution here in no
objection senator support of
your expanded bill
mister president members of the
senate this this is essentially
the same
votes who went to the governor
and was pocket vetoed we've met
with the governor's staff over
the interim and her sure that
all of her questions have been
there there was a request
actually in the issues version
also but it's a bit been amended
we had requested two separate
funds to help with your thermal
development of a grand phone
state agencies universities or
tribes that that needed some
cash to match federal money or
they needed to buy crucial
bill to all the appropriations
with strip from this bill but it
is in house bill to for two and
a half million and then the
other phone which was originally
fifteen million.
project got off the ground of
that also has been stripped from
this bill but there is money in
house bill two for that uh there
is a two and a half million in
Thank you is president and and
senator last year I believe
there were there were two of
these geothermal bills
schenger could you elaborate
mister president and senator a
great gladly yes there is a
separate bill
that was introduced uh that was
just passed out a time passes
but either last night or
yesterday afternoon it was in
that tax package so there is a
but it's contention on this bill
passing.
Thank you center disappear no
there to send it bill ideas as
well fifty nine or so
mispresident center or their
differences between your bill
proposing to strip it off in
senate finance but the chairman
of finance said no need to to go
through this we have ninety one
coming across and it's already
been stripped out so that's
fraud purposes exactly the same
as this bill.
Senator gregs thank you mister
president thank you you senator
are you are you wear senator
geothermal well up in the the
four corners and here's his
thought is a issue I think it's
twenty thousand feet deep well
is what he she's thinking about
yes i've read his is email he
sent it to me as well I
forwarded to other members of
our geo thermal working group
and you know potentially
resources department would help
anyone who wants to develop a
geothermal resource to to find
the right
site for it to get the
technical assistance of supports
for the project and then uh if
they need it helped financially
those two funds might be tapped
electricity they would then be
eligible for the tax credits as
well.
Thank you center dc ten thank
you mister president and senator
that night yes maybe if it's all
getting done some point we we
can sit down see how it turns
out that who knows where we're
going today so thank you most
projects thank you center thank
don't for a couple of questions
disappear dealed mister
president I I would be glad deal
to senator woods thank you
center words mister president
a quarter in million to study
the cost and benefits of a
geothermore development projects
comma put some sad boards on
add to get me a a quarter
million dollars mission mister
president you senator woods you
it's in section d on page six
money in the due of the remote
projects development fund may be
used pursuant are only for
added in section e for a trib
tribes so it really the grants
are for.
Uh matching money basically a
quarter of a million will get
you very far but if there is a
federal uh
developments but you need some
match this could be used for
that
of course there's also the other
matching fund that was created
this year in this session for
federal money so that would be
available as well but private
so I noticed that the last
bullet point talks about
the phone can also be used for
administrative reversable costs
president thank you senator who
had sent her disappearance.
Well
let's see mister president
senator was let's say three or
four different universities come
up with proposals for grants
from this fund and so a decision
has to be made which ones are
going to be awarded and so there
may be the need for the
recommendation to the secretary
for which ones and that I think
that's a an attempt at making
sure that we're we're not
strangling development they not
another question about section
five one it talks about the geo
thermal projects
revolving long phone so it's a
different phone
phone so I am asking now about
the jule there are more projects
revolving loan phone and it says
to make loans and different
center would senators have been
mister president senator was
that's right money in the in the
first fund is for grants but
it's limited to grants to state
about now is for private
companies who who may need to
borrow money to help
bring in special equipment today
loan from this fund to help get
it off the ground we want to
make sure we're providing every
assist we possibly can to
develop these resources and but
asking entering my questions you
did a good job senator.
Thank you center woods center
for share.
thank you mister president
so I know this is about the the
project funds
but can you tell us how this
mineralized and stopped working
so how are we good do we have
new technology to make these
work.
Senators mean mister president
senator would have sent your
including the pan m center for
about ten or twelve years all
the heating on the campus was
done with that hot water from a
a deep g of thermal well that
brought up
project and what turned out to
be is exactly as you said over
time that the water had such
heavy concentrations of minerals
that the pipes began clogging up
trying to do an alternative that
would not bring up
that wouldn't run the actual
water with a full of minerals
through the pipes but it would
use the heat circulating some
development is what was
demonstrated at a well in
animals earlier last year
were a company
ever drilled down to eighteen
water but rock so hot that you
could bring it up bring the heat
up
you put down a a close loop
circle circuit and you you send
with it and then it just keeps
circulating you're not bringing
up any water and you're not
injecting anything.
It's just the the fluid in your
close circuit continues to to go
mexico who is drill bits
produced at
through sandias experimental
work on geothermal they now have
used that to begin a well in
so we we weren't in position to
say why don't you develop it
here but hopefully this bill
would create the the
administrative capacity and the
center share thank you mister
mister president so do we know
what kind of fluid that we're
talking about that they would
put down there and bring it back
up with it
head of the new mexico tech
geothermal energy
center of excellence answer that
question with a variety of
I I don't know but maybe even
petroleum products or something
that are circulated but that
never leave the the the circuit
their different fluids that uh
after we've get get the fluids
moving
which I suspect or not
water at all but
exchange and there probably is
steam generated to to produce
the the movement of the turban
so that it it produces
electricity
Mr president and the one senator
shared the one in western
utility near the nevada border
this being developed currently
is two hundred and forty
megawhat.
I would like to point out that
this will be an economic based
business there will be a new
industry for new mexico and I
think you can do that in a lot
go to do a geological
sequestration of of c o two but
it turned out gets down there
were where things are hot and I
other areas clearly this is new
at least new to the mexico of
this system is new and I applied
brought before that we that we
then seem to have a gut
relationship this is unproven
technology so we better not do
it
for I don't know hundreds of
years probably
certainly the hot springs of
where ever in the in the world
is based on the same kind of
seen off for the debate we do
have for the debate senator
should not be glad to.
Thank you mister president and
uh mister president thank you
for not forgetting me completely
appear but uh um center or t
pino
we have to drill.
and senator mccutch and yes
you've been I see you've been
paying close attention to the to
the handouts ever given in the
hearing before but that's
to drive the turban and then the
the the the horizontal drilling
that goes on below ground to
create that radiator effect it
couple eighteen thousand foot
wells and then do you have any
idea how many laterals they
build or do we have to get down
there to see the heat in the
exchange in all all of that in
think the techniques that the
oil industry uses the petroleum
industry uses probably would
would would be the same ones
used here and it it just depends
they'll use that same horizontal
drilling technique that's used
in oil fields.
Mister president center thank
you thank you very much i'm i'm
trying to wrap ahead around this
lot plant which would which
would be a significant needle
mover for the southwestern part
of the state and I mean if we
can develop this the the
technology and thanks to all and
exactly what it would cost it's
it's going to be roughly about a
thousand dollars of foot to
drill the eighteen thousand we
get to eighteen million dollars
wells and then we have the later
at this and how much it would
cost to to make our two hundred
and fifty megawhat mister
president in and senator the
these are going to be major uh
investments that it's going to
take and the amount of money we
have in our fund is not is not
where it's what's going to
finance that it's simply going
would make the investment
much as we have now with wind
and solar if you don't have that
purchase sir lined up you just
can't afford to put up all those
expensive wealth but new
mexico's geology is such that
that along the rear grand rift.
The crust of the earth is
and mister brenda center thank
you very much for that to build
a four hundred megawhite natural
gas fired plant we're looking at
expensive than that to and and
obviously we have much lower to
missions and a lot lower
operating costs I would think as
well it would that be correct
mister president and senator I
in there's no way staff to roots
to hold away once the wells are
once the facility is built and I
think it is going to be couple
hundred million dollars at least
to to get one of these off the
longer it operates the lower the
cost drives.
And mister president center
these penal thank you for
bringing this up every time I
turn around and just amaze with
the natural resources that we
Great cost savings for energy we
know the energy is what drives
our entire economy and if we can
give our citizens car savings
thank you mister president thank
you catch and I apologize at him
a kitchen I wasn't intentionally
not trying to call on you I just
couldn't see your hand with the
very interested in this topic I
think it's it's quite quite
interesting really
you know I do have some concerns
with it with with a lot of the
say green initiative we we don't
in and use it it's a good thing
and in fact
i've done a few projects now
with earth tubes and and it was
one of those things were i'm
in the walls on one side that
then create a natural vacuum out
of a basement and then you run
tubes out into the earth and
you're constantly pulling in in
things that have been done many
many years ago before we had
such cheap energy that you know
household insulation and walls
basically became a thing of the
passo you know III want to
side but you know any time we
can use the the natural
temperature of either heat or
house in the winter cooler house
in the summer it's quite
interesting but those things
you know growing up I always
found it interesting how it was
always such a comfortable
temperature and you know those
types of things back before air
conditioning or or central
heating that's what they had to
have a real impact on using less
energy instead of still being
dependent on energy we can we
can put things in place that
make us dependent on no energy
so we're not arguing whether or
not uh
can truly be efficient and
hardest that ears the natural
beauty and power thank you
mister president.
Thank you centerpril saying no
further debate centered he
supported the clothes on the
bill
gregs uh pass the initial
geothermo resources bill in this
state and we're simply building
on the work that they did with
that initial peace and
shows that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands thank you to
support senders where voting all
senators your seats please if
you wished about no please raise
your hand.
affirmative zero on the negative
husband ninety one as amended
has passed the senate senative
you know mister president thank
you very much mister president
members of the senate thank you
how many year two senate
worth thank you mister president
I just wanted we are going to
roll over item seventeen house
bill one thirty four at the
request of both the house
sponsor and the senate sponsor
down you have to send we go that
are because third reading of
legislation are yield to center
padia for item number eighteen
how per house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
all actions for placing house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill five as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or a substitution.
top ten for folks coming into
new mexico economic development
a whole number of things that
are happening here one of them
in particular is maxy on solar
bringing eighteen hundred jobs
which was recently announced
fifteen hundred jobs a one point
two million dollars square as
one point two million square
foot facility all of these
facilities all of these jobs and
printership trust fund makes it
makes annual transfers from the
trust find to the public work
apprentice and training fund and
makes annual appropriations to
the work for solutions
department for the purpose of
contribute to the states ability
to continue offering these
important resources and
specifically to provide critical
funding for the public works of
printership and training
for the air senators were
debating house appropriation
finance committee substitute for
hospital five as amended and we
have senator brand followed by
center share center
thank you mister president with
understand what we're doing on
this one but
is this creating a kind of a
trust fund that will be used for
internships and if so what kind
of internships.
Center break in missed president
series this uh like internships
with boeing or honey well or
what kind of internships are
know bringing manufacturing back
to the united states in a very
big way into new mexico eighteen
hundred jobs in a one million
square foot facility and that is
just phase one of what this
jobs with a two hundred thousand
square foot facility that is
expected to triple in the next
to five to ten years and then
another organization that just
recently announced called new
A mispresent I had one of the
union reps come and talked to me
about this bill and about this
being more for uh construction
organizations we do need massive
construction projects to make
these happen so you are
absolutely right sir.
Well thank you mister president
fine but even without them we
have a huge shortage in our
trades
fields and you know they they
types of jobs even just learning
how to build a house honestly we
don't have workers for those I
was just talking to one of the
union guys uh while I was get my
young people right into the
trades do an apprentice ships
getting their licenses through
the state so if they can then
start their own companies and
and hopefully soon you know
part of that and I appreciate
that you've worked with me on
several of of those c t issues
and we can continue doing that
together and and maybe at those
tradies jobs filled thank you.
Thank you mister president.
tell her she mister president so
you talked about all of these
jobs in the million square foot
facility in I don't remember how
many fifteen hundred jobs here
people
do they need taxpayer help to
train their their staff.
I thank you mister president in
just one operation with the
moment they're done serving one
court of organization they max
go to a public project also
little bits for an
infrastructure development
small part of what we would be
doing for some of these
companies.
Okay thank you mr president so
senator where where would this
and so the abc association to
builders and contractors they
have their training facilities
you might have some of this
happening at some of our public
So mister president the reason I
ask you so someone college which
is
unabashedly the premier
needs it so if we've got a which
it business they will figure out
how to train which it
and and that's what they do but
largely those those classes
for the class would this
essentially work the same or is
this just tax payer money paying
for the tuition.
And so mister president this
would pay for a portion of it
fitters have technicians
electricians and construction
workers so they'll work on
multiple projects not just one.
Thank you mister president it's
equipment as the big yellow toy
school but
but again it's a
initially is whatever company
wants the once the this person
trained until that's why I was
asking I I see here that there's
and mister president I am
looking for that but yeah they
the the there's a couple of
funds that this effects and it's
going to the the folks that are
solutions abc association to
builders and contractors folks
the that represent think people
that not represent you that work
with people that work in the
industry.
So.
unions and so forth does it
include any business
any business ownership
representatives of business.
Thank you very much mister
and then you have the
over the agc of new mexico you
have
to make sure I see this right
did this start out is a fifty
million dollars appropriation in
in
get whittle down to thirty
million or get in my
so we have a a trust fund that
we built as we talked about here
and we've got a lot of those
this year now I love the idea is
the thirty million dollar trust
fund enough
work is initially the distribute
distribution with five million
dollars and fiscal year twenty
five five million and twenty six
and three million for the
following seven years but in
the investment of this fund
it'll continue to grow as we've
seen in a massive road with all
of our other funds in some years
it may be flat and other years
it might shrink a little bit
then following that it'll go but
just rsic our state investment
council will will do the
investing of this.
That's correct mister president
in in mister president work for
they do it today and so this
would simply be a an addition to
what they're doing and then
it'll compliment a couple of
their already existing
apprenticeship programs so
mister president I know they
is presented it out feasibly
could be in the thousands the
dollars that I meant I mentioned
here for this particular purpose
for this particular piece of
legislation you're going to see
costs.
Okay or mister president thank
you very much I appreciate
appreciate the trust fund
concept here thank you.
members of the body who I hope
all right in here right now
mister president so again this
is AAA a giant leap forward for
I move that house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for household five as amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent to the senate the
records show
you wished about now please
raise your hand.
Senator smith is volume now
senator mccartin will renew.
I have a have thirty two in the
affirmative.
I have ordered thirty three in
the affirmative aid the negative
house appropriations of finance
committee substitute for house
still five as amended as fast as
senate center by the
list I would next yield we'll go
to item number nineteen that
center stephanics for house
agricultural sake is and water
resources can be subsuper house
built two eleven as amended
house agricultural sake years
and water resources committee
substitute for house bill two
eleven as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amends various sections of the
water project finance act to add
wastewater convents and
treatment is qualifying what a
authorization prior to the new
mexico finance authority making
grants or loans for one year a
temporarily.
facilities particular from
smaller systems there is limited
demand for endangered species
act project applications so we'd
help leverage the water project
fund both the mister president
both ms supports hospital to
water projects particularly
those in rural new mexico that
is a statement from market of
russell and the state engineers
office has indicated that these
I would stand for questions and
comments thank you some might
center the phonic centers or
debating.
House agriculture is second
water research committee for
gaz in water resources committee
substitute for house bill to
eleven as amended amendment
sponsored by senator joseph
Mr president I will you
senator matters.
I'd rather hear the question
first center for going to move
the amendment and then we'll
explain it of course mister
if you'll explain what you're a
memory attempts to do
yes mister president miss
president we discuss this bit
yesterday when we were approving
the project list which we do
every year to be funded from the
really no reason for us to give
that authority away we almost
always approve every project
recommended to us but this would
assure that we do not have any
sponsor if show yield to I think
about five hundred million
dollars a projects
and have some more questions for
the sponsor biggest center
wastewater it's a portion of
that fund of those funds for
wastewater the other portion is
for water projects but mister
president I request unanimous
single new mexico finance
authority sorry see no objection
if the sergeant are so please
sponsor and we discussed it
quite a bit in the conservation
committee as well every year as
long as i've been here we have
had this part of our process
somewhat like our capitality
process but we tried with
misrussell and others at mfa to
reform the process so that we
would approve projects that were
shovel ready that in many cases
very throughout the year by an m
and then they're recommended to
us for approval by the water of
trust board we've talked a
little bit earlier today in
yesterday about who sits on the
water trust board in the fact
always approve them ever every
one of them i'm not really sure
why now we would need to take
away our authority to approve
those projects we do it every
projects but the if you look at
the amendment you look at the
billing context all it does is
just uh changes the title of the
bill and strikes the words that
would mean you know read what
legislative approval I know
that's been amended I think
along the way to so that then I
see miss russell night in your
head so you know they start it
out with a much broader
for us to do it and so that's
the reason for my amendment
thank you center survive to
senders were debating senate
floor member number one and I
yield to the sponsor center so
thank you
trust board to promulgate rules
and policies without the one
your pause the border trust
board would not be able to fund
during that year so and mister
floor member number one we have
senator steinborne.
Thank you mister president will
the senator yield for some
questions senator stephonics.
several mutual domestics and
you know water eneddies that
need funding and need funding
over the next few years so
Mr fraud mister president miss
market a russell indicates that
it would delay waste water
expands this phone to include
wastewater for the first time
but if we don't also get kind of
immediate authority to fund way
swatter than in fact we will
Mister president senator yes.
Okay and I guess that my other
question mister president
senator is what project what
Mr president center since this
would be a new use of the funds
rules would have to be
promotated in order for projects
to qualify.
projects I know we've given a
lot of extra money for this fun
how much extra funding have we
given.
To this fund overall in this
budget.
much extra beyond what the level
we normally fund.
Sooner than mr president center
And mr president senator
nice tell me if i'm if I read
this correctly that there's also
a a line in the bill that says
Yes mister president okay this
alters into the amendment mr
president is trying to get a kid
a global view here
so
it's going to just the
wastewater portion of this.
projects that can be funded
until next year because all of
the projects that we funded like
yesterday used up the fund.
So mister president center I I
it's kind of a mean issue on the
main bill though um so what can
answer it now for a go.
how much is going to be approved
for the future we don't know how
many projects are going to be
applied for the application of
projects could determine a
larger amount of money being
appropriate.
a valid point but
although I I am concerned about
the delay I will say that I am
concerned about that because I
want that money to go out that
approval requirement I do ask
one more question.
Well i'll wait until we get back
on the buildness present cause
that that's on the bill thank
you very much understand boring
this part of the amendment
please.
Senator said ranters do you so
you'll thank you thank you
mister president center it's my
understanding that
pointers mainly is that is that
true i'm i'm not i'm just not
that familiar with them to
reserve a center I think your
question is n m fa men and pay
here's the body that
historically and always has
recommended projects to us we
have almost always accepted
their recommendations like
really can't even think a year
water transport granted it's
only for one year but but it
would take us complete out of
that process and so senator your
question was who makes that the
n m fa I think your question was
governor cabinet or governor
appointee so they they control I
think by the senate senator
sponsor's good number I think is
about a hundred and fifty
million dollars of capital
president serious and you yes
you you read my mind that's
exactly what I had intended to
ask was not the actual method
but the water transported there
was exactly my question
I you know when you're elected
it it seems to me that
you just have more
you know I I have listened to a
lot of
different senators on this four
talk about the water issues in
their districts we have water
and I I think i'd like to keep
that
n
honor that honor that
appropriating authority just
because i'm a little bit more
comfortable with that
the debate and keep hearing
different view points but right
now center you you've got me
convinced thank you mister
president.
Thank you very much center's
meetings next we go to the
based on her neighbor mister
president I too
listening intently with the
arguments for and if I
understand it correctly will the
or authority to review those
projects and to
provide some oversight of the
moneys or actually directly
appropriate the monies to fund
right now the projects we've
done and we've done this in the
twenty plus years i've been here
we find water projects to
include conventions storage
other projects the proposal
does the build essentially
assess the pause are
appropriating authority so they
can adopt rules for waste water
and there's really no need for
that we can continue to fund
water projects as we always have
projects while they get that in
place but we've never found them
before and so there the urgency
of trying to get was water
projects and here is a good one
but it doesn't make sense taking
long without wastewater projects
in the mix and to give up our
appropriating authority for that
purpose it really makes no sense
to me.
Thank you center a neighborhood
were on the amendment please
proceed
again it protects this bodies
authority thank you very much.
Thank you very much center
neighborhood next rego to send
course please see senators have
been thank you mister president
senator servantes we
we just approved issues
wastewater I mean water trust
board projects didn't we
yesterday.
but you're right we approve
those projects yesterday as we
do every year center and was
there any debate on any of the
projects.
Mister president center I don't
they said almost always accept
those recommendations
and and mister president senator
are there any legislators
involved in the
legislature's oversight
currently over these projects
other than just.
Giving the yay or no voda on the
we have an inadequate role and
for years i've been trying to
change the composition of the
board in fact I passed
legislation two years and put
that on sent on governor
martinez susan martinez's desk
hundred plus million dollars of
water projects the governor
understandably vetoed at which
senator uni both have talked
quite a bit about the fact that
governors don't give away
interim frequently the water
natural resources committee will
have a hearing on projects we
will approve the bill usually as
a committee bill so we'll have a
hearing on that during the
get referred to water natural
resources or to the conservation
committee and then often times
usually to the finance committee
where the bill is heard both
those places in the and the
projects are reviewed
more to her to sip enough and
mister president senator for one
year is that correct.
Mister president center i'm
when I saw it two years and I
think now it's down to one year
center a tc peanut would you
like the sponsor of the bill to
go a new for verification thank
you mister president yes with
for one year so that projects
are could start up by twenty
twenty six with the legislative
approval.
Thank you senator tc pena
please.
Well
on record as saying we've given
away our authority but it's not
all that much of an authority as
far as I can though we've never
said in the time i've been here
I can't remember it's ever
I I just think if this would
make life.
If this would get was wider
projects funded faster I would I
would oppose the amendment
that's all I would say mister
Thank you mister president in
its it's almost difficult to to
talk about the amendment and not
talk about the the process of
granded basically ten percent of
the severance tax bond dollars
and so there's a funding amount
that goes to the water trash
money should aside and then they
identify the projects
that are
applied for and that are in
project fond gets basically half
of what the water trush board
gets and yet they don't have to
Is legislative authority.
Wish president in senator
provided sender uh
The legislature has never not
approved a project that I would
call
so.
ultimately the legislature has
the funding authority of any of
these projects and if we choose
not to
And to that end in and in if in
m f a meeting and october or
money in it to complete the
projects the water trush board
had already agreed or had an
agreed defined but had had
aren't there too to do that so I
don't I don't know mister
president and senator.
that we grant almost which is a
brief cursory look at.
As far as the legislature goes I
believe probably the water the
senator that is legislative
oversight because it's a
legislative committee by term
which presidential center
there's a hard one for me
and they can't because they have
to wait until we fund it later
in the year show.
I'm I think i'm not going to
and I will grow now but
I think we could currently fund
projects quicker and operate
better if we didn't have to come
committee which is a legislative
committee to then
allow this money to be allocated
in span.
I mean I think we could
but each it's hard to get just
to the amendment without really
talking about the risk of the
process so thank you mister
president thank you centers
thank you very much senator
Please proceed senator woods
like mister
Will miss president let me go to
the original sponsor of the bill
for for a question or to
in this is
several agencies that vet
projects
are for the water trust board
they veterans showed that
they have
the water trustpoint wished
president
madame
staffon senator stavonics is
remember a couple of years ago
or a few years ago and I don't
know how many years ago
we had a discussion much like
this
projects available for funding
because they were shovel ready.
Then we had money for and and so
this year
projects up this year.
Now mr president
missed president in incentive
just to finish is have we got
even more projects than the
hundred and fifty million more
backlog even after the two
hundred million mister president
and senators to finish interest
of fantastic
mr president and senator yes
That.
We have water projects that we
don't have enough money to find
to phone weight water projects
with the same phone.
Er mispresident in senator
stevanics is that correct so so
if I may senator
please proceed he was posing
that question and just again the
reminder to everyone were on the
amendment center stephanics so
mister president I would need
trying to clarify in my mind
exactly what this amendment
would do.
Because why would we need the
amendment.
time the firm not wrong and
sometimes my mind gets further
but if i'm not wrong there was
one year we didn't approve.
Boat projects.
projects because we had repro-
approved from the year before.
And so the reason we didn't
approve them because we wanted
deal and so why do we want to do
that we want it to be more
courage and if mister president
if the.
mister president I think yes
ideal it's president i'm sorry
okay going back then senator
woods so we're going back to the
sponsor of the amendment and he
At that point in time when we
did that when we we didn't
approve those projects for a
year
that was a reason one that we
just had so many projects out in
front that that.
run out of time because the
permeaning blah blah blah and
regulations and blah blah blah
all of any things we do in the
state to keep project from
center thank you for the walked
on memory lane I I forgot about
that you know i've been here on
that long there was a year that
legislation various pro-
projects and the bill never got
all the way through to the
projects that year were not
fighted at all
and as a result then the
executive and the board went
particular year i'm looking at
miserable misrussia because she
she was there in the front line
with me and and you center i'm
really glad you might be that
but it's a good point because
money that was set for these
projects was boosted
to balance the budget
for other purposes sometimes the
money was moved out of these
phones into other projects sort
been a common thing but we've
done it before so senator you're
right in into senator tino's
penalty or he's a peter's point
this has not been a rubber
standard it's not been a matter
of just approving every project
there have been years.
With that back history
you know that the the word it
came to me mister president was.
Well we were gonna run out of
again update our list in but
actually it's going to get a
chance to add to our list.
With waste one.
So.
i'm current in the camp after
listen to the discussion that.
We probably just need to work
the westwater in
those projects.
percent of the money going to
wash water or
this the most point value goes
to waste water I don't know how
And
I don't think we want to give up
that authority I think that the
the amendment probably needs to
go on
I've got.
One of those big water systems
and my district and our district
senator that.
that everybody thanks for
throwing money after money after
money but with pipe in the
ground is getting bill and the
the funny part about that
of a deal and it's it's a tough
place to be in you can't read
that fiance but we started that
project years ago.
Even before I was in the senate.
amendment because we need to
stay steady on what we're doing
the legislature needs to have
the information on what's going
Here often mister president you
say water is life and I agree
with you a hundred percent so
young opposite you mister
president will the sponsor of
the bill yield senator is to
fantastic yield
mr president center city a lot
suspension of legislative
involvement and that's when I
learned that it was amended down
to one year
and I was trying to recall the
excuse me senator president I
mean mister president thank you
very much center I see the low
best we're going to the sponsor
of the bill and that center
stephanics centers to fedex
please
the the amendment pissing the
legislative involvement for a
year was because of the timing
correctly the rule making begins
in august that that's what I
need explained again and I
apologize it was explained at
the committee hearing and I just
to go back to the sponsor of the
bill and then from there if you
wish you can also ask the
sponsor of the amendment to
yield as well and see if we can
for the rule making in that one
year of release of legislative
authority would allow the it the
m f a two get the rules in place
support the parts the one year
pass because I think it's
important that the rule making
fold in the waste water projects
um and so that their balanced
the past if we don't have this
pause to get everything in place
for the application of this a
very new
you know the the bad water the
wastewater is just as important
has sources of new fresh water
so thank you mister president.
Thank you very much centers to
yield centers advantage do you
yield just miss president.
Thank you mister president thank
you senator um you know we've
we've had this discussion
so the way I understand it after
listening to all this as the
bill was five years they knocked
it down to one year and you've
got this amendment that would
strike that portion which would
Thank you mister president in in
that case I I have to stand with
you
in with this amendment because
and what we find out
is that
maybe a year or two later or
three or five
it really didn't make it easier
for us
now we we come back and we try
to change it back and and here's
here's one of my biggest
concerns if we don't put this
amendment on every time we try
to take our forty back.
is that every time we've given
our authority away even when we
say all it's only going to be a
year or so they gonna be five
years.
Then when we try to take that
authority back.
Group that puts these water you
know the water trust board would
would end up liking this
authority so much that they
would do everything in their
power
have seen the results of that
for the past four years more
than any other time in the
twelve years that i've been up
here that we have seen the
results of giving away our
forty.
Was some really bad decisions by
the executive.
The.
And i'm not willing to go
through that again now I tell
to be able to drink it now I am
not i've not tried let me just
put it that way i'm not that
brief but i've i've looked at
the plant i've looked at all and
We're in the desert for all of
you that don't realize that.
And mister president center I
think maybe sometimes we have.
Ignored our responsibility when
resources committee with you
during the interim a couple
years back
and you take that very seriously
and I learned a ton in that
interim process to look at what
these projects are so that we
make sure that we're vetting
them properly and make sure that
the water trust board is betting
them properly.
We've had our authority taken
away too many times to the point
that we're almost as bad as
school boards where we shouldn't
you know we don't even need to
meet anymore
not continue to give away our
authority thank you mister
president thank you very much
senator brant we're moving along
on the amendment to send it her
money off center on yours please
advantage no mister president
center now did not come to
judiciary.
Sooner she wanted this to this
come to conservation
mispresident center did yes to
Mister president center I saw
the issue we discuss it in the
committee and I opposed it in
the committee.
Thank you mister president I
authority has to remain in place
otherwise we're just giving all
our government away the judicial
branches trade this a couple
be voting for this amendment.
Thank you very much anyone else
is there any other debate okay
we're going to
send understandable employee
Mr president I yield if it's on
the bill on the amendment well
we are on the amendment mister
but it relates to the amendment
so I can say man present with
the senate real for one question
so so with that center's
defanics if you feel that it is
and your asking center staff and
it's to yield on the amendment
mister president that's correct
it relates to the amendment
please proceed center stephanics
for two years that the amendment
seeks to get rid of is it just
for wastewater projects or is it
for the whole fund.
Senators to fantastic mr
thanks thank you very much
centers down born any other
debate in your discussion if not
then i'm going to center is
advantage to go out and close on
center advantage please i'm
thank you mister president
mister president I appreciate
all the good debate now we
appreciate the interest in water
I appreciate the work of
misrussell i've chaired the
interim committee i've worked on
this issue for many years before
appointees it's generally been
headed by the state engineer
who's a governor appointee what
this has meant historically is
that back in the years when
susan martinez was the governor
objected to it back then just as
i'm ejecting to it with a
democratic government
when when that was going on and
when I checked the internet
committee what was really
and I don't need to point out
that that was political
a state engineer at the time had
very close tires to the project
broaden the availability this
money away from those two
projects to make it available to
smaller communities and
throughout new mexico
particularly rural committees
like mine.
The.
Don't you have a county doesn't
and we change that process by
essentially forcing more
pressure on the water trustport
to broaden the consideration of
project and we've done that
successfully in the time that I
to the water trust board in the
water trust for it is
constrawled by this
administration in this executive
and I can understand why they'd
like to that it doesn't make
in adelaide swatter projects we
can do that and that that could
be a bill this session but
that's not what this is this is
to pause i've got to believe
been here long enough there's a
I don't know what it is I don't
know who it is I don't know
where it's going to go uh but
but there's clearly something a
front to to get a particular
project or two appropriate here
sometimes it's some cost all the
way to the state supreme court
to preserve the authority of
this body as an institution is
as a chamber and I got to tell
you when we went to the supreme
bridge the justice of sure court
said I learned this and third
grade the legislature
appropriates.
Now we can delegate this away
politics into a board that we do
not appoint we do not control we
do not have any oversight of and
we're given that to the
executive branch and we've got
to just stop doing them.
When we don't even want to do
the job that we have now.
How about we be a senate how
about we be a legislature.
Senator how would you like to
have that quote
thank you mister president i'm
sorry about that when we do that
on a show of answer thank you
very much senator centers to
eleven is when some ended if
pope votes no senator said that
your locus boats know.
Senator greggs boats now.
Center hamlin boats now.
Center of thomas words now.
to house agriculture sick is in
water resources committee
substitute for house bill two
eleven once amended has duly
passed the senate were back on
Thank you
mister president and and i'm
happy the amendment went on I
but I was reading through does
it include other places or other
projects that this money could
be spent on.
Centers to phone x.
small systems so adding these
was water projects would help
leverage other funds from other
assistance to the small
applicants so mister president
i'm not sure if that's what the
senator is asking center period
and and thank you mister
president I was more curious as
they're
specifically on wastewater
projects.
Mr president yes the board
dangerous species act
implementation projects.
And thank you mister president
senator I think that's my my
biggest issue here's you know I
communities like dexter hagreman
like arthur those municipalities
that are dealing with way
swatter in and trying to stay in
compliance and insurer that this
so that if this money isn't
being put into those projects
and instead it's for for other
things that that we have some
say now whether or not the
legislature's going to over rule
bill as I wish it was just about
waste water
I think that's a huge need
across a state just because we
do need to protect that that
resource in ground water and a
funding or anything in the in
the legislation to do kind of a
maybe in a evaluation of the
current infrastructure in and
where the needs are most it may
oversight task force and and
there's
a way that they go in and score
and we we try to take care of
the the worst roofs first or the
worst schools first is there any
go around find the
municipalities who are or most
in need and the ones that are at
most at risk of of endangering
the environment.
Centers to fanux thank you
mister president and center that
I I know that republicans have
the reputation of not not given
a darn about the environment but
that's not true and you know
that more than anybody uh mister
president senator we do we don't
or this waste water into the
ground water because that's
that's what we drink in you know
if grampa taught me a lot of
things and that was put the
outhouse far from the well and
so I thought I think that's an
putting in for money for their
system it's in direct and and
hopefully they can get some of
this funding thank you mister
president thank you very much
there are pretty i'm going to
send a repair there and then
after that i'm going to center
no objection to so ordered going
on to center ahead of me on the
bill center hutton meal please
mister president I don't need
the sponsored yield but I do
want to say it might district
this bill is very important when
eligible to apply for that
funding and we've run into some
major issues in northern rioring
but county when we start talking
about wastewater and the threat
of groundwater contamination now
rural new mexico and small
communities that need assistance
with funding for wastewater
treatment systems now as you
know there's a significant
demand for grants to find a way
swatter treatment facilities
and contamination of their six
existing drinking waters and I
stand and support this bill
thank you mister president thank
you very much senator had a meal
next we go to senator griggs
concerned about adding adding
washed water
to this this legislation in
that.
There is a certain amount of
money funded for water projects
it looks like there's in the
opportunity for fewer in fewer
water projects to be done
which president appears to me
that if we want to do ways water
ancient we use ten percent for
the water trash board earmark to
water projects
we use five percent to clone
years will you five percent to
share you we're gonna we we
wanted the year and I guess that
would have given us a year to
evaluate which water projection
in pretty much put a lot of the
and we get those projects
potentially
we also continue to have water
projects so mister president in
in sentence i'm free the what we
paypal is what it would it
concerns me about and I I
understand the needs i'm just
and when it may be listen to see
if i'm off based somehow but
you senator and marketed
thank you very much senator
greggs next we go to center
citations senators advantage
please.
we essentially scam off some of
this money to the said engineers
offers and then from the money
that skimmed off to the state
engineers off we skim off part
it took away our appropriating
authority whenever we do these
automatic ten percent goes to
this and eight percent goes to
this and two percent goes this
once again we're given away our
authority we're not deciding
what the courts really need
we're still doing the same way
still skimming to the state
engineer we're still skimming
from the state engineer to the
courts but we're reducing it
looks like we're substantially
engineer here saying you've
given me too much money and we
have the courts coming in saying
you gave us too much money in
this skim percentage and so
does these adjudications not
give him an automatic percentage
and and we should appropriate to
the courts what they need to
adjudicate water rights based on
their budget and their needs and
percentages but it's telling it
it tells us that they didn't
need what we skimmed off as a
percentage and good for them
good for them for saying we
don't quite need everything.
You guys have been given us all
the courts to get these
adjudications done but it was
unwired it was a mistake and
i've learned a little bit by
being here over time.
If I may mis present if the
to the environment and issues of
conservation the the bill on
page two though presently that
the existing law allows for
and specifies what are the
so we in the past have used this
funding to support federal
inagered species act projects
you're striking that in other
words you're eliminating the
saying no so well how my reading
that wrong because I see the
language restructure it says
federal endangered species act
projects would would not be
qualifying finished a phone
explete thank you mister
because because with miss
russell and you center many
others we've used some of this
fighting to support endangered
species act projects in and as a
other senators are pointed out
when we had waste water and
and so a greater demand to
include endangered species and
water projects and now adding
white swatter in the inevitable
result of that is going to be
less money likely for any one of
said about it is there any other
debate see no other debate what
we're going to do now as close
and house agriculture executives
and what a resources.
The.
Senator neighborhood on car go
do you yield mister president I
mister president my one question
is whether or not we have.
money every year but there's n-
we are finding that there's not
sufficient treatment of the
waste water so we are having to
ask or we are having to put our
money into the treatment every
year so this would clarify the
funding streams.
Center nightmare well mister
very small community that I used
to serve honda
that was in dire need of.
with reference with respect to
fresh water and by expanding the
role
we may
compromise or may not be able to
cannot talk about uh how the
waste water aspect is going to
impact maybe the many requests
that we have for fresh water
projects interesting please
application was complete or
shall already and with the
implementation of a waste water
in this fund if it were to pass
approved and then the weight
water trust board would move
ahead with the request from the
state legislature for enough
fans to cover all of the
continuing with debate going to
send your money out senator when
you ask please thank you mister
president i'm looking at this
bill and said a good with the
senator yield for some questions
interesting phone extra yield
o water issues so it could
include wastewater issues.
Mister presidency and give me a
a waste water I am soon
and less than somebody's making
a claim to all drinking all
watering.
Thank you mr president center
are you referring to a
particular page because page six
so mister president page six
line eight has to do with water
rights adjudications that the
Cast rate to let them do that
but the judiciation what what
just I guess what waste water
with he do you.
engineer just the judiciation of
water rights or talking just
about wastewater projects being
put in for funds but not for the
state engineer.
for water writing a dudication I
know in house bill two week put
tons of money for the state
engineer for for water rates and
he always has a poll money for
water rates I just from twenty
twenty four through twenty
water rates but and just don't
get that section.
Centers to fannics.
receives.
So mister president in so he
already has the authority to do
this we're just giving him
additional form that's what I
when yours any other discussion
in the other debate seen and
then we're gonna go and close on
house agriculture of seconds and
water resources committee
substitute for house bill two
substitute for house bill two
eleven as twice amended do now
pass a mast unanimous consent of
the senate that the record
showed the role has been called
please raise your hands.
Senator woods boats now.
Senators share words now.
Yeah.
eleven as twice amended has duly
passed the senate center is to
fan thank you mister president
members of the senate thank you
senators to phonics moving along
understand center stephanics
you're still up
thank you
I ask unanimous consent of the
senate that the record show that
amendment or substitution thank
you senator phonics hearing
objection centers and fonics are
real explained the bill thank
you mr president house bill
seven which concerns to the
health care affordability fund
fanned established in twenty
twenty one has enabled new
mexico to create successful
programs that reduce consumer
costs on the state's health
and helping small businesses
across the state the problem we
are trying to address with
hospital seven is that the
distribution of revenue to the
fund is scheduled to drop
but will drop to thirty percent
indefinitely if it is not fixed
we have adopted an amendment to
house bill seven so they're
changes the distribution back to
fifty five percent.
applied twenty six
implementation it does not have
an impact on this year's budget
today six thousand small
businesses and their employees
are open enrollment periods that
just ended for be well new
mexico resorted in the highest
enrollment ever recorded with
enrollment up thirty eight
percent year of year fifty seven
not medicaid so people are
paying for insurance I would
stop here and answer any
questions and here are any
comments thank you thank you for
this to find extenders where
command the sponsor for
saying something I think is just
really really good and a lot of
people use the word affordable I
think it's in the the title I
and I I just think that is it's
a wonderful way to present this
concept it's it's kind of a
you know
just a point of.
the consumer cost just as the
sponsor said so kudos to her for
that III just want to say a men
to that
well with that with the sponsor
please ill
trying to track this on the on
the ipad here with the
amendments and I just wanted to
make sure I have this straight.
The
Mr president senator it will go
Thank you mister president
center so
so no matter why if the bill
doesn't pass or if the bill does
pass there will be a a temporary
it will still go down to thirty
percent for a temporary time
is that correct
mr president center that is
correct great okay I understand
mr president I moved that house
bills seven is twice amended do
now pass and I assume the
enemies consent of the senate
that the record show the role
has been called and all those
Senate my curtain volume now
center smeaties boring now
center back body mill senator
Senator perl volume senator
sunches volley now center birth
will you know santa gara spotty
amended has passed the senate
center so vonics
thank you mr president and
members of the senate thank you
we're gonna go on the calendar
that's going to be the next item
I don't number twenty one
hospital one ninety five and I
ninety five on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution seen no objection
center by the if i'll explain
the bill thank you very much
dwelling unit shortage here in
new mexico alone and it's just
growing it seems to by the
quarter and so as a result we
did work all year to put
together some housing
year to add a housing
development revolving fund that
will finance work force
development housing and fund
infrastructure needed for
affordable housing
to live mister president and
then of course we do need to
focus on affordable housing the
new housing development
revolving fund will provide
loans for affordable housing
infrastructure and work for us
the new fund will prioritise
projects in municipalities and
adopt improving zoning
initiatives which is one of the
things that we found during the
work we were doing all year on
housing mister president is
building and development
the legislation also clarifies
the definition of an enterprise
development project as a
facility that is primarily
occupied by non affiliate
contains a hundred and seventy
five million a one hundred and
seventy five million dollars
appropriation one hundred and
twenty five million dollars for
the housing development fund
which is what this particular
Seen no debate center by the end
of close on the bill
thank you mister president I
move that house bill one ninety
we're voting on hospital one
ninety five to your seats
please.
If you wished about no please
raise your hand.
Center neighborhood voting now
senator share voda now senator
woods voting now sender greg's
voda no sender sunches fully now
senator personal voting now.
Senator brantley
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative fourteen the
negative hospital one ninety
To explain the next order
business thank you mister
president unamazon sent me going
that our business announcements
in misleading us here in no
objection we're on that order
business announces a
miscellaneous senator worth
items we're going to do before
we take a break item number will
do item number thirty five first
that's house joint resolution
eleven kirtland air force land
based jurisdiction and I believe
is the election a I bill it came
out of senator disheary
committee
ah this morning and then we will
take a break after that so mr
president unanimous does that we
hand it out now so people can
see it and take a look at it and
pull up the bill thank you so
the worth seen objection or on
senate and returns same here
with respectfully submitted lisa
and more teased my cutting chief
clerk the journal show the
message from the house
has been received.
to committee reports first.
That's a majority floor later
peter worth take us to the next
order of business and thank you
mister president you know ms
whom has been referred senate
judiciary committee substitute
for senate bill five as amended
has had it under consideration
and reports that same has been
Senators has been our senator
hambling and move adoption of
the community report and it is
there's a motion to adopt
community report all those in
senate have signed in open
sessions senator district
committee substitute for senate
bill five as amended the
rediterate
in a growth preparatory signing
by the officers of the senate
respect the submitted senator
speak composed carry hamblem
clifford period co chairs thank
you senator hambling.
favor significant saying I those
opposing
the eyes have at the committee
part has been adopted and i'd
like to announce to the members
that the officers of the senate
have signed an open session
mislanes hearing no objection we
are on that order business
announces misleading a senator
worth thank you mister president
it now being eleven fifty nine
am I moved to adjourn until
morning session are president
this afternoon session.
Senor objection so ordered
to them trying to create a
the judiciary committee say no
objection it is so ordered
senate majority florida peter
worth six and next order
of business thank you mister
president so just as I mentioned
again we're going to item number
one eighty two and then we will
take a break your name is
concerned we go to that or
business third reading of
legislation and I yield to
senator said the lopes for item
number thirty five see no
that the record show that all
action for placing house joint
resolution eleven on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution thank
you says they'll offer seen
there are some taking some
underutilized property and they
have entered into a lease
agreement with some private
developers I was honored to be
included in a ripping cutting
for a huge facility that is
tenants in this in this parcel
this bill is the last step in a
long process involving
coordination with bernie
o'county shirts department the
in the parcel it's a parcel that
starts at car liable of carlile
boulevard and then it goes
the legal description is there
to currently near for space and
it's a really beautiful part
parcel and would they have
planned is an exciting
development of restaurants
hotels
to be the senate sponsorer of
this house joint resolution and
the final step in making this
this happened thank you senator
sale of a senate is where
debating house joint resolution
eleven.
moved in house joint resolution
eleven
I asked new network on my I
asked unanimous consent that of
the senate that the record
showed that the role has been
of hounds the elope is just
reminded her members of the body
that it is a joint resolution so
it will require a majority
thoughty members which is twenty
two.
By board of thirty two in the
affirmative zero on the negative
house drawing resolution eleven
has passed the senate center
sale office thank you mister
president thank you colleagues
thank you senator peter worth.
house bill wanna to thank you
senator worth center during mr
president ask and I ask you name
is consent of the semente that
the record show that all action
for place has due to sharing
explain the bill
thank you mister president house
bill one eighty two requires
that visual or audio disclaimers
be used if and when deep fakes
to create symphetic images or
audio replicas to make someone
believe that a person has done
or said something that they did
not really do our say in
addition to making people
believe someone did or said
us can certainly appreciate the
harmful nature of deep fakes and
most contacts this bill is
limited just to the use of them
in the context of campaign
advertisements house bill one
eighty two immensely camping
reporting act to add disclaimer
requirements for the use of some
synthetic images visuals and
audio created by artificial
intelligence or deep fakes and
campaign advertisements mister
president are stand for
questions.
meetings and I believe send your
greeks to change your hand up
to.
Senate vegetarian president will
the sponsor you.
Thank you send a neighbor center
to him
mister president there are five
states altogether have adopted
it it's there's actually similar
texas a minnesota that
completely prohibit the use of
definition that would be
standard in I guess the states
that have passed similar type
legislation.
believe is modeled on the other
legislation that there has been
adopted where is that was
similar to thanksgiving extender
neighborhood
yeah mister president I think we
one of those areas I appreciate
uh the legislation I
I see throughout the bill
like beginning on page eleven
those words I was wondering
because I have to use a reading
glasses where the that means i'm
Senator hit mister president
senator so right now we already
have other disclaimer
requirements in our
election code and the word
legible but the same way that
legible would be interpreted if
this were to I go before a court
or or any other enforcement body
uhm easily readable I think
you know I I think there's is
necessary and I I
wonder if
we have enough data to come up
with
imagine this is probably
something that all states are
going to have to ultimately
grapple with and
I do believe that we need to
forward and will certainly
keep our eye on this to see how
it pans out probably in this
election seasons help
technology is deployed so miss
present senator thank you.
Thank you senator neighborhood
we have senator smeaties
followed by senator burnt
yes thank you very much
mister president center had some
questions on page ten
minutes were defining a person
what what types of
entities.
Are are going to be creating or
producing this content.
working on campaigns other for a
specific individual or around an
issue or say advice groups who
are
general
you mister president center I
certainly support that.
And in agree you know I i've
i've seen a lot of these yeah I
think we all have right and we
if they're using a I
like let let's just say a yeah a
worker on a campaign maybe they
would it just be that individual
that would be held liable under
this bill or would other
entities are people be found
liable in that situation.
I think it's page twelve
essentially
it as long as let's say
matches what is in this bell
then we're not going to haul
facebook responsible for someone
not following that policy same
you have to include that
disclaimer on there we're not
going to hold them responsible
for a purchaser failing to abide
by that policy thanks center do
you etc
Most likely had I hadn't seen
this bill before but it sounds
to me or it looks to me like
you're not actually banning.
The
Senator do mister president
center yes you're exactly right
because of first amendment
concerns we are doing and all
out prohibition we're just
center day he extended speed is
thank you mister president
sender
so so someone could still
Senator mr president senator yes
there's only two states that do
an all out prohibition that's
texas in minnesota and i'm not
interesting mister president and
sander to think
that texas and then minnesota
are are the only two that you
don't you don't usually think of
Yeah the the straight pro
hibition of that you know it's
interesting so that the
disclaimers are just going and I
I think I saw it it it just says
artificial and intelligence and
so that this claimer will be
at the bottom or top or what
we're wherever it's easy to see
potentially catch.
The additional people I just
wonder I just want to explore
that with you since this the
first time i've seen the bill so
not of the not a volunteer
they're just an individual
rather just an individual they
have they've purchased some
you know video editing a I
the candidate is is saying and
they post that let's say on
their personal social media page
is that a violation without a
raises to the level of an
advertisement under our campaign
reporting act now so we don't
we're not changing the
definition of of an advertising
in our life of an advertisement
not be.
Okay and mister president center
did do that come up because it
it seems it seems to me that I
i've seen some of this
car intent and things going you
know kinda going viral on on the
internet
did do this come up in any of
the committee.
in trying to paul so called the
so called freelancer that may be
trying to misrepresent a
political candidate during
campaign season did that come up
in discussion.
brought up the the issue that
you're reason
but even under under o our
election code currently if you
have a freely answer who is
doing something that would
matter regardless of the deep
fake issue they just send a
scenario.
Thank you mister president
center i'll have to I guess i'll
have to look at that
advertisement means a
communication referring.
To a candidate
that is distributed to the
public.
news story a debate non partisan
voter guide or a statement made
to a court so so clearly we
would actually it sounds to me
an independent person uses a eye
to misrepresent a political
candidate and this is all it is
that would you agree with the.
Thank you finished me to senator
so mister president senator take
a look at page nine their
expenditure for an advertisement
that exceeds one thousand
dollars
so it's not just an individual
To be regulated as an
advertisement which means it's
done through a campaign
expenditure coordinate
expenditure independent
expenditure exceeding one
But I want to make sure I just
really want to make sure this is
cracked so i'm looking at page
eleven now
provided in subsection d shall
be subject to civil penalties.
So then we go to subsection d
disclaimer it looks like they
will be in violation and subject
to the civil penalties.
So are is that correct.
generally talking about
disclaimers and advertisements
and then were more specifically
getting into the disclaimers and
advertisements around these the
Thank you mister president
center in you know I i'm very
open to this bill I just i'm a
bit intrigued by
referring to.
It says that this person who is
making a campaign expenditure
paid for the advertisement
but then if we go down to
subsection d just.
You know it it says an
as I just read subsection d
which is the new language.
You know it's i'll just read it
reference back to subsection a.
And I don't know if it needs
needs to be
but like I said I don't see a
I I i'm just not seeing a
referral back to subsection a uh
i- it does that the isn't this
reference to subsection a in
order for subsection a two to be
applicable but i'd be happy to
bring and uh linda bottling from
the secretary of state's office
I just
you know I I just want to and
maybe other members of the body
can chime and i'm not going to
go I think much further with
this I probably continue to look
at the bill
just not completely convinced
that just your your average kind
of person that's posting things
on social media if they don't
know about this and they're just
sounds to me that's clearly not
the intent of the act
but I am I am a bit.
I'm a bit concerned with that
limit let me actually ask you
create let's say a video
are are we going to sit like who
who is doing the creating are we
saying it's it's just the person
content do you see that the
difference there is center city
to senator
then give mister president
senator so now I I don't think
extended is great thank you for
clearing that up for me
appreciate it thank you mister
insurance center mister
president.
Thank you we do have further
debate we have senator birth
thank you first for bringing
this forward I think timing is
good on something like it like
this as we had into a political
season
the had stored on this I see in
the their provisions for
disclaimers whether the ads are
again in traditional media or
digital media so I think that's
a good thing and that needs to
I don't know how deep it goes
and I don't know if it would be
covered but for example if
someone created a podcast where
someone of note was.
are there provisions in this
this bill to make sure that that
is covered as well.
Senator do sell mister president
center so again it would it
would absolutely be covered but
this III I am the first to admit
this bill does not address every
place where someone might use a
I think you missed president and
and I guess i'm digging in a
little bit because I see some
concerns that that the industry
may have so maybe this is good
the fact that ai is used ended
up sent to again traditional
media or even social networking
and things of that and it runs
judge platform managers who put
this on the platform or is that.
The other provisions in the bill
to protect them.
Senator do mister president
section for and then this is
what it's talking about the
basically if that station has a
contract to run that ad as part
of the station's policies and
procedures they should say if
you're not on the hook for that
or were rather the the station
is not on the hook for that
thank you in mister president
thank you
and senator thank you I think
And are we relying also on some
of the laws that are already on
the books to back some of this
up with the glarge to fraud or
whatever the case may be
would they come in to play if
someone attempted to use a I and
did not inform.
The.
can't tell you necessarily what
other laws we have on the books
that that would address this but
what I can't say mister
president is that
the the revenues available under
to a claim under this bill
pursuing a claim under this bill
would not mean that you could
not also pursue a defamation
claim
thank you center day etc okay
a platform to to build on
but I think it may need some
more work but I applied you for
bringing this forth again
especially the timing I think is
do have some questions for the
sponsor
thank you senator if you with
you yes mister president
pleasure so mister president
first
deals with with me okay if i'm
if i'm running an ad
why would we have anything to do
with the third party why would
why would google be involved
in a share center day so mister
president senator right now that
definition of advertisement
that's at the beginning of the
our election code so so we
there's are there's already a
variety of folks who could be
covered
under under our current election
have to have these a disclaimer
they are not going to be
responsible if someone ignores
those policies thank you center
day share but mister president.
for anybody I could pick on
president by and I could pick on
president drawn picked pick on
you.
Should not I be the one
responsible for it if i'm if I
made the at least paid for the
ad.
Thank you center share center do
mister president senator under
this bill you would be
Sorry I i'm out of misspoken the
other time a platform would be
responsible for it would be if
they did not include that in
their policies but it as long as
I'm trying to get this straight
in my mind
if I made an ad mister president
with your image and your voice
through a i.
And I didn't disclose the a I
did it because a I can sound and
look just like you
I don't think they can do me but
they can do you.
The cable company or google or
facebook
can still be responsible even
though they have the policy it
build us so if you dead a
misleading ad using the eye
about someone and you did not
include that disclaimer and you
posted and you you buy an ad on
responsible for what you have
done you are response where you
have violated our election code
they have not.
says that I am responsible if I
do not disclose that so I can
say all kinds of bad things
about you.
or the cable station their
exempt they because their policy
said I have to tell you
mr president senator yes you've
got it.
in again I think that most of
this was based on some kind of
internet
advertising would that include
flipping to the page.
But yes cable station is
included traditional broadcast
so mister president.
I I think another legitimate
concern is so this is that this
becomes the law on the state of
mexico.
of issue where we debating this
in congress instead of in the
new mexico state legislature.
They consider the share center
national issue uh since we are
at the state house where we are
dealing with it for new mexico
thank you center do have senator
share of thank you mister
and i'm trying to make sure that
this is the way it is in the
bill itself not just in my mind
because the two different
things.
platforms are not new mexico
corporations and they're not
limited to new mexico
so I could do a facebook
or excuse me I can do an ad
But that if it's funny enough
will go viral around the world
so under what jurisdiction do we
deal with that vice versa let's
Thank you center share senator
do have so mister president
senator so a couple of things
one folks who are doing business
in new mexico or subject to new
question it let's say you make
the deep fake I n and derango if
you still disseminate it here if
you put it on the air here then
you created it here or not
your center do have senator
share so
mister president i'm still
they were not made in new mexico
and weren't even targeted at new
mexico and may not have in fact
been made in the united states
or even on north american
connect.
in that case so in this case if
I wanted to make a deep fake ad
against president drop
see it because there's no
there's no filter that says i'm
not going to send it to new
mexico.
How does that effect
the the platform how does that
rises to the level of an
advertisement under our election
code it's not going to be
covered.
Ah mister president I had
so mister president so I I do
something.
That could be seen in new
mexico.
Because there's no real borders
president biten or president
trump either one so I did it a I
did it I mean I paid for it a I
did it using their image their
colorado not far from my house
but I paid for it in derango.
But I really meant it to go
Whose responsible it is google
facebook or comcast response or
anybody else for that matter
those just names that are in my
head
So mister president senator so
one often times went when you
are buying ads with these kinds
of platforms you are specifying
again over on board comec
any of those as long as they
have in their part when they are
selling you and you're buying
those ever adds based from them
No matter where you are mister
president they just interview
apologies center share okay
mister president
so I that makes me feel better
pages long in point two fount
nobody can read anyway and even
if they wanted to read it they
can't see it.
So
to their disclaimers.
In so now the disclaimers mean
nothing cause nobody can read
the disclaimers and so is this
describing it sounds like
something pretty easy for all
this if all these companies are
already putting all of the stuff
in their disclaimers to protect
themselves sounds pretty easy
issue that we we are that we fix
in this bill certainly but I
think what you have said also
demonstrates mister president
sender how easy it is for these
if the if the liability really
does not fall on the platform
that publishes it if the
liability really does fall on
the person that
president senator it's a person
who create if you look page ten
started line fourteen a person
who creates produces or
purchases and advertisement that
that's not the word you use okay
what a formally vodafone one of
the three did it so I paid for
it but somebody else produced it
and created it.
Mr president center yes all
three of you if there's three
separate people creating
producing our purchasing it and
all three of them do not all
back to the assumption that I
don't know how to create or
produce it
but I can write a cheque
and I say to the creator and
producer
being the law but nobody puts
the disclaimer on in my still
responsible even though they
created it and produced it.
Thank you center chair senator
that they are acting under any
you would be responsible for
knowing the laws that you are
acting under and responsible for
violating them if you did so.
Thank you senator
if I am doing something to make
you look embarrassing mister
president that that I should
have responsibility for that
whether it's through a I are
just
me photo shopping you which.
to know all of those books that
are back there.
The.
Or they have to know all of the
disclosures there are on all of
these things because we've made
And I would be frankly missed
present I would be surprised if
anybody reads those disclosures
you're going in there and say
Is this enforceable if they if
the disclosures or the laws are
so voluminous that you can't
read them or understand them.
a law therefore I should not be
held responsible for violating
it that is that we would we
would live in and chaos mister
so mister president I i've known
that from high school ignorance
is not
a defense
but in high school
because they weren't nearly as
volume and is as they are today
so I agree ignorance is not a
defence
and i'm not actually claiming
and
it in my guess is other than the
attorney that wrote them.
Nobody knows what they say
quantity makes them absolutely
worthless
so in this case here yes we're
going to we're gonna
capture me in this evening I
put that claim in there
so
mister president what III don't
need to prolong this I am
sucked into something and here's
why because we know that there
was somebody and I can't
remember the case now I was
trying to find it you're earlier
About hillary clinton.
And they didn't say that this is
a campaign ad they didn't
produce it was just sat higher.
And so now I think the bigger
picture is
how many of us are going to be
satire.
And his google facebook come
cast can be in violation of the
law for sad tire or they simply
not going to allow satire.
And this is a serious question.
They used satire against
everybody and it was funny even
if it was directed at you or
your friend it was funny
and now they've become
politically correct and
absolutely boring.
important political messages
through satire.
A couple of days ago was the
fiftieth anniversary of the of
the release of blazing sat uh
it's like the most anti racist
movie in the ever created
using every kind of racist thing
that can happen as sat higher
But if all of us had that
becomes illegal.
Then a tool for political
conversation is taken away from
us
that we can't use that tire and
I don't want to go so far is
that people that are just trying
to do the right thing.
because I know what the answer
is oh it doesn't really happen
that way but
it does thank you thank you
center to share we do have
further debate senator or
disappear.
mister president and senator.
We currently have on the books
do we currently have on the
books laws that protect against
somebody's interview
or or a statements are making to
create misleading impressions do
we have laws against that make a
centuries of paying out senator
advertising and send stuff like
that but not i'm not aware of of
laws we have on the books that
deal with this kind of
manipulation of someone's image
more stop those things all this
bill really deals with the micro
is artificial intelligence
generated images
or messages
that context and it doesn't stop
it it just requires a disclaimer
at the on the image or in the
audio so that whoever is seen or
hearing it knows that they're
guess they say it's you know so
superb you can't really tell the
difference but wouldn't somebody
just be able to evade the fact
that they didn't put a
disclaimer by saying oh well we
senator so it's still going to
so it's what it is is is it's if
you're doing something that is
materially deceptive media and
so that's gonna be something
that is
the public without the consent
of the depicted individual and
was produced in whole or impart
using our official intelligence
and and it says end and mister
president as my point
The photoshop the other ones I
mean it doesn't even really
beneficial as you have to tell
them but if you.
intelligence that portrayed me
badly
misleadingly and and it didn't
use they didn't put a disclaimer
on it couldn't their excuse
on computer based system that
through hardware software uses
input data to emulate the
structuring characteristics of
input data in order to generate
synthetic content including
considered use of artificial
intelligence
mister president senator under
this bill it would be if it if
and you send a deal who have
senators been
mister president senator thank
you so we do have then a way of
covered in this mr president
senator yes absolutely thank you
mister president i'm fine.
Thank you senator disappearance
we have sent them when yours
with center share so if that was
done in durango and somebody
shared it I guess I will the
sponsor yield.
where is the responsibility
that you sent him in your
synergy so mister president
center so that we we we just
went through this with with
under our election code air then
yes you would be responsible for
complain with our election code
if let's say you put it on
failing to follow those policies
present center I am I guess i'm
confused cause i'd in create it
that and all the sudden in new
mexico got shared all around I
did have any of those
responsibilities to put the
disclaimer and have anything to
advertisement as that is defined
and our election code then now
it's not going to be covered you
just personally sharing
something that you think is
funny is not necessarily an
advertisement under our election
and mister president I rarely
look at facebook other than to
look at if I need to buy
something or something else but
to make sure my kids share me a
text the other day or uh ideal
citizen you know you should get
up early in the morning be like
a king group in a cassie and
high and make the world the best
thank you anyone else in order
to president senator now it if
you look at page ten online
fourteen it has to be someone
who creates produces or
rate so I don't want to be that
but we try doing a kids code to
protect kids.
In the same circle.
How do we protect them from a I
that against them but a lot of
things need to happen that
legislature but election code in
a III use a i'd right letters at
usa i'd to do a lot of stuff I
can answer a lot of questions I
understand where you're trying
to get to I just want to make
sure that there's no
responsibility you know I was
walking on the hall and I heard
somebody saying body kind of the
that sharing an ad not created
by someone doesn't cook them
responsibility but I want to
also say that you know children
need to protect it from this not
just elected politicians.
have cinemates of them senator I
think that ai is here I
appreciate this conversation
because it's only going to
become more and more of an issue
you know where we see deep fakes
we're going to allow that to
play in
in politics and I think it's
important they're all listening
even consultants and candidates
as we go into the selection
season because this is going to
what if the ai is in part you
know it's it's an authentic
legitimate photograph but
somehow parts of the photograph
let's see the background spend
Artificial
synergy so mister president
senator if you look on page
conductor speech that they did
not engage in was published
disseminated distributor
displayed without the consent of
the end of a job and was
produced in whole or in part
using ai so if it doesn't raise
Is that allowable on a campaign
at seven days and a brand new
center do you mister president
senator if it you were
but no if you're doing it to
yourself then you can sent to it
then you can do that okay thank
you so for example i'm not snow
that misinformation and can a
promote let's say whatever new
mexico is right but everybody
who knows me knows that never
happened that's that's allowable
correct center do mister
distinguish between an aimage
and a photograph and I say that
because that senator mr
president.
Sometimes you just have like a
Mr president center I mean the
same way you would in any
situation when you're dealing
make those findings senate thank
you mister president and and
senator and if I were going to
file a complaint because I had
suspicion a reason to believe
that it was was manufactured or
mr president sandra if you go to
page fifteen
forcement
including inductive relief so if
district attorney you because
you are the individual being
falsely represented
I know I can't whose likely to
be injured by the distribution
center really thank you mister
president and senator in if I
see a video of someone the
opponent has put it out there
saying things I know they didn't
So mister president senator if
in that situation you are a
candidate for office who has
been injured or is likely to be
you just summarise again the
consequences the immediate
consequences if if found that it
was manipulated in fact of of
second and subsequent time it's
a fourth degree felony
thank you thank you I appreciate
your time senator thank you for
this thank you mister president
thank you and they see no
bill one eighty two do now pass
the asking endless consent of
the senate that the record show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those but
in the negative by show of hands
serious share volume now center
rant leave volume now.
Sender greens voting now center
backer body now
center more is very now send a
pretty voting now.
Send it a brand body now.
Senator woods voting now center
neighborhood voting now.
Saddam a cution voting now.
negative house community
substitute for house but one
sixty two has passed without the
emergency class
senator purdle to explain to the
vote for the by senator ever saw
voting now thank you center per
l senator I saw them thank you
very much uh mister president
mister president uh we had this
bill making sure that people
could trust election advertising
we have the o g bill about truth
and election advertising that
was carried on this sand floor
we have the og bill on truth and
seventy five in two thousand and
fifteen thank you center every
south of a recognizing that and
if I recall it was a non ai
choose an advertising person
senator peter where it takes
that next order of business
never got out of committee sen
thank you mister president in
amazon said we go that are
business announcements
this morning and we appreciate
very much the sponsors available
now in the senate lounge we're
going to come back at six thirty
and we've got uh some additional
certificates for members that
certificates with a supplemental
calendar for more bills tonight
so with that mister president
you know it's that we go out of
business coming reports see no
objection or in that order of
under consideration reports that
seem has been duly enrolled in a
growth preparator to signing by
the officers of the senate
respectfully submitted senators
we have motions adopted
community report all those in
favor of significant sna there
was a pose
the eyes have it the community
port has been adopted I like to
worth takes that next order
business thank you mister
president unanimous is that we
go to that our business
announcements in miscellaneous
see no objection where in that
order business announcement some
end in forty five minutes with
that the united states sent we
go that are unanimous consent we
recess until six thirty this
evening see no objection we will
