Item number 27.
Is House Bill 298. That'll be
Senator Scherer.
Uh, 30 is House Bill 368,
that'll be Senator Hamblin.
Uh, 31 is House Bill 532 that
So, Mr. President, let me just
do, I know Senator Cervantes is
in the room, so.
some announcements that are
needing to be made. Absolutely.
You know, I
I, I mentioned this a little
earlier and, and honestly, uh, I
got so.
Uh
I don't know who
Reserved the rotunda and allowed
it.
Talking to security, there were
some choices that were made that
I do not appreciate.
allowed.
Um, we have reports of
Two House members being
assaulted.
One senator being assaulted.
Things got pretty sporty.
On the 2nd floor today.
I appreciate the law enforcement
officers that were there in
mass.
means.
It calls that is a chant for the
genocide and the annihilation.
Of the people of Israel.
Some of the Mediterranean Sea.
As Israel been 100% right in all
Hamas refused to release any
more hostages. There are still 5
Americans being held hostage.
They're pretty sure 4 of them
And yet we as Americans.
OK.
With a group.
In our Capitol building.
That were hiding down here on
the first floor.
I don't care who you are. I
don't care the color of your
skin. I don't care what religion
you, you.
Practice
It is not OK for you to not feel
Or employees.
Or state police officers. That
is not OK.
Mr. President, members of this
chamber.
Because Hamas refused to release
the rest of the hostages.
And started launching attacks
against Israel again.
If the cartels on the border.
Started actually launching
missiles into New Mexico. Would
we be OK with that?
population. We don't seem to
mind that.
But would we be OK?
If they started launching
missiles or would we respond?
I guarantee you everyone in this
going to put up with that as a
sovereign nation. We're not
going to allow someone to launch
missiles into our country, but
yet that's what people think
that Israel ought to do.
attack.
From the people that live around
them.
Constant attack.
Now there's some in this room
that may.
Our combat veterans know what
it's like.
To live like that.
That I was about 1 mile from.
That's nothing.
Compared to what our combat
veterans have gone through and
I guarantee you if the same
thing happened to the United
States of America.
We would be doing the same thing
that Israel is doing today.
Don't get involved.
Don't tell them to remove the
signs, even though every other
person that tries to bring a
To the palestinian people
deserve to live? Absolutely.
Should they be freed? Yes, they
should.
They should be freed from Hamas.
Absolutely right.
They didn't start this war, but
I'll be damned if they don't
finish this war.
this, the director of the
council service called me uh
this afternoon and uh told me
about what happened, uh,
certainly probably the best news
Senator Brandt knows that
there's more than him that are
concerned about this and that,
uh, the director actually said
that I could come watch the
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
let me fill in the sponsor of
Senator Cervantes for item
number 6 Senate Bill 318.
Thank you Senator Worth, we are
on that order of business at ULT
Senator Cervantes. Thank you,
Mr. President. I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate. The
records show that all action for
Uh, Mr. President, uh, a little
bit of housekeeping first of
all, I know the board does not
show this to have been amended.
My understanding is that we had
placed the amendment on the bill
previously and that I do not
amendment that was 946.2 is
already put on, put on the bill,
and I see the board now
corrected to reflect that.
Senator Cervantes, you're
correct that has been, uh,
tracked on the board. It does
have the amendment. Thank you,
expert witness? I didn't catch
that Brandon Cummings.
And Brandon is.
Brandon Cummings is a staff
member of the Senate Judiciary
Committee. He's
Yeah,
Mr. Senator, uh, I mean, Mr.
President, just a point of
order. Uh, thank you and, and
you know we had a staff person
fired.
For giving
going to have a staff member as
an expert witness.
Isn't that a little bit beyond a
staff member actually standing
up and saying something in a
committee meeting.
We've had that whether it's the
budget or other types of pieces
of legislation so it's nothing
new.
As you know, on the floor.
I see, Mr. President, so it's,
it's fine for thee, but not for
then there was a call placed on
this bill and it's been in place
for several days, the call being
lifted now. So Mr. President,
I'm prepared to resume the
unlawfully, and the reality is
that uh we can go online and I
can give you the names of the
websites right here.
on the floor, where you can go
on and you can buy devices that
are um we've referred to them
parts and sellers. Sometimes the
parts originating even abroad
but that are then marketed and
sold here in the United States
through an online marketplace
and so the goal of this bill is
federal law would be subject to
New Mexico jurisdiction and
subject to a lawsuit under the
Unfair Trade Practices Act.
Bill also increases the
statutory damages provision of
amendment that I put on the bill
previously after conferring with
representatives of sporting
groups and uh weapons groups,
um, we agreed or I shouldn't say
we agreed, uh, they asked, and I
anywhere in the bill is $30,000
or under the existing law,
actual damages or treble actual
damages, Mr. President. So that
summarizes the amendment you
have before you summarizes the
The goal here is to make uh
subject to civil penalties and
liability, the manufacturing and
the marketing of those devices.
here in New Mexico with that Mr.
President, I'll stand for more
questions. Thank you Senator
With the sponsor you I, I, I
have a few questions I'd like to
ask the sponsor with the sponsor
yield?
Yes, I you.
liabilities and.
Unlawful gun activities,
accessories and things of that
nature and so I thought.
I guess when I first looked at
it.
Could the smartter explain to
me.
Why it does not conflict or
first maybe you have the sponsor
explain to me what the PLCAA is.
guns and yet the congressional
enactment also has certain
language that makes exceptions
to that general liability. And
so among the exceptions are
exceptions that would apply here
uh, the manufacturer would be in
conflict with the exception
under the, the federal law does
not then apply.
Thank you, Mr. President. So if
exceptions that would probably
apply if we enact this law. One
of them is that, uh, the, one of
the exceptions is knowingly
violating a federal or state
law, so a company or dealer who
Thank you, Mr. President. So
what you're saying is if the if
the
If the law
If the
make this uh exception kick in,
is that correct?
That's correct, Mr. President.
Thank you for that, Mr.
President. I, I was, so now it's
unless there's a particular
exception with that.
Now let's go to the unfair
Practices Act.
Um,
So could you explain to me what
Mexico. Again, it's been in
existence since the 60s and this
is a law that originated at that
time to try and protect
consumers in the sale of goods
and services, so it applies to
broadly in, in, uh, consumer
protection efforts at all.
also includes provisions for the
Attorney General to be able to
bring a uh.
Consumer protection rights and
Have some definitions for what's
called unfair and deceptive
trade practices, is that
correct?
That's correct, yes.
So
manufacturing, advertising,
distributing, or offering for
sale a firearm, destructive
device, a firearm part or a
firearm accessory.
Uh, unfair Practices Act, is
that correct? Yes, that's
correct. OK, so now, now I
understand. I think that that
helps me.
That helps me to understand that
by adding this additional.
Mr. President, Senator, that's
correct. Thank you for that. Um,
Mr. President,
fines. If someone were to be in
violation of this unfair
Practice Act.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator,
that's correct. Uh, the bill
There are already existing
statutory penalties that exist
in the act itself. These haven't
been amended in quite some time,
but you'll note, for example, on
damages and in some cases up to
3 times those fixed statutory
damages, all of that is true
under the existing act and has
been for now many decades.
The difference here is that
were enacted, uh, a six pack of
Pepsi was 29 cents.
The statutory penalties are $100
and we're increasing those in
there's a willful violation. And
so you'll see that those amounts
change a bit uh when we do when
there's a willful violation, but
you'll also note that
In the amendment we adopted, for
we substantially reduced those
statutory damages.
Thank you for that. So we thank
you, uh, Mr. President, you're
So
OK, thank you for that, Mr.
President. I'm curious now.
Uh, Mr. President, Senator, it
is a complicated legal
principle. New Mexico.
As a default has what is called
joint liability. That's kind of
which means that all of the
parties to the liability are
each individually liable for
their own, but for the group or
total, uh, liability of of all.
So that's the joint and several
a US marketplace to sell those
parts to go and then perhaps
even that party is going
through.
another party, the goal is to
make each of those individuals
in that stream of commerce
Uh, thank you for that, for that
lesson, um.
So
My understanding this correctly,
then, uh, a
either a party or several
firearms or firearm parts or
accessories. Each of them can be
held jointly and or sub
individually liable for any uh
marketplaces, is this, are we
talking folks like Amazon?
Walmart, Apple, I mean, are, are
these online marketeers?
Potentially liable with this new
law in place.
carefully over some period of
time and not seeing Amazon or
sales of, of these types of
devices on Amazon, but they're
readily available and you all
can look them up right now on
your computer being sold by DH
glock switch that's presently
on.
sale at DHgate for less than
$50.
You'll see in auto earer being
sold by DHgate for $30.56. This
devices that are intended to
convert weapons into automatic
weapons, which is unlawful in
the United States.
Thank you for that, Mr. Mr.
President, um.
to anything else besides
weapons. I mean, by increasing
the penalties or fees or fines,
uh, under this, uh, UPA
intended to handle all goods and
services where there's a false
and deceptive trade practice in
the manufacturer sale of goods
or services. So yes, this would,
because now we're saying that
This unfair Practices Act has
been in uh in line for lots of,
for years since, since the 60s
It, it seems to me that this is
going after, um,
Potentially more than just the
gun uh folks. I mean, it seems
like there's, there may be a lot
Uh, Mr. President, the, in terms
of the
causes of action that expand the
unfair Trade Practices Act, and,
and you'll note that the
the knowing manufacturer sale of
firearms contrary to state or
federal law. So we're adding to
that, uh, but the increase in
fines, uh, or statutory damages
in an online marketplace where
more and more goods are put into
the stream of commerce, uh,
nationwide by these third party
marketplaces and this bill would
assure that New Mexico courts
would have jurisdiction in those
some sense because I think it's,
it's kind of unique that you
were able to use the the federal
law exception to then, uh,
change our statutes so that uh
this is going to be limited to
just guns. It, it seems like
we're opening the door for a lot
more opportunities for unfair
practices, given the fact that
they really occur, they probably
this exception in the federal
law. And, um, and I think it's a
loophole that
Obviously exists uh but it's
it's something that I very, very
concerned about and with that I
Steinborn until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call no objection.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. Uh,
next on the list I have Center
share.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
You know, I was, I was just, I
actually prohibits us from doing
this.
Unless the state creates a
special loophole.
A special loophole has to be
exactly what they advertise it
to do and functions exactly as
it is supposed to do, so that's
wow, Mr. President.
this unless we have a special
loophole so that we can sue
people for selling a product
that does exactly what it's
supposed to do, exactly the way
it is supposed to do it.
It is so broad, Mr. Mr.
President.
That I think it dramatically
limits.
They rely on online sales for
all kinds of stuff now.
And what's amazing is, I live in
But according to this, if any of
these things happen,
Somebody gets to find the
deepest pockets they can find.
And sue.
this bill was
was
Purportedly, you know, maybe
it's false advertising. Maybe
it's an unfair trade practice
because we're talking about a
have possibly been unfair to
somebody somewhere.
And we know that things like
that have happened, we know.
We know that Red Bull actually
would really give them wings.
And the subway footlong is not
really 1 ft long. It's 11 3/4
inches long and so they got
sued.
trade practices here. I'm amazed
that this bill is even here.
Pretending to be unfair trade
practices.
When it's really aimed at
it.
But we can only do that if New
Mexico creates its own special
loophole.
amendment sponsored by Senator
Brantley.
Center Bradley to move the
amendment.
Mr. President, I move the Senate
bill, I'm sorry, I, I moved the
See no objection centerator uh
Brownlee, if you'll explain what
your mement does.
Mr. President,
To address the concerns that
this is just a trial attorney.
Bill
beneficiaries of any of these
what some may argue is a
frivolous lawsuit.
would be a worthy cause, and so
we are
all monetary damages awarded
shall be paid to the crime
victims respiration fund.
So we talk about that
Who would be the beneficiaries
of doing that tonight. Victims,
victims in New Mexico who have
aggravated assault, dangerous
use of explosives, criminal
sexual penetration, contact of a
minor, and the list goes on and
on.
That if we're expanding the
liability.
That those who are harmed most
are the beneficiaries of that.
And so with that, Mr. President,
non-constructive amendment. Uh,
this would change the recovery
under the unfair Trade Practices
Act, which is usually recovery
by the plaintiff or the claimant
and the claimant's attorney, of
floor Amendment #2.
See no debate, Senator Brantly
close.
Thank you, Mr. President. That's
disappointing.
would be those who
We're harmed the most.
Who New Mexico has identified as
the true victims.
I think that maybe that seems to
be the case.
Mr. President.
I moved the Senate floor
send your seat. We're voting on
Senate floor Amendment #2.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
Senators Celia Lopez for you
now.
Senator Pinto voting out.
Senator Gonzalez voting now.
Senator O'Malley, voting no.
Center Navarino.
Senator Charlie voting now.
Senator Doig voting no.
Senator Jaramillo voting no.
Senator Hamblin voting no.
Buy a vote.
By a vote of 17 in the
affirmative, 20 in the negative.
Senate floor number 2 has failed
to pass the Senate.
I don't need the sponsor to
yield, I'm just disappointed
like, uh, the previous senator
who put the amendment forward
because it really does show what
this is all about.
That's what this is gonna be.
Everyone has seen it's so bad in
this country. It's going to get
worse in New Mexico. We've all
seen the ridiculous lawsuits
around.
back in 1993, Mr. Richard
Overton.
He actually sued Anheuser-Busch
for false advertising, which is
what is in this bill.
We've also had right here in New
Mexico, one of the most famous
frivolous lawsuits in our
history. The McDonald's Hot
Coffee case.
was excessively hot and caused
severe burns.
While the case garnered
attention for being seemingly
frivolous, which it was.
It did lead to a large
settlement.
We've had even women's products
with oil free skin care,
consumers filed a class action
lawsuit.
to unexpected oily skin.
Who knew
These lawyers, Mr. President,
are not making our lives safer.
Common sense does that.
In economic development boom to
attract trial lawyers to our
state.
That will once again replace our
state motto as I mentioned
before.
From the land of enchantment to
And when we see the true colors
of this bill where those damages
can't go to a crime victims
fund, but they go to line the
pockets of attorneys.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I built my small business of
literally just myself and my
husband. I built it.
So that everyday New Mexicans.
And tonight I've heard a lot of
different things and
Facts might not matter to
everyone, but they matter to me
and I know for sure that facts
practices.
Of online retailers who are
selling Glock switches, which I
don't even know what that is,
but I looked it up and I know
And I think that it means more
to the good working men and
women in this state to be able
to purchase what they want to
online.
From a young gal right here in
New Mexico.
What does it mean to her if I
got this ring.
And said, I don't know if this
is truly turquoise.
But what if I thought it was
real turquoise.
From a certain mine.
Does it give me a right to sue
her or am I suing Etsy?
$300.
Doesn't mean much today.
So we've raised the, the fees to
In that $300 is now $2,897 a
very far cry from $30,000.
around New Mexico and those
small business owners are your
neighbors. They're my neighbors.
They're my friends.
broadening the scope of the
unfair, unfair practices Act to
a point where.
Scared to death.
That their dream, everything
that they have worked for, for
I don't believe in the deceptive
wording in here.
I don't believe it.
descriptors there.
I'm upset
was to make every person's life
better in this state and this
bill, it might seem simple,
might not matter if you just
Are you're going to be afraid to
order something from Amazon.
Well, you're not going to be
able to order something from
Amazon.
And if you're a small retailer
Can I even afford to be in
business?
How am I going to feed my
family? And then what happens
when those insurance premiums go
this 60 day session as a
freshman senator. How many bills
we have passed.
That penalize everyday New
nail in the coffin for every
single one of us, and I'm
absolutely outraged.
And I really hope that the body
takes a pause for just a moment.
When we close this session on
Saturday.
I hope we can all say that we
made the best decisions possible
Cervantes to close on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, I'd like the
opportunity to remind members,
uh, a statement I made earlier,
I've never done an unfair trade
practices claim. This is not,
try and address gun violence in
New Mexico by recognizing that
our law enforcement officers are
on the streets against people
that are armed with automatic
weapons, and we've made it
up, pick up your computer and
you'll find it right now. These
parts are available to be sold
here in New Mexico today, and we
should make sure that our law
enforcement officers are not on
the streets fighting.
Enemies who have these types of
effort as a gun owner to
recognize that there are
responsible gun owners and there
are irresponsible gun owners,
and my purpose in bringing this
bill has been to assure that
irresponsible gun owners are
And I appreciate the suggestion
that this is like the footlong
case, and that was not a New
Mexico case and that was not
under New Mexico law or New
Mexico and for Trade Practice
Act. These arguments are
spurious.
And disparaged again here
tonight as a profession and I'll
just take the opportunity, Mr.
President, to recognize I turn
on the news every day like the
the judges and the lawyers who
are holding this country
together today and trying to
hold some semblance of
constitutional law and
separation of powers.
And I'll remind members that
name of Lincoln who held the
country together in the Civil
War and fought slavery.
And it was Lincoln.
And men like Lincoln later in
the New Mexico uh the United
I'm not ashamed to be a lawyer.
And those of you who would use
this opportunity to disparage
Medal or any number of other
know, some people say if you
love what you do, you never have
to work a day in your life.
I'm blessed to be able to do
that, and I've got to tell you,
these damages when you sometimes
look at these concerns and these
people to find justice for me
and my clients and those jurors
deliver what they consider to be
justice and there're people just
like us.
And people on the street.
And this is their justice.
caucus.
They had a fine lawyer, so he
used to sit here to my right
hand side.
An honorable man.
Smartwa.
But I do remember, and we're all
in the West accustomed to the
same.
You don't bring a knife to a
gunfight.
Mr. President, you're sure as
hell don't come with sticks and
the records show the role's been
called and all those present
vote in the affirmative, except
those voting in a negative by
show of hands.
The clerk to call the roll.
Center Boon boats no. Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt votes no. Senator
Brantly. No. Senator Brantly
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Do Hick. Senator Do Hick
votes yes.
Center is.
Centerel votes no. Center
Figueroa.
Senator Hamlin, Senator Hamlin
votes yes. Senator Hickey.
Center Hickey votes yes center
her meal.
Center Maestus votes yes. Santa
Munoz.
Samignos votes no.
Sennava.
Centurnava votes yes. Senator
Pinto.
Center Pinto votes yes. Senator
Pope. Yes. Senator Pope votes
yes. Santa Ramos.
San Lopez. Yes. Center Cia Lopez
votes yes, sent to share.
Center Sheriff votes no. Center
Sendo.
Senator Steinborn boats.
Yes.
Senator Stewart is excused
Center Thornton.
Trujillo.
Santa trio votes yes. Senator
Wirth.
Centeror votes, yes. Center
Woods Center Woods votes no.
I vote of 21 in the affirmative,
18 in the negative. Senate Bill
318 as amended has passed the
Senate.
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Mr. President,
colleagues. We are on 3rd
I'll spell 181 to be presented
by Senator Munoz.
Give me 1 2nd, Mr. President. I
thought I was further down the
list.
debate amendment and
substitution. no objection.
Senator Munnos to explain.
One second, Mr. President.
legislative. We're now
appropriating the budget to grow
we're tracking how
accountability PED is, how, uh,
early early child is gonna work,
determine if this is going to go
in the general fund budget after
a 3 year or 2-year process with
that, Mr. President, I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
pass and that's consent in the
Senate. The records show that
the role has been called in all
the roles being called and all
those president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
Senator, uh, uh, please we need
you at your seat.
calendar that's gonna be
hospital 298 and I'll yield to
Senator share. Thank you, Mr.
President. I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate. The
record shows that all action for
Mr. President, this really does
local government changes that
have not been updated since
1978. It's really for mayor,
municipalities to formally
enlist.
Other municipal, uh, public
safety people to come in case
you have something like a
wildfire or a wild flood, and
close on the bill. Mr.
President, I move that House
Bill 298 do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate,
the record showed the roll's
been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
affirmative is real in the
negative House Bill 298 has
passed the Senate Senator
Sheriff.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President and body. We're going
to item number 28, that's House
Bill 155, and I'll yield to
Senator Paul.
taken and is now subject to
debate amendment, or
substitution. Hearing no
objection, Senator Paula you'll
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. This
bill, House Bill 155, is pretty
you Senator Paul. Senators,
we're debating House Bill 155.
See no debate. Senator Paul to
close on the bill.
Mr. President, I move the House
Hearing no objection.
I apologize. Senator, to your
seats.
To your seats if you wish to
vote no, please raise your hand.
I voted 30 in the affirm is 0 on
the negative House bill 155 has
duly passed the Senator Paul.
Thank you, Mr. President and
record showed that the action
for placing House Bill 269 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it's now
subject to debate, amendment or
substitution no objection.
model to a more flexible,
efficient, and provider friendly
approach. This bill requires the
New Mexico Healthcare.
to adopt the data aggregator
model allowing providers to
in reliability and streamline
service delivery. With that, I
stand for questions. Thank you,
Senators. We're debating House
Bill 269 as amended.
consent to the Senate that the
record showed that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you all senators to
your seats, please. We are
voting if you wish to vote no.
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative, 0 on the negative.
House Bill 269 as amended has
passed the Senate.
Senator Jarami, thank you, Mr.
President.
consent of the Senate that the
records show that all action for
placing House Bill 368 on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment, or substitution.
definition of a threshold job to
align with the existing
definition of
a new high wage job. Instead of
being tied to a calendar year, a
threshold job will now qualify
employment level for determining
eligibility for the high wage
job tax credits and under the
current law, a threshold job
must be filled for 44 weeks
within a single calendar year to
See no debate, Senator Hamblin
to close. Thank you, Mr.
President. Mr. President.
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senator Hamlin senators, we're
voting all.
Senators, to your seats if you
wish to vote no.
Congratulations Representative
Hernandez.
presidents anybody. Thank you,
Senator Hamblin.
We're gonna go to the next.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record shows
that all action for placing
House bill.
Uh, Mr. President and members of
what the House Bill 532 this
mandates that all school
districts and charter schools
develop and provide a student
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senators were debating hospital
532.
See no debate. Senator Gonzalez
to close.
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting the negative by a show of
hands.
Senators we're voting and all
senators to your seats, please.
your chair so we can record your
vote please by a vote of 38 in
be a house bill 571.
That's building housing
communities, and I'll yield to
Senator Steinborn.
Excuse me, that's House Bill
Well, let's do it. Senator
Steinber, if you need a moment,
I'll yield to send the word.
You ready, Senator Steinborn?
Mr. President, I do need a
moment. I apologize.
bill or number 42 on tonight's
calendar. That's Southville.
65 with the emergency class.
Center woods.
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken that is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution. Hearing no
objection. Senator Woods, to
explain.
bodies have the authority to
determine the number of
instructural days per year and
the days per week, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
To close. Mr. President, I move
that House Bill 65 with the
emergency clause do now pass,
Senators, we are voting all
senators to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no, please
raise your hand.
you, Mr. President, in the body,
thank you very much. Thank you.
We're gonna go back to the next
item that we skipped over that's
gonna be item number 32, House
Bill 571 Senator Steinbar.
Bill 571, um, has been put on
final passes all action's been
taken. It is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. No objection.
is adopted or established one or
more department approved
strategies to increase housing
affordability and accessibility.
With that, I stand for
questions. Thank you, senators.
We're debating House 571.
I move that House Bill 571 do
now pass and I ask you names
consent of the Senate the
records show the roll has been
called on all those president
vote in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
Leader Peter Worth to take us to
that next order of business, Mr.
President, unanimous that we go
on our business announcements
and miscellaneous. He no
objection. We're on that order
of business, Senator Worth, uh,
just before I go to do the work
have a mandatory bread, uh,
opportunity right here,
bipartisan all the way with
Senator Lanier right in between
us. So Mr. President, we just
want to invite
members to come and grab a a
piece of pandulce.
from the house. We're on that
order of business. Messages from
the house.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled and gross copies of
Senate Bill 17 as amended Senate
Bill 73 have been read in full
has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 36 as
amended by the Senate and
returned same herewith
respectfully submitted Lisa
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
amended by the Senate and
returned same herewith
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Ortiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
Journal will show the message
from the house has been
received.
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 72 and
returned same herewith
has passed Senate Bill 100 and
return same herewith
respectfully submitted. Lisa and
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
show the message in the house
has been received.
Journal show that message from
the house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed.
Senate Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Lisa
Amartiz McCutchen, chief clerk,
a message from the house has
been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
the House has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
has passed Senate Bill 280 and
return same herewith
respectfully submitted this
respectfully submitted this
Martiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will show the
message in the house has been
received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
House Bill 197, House Bill 214.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 308
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen, chief clerk Journal
show the message from the house
has been received and I'd like
to announce to the members of
the body that the officers of
the Senate have signed an open
session House Bill 12, House
Hey
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
The journal show the message
from the house.
Has been received.
Uh
The reader will read.
Bill 120 and request the
concurrence of the Senate.
Respectfully submitted, Lisa
Marti McCutchen, chief clerk.
The journal will show that the
message from the house has been
received.
Mr. President, your house tax
and business transportation
Committee, to whom has been
referred house taxation and
as amended.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Carrie Hamlin, chair.
Senator Hamblin, Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
House commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
House Bill 67 do pass.
House appropriations and Finance
House Bill 444 do pass House
Bill 553 as amended do pass.
House Judiciary Committee
I was in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed, the ayes have it.
The community port has been
adopted and the journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually.
Reader to read.
for House Bill 140 as amended
has had it under consideration
and reports same of the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth List Deannos chair.
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually no objection. The
reader will read.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
House Bill 219 as amended do
pass House Bill 295 do pass and
House Bill 361 Dupas.
community report. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
I
We have a motion to adopt the
committee report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Mr. President, your finance
committee to whom has been
referred appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House bills 2 and 3 has had it
under consideration and reports
Senator Munoz, Mr. President, I
can send to the Senate, the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee approach and vote
on them vote on them with one
motion and the journal reflect
House Bill 145 as amended do
pass as amended.
aye.
Rosapone.
Yeah I have at the community
port has been adopted and the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Reader to read.
the same has been duly enrolled
in a gross preparatory signing
by the officers of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Senator
Carrie Hamblin, Senator Heather
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Don't oppose the ayes have it
the community part has been
adopted. I'd like to announce to
the members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
referred Senate Bill 73 has had
it under consideration reports
that same has been duly enrolled
and engrossed preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Center Paul
Mr. President, move adoption of
the committee report. We have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Senate Majority floor leader
Peter wants to take us that next
order of business, Mr.
President, unanimous consent. We
go without our business
introduction of legislation. He
no objection. We're on that
order business introduction of
legislation.
Duhig and Senator Townsend, a
resolution amending the Senate
rules to provide for the daily
posting online of a sheet
showing bills pending before
each standing committee to
To allow a senator to sit when
presenting, but while another
member is recognized.
Regarding certain behaviors in
the chamber.
To remove the requirement that
session.
Regarding
Bills on the consent calendar
and instances that such bills
shall be placed upon the
calendar.
The chairs of committees be
appointed by request of the
senior members.
To remove mentions of the Senate
streaming oversight committee.
Regarding live streaming to
remove the requirement that each
standing committee hold meetings
twice each week.
To allow the rules committee to
sit for the purpose of
considering confirmation.
Regarding prefiling.
there be seats available at at
the chief clerk's rostrum for
the writing press to remove the
requirement that members not
introduce guests other than
officials.
Senate resolution 2 having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred.
To the Senate Rules Committee.
regulation, providing for state
criminal history checks and
national criminal history
background checks as a condition
of eligibility for licensure.
Requiring that an application
for House Bill 112.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 112 haven't been
substitute for House Bill 120.
An act relating to disabilities
enacting the accessibility Act
to require each state agency's
Information Technology to adopt
digital accessibility standards
creating the office of
accessibility to implement and
administer the accessibility
Act.
For house bill
120, have you been read twice by
titles referred to the Senate
Rules Committee House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 120.
Uh, we will be coming onto the
floor at 11 o'clock tomorrow and
I'd like to yield first to
Senator Jaramillo and then
Senator Gallegos to let us know
announcements miscellaneous
center how toil. Mr. President,
the Senate Democrats will be
caucusing tomorrow at 10 a.m. in
the lounge. So once again, a
caucus meeting, Senate Democrats
326 at the same time, and I've
looked forward to let Senator
Jamila know when we're done.
Thank you, Mr. President, I just
wanted to make sure that's 10
o'clock Senatoregos. Yes, sir.
the room and I see Senator
O'Malley here and I see Senator
Worth, and I see Senator Doig,
see Senator Thornton, Brantley,
Thank you Senator Cervantes. Any
further announcements, senators
Senator Hamlin, did you wish to
make an announcement?
Right
See no further announcements,
Senator, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent to
