Senator Charlie.
Senator Do Hick.
Senator.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Harmiel.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lopez.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul.
Senator Pinto.
Yeah.
Senator Pope.
Senatoradia Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shando.
Senator So.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Tobias then Senator
Townsend.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Abdul Rolf Compass.
Marchetti
From you know Mirrara Muslim
Community Center in Albuquerque
with us that you remain standing
In the name of Allah, the most
compassionate, the most
Uh, I would like to thank you
and the community of Menorah for
the honor and the opportunity to
be able to do today's invocation
and prayer.
We created you from a single
pair of a male and female.
And made you into nations and
tribes that ye may know each
other.
you?
And God has full knowledge and
is acquainted with all things.
Let us pray.
We ask our beloved creator to
bring unity to the Senate and
guidance of purpose so that
Democrats, Republicans and
laws made on this day and in the
future, be in the best interest
of our citizens, providing
justice, fairness, and security
Help the men and women of the
Senate to remember and preserve
the God-given rights of liberty,
justice and equality for all.
The laborers, the educators,
preserve the right to medical
care to preserve and protect and
disenfranchised and homeless of
our state of New Mexico.
Open their hearts to the light
of justice and fairness for all.
Mexico and the United States of
America, I mean.
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
Yo promento.
Yeah
the stadium.
And
You may be seated
Good morning, everyone.
Unanimous consent. We go without
our business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection, Senator
Worth.
First, Mr. President, as I
mentioned you're honored to be
here, but we're honored to have
you and we very much appreciate.
Just the pause every morning to
give us direction and where
we're headed, and again, thank
you for, for that this morning.
excusals on both sides and we'll
go to Senator Sher and then I'll
come back with a little road
map.
Thank you, Senator. We're
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent to allow
cameras on the Senate floor and
in the Senate gallery. no
Cervantes, Hamblin, Pope.
Doig
Steinborne Compos.
and compost.
excused about half of the
chamber here.
Ask unanimous consent to also
excuse the people in
conservation, Senators Townsend,
Ezel, and Scott, as well as
to excuse Senator Brandt, who
truly won't be here today.
See no objections, so thank you
Senator Sheriff. Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
just some announcements today.
you here and New Mexico
Department of Transportation and
tourism's Breaking Bad Habits
Day at the legislature.
Uh, it is HomeBuilders
have a certificate of condolence
for Chuck Malagodi, a cyclist,
and Senator Sidilia Lopez has
that certificate. It will be
read, uh, once they come down
from from Senate conservation.
from 9 to 1, and there's a
certificate that Senator Campos
will present will not be read.
Uh, it's Santa Fe County Day,
and Senator Chijillo has the
last day for introduction of
bills. So last day for
introduction of bills.
Uh, Doctor Nuzzo will be back in
the Senate lounge today from 1
and Mr. President, just before I
yield to other members to
introduce guests. I do have a
guest today, uh, if Mr. Anderson
could stand up, uh, Gary
expertise, data analysis for
insurance commissioners to
regulate the insurance industry.
Uh, we have commissioners in all
50 states, the District of
until April 2024, and he also
before that was a policy advisor
and senior counsel in the
Massachusetts State Senate. So
Thank you, Senator Wirth, and I
would yield to other members to
introduce their guests. Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. President. It is
lieutenant Governor of the day.
Boy, that has a ring to it,
right, Danica? You could hear
that more often. You might.
Um, she's 13 years old. She's a
student at Sierra Middle School
School advisory, culture and
community team. That sounds
pretty cool, and she enjoys arts
and crafts, especially
watercolor and music outside of
that, you need to become more
well rounded.
Just kidding. That's amazing.
understand dyslexia and fellow
dyslexia, understand that they
can be successful. That's really
cool.
And so y'all give Danica a round
think it's great, and Danica,
you got the best public servant
in the world you could learn
from right there.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn. We
do have others who would like to
make uh announcements, Senator
Brantley.
Guides. This is Carrie Cox
Romero. She is, um, a champion
for obviously the, the hunting
industry. So if you have any
questions, I encourage you to
introduce, uh, yourself to her.
and our state attracts.
and anglers from all over the
world who in turn generate
critical jobs and dollars for
rural communities. In fact, I'll
mention that I represent Catron
anglers spend $232 million on
travel gear, guides, and other
goods and services in New
Mexico, which in turn generates
economic benefits touching all
Mexico Rocky Mountain big horn
sheep was auctioned off just
recently for a record breaking
$1.3 million for one sheep tag
the United States. 100% of those
dollars will come back to our
game.
Fish department to be used for
conservation projects. When it
comes to economic growth,
off the press document big money
for New Mexico was just handed
out. This will highlight the
impact that New Mexico hunting
and fishing brings to New Mexico
introduce my guests no
objection. Proceed, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President, uh,
today, uh, uh, I stand the
recognition of San Domingo, uh,
Domingo Pueblo, as many of you
may not know, uh, typically will
host the first, uh, meeting of
the all public council of
Governors at at Santo Domingo
and
It's been like that for, for,
of the meeting uh of the council
I wanna say it goes back to like
1500s or somewhere in that time
period.
But anyway, I have the privilege
my head, so I can't really see
back there, but, uh, with that
being said, Mr. President, I'm
extremely honored to have the
privilege of welcoming Santo
Councilman, uh, Jonathan Garcia.
Councilman Herman Torrio.
Did I get everybody, go ahead.
I, I don't have you on the
councilman Arvin Garcia, thank
you, thank you.
Sammy Garcia.
Tribal programs, administrators,
uh, Herman Sanchez.
Please help me welcome my guests
to the Senate chamber.
Mexico they're with the
entrepreneurial Institute of
Northern New Mexico culinary
program led by my good friends
Chef Fernando Ruiz and community
culinary skills but also focuses
on personal and professional
development, helping part.
build confidence, improve
communication and transition
successfully into the workplace.
opportunities for inmates to
learn a skill to be used upon
release so that they can be
successful when they get out of
behind bars and enter the
workforce. Now just so you know,
support the program or those who
are wanting to support the
program. Now, if I can ask my
guest to stand, Chef Fernando
Ruiz is the 3 time Food Network
challenge winner and owner of
Escondido in Santa Fe.
Isaac Sork, who is, was a
participant in the program and
was released on Valentine's Day.
He had two main things he was
going to do upon release. One
to work with him at Escondido.
He was part of the program,
learned the culinary skill, chef
then offered him a position.
He's not working at Escondido
when you come and visit the
about coming back into society.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
Senate, if you can help me
welcome my friends to the Senate
chamber.
Thank you so much, Senator
Jaramillo. We have Senator
Cedillo Lopez next.
Senator Pinto.
Mr. President, I yield to uh
Senator Pino, did you want to be
on the list as well, Mr.
President. Senator Senator, I
think we've got some
certificates coming up, but I
just want to make sure the
guests all get a chance to get
Bratton, let's go ahead and
yield to Senator Pinto cause
let's get all the guests
introduced and then we'll.
Go to Senator Padilla for a
little unanimous consent before
doing the certificate with
uh Kawaubbo, if I'm not
mistaken, then, but you get a
lot of compliments on the
jewelry I wear and it's really
to a gentleman that it is from
that you guys have in there
within your your community so
thank you very much uh here, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
to enter the chamber, not in our
dress code.
See no objection. Senator
Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, President, and I'll yield to
whorode his bicycle here, uh,
gets to sit in the chamber with
his safety bicycle equipment on
in honor of this certificate,
knowledge of how to really get
things done has left his family
and communities reeling. Chuck
was that exceptional magnificent
type of person that inspired
influences continue in all of us
to seek a safer place for
cyclists and walkers everywhere
today we
Chuck's memory and celebrate his
life with his family and friends
the certificate is read the
certificate red. We'll have
other members who would like to
speak to the certificate and
then in closing we'll have you
introduce a guest today. Thank
you, Mr. President.
see no objection.
The reader to read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislature, first session,
2025. The New Mexico state
sympathy to the bereaved family
and friends of the deceased, and
whereas Charles, Chuck Malagati
past tragically on January 19,
and whereas Chuck dedicated his
life to making Albuquerque a
better place through nearly 25
years of service working for the
city of Albuquerque's parks and
young people each year how to
cycle safely and whereas Chuck's
legacy.
will live on through his key
role in the establishment of the
Esperanza Community Bike Shop,
other outdoor safety programs
and whereas after his
retirement, Chuck served as a
board member and project
coordinator for Free Bikes for
Kids New Mexico, a youth
passions included bicycling,
education, camping, outdoor
recreation of all kinds and
finding scrap metal to recycle.
enjoy.
And whereas Esperanza means hope
and Chuck's dedication to the
Esperanza community bike shop in
the spirit of hope he shared
Charles Maligoty Junior. and
whereas Chuck is survived by his
wife Isako Morayama, his
daughter Angelina Junco Malagoti
Mexico that condolences be
extended to the family and
friends of Charles Chuck.
Malagoti, a loving and devoted
New Mexican.
Signed and sealed at the capital
Thank you to our reader. I'll
also to senderilio Lopez for
some opening remarks, and we'll
go to other members.
Thank you, Mr. President. This,
unfortunately he died in my
district with a um really
terrible bicycle accident and it
is really in his honor that I'm
so passionate about uh about.
um, I, I ride, yeah, mountain
roads. I ride bicycles, um, I
noticed that one of my partners
in riding bicycles is is in the
able to.
To join us today, but I will go
ahead and, and read the list and
I will ask um you to hold your
applause until everyone's,
CBQ Parks and recreation
director Dave Simon.
Mike Lucero.
Jim Thomas
Betty Jeros Lee.
Envy
Tim Rogers
And Stephen New Newhill, who
thank you again for allowing him
to honors honor Chuck with his
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator C Lopez, you still have
the floor.
located, um, but, um, I, if
anyone else wants to speak about
bicyclists or about Chuck, I'm
happy to yield if not.
That concludes our Senator
OK, thank you. I do want to give
the, the certificates to um to
the family who are going to
accept them, um.
Leader Peter Worth to take us to
that next order of business. uh,
thank you, Mr. President. We're
now going to do a certificate of
recognition for the New Mexico
home builders andenator
Stephanic has asked that Senator
There's been a unanimous consent
request for the reader to read.
See no objection reader to read.
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to New
Mexico HomeBuilders Association,
February 18, 2025 be recognized
as New Mexico homebuilders
working and operating conditions
in the construction industry in
order to provide the residents
of New Mexico with safe quality
legislative and regulatory
processes and whereas the New
Mexico HomeBuilders Association
provides industry leading
information, proactive advocacy,
Committed to improving industry
standards, the association works
to improve the construction,
environment, ensuring New Mexico
residents have access to safe,
high quality housing and
National Association of Home
Builders and 9 local entities
that represent the housing
industry and serve as advocates
for home ownership, including
Eastern New Mexico, the building
contractors association of Otero
County, the.
Lincoln County Home Builders
Association, the Southwest New
Mexico Home Builders
the New Mexico homebuilders
Association are to advocate for
attainable housing in the New
Mexico in New Mexico through the
promote home ownership
statewide.
And whereas the New Mexico
HomeBuilders Association has
served a pivotal role in
crafting the framework for the
pathway to return to work after
a work related injury and
whereas the Mexico HomeBuilders
Association has worked to
relieve the burden of double
taxation in the construction
whereas the Mexico Home Builders
Association understands the need
for affordability in the New
Mexico housing market and has
encouraged the consideration of
the development fees Act. Now,
therefore,
Be it resolved by the Senate of
the state of New Mexico that
February 18, 2025 be declared
and sealed at the capital in the
city of Santa Fe, Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefaniks, Mimi
Stewart, President Pro Tem.
Sherry De Luhan, chief clerk New
Association today. I, you have
used them in many different
instances. They're a great
resource for helping to
understand how do we get more
more people housed. There are
just too many families that are
struggling to.
get into a home and this is a
really important aspect. I want
shortage of electricians. We
have a shortage of, of, of
builders. All of those trades
are being taught at our
community colleges at our high
to anyone else that would like
to speak on behalf of the
Homeowners Association. Thank
you so much, Senator Trujillo.
A you also to send everybody.
would have said, uh, but I will
follow her comments with saying
that this might be, um, in the
top, if it's not the number one,
the top 3 issues that we need to
Security on more basic things
like a child not having to be
moved around a lot because they
don't have a stable, consistent
place to live if the child is
not gonna know what they're
tremendous impacts on all of our
communities, which then lead to
other outcomes, Mr. President.
So housing, uh, we have multiple
pieces of legislation. I have
one myself and I'm not at all,
Mr. President, trying to debate.
one of the things we found is
that there's just significant um
regulatory issues that we need
to sort out, um, from utility
placement and the throughput
there and how long it takes to
needs
to be a walkable trails, all of
the different things. We have a
real opportunity to really
improve New Mexico with our
housing strategy, Mr. President,
and so I want to thank the Home
also rise in support, um, you
know, it's interesting over the
years, I think when I first
showed up here, some of the home
builders were pretty leery about
me and some of the bills that I
worked on, just.
the house. We carried a bill for
Governor Richardson on the
sustainable building tax credit,
the home builders were pretty
leery of that too. They weren't
quite sure where that was coming
providing an additional tax
credit to build not only build
homes, but build homes that were
sustainable, which benefits
everyone involved and so over
Senator Trujillo for stepping up
for Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Senator Wirth,
Senator Nova.
absolutely agree also with the
way that the senator has tied
the relevant connections to, uh,
the lack of housing, education
to Secretary Marcia Fudge of
Ohio. I got to see
Innovative tactics across the
country and learning and seeing
collective effort that we need
to work on as the state of New
Mexico. I think we have a long
path ahead, but I think there's
a lot of potential here and
housing is a national issue, and
I could not be prouder to stand
and support and great and
grateful for all of your work
here today, um, and also just
letting you know that I am here,
home buyers programs and making
an accessible for our
communities.
To become a first time home
buyers and ensure that we
provide the educational support
Discussion I'll yell to Senator
Trujillo.
and again we'd like to thank
Senator Stephanics for
sponsoring that, um, we're still
in that order of business and
now it's miscellaneous seeing no
further announcements from our
senators. Uh you also Senate
Majority Floor Leader Peter
Wortz to take us to that next
certificate, Senator Trujillo,
for Santa Fe County Day at the
legislature, so he healed to
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
these are the guests that we
have up here today and I'm
just advise everyone that our uh
Santa Fe County Clerk's office
participated in a mock election
and Christmas was voted as the
best style of chili, um, so, uh,
Mr. President, we're not gonna
before we go to any guests that
are gonna be introduced, I wanna
make sure and give time for
senators to also comment to the
certificate, so.
We'll get right back to you with
those, but you have to send it
to work.
county clerk, uh, you know, they
do a ton of good work, the
hardest work at the local level.
I have a pretty good source
myself with my uh in-house city
We are making some huge steps
here at the legislature and part
of the reason that we were able,
Senator Sheer and I, uh,
sponsoring Senate Bill 3, it
competency and I know in
visiting with county manager and
some of you just the important
role that the county plays in
that collabor
it's not only the structure that
we need to create statewide, but
done on a regional basis, but
it's also the funding because we
can't and then we're changing
Publicly thank the county for
the work that you're doing and
continue to do and just welcome
you all to the state senate.
Thank you, Senator Worz. Senator
Jaramillo.
commissioners and our clerk, and
I can honestly tell you, Mr.
President, that any time I pick
up the phone and dial any one of
them, whether it's to discuss an
issue in Santa Fe County or to
and I don't only call these
leaders colleagues. I call them
friends and part of my extended
family. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Jail. Any senators wishing to
comment on the certificate.
these are my friends. These are
the people in my community that
that I live with and and
although we had City of Santa Fe
Day earlier and we all thank
them for welcoming us. The city
and I'm gonna start over here
with you, Councilor Green, um,
we have Justin Green who is
commissioner for District one,
if you could rise.
commissioner for District 4. We
have Camilla Bustamante, who is
commissioner for District 3, and
we also have with us Catherine
Clark, who is our Santa Fe
County clerk. Thank you so much
Thank you, Senator Hill.
have that one on your
In your stack of goodies, and if
not, we can jump to the next
little item. Do you have CPR,
go ahead and get that organized.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Senator Campos. Senator
Werth, uh, thank you, Mr.
President. So I'm not sure if
anyone else has any
announcements just in terms of
be done this afternoon, so if
there's not more announcements,
uh, unanimous consent, we go to
that order business messages
from the house.
Representatives, Mr. President,
I am directed to inform the
Senate that the House has passed
House Bill 6 and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted, Lisa M.
that the House has passed House
Joint Memorial 3 and request the
concurrence of the Senate,
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Ortiz McCutchen, chief clerk.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous consent we go without
our business committee reports.
There are no objection. We are
in that order of business
committee reports.
The reader to read.
And as the readers getting that
public affairs Committee to whom
has been referred Senate Bill 55
has had it under consideration,
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
Thank you, Mr. President. I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 58 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
judiciary committee.
Senate Bill 61 do pass and
thence referred to the tax of
business and transportation
Sinners, there's been a motion
to adopt committee reports. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Those opposes the eyes have it,
the community port has been
referred. Senate Bill 6 has had
it under consideration, reports
same with a recommendation that
it do pass respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chair.
Is there more than one
president. In that case,
I asked unanimous consent to the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
Senate Bill 16 as amended do
pass as amended.
Senate Bill 36 as amended do
Senate Bill 109 as amended do
pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes's chair, Mr.
adopted in the journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually.
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Warz to take us to that next
order of business.
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. Senator Campos,
uh, you ready to do that
certificate?
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, and of course uh to
our majority leader, uh, we're
a demonstration going on, uh,
there in the rotunda, but along
with that the whole intent as we
move forward is to encourage
and continue, if you will, with
a very positive attitude as we
continue to come into the, uh,
the final month stretch of what
we're dealing with here, uh, in
anything to add to it, uh, to do
so after I finished the final.
Comments here but in essence as
we move forward dealing directly
with the American Heart
example a district like
Maxwelle, possibly, uh, um,
Springer, some of the other ones
where it might take up to 45
can we continue to spread the
word that through the American
Heart Association, it's always
great as we move forward to
understand what it is to go
ahead and have, if you will, the
informed as possible about our
own health and so again I
really.
want to go ahead and thank the
American Heart Association for
the work that they continued to
It's very important for each and
every one of us. So again, Mr.
President, uh, Mr. Majority
Leader, members of the Senate,
that basically is what the
certificate is indicating and
ahead and share the certificate,
the intent, and of course the
importance of us taking care of
our own hearts. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Campos. Any senators wishing to
Florida leader Peter Wars to
take us that next order
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation. He
no objection. We're in that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
The Reader to read
senators Lanier and Woods, and
act relating to behavioral
health, creating the behavioral
health grant program and the
behavioral Health grant program
Distributing a portion of the
liquor excise tax to the
healthcare authority to increase
Medicaid reimbursement for
community-based programs and
services for the prevention,
the Senate Health.
And Public Affairs Committee
then Senate Finance Committee,
that Senate bill.
4:32.
intergovernmental agreements
enacting the dentist and dental
hygienist interstate compact
Senate Bill 434 introduced by
Senator.
Lanier, Senator Tobiasson,
Senator Townsend, Senator Woods,
mathematics or reading
deficiency, establishing
requirements for accelerated
instruction. Senate Bill 434.
Introduced by Senator Pinto, an
act making an appropriation to
the state Department of Justice
to create a public relations
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Indian Rural and Cultural
Affairs Committee, then Senate
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
435.
attributable to increasing
numbers of clients served by the
department. Senate Bill 436
Senate bill 436 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senator Souls.
An act relating to education,
declaring that the public policy
of the state is that the
corporal punishment shall not be
used in early childhood
any benefit to or execute
execute a contract with a person
who provides early childhood
education and care or primary or
secondary education unless the
person prohibits the use.
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Education Committee,
then Senate Judiciary, Senate
Bill 437.
Senate Bill 438.
Introduced by Senator Padilla.
credited service accrued for all
state police members covered
under state public safety member
coverage plan one. Senate Bill
Senate Bill 439 introduced by
Senator Sanchez.
An act relating to business
enacting the deceptive franchise
Senate Judiciary Committee that
sent a bill 439.
Senate Bill 440 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez, an act
making an appropriation to the
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 440.
Senate Bill 441, introduced by
training for judges and court
personnel, broadening the
standards for the determination
of child custody to include
evidence of child abuse or
domestic abuse prohibiting
domestic abuse prohibiting
courts from ordering a
professional evaluation. The
cases were.
custody or parenting plans are
contested and therefore is
Sent a bill
Senate bill 441 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee,
Making an general appropriations
and authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by law.
Senate Memorial 8 introduced by
Senator Campos, a memorial
requesting the state auditor to
deficiency appropriation
requests Senate Memorial 8.
Senate Memorial 8 having been
read twice by title.
A memorial requesting that the
legislative education Study
Committee convene a working
group to study and make
recommendations for continuing
is order printed and referred to
the Senate Rules Committee.
Then Senate Indian Rule and
Cultural Affairs Committee
Senate Memorial 9.
Senate Memorial ent introduced
children and all victims of
sexual crimes and to hold the
perpetrators accountable.
Senate Memorial 10 Senate
Memorial 10 having been read
Senate Joint Resolution 13
introduced by Senator Pinto.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend Article 7 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
party preference or affiliation
or lack thereof. Senate joint
resolution 13. Resolution 13
having been read twice by title
House Bill 6 introduced by
Representative Sypansy.
An act relating to minimum wage,
wage and comply with the
provisions of sections 13-4-11
NMSE 1978, Bing Law's 1965
To the Senate tax business
Transportation Committee then
send the Judiciary Committee,
February 21st, 2025, New Mexico
TRO programs day in the
legislature.
House Joint Memorial 3 Memorial
3 having been read twice by
title is referred.
is not referred.
The committee to be placed on
the president's table.
House George Memorial 3.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter wants to take us to that
thank you, Mr. President. So we
are going to come in tomorrow at
11:30, uh, so now is the time
for committee chairs and our two
caucus chairs to make.
Seals, thank you, Mr. President,
uh, Senate Education meets
tomorrow morning at 8:30. We
will be meeting at 8:30. We did
8:30 tomorrow morning, room 311
for education. So Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. President, 8:30
tomorrow morning in room 321
members of the committee.
Thank you send her to.
We'll go to our caucus chairs
now. I'll go to Senator
Jaramilo.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
him know when we're completing
the meeting. Thank you Senjamio,
Senator Cagos, Mr. President,
uh, do you need to announce also
that Senator Republican caucus
the members of rules that are uh
committee dinner is tonight at
6:30, so we'll see you there.
Thank you Senator. Senator
Hamblin, thank you, Mr.
President. Just to remind you
that your Senate Taxus and
transportation afterwards, but
we will be meeting after the
caucus from both parties, uh, in
room 321. We have an ambitious
agenda, but I know that this
committee is up for it.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President. I know
we can't sit on any tables over
here, I think.
I didn't know that was a rule,
but now I do know it's a rule,
Friday, and they're going to be
due back by Wednesday. So as
capital comes out, it's gonna be
44 million,100,200
on Friday, they're due back on
Wednesday. So you're gonna be
very popular people over the
weekend and lobbyists are gonna
now be hounding you left and
right. So, uh, get ready for
start on House Bill 2, those
members, those news members that
don't know this, if you have a
have a bill in in Senate Finance
and it has money in it that
we're being held until we get
be, but it's in finance will go
in 10 minutes afterwards. We got
a few bills. We know the
sponsors, we've been talking to
them, so, uh, 10 minutes after
the caucus we're Senate Finance.
Thank you Senator Munoz.
out our business messages from
the house.
no objections. We're in that
order of business messages from
the house, the reader to read.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the House
The journal will show that the
messages in the house has been
received. Senate Majority Floor
Leader Peter Worz to take us
that next order business. Uh,
thank you, Mr. President, that
we go that our business
Representative Lente, an act
relating to taxation, increasing
the amount of installment
agreements that shall be
available for public instru
tax.
Increasing certain penalties for
failure to pay a tax or file a
return interfering with
administration of the tax
Having been read twice by title
is order printed.
And referred
To the Senate tax business
Transportation Committee then
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection we're in
that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Mr. President, just for the
members, I'm informed there are
still salads in the lounge if
45 minutes late, 1:30 to 1:45 in
the lounge this afternoon, so
with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to Senate
Senate recess until 11:30
tomorrow morning.
