Center Brandt.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Campos.
Senator Cervantes.
Center
Yeah.
Center Argo.
Sorry. See girl
sorry.
Center Hamlin
San Hickey.
San Hemio
San.
Senator Padilla,
Senator Paul.
Center Pinto.
Senator Pope.
Senator Shino.
Senator Souls.
Senator Stephanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Santa Trujillo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You do have a car, Mr.
President.
Mexico.
Please remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance to be led
today by Senator Scott pledge
allegiance in Espanol to be led
today by Senator Nava and the
salute to New Mexican flag to be
led today by Senator Figueroa.
We come before you now to do the
work that you have set before
us.
I ask for your wisdom.
Your peace, your comfort, and
your guidance to rest upon all
In your holy and precious name
we pray. Amen.
Hoolielta la bandera de los
estados Unidos the America Yela
Good morning. Unanimous consent
we go that our business
announcements are miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection. We're in
that order business and now it
miscellaneous Senator Worth, uh,
thank you, Mr. President, and
again, we take this time upfront
to just pause for a minute and
again, really appreciate you
being here. Uh, so for the
members, we're gonna have a
joint session.
announcements up front, see how
far we get, but once we get the
word that the Chief Justice is
ready to go, we will go as a
committee of the whole over to
the House chamber to hear the
goodwill Industries Day, uh,
Goodwill's Industries of New
Mexico Day and there is a
certificate on that Senator Jami
and Brantly. I understand it's
still going through the proofing
flu shots today, 10 to 1 p.m.,
uh, for all the members.
' s financial reports are due by
January 31st to be filed
electronically by, by that date.
Senate lounge on both those days
from 1 o'clock to 2:30 for
in-person assistance. Uh, the
morning, January 29th, beginning
promptly at 8:30 on a first
come, first serve basis, and
I'll make sure to announce that
that he can introduce as soon as
I get done here and Senator.
Chapos has 11 guests to
introduce, uh, Senator Brantley
has 21 guests to introduce a
from 6 to 9 by invitation, uh,
the New Mexico Amigos lunch is
at La Fonda today, starting at
noon by invitation as well.
reminder to the new members, uh,
the the legislative Finance
Committee will continue, uh,
holding its workshops, uh, room
Michael Padilla, uh, good
morning, Mr. President. Thank
you, Mr. Leader, uh, unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
Senate floor.
See no objections. Cameras are
allowed today, but only on the
Senator Woods.
Uh, Mr.
Mr. President,
I've got a a quick announcement
our batan veterans.
You know, there's a reason that
the original Capitol building
was called the Patan Building.
And
Older men that were in that
death march.
And they came back to be good
prosperous citizens, but it was
Reception on the January 30th at
the New Mexico Military Museum
and it's gonna be a present the
flags of freedom, honoring the
very much. Thank you, Senator
Woods for that important
announcement.
We do have others who would like
to make some introductions or
some announcements, uh, an
obligated to apologize to you
because I know before this is
all over, I'm going to call you
Mr. Speaker, and there's nothing
I can do about it. It's just
been part of my, uh, training,
Rosville, New Mexico is going to
host.
This year for the first time,
uh, the air racism. Reno air
to bring about 80,000 tourists
into our community. So it's not
just a Roswell issue. It's a
regional issue. And it's going
Um, I'm, with your permission,
Mr. President, I'm gonna have
candy A, Senator Candy Azel
introduced the guests there from
those guests be introduced if
you'll please stand when you're
introduced, uh, and then if
there's others that need to be
introduced, you stand and we'll
hold the applause to the very
end. Sins out.
Second longest runway in the
United States, by the way.
And they are setting up a course
race area itself. So anyway,
joining us today.
I'm going to start with my
spirit,
Also, people he was in contact
with Mr. Fred telling. Fred has
been down here for every meeting
help in this, Fred, and for your
involvement and for your push to
get this thing done. I
appreciate it very much.
Next is one of my favorites,
guard turkey that walks her out
to her car every morning.
And uh she has made significant
improvements at the Roswell Air
Also working closely with it is
Mr. Hess Armenta, he meant to,
excuse me, I always say that
wrong. I'm sorry, yes.
He is the city attorney for for
And Mr. President and members of
the Senate, this gentleman
doesn't really need any.
Introduction because he spent, I
So let's give them all a round
warm round of applause.
to come on out in September for
the Roswell air races. It's
gonna be a fun, fun time. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator. Senator
Ramos.
Mr. President, thank you so much
Um, I'm gonna go ahead and when
I read your name, please stand.
Uh, Aubrey Boomgardner,
Serenity,
Ashton Ranovsky.
Salvador Reyes.
Olivia Roberts.
Mariah Salcido.
April, Nevares.
Hidalgo County manager Tisha
Green.
Superintendent Jeff Gebhardt.
Mr. President, it was great to
meet with these students
yesterday evening. They asked
some great questions. They came
to our office and asked more
questions and now they go to the
smart, and it's just an
excellent time to be with them
yesterday and this morning.
Thank you very much and help me
Thank you very much, Mr.
President, members of the
Senate, uh,
Today, of course, is uh really
New Mexico Day, but it's also
New Mexico Highlands Day.
New Mexico Highlands University,
we are one.
And as we deal with it, whether
it be our student government,
whether it be part of the team
that continues to not only
administer and to educate.
committed and dedicated and
devoted to what that future
truly means.
Along with it, those people who
have been a student at New
But that's just part of your
life. There's so many things
back home with your families
with the community, but along
with that as we talk about where
do we get educated.
your degree in New Mexico
Highlands University continues
to reach out.
To each and every one
individually.
But yet we are one. We're all
so many others that uh are also
in the House of Representatives
and throughout, but today again
is New Mexico Highlands Day.
And here we go.
as security, as an individual
who got to know, uh, the
facility, the organization, uh,
Frank Harpo Sanchez again, who
is a New Mexico region, if you
there are so many people that
are very proud to be a part of
this great institution.
Along with that, we also have as
part of our team again, we are
individual continues to move
forward because we all know that
athletics is a very strong key
in everything that we do. So
when we tie in athletics, it
also means we want to provide
went ahead and we tied together
resources so that our athletes
would go ahead and have
a strong academic program we
provide that tutoring and the
whole key is so that as they
leave the institution.
We also have a distinguished
individual with us who has been
at the institution for many
years and continues with his
wholehearted commitment, and
ranks. Not only is a student a
committed person in the
community to ensure that he
invests not only his time and
effort, but our student region,
and that is Mr. Cody Rivera.
government but I also say these
are the individuals who continue
to carry us forward, working
side by side by their fellow
students just as each and every
one of you do when you go back
student government but for
university life.
Those individuals are, uh, and
I'm gonna name them as we go
along, Junior Ansa.
Lydia Okogee.
person who over the years, we've
built this level of humility
with each other and the point
I'm getting to is he is very
grateful to be a part of the
forward to great things coming
from him over the years here in
New Mexico and that individual
is Kay.
who is the uh Rayner, who is
MHU President, I wanted to go
ahead and say the Highlands
president, but I didn't say
that. I went ahead and I, I
spelled it out for you, but
again, thank you very much from
the bottom of my heart. I truly
justice and is also uh the
Highlands University vice
president there with their
students and, and again I, I'm
trying to cut through, if you
will, the acronym or if you
will, uh, the letters because I
have Seth, uh, Hannah from Rama
and uh this person is a senior
in computer science and again is
the Highlands University, and
I'm gonna say the student
student, uh, graduate senator
and this individual this morning
shared a lot of wisdom with.
me, he was able to make the
connection very quickly to what
Who is originally from Mexico
now from Santa Fe, majoring in
criminal justice, uh, with a
minor in political science and
arts music production and an
undergraduate, uh, uh, Highlands
University senator.
We also have a couple of
officers that are here with us.
deal with it, they serve as a
standout role models to the
students across campus but they
respond quickly whenever there
is that need. The chief, of
just a couple of other
individuals that I would like to
introduce. We also have with us
and I, uh, was a member of the
board of directors when this
individual served, uh, if you
And this is Mary, uh, Mr. Gary
Tripp, who is up in the gallery,
I believe he's right, uh,
sitting right behind us, uh, up
upstairs and of course he
continues to go ahead and be a
members of the Senate.
Is the spouse of our president.
Uh, and that's Tisha Wolf. She's
sitting up in the gallery as
that connection, so I really
indicate that as we go forward
she's the person who is you, if
you will, is the person right
behind the president that's
It is my honor and my pleasure
to introduce to you.
The president of New Mexico
Highlands University.
Oh
At New Mexico Highlands
University. Thank you all very
much.
Thank you, Senator Campos, and
thank you for all of our guests
in Mexico Highlands. We do have
Senator Stephanics who would
past year I was in um Las Vegas,
uh, specifically at highlands
and the gathering of people from
so many different groups, the,
President Wolf did a great job
doing the MCing and keeping
everybody lighthearted and
laughing through what could have
been tense times, but he also
together whether it occurs or
doesn't occur, at least you are
talking.
To the entire community. Thank
you very much.
Thank you Senators Hispanics.
is Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico Day and we have a
certificate, Mr. President, with
your permission, if the reader
could read. Thank you. We're
gonna have the reader please
read the certificate.
New Mexico 57this legislature
first session 2025, the Mexico
State Senate does hereby extend
its recognition and
acknowledgement to Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico.
services and whereas Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico is
celebrating its eighty-fourth
year as a nonprofit service
provider in New Mexico and
has 19 stores and donation
centers including workforce
training centers and offers free
programs and services that are
skills training and those in
need of specialized social
services, including low income
seniors aged 55 and older,
veterans and their families who
are homeless or at risk of.
And whereas those who donate
items at Goodwill Industries of
New Mexico donation center
arranged for home pickup of
and employers, whereas to
appreciate the magnitude of
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico's contributions to the
state it is important to know
that 88 cents of every dollar
generated.
Mexico residents and 100% of the
revenue revenue generated by the
sale of donated items stays in
New Mexico and whereas.
while also employing nearly 500
staff members and whereas
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico also maintains extensive
be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that recognition be
extended to goodwill industries
of New Mexico for outstanding
service and commitment to its
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe, Mimi
Stewart, President Pro Tem,
Senator Leo Jaramillo, Sherry De
Lujan, chief clerk, New Mexico
year. And with that, before I
introduce this, I'd like to
yield the floor to Senator
Brantley.
Senator Brantley, thank you, Mr.
President and Senator Jaramillo.
just how impactful are in the
emphasis on workforce
development as a nonprofit, they
certainly are filling the gap by
not just providing resources to
program and I especially like
the focus on veterans, those
facing homelessness, goodwill
is, is coming in and really
providing a gap service to make
donate, um, and to give back to
the goodwills in their
community, 100% of every dollar
that you spend in a Goodwill
stays in New Mexico and it, it
really impacts those workforce
Senator Bradley. So Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico has
over 27,0531 individuals who
were served across the state of
New Mexico and approximately
case managers. Mr. President, I
want to end with every donation
is setting up New Mexicans for
the ability to thrive.
at any age and stage of their
career. Now Goodwill Industries
introduce the guests we have
with us from Goodwill Industries
of New Mexico, starting off with
Shawna Castle, the CEO and
president. Sasha Lee, Chief
Thank you Senator Jaramillo.
Seeing that I yield to Senate
Majority floor leader Peter
Worth to take us to that next
order of business. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President. So just uh
again for the body, we're
waiting to get notice from the
we're gonna try and get the
business done so folks can get
over there. I know some folks
will want to go and just check
in with the uh the whips on both
sides to make sure that we've
got.
Thank you, Mr. President,
Majority Leader for just a
moment, a personal privilege if
I may, members of the Senate.
Proceed, Senator. Thank you, Mr.
President. Mr. President,
governor's invited to speak. I
hope she's gonna be there and
plans to be there. She does
usually last year Senator Munoz,
uh, gave a report on behalf of
the Senate, which was important,
but please do understand this is
participated. The governor goes
every year. We travel around the
country and try and promote
economic development, business
opportunities, and most of the
people that belong are CEOs, uh,
owners of businesses, small
over at La Fonda. And if you're
a little bit late, don't let
that deter you at all, come by.
There's probably a table for you
with, uh, members of your
community.
So they see the, the Donana
Yikes. What's on the back of
your truck
Are those gonna be mine soon,
I'm afraid to say. In any event,
uh, yes, please join us. It's a
President, I just wanted to jump
in on a previous item and
congratulate Roswell for the,
for the air show, that is a
huge, huge accomplishment.
Congratulations to all of you.
You know, really good to see the
response that's happened
federally, the money that's
coming in to help with the town
and uh all, all of its
response. I also want to just
acknowledge uh my good friend
Mike, Espinatu who's up there
who I've known forever, because
I used to work with Senator Jeff
Binghamman and Mike was, I
probably at Halman and uh did an
exceptional job doing economic
development. So Mike, it looks
like you're just moving on and
still kicking butt and doing
what you do, but it's so good to
you all. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Stein.
Borninel.
Centers out
light, Senator Steinborn. I also
want to thank my farmers and
ranchers down there in that
area. Whenever that flood did
hit Ross, we got over 8.5 inches
Midway area. Some of my farmers
were already out there. They
were getting people down off
their roofs with their loader
tractors they had the blades
devastating and I do want to
thank Mr. Mayor.
up there for all the work that
y'all have done.
It was pretty devastating and
it.
It was
Senator Peter Wortz, take us to
that next order of business.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Unanimous extent we go without
our Business Committee reports.
following certificate of
appreciation certificate number
one and directs the chief clerk
to prepare suitable documents to
express the appreciation of the
motion to adopt the community
reports. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
Those oppose me.
The eyes have it. The community
report has been adopted.
respectfully submitted, Katie
Doig, chair.
Senator do Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate,
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
recognition certificate number
one, so we respectfully
submitted. Katie Doig, chair.
Rules Committee certificate of
directs the chief clerk to
prepare a suitable documents to
express the recognition of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Katie Doig, chair.
Senator do here.
Those opposed, the ayes have it.
The community reports have been
adopted and the record will show
that they were acted all acted
upon in one individual motion.
Senator Peter Worth, thank you,
Mr. President. You have consent.
the Chief Justice is ready, so I
would ask youanimous consent,
the Senate resolve itself into a
committee of the whole for the
purposes of hearing the state of
the judiciary, and we returned
to the Senate immediately
that we did for the state of the
state address with that, I'm
gonna yield first to the
sergeant at arms.
Mr. President, we have honored
guests from the House of
Representatives with a message
Thank you, Mr. President and
members of the Senate, we are
here to inform you that uh we
are ready for you to join us in
joint session. Thank you. Thank
