Santa Charlie.
Center do Hick.
Center.
Sent to Figueroa.
Santer Hickey.
Samio.
Santer Lanier.
Senator O'Malley,
Senator Padilla.
Yeah
Senator Paul.
Yeah.
Santa C Lopez.
Center share.
Santoshendo.
Senator Thornton.
Santer Tobiasen.
Senator Townsend.
Santa Trujillo.
President.
After, please continue to stand
for the pledge.
To be given this morning by
Senator Boone in English.
Good morning and thank you for
the opportunity to pray with you
today. Let us pray.
Mighty and merciful God, lover
Spirit. Make us advocates of
your justice and instruments of
your peace.
Pour out your spirit, oh God,
upon this legislature and all
who hold office in the great
state of New Mexico.
serve faithfully with honesty,
human dignity, humility and
mercy.
May they protect the vulnerable,
promote the general welfare and
enact policies of compassion,
Dios indivisible conlibertadhuia
paratodos.
I salute
flank of the state of New Mexico
Good morning everyone. We'll go
first to Senator Michael
Padilla. Uh, good morning, Madam
President. You look terrific up
there.
miscellaneous, Senator Padilla,
thank you very much, Madam
President, and the members of
the body, welcome. I wanna thank
Reverend Gin Gina Barbie. Thank
you very much for setting the
tone and the pace for the day.
is, uh, New Mexico Education
Department educator Pathways
Day, New Mexico Food and Farm
Day, uh, meals on Wheels.
Day, New Mexico Realtor's Day,
Uh, a reminder, staff from the
Secretary of State's office will
be in the house lounge today
from, uh, and tomorrow, today
and tomorrow from 10 a.m. to 2
um, they are due by 5:00 p.m. on
January 31st, members, so listen
up, that's coming up, want to
make sure that gets in, uh,
Meals on Wheels and New Mexico
food and farms are joining
forces today at the.
certificate of recognition for
New Mexico food and farms, and
that'll be led by senators
Campos and Stephanics, um, and
that one is to be read, Madam
President's the only ones to be
in your office already, uh, for
senators today as well as
Senator Figueroa has 3 guests to
introduce with that as well. Um,
let's see here. So having guests
today, Madam President, will be
reception at the La Teraza room
at uh La Fonda Hotel 5:30 p.m.
to 9:00 p.m.?
Kit Carson Electric Cooperative,
uh, legislative reception at the
Bullring 6 p.m. by invitation
at the New Mexico Military
Museum commemorating this event
with author and historian
Hampton Sides at 5 p.m. The
program will begin at 7 and
early childhood education and
care department, PED and higher
education breakfast, uh, for all
legislators to join those
education departments, uh, here
Senator Jaramilo, Madam
President, Senator Hamblin was
going to play the whip song from
the 80s, but it looks like she,
she's not cued up. But Madam
President, unanimous consent to
Thank you.
Senator Woods, Madam President,
and, uh,
God's blessings for you today.
of the United States, uh, have
blessings to use their talents.
To the fullest.
God-given talents, Madam
in the case of a call, Madam
President.
Seeing no objection, we will
take note. Thank you, Senator
Woods.
Uh
Senator Hamblin.
are 3 very special people who um
are very important to not only
my life but also our community
and uh it isn't a legislative
session unless I wind up crying,
so this might be an opportunity
She is a student at J. Paul
Taylor Academy, a charter school
that was named after a former
member of our legislative body,
and logic acquisition and social
justice. Giovanna is a member of
the 4th grade class taught by
one of her moms, Mrs. Hernandez,
so if uh Mrs. Hernandez's class,
Taylor. She is also my neighbor
where her two moms have been
very generous with their child
and allowing my wife and I to be
a significant part of her
So when she was 5 she was
testing the waters, uh, and
telling jokes and one day when I
was talking to her over the
Wilson sometimes, but Joe, when
she was 5, said, you know,
Carrie Hamblin, Carrie Hamblin,
Carrie hamster.
And I went, boo, you made a
joke.
are here to do the work that we
are doing to make New Mexico a
thriving and wonderful place to
live, work and play. And so
given that we are connected to
had a picture of it, um, I
should have, I, I, if I would
have gotten here earlier, I
would have had that picture, but
I do have temporary tattoos and
stickers, some of, some of the
all, and uh I will be more than
happy to bring those stickers,
uh, down here. Now Giovanna is
joined by her other mom, Nicole
Martinez, the executive director
of the Mess.
Valley community of Hope.
Mexico University, a master's
degree in sociology from NMSU
and a BS in sociology from BYU,
um, also here, uh, with us is
communities who have a large
unhoused population that if they
could clone these two,
They would have the perfect
formula for being able to
uh an effectively addressing the
issues facing the unhealth and
unhoused, but as well as
bringing more affordable housing
to our community, including the
Amador Crossing, which is a new
their work has resulted in Las
Cruces and the community of Hope
to be recognized nationally as a
model program to effectively
address and assist those
experiencing homelessness, so
And at this, at this point,
Madam President, if I may yield
to Senator Jaramillo because
we've got some, we've got
limited space, so Senator
Jaramillo is willing to
introduce my other two guests,
Thank you, Madam President and
Jojo, we've heard so much about
you throughout the years that
we've been in the Senate. It's
about time I finally got my hug
from you. Madam President,
University where she earned a
bachelor's of Arts in government
and a master's in social work.
She's a Las Cruces and counselor
for District 4, and she is a
board member of the New Mexico
Environmental Law.
the governor's Advisory Council
for Racial Justice, Madam
President, if you can help me in
welcoming Joanna, Joanna
Boncommo.
Ana Community College. She was
elected as Las Cruces' first
queer city councilor in 2021 and
represents council District 5.
Becky was an emerged New Mexico
advocate.
an educator and a city
councilor, Becky Corran.
And I now yield back to Senator
Hamster.
I don't mean to hijack our our
meeting and in all ways.
The amazing work that our city
councilwomen are doing in Las
Cruces.
Uh, so I, I need to tell you
that the house is ready for us.
They have not notified us yet so
we can do a few more
introductions, but we're not
gonna be able to read a
Thank you, Madam President. Also
attending from uh Las Cruces is
the Las Cruces City Police Chief
honor all of our law enforcement
officers in New Mexico. Thank
you for your service.
The certificate, which we will
do when we return.
A sinner
Go ahead, Senator Nova.
Madam President, we have honored
guests from the House of
Representatives. Representatives
small and Representative Jones.
Jones, Representative Romero,
uh, and, uh, Speaker Martinez,
minority leader Armstrong, we
wish to invite you and the
honored senators to join us in
OK, uh, soon or not.
Madam President, thank you very
much, uh, I would like, uh,
United must consent to introduce
my guest.
Uh, go right ahead.
9 in the proud town of Corrales.
Mr. Wagner is the owner and
operator of Wagner Farms. He's
born and raised in Corrales, New
family has been growing fresh
fruits and vegetables.
the middle Rio Grande Valley for
over 100 years. They farm in
Corrales and in Socorro, and
they have also been involved
New Mexico and they, he's also a
member of the New Mexico Food
and Ag Policy Council for over
10 years and farm and table
addressing issues pertaining to
Department of Agriculture Farmer
of the Year award. All right,
Senator Hamlin.
my family have some interesting
ties. I just have to share very
quickly because Mr. Wagner, when
I was running the campaign, I
told them, you know, I don't
come from a family who could
cleaned his home and I as a
child went many times and they
were so gracious and so kind,
and it takes people like the
please help me welcome Mr.
Wagner to the floor.
If there's no objection, the
Senate is in a committee of the
whole Senate.
