Senator Block.
Senator Boone.
Center Charlie.
Center do Hick.
Senator.
Senator Hickey.
thank you. Sentamio.
Center Lana.
Senator Lopez.
Center here.
Center Pinto Senator Pope.
Santa Ramos.
Santo Sanchez.
Senator Souls.
Santo Stefanis.
Center Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
You do have a quorum, Mr.
President. Thank you. I ask that
everyone please rise.
For the invocation to be led
Pledge allegiance in Spanish to
be led today by Senator Roberto
Gonzalez and the salute to New
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator O'Malley.
presence.
We give you thanks, our loving
God.
Whose power is revealed in
nature and whose providence is
vastness that reminds us of your
infinite power and majesty.
Even more, we see you reflected
in the faces of the people that
Mexico home.
conscious that in you we live
and move and have our being.
We ask that you look favorably
upon us this day.
solutions to seemingly
intractable problems.
guard their speech that they may
reflect the truth revealed in
your holy will.
Touch their hearts.
and mercy and then often broken
and struggling world.
Father in heaven, conscious of
our profound need for your grace
Give them the fulfillment of
their aspirations.
The joy of unselfish public
service.
And the peace of knowing that
they have been true to their
beliefs.
And so, Lord of all, as we lift
our hearts to you this morning
in prayer.
We ask that you extend your arms
of benediction over this
assembly, the Senate of the
state of New Mexico.
Senator Boone.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
Huofelida
a la bandea de los de
loss the Americas in.
Senator Cervantes, for what
purpose do you rise? Uh,
personal privilege, if I may,
Mr. President, for a few
moments. So no objection.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President.
resignation to the Holy Father,
to the Pope.
And I hope all of us will, uh,
pray that the Pope rejects his
letter of resignation. Uh, and
unique in my time here as his
parishioner. I've registered
with the, with the cathedral
here and the Catholic Church
under his leadership has taken a
very different direction. I want
the conquistadors, which again
in Santa Fe sometimes a
political thing, um, and, um,
And the Catholic Church is tied
into that history.
And, and I would want all of you
the Santa Fe Fiesta celebration
in the cathedral.
That's just one of the many
examples of an individual who,
when I came here 25 years ago,
Catholic Church took a very hard
and, uh, trying to bring in as
much love, um, and healing as
possible and he's, he's guided
our church through some very
difficult years, very, very
difficult years, and he's done
Francisco, and him and I share,
uh, an affection for the 49ers,
which is beginning to make me
think that his, his influence
upstairs is waning, uh, with the
appreciate you, Mr. President,
and the members of the chamber
recognizing that the, the church
He is part of a great history of
Santa Fe, the cathedral and
everything that it means to
tourism, but to those of us that
things started today I'll yield
to Senate Majority floor leader
Peter Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President, and we go out our
business announcements and
miscellaneous hearing no
objection. We are in that order
appreciate tremendously you
being here, just echo, uh, the
words of my colleague in terms
of what you've done and the way
you have handled yourself and
of the campaign to keep you, uh,
here in this role.
very much appreciate it and, and
your blessings and your
invocation this morning was
number 2 of 8, and yes, I'm
counting. So thank you very
much, Archbishop. Uh, a couple
of announcements today is health
A reminder to everyone tomorrow
are the composite photographs of
the Senate, uh, an individual,
uh, photos taken in the Senate
photos that will be up for 4
years, so dress accordingly.
Uh, also tomorrow, January 28th
and 29th, staff from the motor
vehicle department will be in
and 1:30 to 5.
Uh, PM we are gonna have a
certificate today, uh, to be
read for New Mexico Teacher of
events, the Clayton Union County
Legislative luncheon is the inn
and spa at Loretto from 11:30 to
1:30 today by invitation, uh,
this evening from 5 to 7:30 is
reception in the La Terrazas
room at La Fonda 5:30 to 7:30 by
uh invitation tomorrow, the New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
Bishops, uh, have their prayer
plant legislative breakfast is
in the La Terrazas room in
Lafonda from 6 to 8 a.m. by
invitation only. Uh, just one
final announcement for new
8:00 a.m. and they'll be
discussing the following
legislative procedures, requests
for bills, amendments, and subs
institutions so anyone is
You look terrific this morning.
It's a little early for glasses
in the session, but you look
terrific this morning, uh,
Archbishop, so wonderful to see
you. Thank you for sharing a few
moments with me in the Senate
lounge earlier. That was
See no objections. Cameras are
allowed both in the gallery and
in the Senate chamber. That's
what I meant to say, Mr.
President. Thank you. Uh, and
with that, I would ask you to
consent that we excuse Senator
Senator DuH until she returns to
the chamber.
Seeing no objection.
So ordered Senator Padilla, uh,
thank you, Mr. President, and I
just want to let you know, Mr.
years, I think I'm not gonna
tell you how long because they
might get mad at me, but, uh,
Mr. President, we have some
pretty remarkable New Mexicans
here today. I want to start
with, uh, Robert Chavez, who is
of the Behavioral Health uh
collaborative, also the director
of the board of nursing, and
he's had uh a couple of roles
over at YDI as the CFO, COO and,
and now CEO and he continues to
also a very, very good friend of
mine, um, who is kind of
mentored me along the way, uh,
Deborah Baca, I'm gonna ask her
to stand, you know, uh, you and
years with Youth Development
Incorporated, everybody. She
started when she was about 6
years old and has served there
for 41 years and, and I will
tell you has built uh a lot of
what is now uh youth services.
the services that they do
provide, but they're
specifically in those counties,
and I just want to thank Deborah
for all of her leadership over
many years. She's been a mentor
to me and I just just love her
like a sister. Can we give my
friend Deborah hand?
Gomez to please stand. He
represents uh RPNM retired
public employees of New Mexico.
He also works very closely with
the New Mexico State Police
Um, he is the one that brought
me to the movement. He is the
one that really did a lot of the
heavy lifting very early on.
To get a lot of the things that
we have done here today on early
education from the
constitutional amendment to when
concerned, and I'll ask the body
to please welcome him to our
state senate.
Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Perez. I
think that'll be it for now.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. We
the chamber except for the
purpose of a call.
Seeing no objection, so ordered.
Senator Wood, you still have the
floor. Thank you, Mr. President.
Uh, I too want to thank the
Who is the very important one to
worship. It is not government.
It is not another person but God
Himself. Thank you, sir.
welcome the seniors to the
Roundhouse who are here from Los
Alamos, Santa Fe, Sandoval, and
Los Alamos counties, which are
my Senate District 5. Welcome to
the Roundhouse and thank you for
which was established. Thank
you.
This is an exciting opportunity
established by Lieutenant
Governor Howie Morales to engage
young people in the work of the
to an assembly just a couple of
weeks ago. He's 13 years old and
is in the 8th grade. Now,
Gabriel enjoys hunting, fishing,
and baseball, and in the future,
Congratulations, Gabriel. Make
sure that you do some important
work. Let me know how your day
was going. You make me so proud
Montoya for being here.
Appreciate it. Uh, Mr.
President, today I have a
special guest. His name is
Robert Mendez from, uh,
small businesses in New Mexico
and the Albuquerque area called
Carnivore Popcorn Company.
This is a, uh, company, uh
business, Mr. President, that
He has 18 employees. He's a
service connected disabled vet,
uh, and it's also, uh,
women-owned small business as
well.
Mr. President, annually they put
roughly about $2 million back
They have grown on average 20 to
30%, uh, in their business, uh,
except for one year during COVID
in 2020, but, um, they have
continually just been a huge
total of 50 flavors of
wonderful, beautiful New Mexico
popcorn here. And I asked Mr.
Mendez, what's his
bestseller.
I would ask, uh, that you, uh,
if you're interested in the best
popcorn in New Mexico to support
our small businesses around the
state and one thing Mr. Mendes
for being here and, uh, please.
Thank you, Senator Block. We do
have other announcements. We
have Senator Brandt, followed by
Senator Townsend, then Senator,
Senator Bran.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Assembly designated January
27th, the International
Holocaust Remembrance Day. This
day is to show respect and honor
to the 6 million Jewish victims
of the Holocaust and the
Therefore, I would ask for this
body to commemorate the victims
by having a moment of silence in
remembrance of those killed and
to honor the survivors.
regime.
Also
I got to meet a survivor.
Here in Santa Fe.
Uh, during Hanukkah.
lives right here in Santa Fe.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brant. We do
have further announcements. We
got Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. President. I call
your attention, um,
North and South, um,
I guess I would be remiss coming
from our teacher if I didn't
call your attention, especially
championships in football in the
nation and so I would be remiss
if I, if I didn't bring that up,
but also in there is uh some
nuts from the Chase Boys and
that's part of our culture
anymore, so I hope we don't have
to use it often, but it's there
for you to use.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. We have uh next center
share.
the New Mexican New Mexico
pro-life leaders for sanctity of
life Day tomorrow. Uh, it's
going to start with a mass at
Our Lady of Guadalupe, which is
on Guadalupe Street.
and then the following day is a
save the babies uh rally uh
sponsored by the concerned Women
Thank you for that announcement,
Senator Cher and.
Center share just as a
correction, the mass will be at
noon.
announcements, senators?
See no more announcements.
I also Senate floor majority.
this point, I would yield to
Senator Nava, who is going to do
the certificate of
congratulations for New Mexico's
Teacher of the Year.
reader be allowed to read the
certificate of recognition.
Hearing no objection, the reader
will read.
The legislature of the state of
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
Chavez, 2025 New Mexico Teacher
of the Year, whereas Lorelai
Chavez, a Native American
studies teacher at Bernal Leo
High School has been named the
daughter, sister, cousin,
friend, and auntie, and whereas
Lorelai is the first Native
American to be recognized as a
New Mexico Teacher of the year
certification through the
alternative teacher licensure
program at Central New Mexico
Community College.
And whereas Lorelai began her
develop an indigenous school
culture and whereas Lorelai
previously taught at Santo
Domingo school and where she
used Indian education initiative
grant funds to review the
and outdoor classrooms and
whereas Lorelai is the sponsor
of Berneville High School
Spartan indigenous Student
Union, which works toward
students to to develop an
inclusive and student driven
yearbook, and whereas
has also been recognized as the
encourage others to find their
paths in life or a career in the
hope that they too will help
another person on that person's
2025 New Mexico teacher of the
year signed and sealed at the
Capitol in the city of Santa Fe,
Mimi Stewart, president pro tem,
to introduce my guests.
Thank you Senator Nava. I just
wanna make sure before we do
that if there's any other
senators who would like to
comment.
Center Woods
honored and humbled to introduce
some of my own constituents from
town of Bernalillo, and just to
let you know, these are my first
Town administrator Ida Fierro.
hour, the women, and I will say
that, uh, Laurie Chavez, thank
you for your work. Thank you for
helping New Mexico students grow
Chavez, who is joining us an
educator. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you for your work.
in coming together throughout
our entire state. And Lorelli
really guides her path through
that lens. She is a
granddaughter, a daughter, a
years of your life in Bernalillo
School District, which we are
very grateful for. And also
Laurie taught in Santo Domingo,
where she was tasked with
And agricultural identity
through a greenhouse and outdoor
classrooms.
Her mottos are teach love, love
of the land, love of the people,
love of community, love of self
and models to her students, what
it means to be part of and give
back to the places around them.
bringing cultural competence to
the table and thank you for
standing for your students. I am
honored to honor to recognize
you all today. Members, please
Thank you, Sennava Center Nava,
nice job on your first
introduction, by the way.
uh, group's attention. I have
just been notified that we do
not have any FI or any kind of
analysis brought forward on
conservation for tomorrow. I
You know, it's very upsetting
that we're, we're pushing this
deal forward so quick.
To not even have the analysis.
For our members to study.
So
analysis 24 hours before a
meeting time, Mr. President.
Thank you for the announcement,
Senator Woods. Senator Hamblin.
um, colleagues, this is Kristen
Worthington, and she is the
co-owner of the Worthington
Pecan farms, uh, full
transparency. She's also a
member of my chamber, because we
But she's the creative genius
behind the pecan jam, pecan oil,
butter pecan granola.
Pecan soap and so much more.
thing on Wednesday. So, uh, she
will have some of her goodies if
you'd like to try those. Um, but
I want to highlight though, just
the resiliency of our small
businesses because Worthington
working on. She wound up like
many small businesses, being
successful and adapting,
pivoting, and redirecting the
efforts so that her business
could thrive. And I know that we
we're going to see them thrive.
And so it's my honor, uh, Senate
body to
You have Kristen Worthington,
who is also the co-organizer of
the 2nd annual Pecan Festival
Thank you, Senator Hamblin. Any
further announcements, senators?
See no further announcements,
Senator, Senate Majority Floriad
Uh, and we have introduction up
on the table. I don't think we
have any more messages at this
point. So with that, Mr.
President, unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation no
objection. We are in that order
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to criminal offenses, creating
the crime of unlawful possession
of a stolen firearm.
Senate Finance, that's Senate
Bill 32.
Senate Bill 33 introduced by
Senator Stephanics,
representatives Vincent Ortiz
and recompiling a section of the
NMSA 1978 to be a a section of
the wildfire prepared Act,
adding members and duties to the
enactments of the same section
of law by repealing laws 2003,
chapter 115, section 1.
Making an appropriation.
Senate Finance Committee sent a
bill 33.
Senator Bill 34.
Introduced by senators
shielding outdoor light
fixtures, adding exemptions for
roadway navigation and safety
signs on interstates and federal
primary highways and temporary
outdoor light fixtures with
automatic shut-off devices and
certain types of advertisement
signs.
Repealing section 74-12-2 NMSA
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Conservation Committee,
the Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee, Senate
Bill 34.
separate crimes, providing
penalties. Senate Bill 3535
having been read twice by title
and order printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Requiring the installation of a
of an ignition interlock device
and the obtaining of an ignition
interlock license upon
conviction of driving on a
revoked license.
interlock license is valid for 4
or 8 years, providing that an
ignition interlock may be
removed without a court order.
Amending elements to qualify for
the interlock device fund.
Senate Bill 40.
Senate Bill 142 introduced by
Senator Munoz and Representative
Dixon.
to develop a road map for grid
modernization.
Adding school districts and
charter schools as eligible
locations for proposed projects,
and referred to the Senate
Conservation Conservation
Committee then Senate Finance
Committee Senate Bill 142.
Senate Bill 143 introduced by
oversight fund.
Increasing certain fees and
changing distribution of
collected fees and penalties.
Providing for the enforcement of
Then Senate Finance Committee
that Senate Bill 143 Senate Bill
144 introduced by Senator
Gonzalez endorsed by the
mortgage Finance Authority Act
Housing Act. Senate Bill 144
Senate Bill 144 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Senate Health.
Public Affairs Committee, then
Senate Finance Committee that
Senate Bill 144.
Mexico Housing Trust Fund to
carry out the purposes of the
New Mexico Housing Trust Fund
Act and to make money available
to to municipalities and
Committee that Senate Bill 145.
Senate Bill 146 introduced by
Senator Pope and Representative
Tsarana.
educational opportunity for
military children. Senate Bill
146 Senate Bill 146 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to Senate
Relating to children enacting
the exclusionary Practices Act,
providing limitations on the
expulsion or suspension of
Providing exceptions requiring
reporting.
Senate Bill 147.
147 Senate Bill 148 introduced
by Senator Maestas, an act
relating to hazing.
Enacting the anti-hazing Act.
Creating the crime of hazing,
conduct and a hazing prevention
committee at a post-secondary
educational institution.
Requiring hazing prevention
education.
OK.
Senate Bill 149 introduced by
Senator Maestas.
Senate Bill 149 Senate Bill 149
having been read twice by title
is order print and referred to
Representative Royal Caballero.
An act relating to judicial
retirement.
Providing for appropriations and
credit multipliers provided in
the judicial retirement Act.
Senate Bill 150.
Senate Bill 150 having been read
Senator Stephanics and
representative Royal Caballero.
An act relating to magistrate
retirement.
magistrate judges increasing
certain service credit
multipliers provided in the
magistrate retirement Act.
Senate Bill 152 introduced by
Senator Stephanics and
representatives, Stephanie Lord
and Anita Gonzalez.
the regulation and licensing
department for a moratorium on
new cannabis producer licenses.
Senate Bill 152 Senate Bill 152
Cenel 153 introduced by Senator
Maestas and Representative
Chavez.
An act relating to Larson
Larsen.
Removing dwelling from
Senate Bill 153153 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed.
And referred
To the Senate Judiciary
Committee the Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 153.
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to motor vehicles, limiting a
court's ability to defer the
sentence of a person who commits
a moving traffic violation.
Senate Bill 155 introduced by
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to embezzlement.
Allowing a 12 month aggregation
twice by title is order printed
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee that Senate Bill 155.
An act relating to energy.
Alphabetizing definitions and
adding a definition for low
providing instructions for the
qualification of low income
customers. Senate Bill 156.
Senate Bill 156 having been read
twice by title is order printed
Senator Doig and representative
Art De la Cruz.
An act relating to forfeiture
allowing certain seizures of
law enforcement, go to drug
treatment rehabilitation. Senate
Bill 157 Senate Bill 157 having
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
For the legislative Finance
Committee, an act relating to
economic development incentives
requiring the economic
requiring the economic
development department and the
workforce solutions department
to provide information to the
staff of the legislative Finance
development training data to the
legislative finance Committee,
Senate Bill 158.
Senate Bill 158 having been read
twice by title is order printed
An act relating to alcoholic
beverages authorizing the
issuance of special independent
theater dispensing licenses for
Committee, then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate Bill 159.
Senate Bill 160 introduced by
Senator Maestas.
students in public schools
requiring the public education
department to provide policy
guidelines requiring policy
bill 160.
take us to that next order of
business.
Here and how we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous. There are no
objections, we are in that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous.
tomorrow. Uh, so that is it for
today, uh, certainly, uh,
tomorrow, one thing, uh, a
little bit different, uh, I
announcements for.
committees this afternoon and
tomorrow morning. Thank you,
Senator Wirth. We do have
announcements. We have Center
Tuesdays and Thursdays at Fort
Mercy is reserved for the
legislature basketball game. You
do not need to pay to get in as
a legislator, you are covered if
you are an employee of the
good basketball, but, uh, we
enjoy it and certainly, Mr.
President, we hope you join too.
Uh, we got to make sure we get
in shape. The game is set in,
uh, the first week or so of
March and we want to make sure
you on. Um, Mr. President and
Senate body, that your, your tax
business and Transportation
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow at 1:30 or 30 minutes
after the floor.
uh, uh, Secretary Chardon Clark,
who will be giving a
presentation as long as well as,
uh, from our own, uh, offices to
talk about tax 101. So that will
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr.
President, you know, center
souls was just announcing the
basketball games or the
basketball team's gonna be
practicing on Tuesday mornings
the team and others, and so I, I
do appreciate your strategy
here, Senator Souls. I like it.
I think it's wise and I'm, I'm
glad you're leading the effort
this year.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
over some new colleagues and
we'll get to know them. It'll
also be useful for two other
reasons that I encourage all
members to kind of take note,
um, first of all, the Senate
rules, the committee. Let me
just explain, generally, the
reason that I've adopted those
rules last couple years to
really allow for true meaningful
debate on issues. I'm not a big
fan of getting 30 people up to
allow large blocks of time to
supporters and opposition, but
require they organize themselves
to do so.
And so there can be a meaningful
debate and discussion in
opposition to a bill or in
support. Anyway, we have some,
The, the other thing that I
intend to do this afternoon or
two more things. One is to
explain what I call our triage
in the office, which is how
the sentencing commission and
I'd like to take a moment, Mr.
uh, Mr. President, while we're
making this announcement,
Sentencing commission has kind
of, in my opinion, fallen by the
meaningful process in place, but
we haven't been using it, um,
and so we have a sentencing
commission. Their job is to have
good representation of
prosecutor.
s judges, judiciary defenders,
horrific circumstance or
statistic. The response is
always the same, which is run to
the cameras, number one, and
then to announce that we're
going to get tough on crime by
increasing sentences. We
attorney general and everybody
else who's got lots and lots of
these crime bills to come and
see how a thoughtful, meaningful
approach to that.
Could and should be done. So I
encourage all of you to join us
this afternoon at 1:30 in Senate
Conservation Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. We
will start with our
organizational meeting
introduction of all the staff,
the first bill on the agenda
tomorrow, that would be good,
uh, and then roll the other ones
to Thirsty.
I think it's pretty early in the
assigned to us both D's and R's,
so, um.
I, of course, think the FIRs are
very important and we will
contact LFC to see what's
rules, Mr. President, about
limiting debate in committee.
I thought that's where we were
supposed to flush this stuff out
where we were supposed to talk
it out where we were supposed
That they're going to affect New
Mexico for many years in the
future. How in the world can we
wants to hear our voice. We need
to have some kind of balance,
talk about this.
And when you start trying to
limit talking time in committee.
process. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you. have
further announcements, Senator
share?
Thank you, Mr. President. I very
much appreciate the chair of
conservation talking about the
hours in advance of, of a
committee hearing until we get
to the very end of the session.
Uh, I know that, anyway, I just
wanted to share that.
Custom is not a rule, but custom
the health committee will not be
meeting today, but uh our chair
will be back on Wednesday and
we'll have our organizational
going to hear about economic
development in, uh, what happens
with the economic development in
the state of New Mexico. And
what happens if we start
electrifying New Mexico more.
and you, you can name a number
of examples across the, the
doesn't have the power and the
substations there and PNM
doesn't want to electrify that
place. And so,
If we can get ahead of some of
that economically, we should go
economic development into a lot
of communities. So we're going
to hear about a lot about that
today from the PRC and the
economic development department
and so uh it'll be interesting
uh conversation with
Thank you, Senator Mario. He's
actually the honorary lieutenant
governor for the day and he's
upstairs doing important work.
Um
And Mr. President, and, and what
Oh well, the honorary time
Montgomery didn't invite me to
lunch, did he invite you to
lunch? Senator Munoz, he had,
but senators had a lot of
announcements, so it took away
the opportunity to have lunch
you, Senator.
Any further announcements,
senators?
Seeing no further announcements
tomorrow have a discussion about
committee process and as senator
Scher said, there's custom is
cool and some committees have
done things certain ways, and I
think one of the things that's
work through those issues, and I
think we may have a further
discussion tomorrow on that
committee report, so everyone be
down, uh, on the floor when we
of what the customs have been,
but also understand Senator, was
the points you're making.
Uh, so with that, Mr. President,
unanimous consent to Senate
stand recess until noon
tomorrow.
