Senator Campos.
Santo Cervantes to Charlie.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hermio.
S
Senator O'Malley.
Yeah.
Senator Paul, Senator Pope.
Lopez.
Senator.
Senator Souls.
Senator Stephonics.
Senator Wirth.
right here in Santa Fe. Please
remain standing for the Pledge
of allegiance to be led today by
Senator Linda Trujillo.
Pledge allegiance and espanol to
be led today by Senator
Good morning.
It is great to be with you this
morning and to lead you in
prayer as you begin your
important work.
and I know that he is here with
us today in spirit.
I thank you for your service,
your dedication is greatly
appreciated, and I look forward
to seeing the positive changes
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father,
Creator God.
Great spirit.
Yahweh
gift of life for the love and
support of our families and
communities.
And for these senators and all
who work to serve you in our
state government.
We thank you for their
willingness to serve and for the
presence of each individual here
dedicated to the welfare of our
state.
We ask that you preside over
represent.
Help them to listen to each
other with open hearts and
minds.
Ensuring that all voices are
heard.
the dignity of every human
being.
We pray for your wisdom as they
navigate through the challenges,
challenges before them.
May their discussions be
connecting diverse perspectives
and fostering unity for the
betterment of all.
We place this day in your hands,
trusting in your divine
guidance.
We ask your blessing on their
efforts, knowing that with your
help, your will be done to
improve the lives for all New
Mexicans.
Is in your most holy name we
pray.
Huoidad
paratonos.
You may be seated.
Mr. President. Good morning to
you and everyone here in the
chamber. A unanimous consent, we
go without our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
See, no objection. We are in
that order business, Senator,
unanimous consents so we can get
some cameras and uh dress.
code and then we'll, I'll
introduce our guest.
Senator Padilla
Uh, good morning, Mr. President.
Yes, unanimous consent to excuse
to excuse them, to allow them on
the Senate floor and in the
Senate gallery.
See no objections. Cameras are
both allowed in the gallery and
code for the morning session for
the students that are in the
chamber. There's been a request
to members, just the students.
There's been a request,
President. We'll go to you in a
minute, Senator Woods. Uh, I
would like and have the honor of
introducing Nicholas Tocchetti
from the Young Voices of the
Santa Fe Opera, who is going to
My
the dawns.
What's so.
we
who's brought stripes and bright
stars through.
The.
Or the
but we
busting
Gave.
through the
does that star spangled.
I
to
of the
standing up, Nico. Let me just
introduce you to the chamber. He
is an 18 year old native Santa
Fean, a senior at the Academy
for Technology and Classics
charter school in Santa Fe where
for the US presidential scholars
program. He's been a student of
classical piano from age.
7 and began taking formal voice
2nd in his first vocal
competition, and at the end of
this month, he'll travel to San
Francisco to compete in the
Schmidt vocal competition. He
wants to pursue a dual degree in
Senator Worth, uh, thank you,
Mr. President, and I also want
to thank uh Reverend Chambers
it was good to have him steering
the ship. We've got Father Harry
now who does a great job at
that, uh, but I just appreciate
your words about kind of the
moment we're in and home
mentioning our families, uh,
because it's a big effort.
uh for them to have us here as
well. Let me yield to Senator
Woods and then I'll kind of give
a run a show here this morning.
need to excuse anyone, but thank
you, Reverend Penny, for, for
the beautiful prayer and
inviting God down into our
chamber today and, and his will
Mexico County's Day at the
legislature. It's also Santa Fe
Opera Day and we do have a
certificate what's going to be
red and I'm gonna present that
and there's some guests on the
25th, um, something the opera
does, we'll talk about that in a
bit. Uh, there's a
a certificate for ability,
talent, and potential in all
schools day at the legislature,
1:00 to 4:00 for Naropathic
treatments. Uh, we really
appreciate him being here and
encourage members to uh attend
who's up by you. If you could
stand up.
Uh, our honorary lieutenant
Governor today is Edward Teddy
Kitzman.
Uh, Teddy's 9 years old, 4th
with Legos, creating slide shows
and running, he'd like to attend
college and pursue a career in
the field of science. So let's
all welcome Kennedy as our
Mr. President, I would yield to
other members to introduce
guests who are not here on the
certificates and then we'll do
the two certificates and uh jump
in today's work on the floor.
Thank you, Senator. I thought we
Finance director.
Dannella
Hammer
County manager, Victoria Vero,
morning and, and find out some
of their concerns. So Mr.
President, thank you so much and
please welcome my guest.
Belen Middle School, uh, student
council here today, uh, down
there in the front we have their
teacher, uh, Daniel Solis, and,
uh, the students there to the
right and left of him or the
who's another member of uh Been
uh Student council, and Mr.
President, although that I
wasn't in student council, I
just, I'm honored. I, I, I
missed the days and all the
Thank you Senator Sanchez.
Center block
uh, family members, Darnell and
Jones inventor who have been um
just amazing people in our
community.
Uh, not just with our church,
but also community involvement
services, uh, community services
and it's just done so much for
the county, uh, regarding animal
shelters and um.
Meals on Wheels senior center,
waving there and, uh, the
inventors. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Block any
further announcements we do have
further announcements. Senator
shutting down our entire IT
system because it cable has been
severed in a neighboring state,
so it's gonna happen at midnight
fix. They
an hour or two, but be warned
that um hopefully by the next
morning, things are up and
See no further announcements.
I'll yield to Senator Peter
Worth. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. Today is Santa Fe
Opera Day, and I'd ask unanimous
consent that the reader read the
New Mexico, fifty-seventh
legislature for session 2025.
The Nimmesco state Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to March 11,
breathtaking backdrop of the
Sangre Cristo Mountains offers
an unparalleled operatic
experience introducing thousands
of visitors each year to the
companies in the world, the
Santa Fe Opera welcomes a
diverse audience, attracting
local and regional attendees as
well as visitors from all 50
Fe Opera has earned
international acclaim for its
artistic excellence.
and innovation and was honored
as festival of the year at the
International Opera Awards in
including for its acclaimed
world premiere Productions and
recordings such as Cold Mountain
and the revolution of Steve
Jobs, which won the Grammy Award
by 92 composers covering 5
centuries of operatic history
and has established a
distinguished legacy with 45
more than 120 emerging artists
each season.
With a cumulative impact of
helping more than 5000 young
professionals to prepare for
careers in the performing arts.
Through its active learning
through opera program, more than
40,000 students have
participated in the creation and
production of original operas,
And whereas the pueblo opera
program now in its fifty-second
year has provided access to
opera for more than 120,000
indigenous youth and adults
New Mexico, generating an
estimated $250 million in
revenue annually with opera
visitors contributing $70
million to local hotels and
jobs each season, making it the
7th largest employer in Santa Fe
County.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the Senate of the state of
New Mexico that the Santa Fe
Santa Fe Opera Day in the
Senate, signed and sealed at the
capital in the city of Santa Fe,
Senator Peter Worth, Mimi
Stewart, President Pro Tem,
certificate and just talk for a
minute about the opera. It is
the cornerstone, I think of our
arts tourism and culture economy
here in Santa Fe, but I'd also
kind of hits home with me and it
was mentioned in the
certificate.
The annual
Income that the opera generates,
segments, but for arts, tourism
and culture, what the opera does
is critical, and I mentioned the
arts advocacy night on June
the dress rehearsal of La
Boheme, and I think you'll see
and get a feel.
for how special this institution
is here in our state, and I'm
gonna say it's in our state
a creative idea and look what
they've created that still is
here with us today. So, Mr.
President, before I introduce
guests, I'd like to yield to
Senator Trujillo and then any
other members who want to say a
senator said, a cornerstone of
our community. What I have
always been really excited about
are the children's programs that
are provided by the opera,
and worked.
worked at the opera during the
opera season, and they get to be
involved, they get to see things
from the backside of the operas,
advocate and support for the
youth of our community and for
that I'm just really, really
proud of the opera.
Thank you, Senator. Here we do
have other senators who would
thrilled that you're here today
and I'm honoring our opera
company and what a beautiful
facility it truly is a world
class, um, facility with world
watch these amazing productions
you are missing out, and I will
tell.
tell you that I do my best every
year to be grudgingly drag my
Thank you, Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Fanics.
Thank you, Mr. President. um, I
but they had the opportunity to
apprentice at the opera and she
also made some of the costumes
for the opera and so for the
their future, but thank you very
much for all of this.
Thank you Senator Panics. We do
have further discussion center
Stewart.
used for other venues. I saw
Lyle Lovett and his band there a
number of years ago, but if you
think the opera's incredible,
For us to come and see a dress
rehearsal, so I, I don't have
the, uh, opera background that
Senator Tobiasson does, but I
See no, Senator Worth. Uh, thank
you, Mr. President, and I really
appreciate uh my colleagues
standing up and saying a few
words. Just one final thing that
I, I would highlight that just
access to more than 100 over
those time, more than 120,000
indigenous youth and adults who
have been able to experience
this opera and be part of that.
And I, and I just appreciate
just gonna read down the names
as I do. Everyone stand up and
stay standing. We've also got a,
a lot of folks up in the
gallery, which is terrific, uh,
general director Robert Maya is
Pollock, his mom, stand up she'd
like, Olivia Darrell, Santa Fe
Opera staff in the gallery, we
have some on the board of
directors, Marita Hines,
Kelly Dean, Yvette Dela, Charles
Gamble, Paula Hunter, Daniel
James, Emily, Emily Doyle Moore,
Brooke Lang, Caleb Martinez,
Copanustazi and
And Mr. President, I believe we
have some certificates
Our lieutenant, our, our
uh, for a certificate for
ability, talent and potential in
all schools day, and we're gonna
read that as well.
Thank you, Mr. President. That
was incredible hearing Nico
stand here and I talk about how
we need to meet children where
they are with our educational
programs and education is about
time. The time it takes to
and creating beyond their grade
level, true equality means
ensuring that every student
learns something new each day
and.
Experiences the joy of discovery
allowed to read the certificate
recognizing today has ability,
talent and potential in all
schools day in the Senate.
There's been unanimous consent
The New Mexico State Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and acknowledgment to ability,
talent, and potential in all
schools day on March 11th, 2025,
and whereas New Mexico needs
wise intelligence.
and creative leaders who can
imagine new opportunities and
inventing new solutions, and
whereas students who are ready
students with gifts of ability,
talent, and potential comes from
all socioeconomic, cultural, and
language groups and may have
disabilities, and whereas
disconnection can result from a
school experience that moves too
slowly and is not aligned with
the students' interests. Now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
recognizing March 11, 2025 as
ability, talent.
and potential in all schools
they in the Senate.
Signed and sealed at the capital
to answer, uh, Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President. Today
we come together to honor and
celebrate students, their
families, and the dedicated
educators who support them,
of encouragement and guidance in
their journey. Education is a
shared responsibility and we
commend the dedication of
families and teachers in
meaningfully to our society, Mr.
President, I'd like to introduce
my guests.
Thank you, Senator C Lopez. I
first wanna see if any, any
Elizabeth Morris, and if I could
ask each, each guest to stand
and stay standing. Um, Mr.
President, she is the NMAG
president-elect.
We also have Jerry Lynn Morning
Manzanares who um who is the
NMAG publicist and past
president gifted, um, and then
are. OK. I, I was looking down
here. OK, um, and we have Amaris
Ortiz who is a 5th grade talent
pool student SFPS.
There she is. Good.
Tiffany Eagle feather.
Chloe Poburn.
Lila Cooper.
Jamie Tomaseo.
Scarlett Henderson.
Brooke Johanneson.
Phoebe Winfrey Hudson Hannan.
Roman Acuna.
These students are all from
Farmington Middle Farmington
Municipal students, and we asked
students, their parents and um
their educators.
miscellaneous, and I yield to
center souls.
Thank you, Mr. President. We
have a couple of guests sitting
up on the rostrum with you right
now from Congressman Gabe
Bosque's office. Uh, we have Eli
for the state of New Mexico and
hopefully they'll carry that
message back to the congressman.
Thank you center souls.
members of the Senate, I rise
today to share a story of a
hardworking man, a New Mexico
rancher, a provider, someone who
Last year I treated a hard
working rancher who suffered a
foot injury, either a puncture
wound or a fracture. I don't
recall exactly. What I do
remember is what followed.
care, assuming he was healthy,
he kept working until his injury
sent him to the ER. That's when
doctors found the real issue
undiagnosed hypertension and
spread.
His poor circulation worsened by
untreated diabetes prevented his
healing.
We couldn't save his foot.
Had he been able to see a doctor
sooner, his conditions could
have been controlled. His foot,
his leg, his livelihood, and his
quality of life could have been
saved.
access to care is delayed.
Not just by days or weeks, but
by years.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator Tobiasson. Do
we have any further
announcements, Senatoregos.
Sanchez for that in just a
moment, but I want to go back in
time. I've got a picture of
soul, who was a little boy that
was thrown in dumpster by his
Padilla for, uh, having Senate
bill.
360, he and I working on that.
I've got Senate Bill 499, but I
want to tell you that uh in that
uh, chief of state police, uh,
Monica Kelsey from Safe Haven
Boxes, uh, Gail Armstrong was
there, Ambrose Castellano,
actually, uh.
session, there's a little bit of
step back from the agreement and
so that became uh Senate Bill
360, um, I'm still asking that
a unique opportunities center.
Sanchez will talk about, but uh
my bills got pulled up
yesterday, so I had to stay here
in the capital, but Mr.
President, if you yield, uh, if
opportunity, um, I wanna thank
all the people that were
involved with this, Senator, uh,
Gallegos champion this baby box
and uh former senator uh Baca
this is that uh Chris Martinez
and his wife, uh, Janet has
Chris comes in from a late night
fire where he was trying to save
someone else. He gets very
baby Mr. President, out of the
baby box, takes him straight to
the hospital, they get him
checked out and what is so great
about this story is, uh,
lieutenant, uh, Chris Martinez
his wife, and then I also have a
picture of him in his suit with
him and his new son, um, so what
a, what a great story and I just
departments, Mr. President, in
different counties in different
cities and so if you guys if
there's anyone out there that is
it, come and see Senator
Gallegos. He has all the
back to Senator Gregos. Thank
you, Mr. President. I just
wanted to
To recap that because, uh, for
that child to go from a safe
haven box to forever home.
In a little over a year.
foster parent to foster parent
in order to find a home. I think
there's a lot of New Mexicans
out there. They're waiting and
wanting to have these children
to, to take them to a forever
To throw her child in a
dumpster.
To parents.
That had no hope.
And having a child.
With that all you. Thank you,
wanna a amazing story.
Of how God provides.
And how he provided for that
baby and provided for that
about.
Legislation down here during
announcements, but there's,
there is a little bit of an
issue with those that some
bill gets dealt with and we get
that passed this year, because,
uh, my city is one of those
cities that won't put one in
And we see that with this
situation, and we've seen that.
Several times around the state
and I just think, David, uh,
Thank you, Senator Bran any see
no further announcements. I
yield to Senate Majority floor
leader Peter Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. So
Senator Gonzalez, uh, Senate
Bill 213, item 2 will be Senator
Stephanics and Munoz, Senate
Finance Committee sub-super
senator Stephanics and Rep
Ferrari on Senate Bill 118, the
tax substitute, item 5 will be
Senator Jaramillo on the
judiciary Committee substitute
unanimous consent, we go to that
order business 3rd reading of
legislation, and I would yield
to Senator Roberto Bobby
Gonzalez for item number one,
members, I ask unanimous consent
that the Senate that the record
shows that all action for
placing Senate Bill 213 on final
Mr. President and members, um,
this, uh, legislation has been
through the members before. It
made it all the way up to the
require vehicle drivers to yield
to the right of way to a transit
bus with the exception of a
passenger van when the
illuminated.
designated bus stop, Senate Bill
213 creates a new traffic
offense for failure to yield to
a transit bus and defines a new,
the new term relative to the new
assessment, Mr. Minor, um, Mr.
President, member, so this does
not apply to the art bus because
On the bus itself in the left
corner and it's just a very
safety issue that warning.
See no debate. Senator Gonzalez,
you close on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President, I move
affirmative, except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands. Thank you all senators.
We are voting. All senators to
your seats, please, if you wish
to vote no.
By a vote of 30 in the
affirmative 0 on the negative
Senate bill, 213 has passed the
Senate. Senator Gonzalez.
Mr. President and members, so
thank you very much.
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 376 on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
Senate, uh, this bill would
basically lower the health care
premiums for all state employees
it replaces the outdated salary
brackets with that 8020 split,
it provides a program to pay
down a portion.
Of all the premiums through the
at the lower pay level and Mr.
President, members, there are
60,360 people in the state
health plan, 36,000 are state
2, on July 1, 2024 and if this
bill passes, the cost to the
state is 68 million, but it
Senators.
We're debating Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 376. Anyone wishing to
debate?
We have Senator Brand, followed
by Senator Scott. Senator
purposes of the bill, uh, but it
is you, you said it would cost
the state 68 million.
Center of Panics yield. Yes, I
Mr. President, I did say that,
but it would come out of the
healthcare affordability fund,
which is comprised of donations,
not donations, but payments from
all the health insurance
companies in the state.
Senator Stephen, thank you, um,
Mr. President and Senator, it is
called the Healthcare
Affordability Fund in order to
get more people, uh, signed up
is to encourage state employees,
all state employees to enter
into some health plans, some are
choosing to go without health
insurance.
Senator Brann
bracket, the sliding scale that
was provided before.
Mr. President, Senator, that is
correct as well as, uh, taking
away the brackets, it would help
Senator, but won't this actually
benefit the most or highest paid
employees.
Not the lowest.
a total body of employees, it is
gonna cut down on health care
costs because they will be more
attuned to wellness benefits and
would provide an annual report
to the LFC and the DFA and the
uh appropriate legislative
committees.
Senator Brandon, thank you, Mr.
we, we have employees pretty
much paid from.
What, 30,000 a year up to
200,000 a year.
Senator Stephenix Mr. President,
um, there are very few people at
the 200,000 rate and I think
since you sit on Senate Finance,
Senator, you probably have a
are um attorneys and physicians
in our health care system.
No thank you, um, Mr. President,
and I, I appreciate you
mentioning that, but, um,
remember I'm, I've only been on
I'll probably know more about
that than you do, uh, at the end
of it, but from, from just the
conversations that we've had in
in finance this year, I, I would
say most of them are kind of at
So that means that that.
The state will pick up 80% of
their healthcare costs.
And they will pay 20%. Is that
correct?
be paid at that rate surgeries
will be paid at that rate. Is
there a cutoff at some point as
to when the state picks up the
full bill. Thank you, Mr.
pricing, so for any health care
system to accept payment from
the state for.
these individuals, they would
have to be within that pricing
system.
gonna, uh, negotiate with the
hospitals. What's that rate
based on?
Senator Panic.
Mr. President, Senator, if I
don't find the answer, I will
request.
witness, I believe, is Colin Bao
who works for the healthcare
authority and is over the group
benefits.
Thank you, Senators. There's
been a request for unanimous
consent to allow the expert
witness into the chamber.
See no objections, Sergeant Ar,
you please escort our expert.
Sent Hispanics, do you wish to
That will be paid to the
hospitals. Is it the Medicare
rate that we, we pay under
Medicare or is it a system we
create on our own?
Thank you, Mr. President and
expert says it is Medicare rate.
Mr. President. I appreciate
that. I'm, I'm just.
Uh, just trying to figure this
bill out, so, so these uh.
the exchange together.
Sinner Stephanics, Mr.
President, uh, this bill has
been in existence since 2021.
Well thank you
so, um, and, and is that paid?
Into by us as a legislature, the
general fund, or is that paid in
by insurance companies around
fund comes from the insurance
companies.
Senator Branton. OK, thank you,
Mr. President. um, thank you,
Senator. I think that's all the
questions I have.
Thank you, Senator Brant. We do
We'll uh sponsor yield for a
couple of questions
Mr. President, I do yield.
Oh
Mr. President,
And Senator.
And it's my understanding.
That that's been underwater
actuarly since its inception.
many years that 2021 is the
healthcare affordability Act and
yes there have been some issues
with the funding for this
program that is why the
Senator Scott and Mr. President
and Senator, what will this bill
do to either help solve that
problem or exacerbate it and
every year and it it just in FY
26, it will save the general
fund $19 million and over the
next 5 years, there will be a
where did the $68 million cost
come from.
the employees at the correct
level.
OK, Mr. President and Senator,
so that $68 million will be
like to respond to that.
Thank you Senator Munoz, do you
yield to Stephanics.
Um, Mr. President, yes, I do.
Would you like the question to
be restated or do you have the
over from 2020, 2021, the exact
never raised the cost of
insurance on state employees or
city or county local employees
uh, the cities and counties sued
the state because we tried to
get our money back for paying
their health insurance costs. So
the 68 million is the cost of
the insurance that the state has
million savings against the $68
million expenditure.
Mr. President, Senator, the $19
million will be a future savings
didn'tjust it the next year set
it off. And so the annual
savings will be incurred by us
reducing the cost and then
making the cities and the
the rates in, and how we handle
insurance premiums going
forward.
Thank you, Sandra Munoz. Senator
Scott.
So Mr. President and Senator,
governments as a consequence of
this is.
Did I get that correct?
Senator Munoz, Mr. President,
Senator, there's always a cost
to local government. The state
municipalities and the counties
a bill. They came back and sued
the state.
Saying you can't retroactively
bill us. You can only bill us
forward. Well, the state never
the policies and the premiums on
the policies over the next 5
years. This was going to be a
$500 million problem for the
You have to cost control this in
the way the cost control this is
pay the balance.
of the premiums.
We look at the policies and
adjust the rate to a correct
To consumers of this insurance.
Is that correct?
Mr. President, not to consumers.
to come in and subsidize that
for everybody.
Uh, Mr. President, I'm sorry I
misspoke. I, I meant the
employees, but they are in fact
consumers of these policies, so.
When these services are
rendered. How is that, uh, how
According to my expert, OK, and
I believe, Mr. President, that
Center of Panic.
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator, uh, that's very
important. That's so that extra
costs cannot be charged to the
So Mr. President and Senator,
Excuse me, Mr. President,
Senator, I prefer to look at it
a different way. The hospitals
are entering into an agreement
be,
Whether or not this
reimbursement rate covers their
those rates, and I would assume
that that would be part of the
fair market pricing that goes
into the hospital rates as well
as the actuarial soundness of
the rates for the employees.
between what employees can
afford for insurance and what
the hospitals need to have to
stay in business. I, uh,
you, Senator. Thank you, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Mr. President. uh,
This is going to be a statement.
I won't ask anybody to yield.
And now we won't have the same
setup to the teachers.
So, the teachers are still a
A different plan and, and a few
years ago, we made this a
staggered plan.
To
teacher was making so much
the teachers.
The same deal.
So it's gonna, it's gonna be a
higher cost to the state. Just,
just looking straight at the
Senator Stefaniks and Senator
Munoz many times about how do we
budget this deal?
And I know the bill says
require, require, require to
It's against the law to, to
spend more than you're
budgeting.
So
You know, I hope
This time we hold them to the
law.
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Well, the sponsor yields.
Yes, Mr. President, I will
yield.
To do this 8020 for especially
our lower paid employees in the
education system who never make
more than 30 or $40,000.
I uh,
I just can't believe we're doing
this for only, in fact, here's
my question. So, Mr. President,
people are talking about cities
and counties, but when I'm
reading is that it's executive
judicial or legislative only.
provide support for the
educators and uh they're working
with NEMCA and APS, and this
year the unions including
educator unions supported this
the counties can set their own
rates with this bill.
So they themselves, Mr.
President, Senator might have a
said the state will pay 80% of
the premium for group insurance
for all executive judicial or
legislative department
employees, is that not correct?
legislative, the legislative,
the local public bodies are
outside of that.
So, Mr. President, I, I am just
amazed that we have this bill
going to pass next year is not
paying attention to what we've
done year over year over year
for our lowest paid, especially
employees, APS NEMSA Healthcare
retire retiree authority for
these folks not using IPA? Are
they so special, they're outside
they do look at a pharmaceutical
contracts, uh, they go out for
they have RFPs for
pharmaceuticals. They have, uh,
RFPs for medical and so they are
So Mr. President, um, senator,
they all go to bid together, but
each large entity can pick out
are these special employees that
we're now giving 80% to
executive legislative judicial,
are they going to be part of
IBAC.
It came down originally, but the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute does not include
executive branch are considered
state employees, the judicial
branch are considered state
employees.
So, Mr. President, so they're
people we're going to pay 80%
for are the executive judicial,
maybe not legislative, my
analysis says that.
we have around 36,000433 who are
affiliated with the state of New
Mexico and those are the
individuals that would receive
the 8020.
Senator Stewart.
so it's curious to me why we're
singling out one group out of
the 4 IBA groups to do an 80%
when we've been trying forever
to someone who makes $200,000
when we won't give 80% to people
who
30 or 40,000. It's just.
Just don't know how this has
Um, after that, I think I'm more
confused than I was before I
wanted to ask a question.
But
Existing law.
Uh, Mr. President, says.
Up to 70% of the cost of
insurance for an employee whose
annual salary is 50,000 but less
than 60,000.
dollars.
I guess I just need to clarify
that, Mr. President, if, if the
sponsor will yield is that
existing law today
Senator Spanics, Mr. President
and Senator, this would in fact
poverty level and individuals
making less than 50 would
actually still today received
the federal subsidy.
Uh, yes, Mr. President, I get
that, but
That is current law goes away
under this bill. So it's 8020
for everybody where it was 80/20
for the lower, uh, paid, and
then up to, to 60%.
correct.
So, Mr. President, um, if the,
if the pro tem is interested, I
I, I think, I think the thing
that finds that that's amazing
to me is we've decided that
this, this flat rate was good
for everybody, and yet when
anybody else offers any kind of
but I'm gonna carry this
amendment over to the pro tem
and see if she's interested. So,
uh, if somebody else wants to
talk for a few seconds so that,
uh, she can take a look at it.
Is the long term savings of this
plan.
Uh, is what makes us go to
80/20.
And I think that's in in the
And so that cost in the cities
and the counties was actually
around $30 million that we were
subsidizing them annually.
they did 15% last year. um
hopefully the expert witness is
listening and can nod his head.
Is that correct? And, and so
they did a 15% last year. That's
still not enough to cover the
cost of the insurance.
And, and so you look at those
cost savings and say, OK, well,
it's a 15% increase. We're still
short. That's what's running the
number up. And so when we do
subsidizing them, and then
they're gonna go and look at the
plans and they're gonna go look
at the, the, the planes and say,
OK, is this the best rate that
we can get for this, and where's
our cost savings in the plans.
just want to go along and, and
spend $125 million every single
year for the next 5 years or 10
years to subsidize everybody in
the state of New Mexico.
I mean, you, you're gonna spend
let's do the cost savings and
let's renegotiate with them, I
think their PPOs or MCOs or I
forget with all the acronyms,
uh, and, and get more cost
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
Say, I've always wondered
something, Mr. President. We,
so that you can provide health
insurance for the family.
And uh
You know, we don't worry so much
about our wages, we worry about
the health insurance is a common
deal.
Mr. President, I would yield and
if it's a financial issue then
we'll defer it to Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Senatorpanic. Senator
If husband and wife both work
for the state.
Both of them don't need to carry
the insurance.
So, Mr. President, and, and
Or how, how does that work?
Maybe that's a financial deal. I
don't know. I mean, shouldn't
you have the choice to take,
take it or not, and if you don't
employee of the two spouses that
sign up for the insurance, they
are the ones who would be uh
paying the premium for the
health insurance and the other
out of some money there? I mean,
the benefit is money, so why
wouldn't the state
Tack the money onto their
Their paycheck.
situation. So if an employee is
married and has a couple of kids
that employee can sign up for a
family plan that would cover the
spouse and their children, so
What I'm getting at
Essentially, we, we budget.
Person, why don't we give that?
In, in a check to the person.
And I know that's all personnel
So, he's, I guess the question,
Mr. President, would be
His benefit money.
we talk, it's kind of a
substitute for wages, right, Mr.
President.
We, we substitute benefits for
wages. We could just give them
That wild thought, uh, Mr.
President, I don't mean, mean to
cause any ruckus. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senators, we're debating Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 376. I yielded to
Mr. President, um, Senator, I
seem to recall, um, getting a
lot of emails from National
Guardsmen.
Who are gonna benefit from this.
Could you explain that benefit,
of our National Guard 567
uninsured members of our
National Guard would be eligible
to benefit from this bill.
uh, men and women showed up to
the Senate Finance Committee to
really speak that this is a
benefit that they really truly
access in the same manner, but
for me the benefit to our
national guards who are not
getting health insurance right
now, um, is really important.
3 strikes I'm I'm out I guess,
uh, so you know, 43 states do
8020 split right now.
The other thing is, on cities
and counties, most of them are
picking up 80, 90 or 100% of the
policy.
And so we're picking up the, the
And so that's, that's what this
bill corrects is with the cities
and counties.
The savings, I said this before,
the savings allows us to do the
80/20.
100% of healthcare. Uh, they're
currently under federal system.
That, um
They don't really have
healthcare and so this allows
We're covering their premiums
and, and so that, that's a big,
a big benefit to our National
Guardsmen who in every emergency
is called out, uh, to serve us,
underneath the rock and, and,
and subsidize everybody in the
state.
But if you really want to fix
problems in the, in the state,
If you don't fix this problem,
every time we do a 4% increase.
Some of these 4% is never going
home with them.
It's going into their health
care costs.
costs.
The higher paid employees when
they do this rate study and come
back and say, here's your
percentage that you should be
paying to equalize what you're
getting from the
What your costs are and what
paying 100% and we're not fixing
the problem, we're paying the
100%. I mean, we cut their
capital outlay? Do we cut them
off from other systems to, so
that they, that we can subs we
Senator Woods, uh, my wife
worked for the school district
and, and she gets her insurance
through the school district and
retired in in.
We pay a high rate. I'll tell
the state portion pays, I still
pay that on top of that.
So that's
$24,000 a year, pretty high cost
for, for healthcare. I could
bill for the hospitals that
should lower our rates. We keep
saying we're going to do cost
containment healthcare authority
was designed and we were sold on
that bill of goods that the
healthcare authority was going
into one pole to to get a better
policy at a lower cost and, and
that hasn't come to fruition
yet, but they've only been there
for a year.
What are the things that people
look for, right? This is one of
the things they look for when
they knew my quality of life.
What's their healthcare like?
Uh, what can they do with
federal employees that are
better employees and, and more
employees.
Uh, so
It's a cost containment that has
to happen in New Mexico.
This is a problem that's been
bothering me since 2019.
And it's brought up in the LFC,
Uh, thank you, Mr. President.
So.
I, I agree we have to fix the
problem, but we've started with
here that we're gonna cover all
of the net premium health
benefit contributions for state
employees enrolled in healthcare
the education system is paying.
60%.
So we're giving 80% people make
150,000, but still requiring
the wrong direction, um, and
here's the difference between
state employees and educators.
We don't get a break on the
premiums. We have to pay no
matter what it is. So the cost
to the
premiums, so I can't support
this. Uh, it's just really kind
of outrageous to start uh
supposedly fixing our health
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 376, and I'll yield
to Senator Lopez. Thank you, um,
gonna bounce it back to budget.
Center Cia Lopez.
Mr. President, I'm slow on the
uptake, so this applies to
Mr. President, I think that's my
question, and I think they would
get this benefit and if so, I,
I, uh, will have to recuse
That that was not a question I
guess that was just a request
when we vote I'll I'll have to
ask unanimous consent to recuse
myself from this vote. Thank
you, Mr. President. Lopez.
Senator Sapanics to yield.
Mr. President, Senator, I will
yield for those questions
applying to me.
Thank you Mr. President.
President, Senator, yes.
So, Mr. President, Senator, I'm
a little concerned because the
healthcare affordability fund
taking from that fund to fund
this benefit.
So Mr. President, Senator 85% of
our state employees, 85%.
are at 250%, 250% of the federal
the second part of your question
had to deal with.
Mr. President, could you repeat
it? Senator Steinborn.
for this to cover this expanded
benefit.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, what's the total
balance of the affordability
fund?
Senator. In the 190, is that
essentially kind of a recurring
amount of money every year.
Senator Stephanics, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, um,
So is your legislation, forgive
me, these are kind of just
educational questions and
answers for me and the body, but
percent of the poverty level
that we are given this 8022 or
is this everybody regardless of
income.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator. Well, you know, the
affordability fund.
It's for everybody, right? And
state employees are part of
And then why do we, why do we
start at 65 million and then why
does that number decrease to 11
million a year after that. What,
what mechanism causes that to
year, but as we move forward, we
expect to have the state health
care uh authority expects to
have a different program for low
income.
question earlier about the
legislation next year is that
what's expected to backfill this
is future Senator Stephanics,
uh, Mr. President, no, that's
about setting up, uh, a
different program in future
years for low income state
employees.
Senator Steinborn.
And Mr. President, Senator, how
the expectation is that the
health care authority will
develop that program.
Thank you, Mr. President. So I'm
President, or a series of
questions that 30%, how many
people that 65 million, how many
employees do we think that that
will help out by providing that
benefit to them.
34, let's see, let me give you
the correct number.
36,433.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr.
Cover
Not through this benefit, but
through just normal use of the
affordability fund.
Center to panics.
Mr. President, I will need to
consult my.
Um, Mr. President and Senator,
I've been told by my expert that
right now we're spending $100
Thank you, Miss. I'm trying to
do the math in my head, Mr.
President, on what we just
learned.
And uh math on the fly in the
middle of a Senate debate
I definitely support um
covering, you know, figuring out
solutions to how we can cover uh
state employees and give them a
better deal on healthcare.
The Affordability fund.
Kind of appropriate because he's
from New Mexicans too. So just
be used, I think, for its purest
intention, which is to really
cover
People, particularly in the
lower end of the income scale,
uh, to have to be able to
purchase affordable health
Thank you, Mr. President.
The senator will yield for a
question.
Mr. President, I do you.
Could we go to the FIR on page
one, there's a table there.
an FIR, uh, dated March 6, 2025.
Center Scott
I believe mine was last updated
What do you show on the impact
to the operating budget.
121,900 and then the
approximately the same for 27
and my co-sponsor Senator Munoz
is not here, and so he would be
looking for was a breakdown as
to how we got.
To those numbers that are
represented in the FIR.
It represents that there's going
to be a structural deficit of
about $68 million a year going
forward.
So,
ah.
repeat the question for the
senator.
Thank you, Senator Stephanic
Senator Scott, please repeat the
question.
Uh
Senator Munoz, will you yield
for a question?
Uh, table here in front of me
that's showing about 121 million
uh both in FY 26 and 27. My
been made during this debate. I
remain confused.
Mr. President, Senator, so those
numbers I'm pulling up that
right now, but those numbers
gonna, I don't know this. Just
say it's an 80/20. Well, and the
premiums went up by 30% over the
last 3 years.
And we never build them for the
next year. That's where those
premium numbers are coming and
so are you looking on the FIR on
page one.
Uh yes, Mr. President, I am.
we eliminate that tiered system,
right? So FY 26 and 27 go down
in the 3-year cost is, is
96,000.
Uh, when we eliminate the salary
Those are the numbers that you
start looking at of where we are
underwater.
And so when you take the 74, the
36, and the 21 in the structural
I'm about to give up, Mr.
President.
And their costs rose by 30, 30,
35%.
But we never adjusted the cost.
And so what is costing you $1.30
today, we never adjusted the
rate for.
numbers come from is we never
adjusted the actual cost of the
health insurance.
And Mr. President, is that to uh
to all of them. GSD came back
and tried to request the
adjusted rate from the cities
and the counties, they sued us.
They said that we couldn't back
And so as those policies
increased 10% a year just in my
scenario.
We're not keeping up with the
pace to adjust those.
And if we do it at $1.30 then
our cost savings from the
premium increases will save us
$19 million a year on the state
employees.
order to come to the dollar 30
number, and when we come to
there, that's how we generate
the cost savings to get to the
80/20, but other states are
80/20, some are even higher, 43
to folks.
And then adjust the benefits to
an 80/20, but there will be
about a 30% bump.
In
Mr. President, Senator, yes,
we're getting to the base of, of
$1.30.
And then we're saying 80, this
is an 80 20% benefit. And now
For that enlightenment.
We do have further debate,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. President. Would,
Senator, I, I think you talked
about the guard and how this
affects our National Guard
warriors, um, how many?
Thank you, Mr. President. Do you
happen to know, Senator, the
Senator Block, yes, please. 83%.
Mr. President, Senator, 83% of
under the age of 6, 25 and 75%
of them are male.
Now most of those guardsmen, Mr.
President, and, um, Senator
Stefaniks, would you agree with
me?
Mr. President, yes, I would, and
I would also say that some of my
constituents are married with
children.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank
average family of four would pro
probably pay around $725 a month
for basic state health benefits,
Mr. President, uh, Senator, are
you aware that our guard has
deployed to Ruidoso.
Again, Mr. President, uh,
Senator, are you aware that our
guard has deployed to Ruidoso to
help the good folks in Lincoln
County.
Mr. President, Senator, are you
talking about today?
Mr. President, Senator, yes, and
they went to Hermit's Peak and
Kaf Canyon as well.
Thank you, uh, Mr. President,
thank you, Senator. You're also
aware that they deployed during
COVID as well?
reminder.
To wait until you're.
called.
Senatorspanics.
Yes, Mr. President, I know that
Which is uh different benefits
than they have as regular
drilling guards, uh, guardsmen.
Senatoranics.
Senator. That's exactly correct.
And my point, Mr. President and
Senator, is, are you aware when
they are done with that
deployment, they've completed
their tour, whether it's in
benefits when they come home and
they're off orders.
Senator Stephanics.
Yes, Mr. President, and that is
why we are including them, them
in this plan.
President and Senator, would you
agree this is, this is to fill
that gap to, to take care of our
incredible guardsmen here in New
Mexico. Would you agree with
that?
and Senator, I think you would
agree. We have asked our guard.
To support our state in our
country in numerous missions,
whether it's the border, whether
ask if you agree, they have
performed admirably and haven't
asked for nothing.
I think we owe them a little bit
here, Mr. President and Senator,
I, I'd like to know if Senator
Stefaniks agrees with my opinion
Mr. Presidentenator on the
National Guard, I agree with
your opinion.
Close on the bill before we go
to you sent of fantasy clothes
on the bill. I want to yield to
Senator Lopez.
A point of personal privilege.
would benefit greatly and I'm on
his insurance plan thank you a
unanimous consent request,
seeing no objection, so ordered.
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you,
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 376
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Senators were voting all
senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
I have a vote of 36 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 376
has passed the Senate Senators
and I'll yell to Senator
Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate,
that that the records show that
debate amendment or
substitution.
He explained the bill.
Thank you, Mr. President. This,
um, Senate Bill 105 would give
here in New Mexico to practice
in other states that are in the
compact, but it would also allow
social workers in other states
that are in the compact to also
to develop compacts around in
different professions. This is
one of the professions that are
fairly new. There's currently 22
similar to this, including Texas
and Oklahoma.
ma
There's two other things that
this bill would do. One is that
but if it's not a responsibility
for licensure because you're
getting licensed in another
state we want to make sure that
individuals understand some of
checks, because in order to be
in the national compact, you
have to be doing fingerprint
background checks and social
work as a profession, um, does
See no objectionener Celia
Lopez. Thank you, Mr. President.
It was an honor to work with
Senator Senator Trujillo on this
bill as we, uh, joked in uh.
supports our military families
here in the state. It promotes
mobility and and addresses
workforce shortages by
eliminating um the need for
The, and I want to thank Senate
Judiciary. um, I truly believe
that this will be a model for
future uh compacts, um, the, the
to accept the state they were
very important amendments that
um reflect New Mexico law and
policy, uh, policies about
attorneys' fees.
uh call out Senator Doig, um,
for her suggested amendments,
um, some of them were very
important like.
We have a um
legislature to to rule on that
is a separation of power. It's
up to the judges to determine
the rules of evidence, so, um,
I'm very, uh, honored to have
worked with Senator Trujillo. I
Thank you Mr. President Lopez.
We do have debates. Senator Do
here.
For years and years, Senate
Judiciary has been where
compacts go to die, because
there is language in them often
that is not appropriate for New
for the, the approach that the
sponsors have taken on this one,
and really proud that we could
finally get a compact out of
Senate Judiciary. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, Mr. President,
for the for the body.
This is
organization for acceptance in
the, the National Compact
structure.
Is is that accurate?
That's him.
that are already in the compact,
um, for them to make a. And Mr.
President, Senator, could you
describe for the body the
customizations that were made to
of the things that we um did is
um we don't have purpose
statements in most new
legislation, we try not to have
purpose statements. It isn't
really.
purpose statement was taken out.
We also took out um a paragraph
about, um, the members of the
commission having qualified
better than I could, um, we took
out some language, uh, that said
that the compact has the force
Legal, um, whether it's against
the commission or against New
Mexico as a state that, um, the,
took out was that, um,
jurisdiction will not just
include, um, courts in
For, uh,
court liability
Would you
Expect these changes to be
Less Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President. So I
first I need to explain that the
qualified immunity would only
that qualified immunity anyway.
And so it's not a substantive
change and so we don't believe
that it will have any impact on
that.
So Mr. President and Senator
commissioners that are not
within the state.
It did I hear that correctly,
Grant qualified immunity to
another state. We'd only have
the authority to grant qualified
immunity to individuals that are
that are or representatives that
become a member of that
commission.
Scott. OK. Thank you, Mr.
President, and
Thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
please? Yes,
I yieldiner block.
Thank you, Mr. President. I, so
I voted against this, um, I
think it was a 5.
Senator, so if I recall, um, you
voted against it because I
didn't have an amendment to take
it out, and I explained that I
see a lot of compacts, so I'm
not gonna talk about uh those
particular bills, but this
particular bill, Mr. President,
um, I want to thank the senator
for the amendment to, to remove
Senator Hill?
Mr. President, Senator, we're
hoping that that's the case, and
I look forward to your yes vote
on the floor.
Senator Black.
do.
I believe in judiciary uh to
make this a lot more acceptable.
Uh, I believe on, on my side of
the aisle. So, Mr. President, I
want to thank the sponsor for,
Senate rules, uh, Senator
Trujillo was appropriate because
the role in the center is that
you never question a senator on
their vote. In that case, she
didn't question you how to on
your vote, she told you how to
vote.
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Wirth until he returns
to the chamber.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator here to close on the
bill. Thank you, Mr. President,
this piece of legislation as
well as think New Mexico here in
Santa Fe. So with that.
um,
Mr. President, I move that
Senate Judiciary Committee
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Thank you all senators. We are
voting. Senators to your seats,
please.
If you wish to vote no, please
been a long, um, travel journey,
and I believe that if we can get
this through the Senate, I mean
through the House, it will make
a lot of difference. Thank you,
Mr. President. Stephan.
substitute for Senate Bill 118
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitutions to explain the
change.
44 sections of law and
regulation and licensing in the
motor vehicle division came
forward and worked it out so
develop, create and develop
materials throughout the state
on how uh state agency.
clients could sign up to be an
comments. Thank you, Senator
Stephanic. Senators, we're
debating.
See no debate. Senator
Stephanics to close on the bill.
record showed the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands. All senators to
your seats, please. We are
voting.
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 118
has duly passed the Senate.
Senator Stephanics, members of
the Senate, thank you. Thank you
to the next item on the
calendar.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 159 on final passage has
been taken and that it's now
subject for debate, amendment,
or substitution.
owner operator of an independent
theater with a special license,
an independent theater, Mr.
President, would be allowed to
serve alcohol. Now that theater
could serve no more than 26
In here.
Mr. President, I do have an
amendment, I think you. There
you go, now you have it. We do
have a floor amendment. I'm
The Reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number 1
to Senate Judiciary Committee
Mr. President, I move Senate
floor amendment number 1 to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159.
See no objection center if
you'll explain what your
amendment does. Mr. President,
Mexico theaters that have more
than one location could also,
uh, benefit from this.
Thank you, Senator Sher.
Senators, we're debating Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute,
Senate Floor Amendment number 1,
Senator Hata. Mr. President,
close. Mr. President, I now move
Senate floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
and ask for a voice vote.
Senators we're voting.
All those in favor signify by
bill.
See no further debate on the
bill.
We do have debate on the bill.
We'll have Senator Munoz,
followed by Senator City Lopez,
did you have your hand up?
Senator, uh, well, the sponsor
yield for a question. Senator
Mr. President, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. President. You
know, we did this for the
spaceport a couple of years ago.
Mr. President, as excited as I
would be about movie night at
the spaceport, maybe we can work
on that another time.
Mr. President, I can amend this
Stewart was with me, we would
definitely want Mean Girls to be
playing at the spaceport even
hesitation. Good job center of
me. Mr. President, this is your
wedding night.
interesting. I mean, we did this
for the spaceport to increase
volume, and I mean, the movie
theaters are kind of dying out.
I think I've been maybe once or
twice this year with my wife,
uh, but they're kind of dying
across New Mexico that the best
option was beer and wine and the
easiest for them to serve in
these venues. Senator Munoz, Mr.
President, Senator, what if it's
like a in Gallup, we have the
Mexico, absolutely. Senator
Munoz, Mr. President, Senator,
so
a city-owned venue would not be
a local ownership, correct?
Senator I Mr. President, you're
absolutely right.
what, why do we will the sponsor
yield
you yield, Mr. President, yes.
Senator Celia Lopez.
Mr. President, why do we have
operable and staying open and
ready for this license.
Senor Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
President. The other um
requirement is to be owned and
operated by New Mexico resident
this targets just those local
independent theaters.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. President, and I
really, I was gonna say um I
be um a lifeblood for the
theaters make the experience,
uh, more positive for
moviegoers. Thank you, Mr.
President.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Woods.
Or in case of a call.
Thank you Senator no objection,
so ordered.
See no further debate, we have
Senator Jaramillo to close on
the bill, Mr. President, I move
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands. Senator. Senators, to
your seats, please, if you wish
to vote no, please raise your
hand.
By a vote of 37 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Ramos.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
substitutions, can you restate
that bill? It's a, it's a
committee subs I'm sorry,
you're, you're correct. I'm
sorry.
I was
a slide behind center objection
if you'll go ahead and uh
handle claims in a timely
manner, reducing the risk of
unnecessary delays that could
financially burden
policyholders.
This clarifies claims procedures
fairly and properly.
The bill targets insurers that
use deceptive tactics to deny or
underpay claims it creates
taken advantage of.
Mr. President, the reason this
bill came up is during the fires
and the floods, FEMA required
injured victims to obtain a
denial of coverage in order to
increase premiums or cancel the
policy. This will take care of
our
Constituents when it comes to
bad insurance practices, Mr.
President.
Thank you Senator Ramos.
you're closing the bill, Mr.
President, I move that Senate
bill 221 as amended.
Do not pass and ask the
unanimous consent of the Senate
you all senators to your seats,
please.
I'll send it to your seats. We
are voting.
I vote of 37 the affirmative 0
in the negative Senate Bill 221
take us to that next order
business. Uh, thank you, Mr.
President. We're gonna stay on
3rd reading and just do a couple
memorials. So I jumped down to
item number 19, yield to Senator
Woods for Senate Memorial to the
just doing one at a time, so
start with number 19. OK,
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I, um,
show that all actions placing
for the
Senate Memorial to be on final
pass has been taken that is now
subject to debate amendment or
It's a fair, fairly small group
in the grand scheme of things
that will meet in the interim
and really look at the
comprehensive approach to
wildlife mitigation and
expertise the group brings to
the table, it's purpose is to
meet during the 5 months during
the 2025 interim.
Uh, service or a hire a
contractor to Monterey, report
back to the appropriate interim
committee in November 2025.
And the cer, I do have an
get in on this deal. So, uh, uh,
Mr. President,
Mr. President, I've got an
amendment here that was handed
out.
one, the Senate Memorial 2 as
twice amended.
Amendments sponsored by Senator
Pat Woods.
Center woods to move the
amendment.
Uh, Mr. President, this is
to Senate Memorial 2 twice
amended. Thank you, Senator. If
you'll explain what your
amendment does.
Uh, my amendment just adds one
of insurance. Every, every time
that I went in a committee,
another state agency wanted to
be in this group. I think this,
Thank you, Senators. Senators
we're debating Senate floor
Amendment number uh number one,
Senator Cervantes.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Mr.
President, with the, uh,
Senate Judiciary with us the
other night where we're looking
at a wildfire, uh, liability
bill and, uh, this amendment
doesn't try to put back into
little bit of your bill there,
and I was wondering whether you
were gonna try and put it back
in here on this floor amendment,
but evidently not. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Any further debate on the
amendment number 1 to Senate
Memorial 2 twice amended.
Thank you, Senators, and how
Those oppose me.
The eyes have it. Senate floor
number one has been added to
Senate Memorial 2 is now thrice
amended. We're back on the
yes.
Senator, what do you plan to do
with the report when, what do
you want to come out of this
once the report is complete.
about 6 months ago, trying to
figure out a way to, uh,
determine if a mitigation plant
I tried it several ways. I, I
tried it with a, a bill that
Senator Cervantes was talking
about, uh, just last night.
industry people to come
together.
And see if there is some.
Agreement
Through many places that we
have, you know, the forest, the,
the grasslands everywhere we
have.
To, to try to reduce the
Because electricity is so
important.
And if you're a, if you're a
homeowner, if you see a fire
any self-protection. So what I'm
trying to do with this is trying
to see if I can find
Some, some buy-in from many
different agencies, many
On this, uh, wildfire mitigation
to utilities, Mr. President,
Senator, that's what I'm trying
to do. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Townsend. Thank you, uh,
Mr. President, and, and Senator
to all the Mexicans is enhanced
fire lines all across New
Mexico. If we can help the
Utilities protect power lines,
And volunteers can use to access
fires to take care of fires, and
it'll be another way to protect
homes all across New Mexico.
Woods to close on the memorial.
Mr. President, I move that, uh,
Senate Memorial #2, 3 times
the affirmative to accept those
voted in the negative by show of
hands. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senators, we are voting on a
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
the body for the vote.
Thank you, Senator Peter Worth,
thank you, Mr. President. We're
gonna do 2 more memorials, item
will, uh, yield to Senator
Charlie for Senate Memorial 14
as amended number 20. Senators
still on 3rd reading of
legislation. I yield to Senator
Charlie.
Memorial 14 as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution nor
explain
your memorial.
property and oppose new uranium
projects that threaten its
cultural and environmental
integrity. Um, it also calls on
The memorial is also supported
by the 20 sovereign governments
represented within the all
public council of Governors, the
land commissioner's office and
See no debate, Senator Charlie.
To close on the memorial,
I move that Senate memorial 14A
And I ask for a voice, but I
actually asked by a show of hand
unanimous consent for show of
hands. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Senator Block voting no.
Senna Lanier voting no.
Senator Boone voting now.
Senator guy goes slowly now.
Senator.
All voting no, Senator Ramos,
you know.
Senator Townsend voting no.
Senator share voting no.
I vote of 21 in the affirmative,
14 in the negative. Senate
Memorial, 14, as amended has
passed the Senate. Senator
Charlie.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the Senate show all
that the records show all action
for placing Senate Memorial 19
Blofield explained the memorial.
education department.
Convened to put together a work
group to develop a plan in which
50% of beef, cheese, and milk
Mexico. And that, that is simply
the, uh,
The content of this request, we,
we believe that we have a very
strong and robust.
of, of our state and what better
way to feed them than with the
products that we produce, so
with that, I will, uh,
I will stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator Boone. We do
Mr. President. Senator, so I
have some uh serious questions
about the memorial, so, um,
Does your memorial include any
requirement on what percentage
Is simply for 50% of of the
beef, cheese and milk.
That the kids eat will be
produced.
And, and marketed here.
amount that's purchased 50% of
it has to be New Mexico sourced.
Is that what you're saying, Mr.
President, Senator? Senator
Boone.
Mr. President
50% of the school meal has to be
meat or cheese. Is that correct,
Mr. President, Senator?
Mr. President, Senator, no, sir.
Mr. President, Senator, as we
Mr. President, Senator, if it's
grown in New Mexico, yes, sir.
Mr. President, Senator, if it's
grown in New Mexico, yes, sir.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr. President, how about tofu
based cheese, Mr. President,
Mexico, yes, sir.
Well, Mr. President, Senator
Tofu.
It's not grown. Mr. President,
Senator, do you know where tofu
comes from, Mr. President,
Senator?
amendment, Mr. President,
Senator, if we added tofu
products.
Senator Mr. President, Senator,
no, sir, it wouldn't.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, we
Not to say that.
Thank you, Senator Boone and
thank you, Senator Woods for
that advice. Senator Steinbar
Mr. President, Senator, I just
Senator Boone, Mr. President,
Senator, no, sir, I haven't.
Well, Mr. President, Senator, I
think this is really an
important bill.
Appreciate you bringing it
allow us to roll over this bill
while we can serve out tofu
samples onto the Senate floor,
Mr. President, Senator.
Senator boon.
Mr. President, Senator.
to the children of the state of
New Mexico and schools would,
would just be produced here and
processed grown here, I mean,
from, from beginning to end,
So we're not sure about tofu,
uh, but as long as the tofu is
grown here, then it, then that
would be part of this
requirement as well, right?
Senator Boone.
water to grow it if it's
produced here, yes, sir.
All right, thank you for
answering those questions, Mr.
President. Senator, so for the
record, you're a fan of tofu?
And soy and almonds.
Mr. President, Senator, if
they're produced here in New
Mexico, yes, sir. Well, Mr.
President, we are evolving,
we're growing places because
we've had bills, you know, in
the past, Mr. President, I don't
know if you've heard about him,
Senator, no, sir, I haven't.
But you just said it, Mr.
President, Senator, that uh milk
can be from all kinds of things
natural and living, um, that
you're really, your loyalty is
The intent of my bill was, was
to support the agriculture
industry as it is and.
OK. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. We are
going to our next, uh, well, we
have quite a long list, Senator
Boone just wanted to let you
know.
Go to Senator Padilla next.
seriousness, these are going to
be a serious line of questions
here. Um, I did sponsor the
legislation that created the
universal free healthy breakfast
and lunch for all New Mexico
did hear terms like required and
50% and this, that this is a
memorial that does not require
tell me, what is the memorial
actually do? Are you going to
study, Mr. President, the, um,
A study group to to come
together and put together a
proposal, uh, of who
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you,
Mr. President. I'm actually very
happy to hear that because, yes,
a study group to study how we do
this, I will say, Mr. President,
breakfast and lunch. We didn't
just say here school districts,
go and do this. What we did say
is we're going to fund an
additional 31% for breakfast and
29% for lunch. And the only way,
farmers, ranchers and food
producers. Did you know that,
Mr. President?
Senbo, Mr. President, Senator,
that is our intent. That, that
is the intent of this whole
deal.
Yes, sir.
if the sponsor wants to say a
little bit about this, uh, you
know, the health benefit of
getting the food quickly from
where it's grown or where it
comes up out of the earth to
the, to the lunchroom table.
There are
like you do. I think the fresher
the better and, uh, I, I believe
that if we could get this set up
and I realized I fully realized
that this is a very ambitious
realized that 50% is an
ambitious number and, and we
would be satisfied with 30.
We, we just want to get it going
and get it where we can get it
processed here, it's from New
Mexico.
Oh, thank you, Mr. President. I
really appreciate that. That was
my goal as well, uh, you know,
one of the things we ran into
microwave, if you will. So those
additional dollars, Mr.
President, uh, for 31% for
breakfast, 29% for lunch, um,
are actually so that schools can
fresher and fresher to the
students. The goal or my whole
goal in sponsoring that
legislation and getting that
thing done was.
to ensure that we took the focus
off of our children's stomachs
things like, uh, meat processing
plants, because that is
something we ran into as well.
So, so we definitely want that
healthier food on the table, but
uh now we suddenly because we've
Mr. President, Senator, yes,
sir, we are going to look very
directly into that. We know
that, that things are better now
than they have been and, and we
feel like we're gonna be able to
stop my comments here. I'm so
glad that the senator wants to
work on this. I want to work
with him and Senator Brantly on
this. I think this is a giant
step forward for New Mexico
again, let's take the focus off
have further debate on the
memorial. Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this memorial uh forward. Would
you yield for some questions?
Yes, I will.
Senator Stephanic really leading
the effort to make sure we have
healthy meals and, and Senator
Boone, I know this is a very
ambitious asks for 50%, but as
you and I both know, there are
but also the quantity of, of
meals for our students. Um,
could you, could you list over
the work group of potential
information as to, to avoid
working in these silo
situations.
Mr. President, Senator, I, I
would, I would like to propose
possibly New Mexico cattle
Hm
Dairy producers of New Mexico,
yes, I would, I would consider
them all to be possible allies
the table, championing this. So
thank you for bringing this
forward. I think it's one step
closer to not just getting our
students healthier meals, but
also just promoting our New
Mexico farmers and ranchers and
Senator Scott has removed
herself off the list, so we'll
go to centers very much. Well,
the senator yield for some
this bill does, as you heard in
committee, we did have a food
purveyor that represents the
Rossville Independent School
District and right now they
uh, there was a lady that really
got involved in this. She came
before the house.
Committee. I was the chair of it
and we got that bill passed off.
We started doing tours down in
it.
We have been pushing this for a
long time, and Mr. President and
Senator Boone where I'm going
with this is with the passage of
in the governor signed it where
our local
Meat producers could have their
product processed here in the
Pecans and butter alike, and
they are locally processed. So
Mr. President, I almost slipped
this bill and promoting what we
do grow for our state for the
United States and for the world,
Mr. President, thank you very
much, Senator Boone. Thank you,
Senator Celia Lopez, thank you,
Mr. President. Well, this
includes small farmers and um
growers like in Albuquerque.
Mr. President, Senator, yes it
Senator, that, that will come
through New Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
so the Department of Agriculture
the cooperative extension
service and, uh, through their
efforts, through their work
together, they will be
guaranteed a spot at the table.
Thank you Mr. President. The
reason I think that's so
over to the schools and that has
been very successful and I'd
like it would be great to see
that broadened and expanded, um,
great idea and really goes goes
takes forward so many ideas that
um senators Pavia, Stefani.
and others in this body have uh
have pushed, um, thank you, Mr.
Mr. President, you know, uh, I
do need the senator to yield a
little bit.
I know you don't seem like the
kind of gentleman who easily
offends others, but, uh,
be treated same as cattle
producers and uh dairy farmers
and cheese producers. Any
particular reason you've, you've
discriminated against chili?
Senator Boone deal,
intent of my memorial was for,
for beef and cheese and milk,
and, and chili will go with just
almost any of that, but if it's
think Senator Munoz took his
committee, uh, lovely bus ride
to, I think, uh, a school
cafeteria and watched all the
kids throwing out all their food
tater tots and all that. And I,
I think that was why Senator
Mosa.
All the kids throwing away all
their, all their lunch meals
without touching it. So I think
that's a, that's an important
solution to what you're doing
here, but, but on a serious
because the top export for uh
New Mexico dairy products top
export is Mexico.
And, and, um, come April 2nd,
uh, we're gonna start seeing
we see 3 million pounds of chili
coming across Santa Trace in my
district in Senator Hamlin's
District 33 million pounds a
day.
April 2nd and you all are gonna
pay for it.
We'll sure as hell pass it on to
the rest of you. So enjoy the
chili. It's gonna cost you quite
a bit more this coming year, Mr.
the sponsor yield for a question
on the memorial?
Yes, I will. Sanchez Senator, I
see that we have beef and cheese
and what else we got up there? I
Mr. President, Senator.
That's, there's already, uh,
lots of that going on with, with
and cheese and milk, but, but
we're just gonna welcome
everything.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Senator, I was thinking maybe we
could add some mushrooms to
that.
Um, if they were in New Mexico
Thank you, Mr. President and
Senator, uh, one further
question I had, uh, been a dairy
farmer there for quite a few
years and I was hurt, I came in
late on the debate on the all
Mr. President, Senator, neither
have I. Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator
Sanchez.
I see no further debate.
Senator boon to close on the
Mr. President, members of the
body, I.
I, I, I commit myself not only
to sponsoring this memorial, but
thing for not only our industry,
but the main thing we want to do
is, is
Help our kids and, and try to
feed them in a better
Way and and provide him with his
to keep it here as much as
possible and create jobs and
stimulate economic growth as
much as we can, so, uh, thank
you.
Thank you for hearing, hearing
this and
The
OK, I'll move, Mr. President, I
move that Senate Memorial 19.
Ha
To show that all 42 centers in
the lieutenant governor present
show voting in the affirmative.
Cents, there's been a unanimous
See no objections.
Congratulations, Senator Boone.
members of the body, thank you
to Senate Majority Leader Peter
awards to take us to that next
order of business. Uh thank you,
Mr. President. Unanimous
consent, we go to that our
business messages from the
house. There no objection. We
are in that order business
amended by the House and request
the concurrence of the Senate.
Respectfully submitted. Lisa
Marti McCutcheon, chief clerk
Jour show the message from the
house has been received.
Mr. President, I'm directed to
Martiz McCutcheon, chief clerk.
The Journal will show the
message from the house.
Has been received.
would take us to next order of
business. Uh thank you, Mr.
Presidentous consent we go that
our business committee reports.
We are in that order Business
committee reports the reader
same with the recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the tax business and
transportation Committee.
Respectfully submitted, Senator
reflects that they were acted
upon individually no objection.
The reader will read.
Mr. President, your conservation
committee, to whom has been
referred House Judiciary
Senate Memorial 3 as amended has
had it under consideration but
same as recommendation that do
Those opposed, the eyes have it,
the community report has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
consideration, reports same with
the recommendation.
That it do pass and that's
referred to the judiciary
committee.
them.
that all action for placing.
No, that's the wrong one.
Multiple I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
pass.
But that Senate health and
public affairs Committee
substitute for a Senate bill.
247 do pass.
Committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Linda Lopez, chair.
Thank you, Mr. President. I move
they were acted upon
individuallyener C Lopez, thank
you for rising to make that
motion. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. President. The reader will
read.
Mr. President, your judiciary
Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 166
do pass and then referred to the
Senate Bill 357.
357 as amended do pass.
and that referred to the finance
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
government elections and in
affairs Committee substitute for
a House bill 47 Du pass.
I moved the adoption of the
committee report we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Those pone, the eyes have it,
Mr. President, your tax business
and transportation committee, to
whom has been referred House
commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11 has had it
submitted to Senator Kerry
Hamlin, Chair, Mr. President, I
move the adoption of the
committee report. We have a
motion to adopt the committee
report. All those in favor
signify by saying.
I
referred to Senate Bill 327 has
had it under consideration of
the recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Senator George Munoz, chair
will read.
Senator Bill 377 do pass Senate
Education Committee substitute
have a motion to adopt the
community report. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Those oppose.
Yeah, I have it the community
report has been adopted a
journal reflect they were acted
Introduction of legislation. no
objection. We are in that order
of business. Introduction
legislation.
And Kate's and senators block
and Nava.
An act relating to
communications, providing
Department of Information
Technology responsibilities to
Hospi 192 having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate tax business,
Transportation Committee, House
posting of website links to the
statutory language that creates
state funds in the Sunshine
Portal has about 209. 209 been
House Bill 269 introduced by
Representative Armstrong and act
relating to healthcare.
Requiring the healthcare
authority to implement an open
electronic visit verification
is referred to the Senate tax
Business Transportation
Committee, House Bill 269.
municipal code, clarifying the
governing law of mayor council
forms of government, providing
procedures for filling
vacancies, providing procedures
for the appointment of officials
and voting on matters before a
codifying the mayor and the
governing body's lack of
authority over judicial branch
affairs.
Require an organizational
meetings.
conflicts of interest exist.
Specifying procedures for such
recusals.
Removing the requirement that
special elections occur within
90 days of the adoption.
Amending the powers and duties
of a governing body, amending
the powers of a commission and a
commission manager form of
government.
House Bill 340 introduced by
representatives Guilla, Little.
Chavez Garrett and Royal
felony but who dies before being
charged to be entered into
codes.
House Bill 340.
I'll spill 340 having been read
Representative Lujan and act
relating to public assistance.
Prohibiting the inclusion of
health care provider gross
receipts taxes.
In a me.
I spell 357 having been read
twice by titles referred to the
Senate tax business.
Transportation committee that
South Bill 3.
track and monitor the quality of
New Mexico's drinking water.
House Bill 427 427 having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Conservation
Amending and enacting sections
of the Affordable Housing Act,
creating the creditworthiness
assistance assistance program.
I'll spell 453 having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, then Senate Finance
Committee, House Bill 453.
Senators share.
And Lanier
An act relating to the
environment.
Enacting the geologic carbon
dioxide equestrian Act.
Creating the oil conservation
division systems and hearings
fund.
Establishing fees.
House Bill 519 introduced by
Representative Hernon.
An act within the cultural
affairs.
Creating the board of directors
of the African American
Performing Arts Center.
department, transferring
functions, personnel
appropriations, money, records,
equipment, supplies, other
property and contractual
obligations.
House Bill 554 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero
and Cristina Parajon.
House Bill 554.
I'll bill 554 having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Health and Public
miscellaneous objection we are
in that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
Senator Wirth, thank you, Mr.
President, now 11:59 a.m. I move
we adjourn until 12:01 p.m. The
Senate will come to order.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
consent that the rules be
suspended that the records show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary Committee. There were
That the rules be suspended that
the journal show all those
present in this morning session
are present in this afternoon
session. It is so ordered.
Uh, Mr. President, I ask you to
Senator. Thank you, Mr.
President. So that is it for
today. We'll be in tomorrow at
11 o'clock. So now's the time
for committee chairs and I think
we also have a couple of
Uh, thank you, Mr. President. I
ask unanimous consent of the
proposed Senate Education
Committee substitute for
emergency Senate Bill 524
proposed substitute is related
to public peace, health, safety
and welfare requiring that
teacher preparation programs
teach students how to teach
reading using the science of
reading.
Thank you. There's been
unanimous consent request.
See no objection, it is so.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
definition for harm to self harm
to others, uh, in the mental
health development disabilities
and assisted outpatient
treatment, so I'd ask and ask
consent, release that bill from
Mr. President, there's no
financial
burden on that at all, Mr. Mr.
President and Senator No, this,
this helps with us, Senate bills
ordered.
We're in that order of business
and out to some miscellaneous
Sando Munoz. Did you have an
announcement that you need to
make,
Mr. President,
tomorrow Senate Finance is going
that. We are wrapping up the
budget. I will tell members
Capitol, the capital
Subcommittee is still working.
Uh, I think they found a really
good solution, uh, and once we
Or some had a $400,000 cost and
we're overfunded by 200%.
So I think we're trying to to
work capital slowly fix it the
right way. I think members will
that up, but we're almost there.
You know what, Mr. President, I
woke up.
Early this morning, I thought
about, you know, where, where
are we at in the budget and
where are we in our shortfalls.
know that if they don't get an
agreement on the federal budget
that general fund agencies will
begin drawing their their money
or their state money to replace
federal money.
budget, really kind of becomes
difficult when you start dealing
with that big of a number. So,
uh, give us a little time where
they're about there on the
again, once again, an ambitious
agenda, but we have built.
from Senator Stewart, Senator
Padilla, Senator Gonzalez Munoz,
Stephanics, uh, Ezel, and then
that's your Senate tax, business
and Transportation Committee.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you Senator Hamblin. Senator
Souls, followed by Senator.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Education meets tomorrow morning
Senate Rules Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. in
room 321, and we will have that
agenda up soon.
Senator Senator Hickey.
a number of carryover bills and
uh including uh malpractice
changes and some new ones as
well. Thank you.
adopted a, a practice that I'd
like to share with all of you a
little bit here today. And that
is when we start talking about
crime.
And the origins of crime and how
we truly combat crime.
About 2 weeks ago an individual
by the name of Michael Elsey was
arrested in Albuquerque and
charged with murder.
He's alleged to have killed
in October. He's seen on
videotape dragging the body out
of an apartment and then trying
to hide it under a nearby tree.
He's now been charged with
has at least 5 different names,
uh, by which he's known.
And
Just before this within months
of this murder.
The grand jury indicted him on
count 2 for conspiracy to commit
armed robbery, a 3rd degree
felony. He was charged by the
there was a 5-year enhancement
to that. He was charged by the
grand jury with count 4, for a
felon in possession, a 3rd
degree felony.
All of these grand jury
grand jury indictments
confronted 16.5 years with our
existing laws on those charges.
Plus an additional 8 years on
top of those 6.5 years for a
24.5 years under our existing
laws.
For the crimes that the grand
jury indicted him 24.5 years in
a plea agreement reached with
Every bit of it.
And so he was free.
When he's alleged to have
repeatedly charged with felon in
possession. He faced 24.5 years,
he reached a plea agreement for
4.5 years, and the court
suspended every bit of it.
the solution to crime is not
going to be the laws we pass up
here. It has to be about the
enforcement in our law
enforcement, and our prosecutors
in our courts.
some shoes and a jersey.
We should recognize the fact.
That we're letting people go.
And no amount of new sentencing
or new crimes, and more years is
On a point of personal
privilege.
Our side of the aisle lost
another committee out analyst
Mr. President,
And going into the Senate tax
during probably the most
crucial.
2 weeks
Of the Senate session.
The infraction was committed.
Testifying while on the clock.
This was a 4 year.
Otherwise exemplary.
Employee
Summarily dismissed.
It flies in the face.
Of due process.
I believe from other people's
infraction was other remedies
should have been considered
first.
We don't have enough help on our
Is not
Appropriate.
Thank you, sir. have further
announcements, Senator Woods.
When we start talking about the
legal system out there, many of
us are novice. We don't
understand the legal, but I
defense attorney and uh and the
DA.
Made that plea.
So somewhere in all that,
Amend the defense attorney was
doing what are you getting paid
for.
But it kind of sounds like maybe
the other two weren't.
Protecting the public interest.
someone's feet to the fire when
something like this happens.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, no further. We do have
further announcements. Senator
Lopez.
evenhanded. A couple of years
ago, it happened to um Senator
McKenna's secretary who, um,
was very moved by uh by
to be evenhanded. You can't, you
can't provide exceptions for
some without uh exceptions for
the others and um I was troubled
they're the minority party, it
happens to both parties.
Um
And then I also wanted to talk
about holding people's feet to
I think that, I mean, I'm glad
that the minority party is
starting to think a little bit
about due process because I
don't see it happening at the
um to work for solutions because
it's so jammed.
So yes, people are suffering and
we need to keep that in mind and
we need to keep in mind what due
tomorrow morning. no objection
