Once, once upon a time.
All right.
So for each of our groups, we
have up to 15 minutes for you
all to present your priorities
to us, so welcome folks.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the Joe, if you would
make sure that microphone's on,
pull it up, so everybody can
hear you. All right.
Good morning.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to present again
this year as our joint partners
organization.
As you know, the uh partners is
a coalition of professional
educational organizations, uh,
established in 2005, we've been
around for a while now, uh, for
the purpose of promoting and uh
speaking with one voice, as far
as education is concerned.
The members of the uh partners
organization or the American
Federation of Teachers, AFT, uh,
New Mexico, Whitney Holland, the
president is here. uh, NEA
National Education Association,
New Mexico and the president
Mary Par Sanchez is with us this
morning.
Also, the New Mexico coalition
of Education leaders and
Superintendents Association
stand rounds their executive
director is here. Uh, the New
Mexico parent Teacher
Association PTA, is also a
member. Renata Whitty was
scheduled to be here today, but
uh had an emergency come up and
will not be able to join us, and
of course the New Mexico School
Boards Association, uh, is a
member of the uh coalition. So,
uh, the partners meet on a
regular basis throughout the
year to identify.
Uh, programs, priorities, issues
that need attention. Uh, we also
work very closely during the
session, uh, with these, uh,
House and Senate Education
Committee members and of course
during the interim, uh with the
legislative education Study
Committee, so you see us quite
often.
We play an important role in
educating the public and our
respective memberships on issues
that are affecting the operation
of our schools. Uh, another key
role that the partners play is
getting the good news out about
what's happening, uh, in our
schools, all the good news about
what students, parents,
teachers, administrators, and
school boards are doing on a day
to day basis.
Uh, we also have been extremely
successful in recent years in
speaking with a united voice so
that there's no question on
those items that we, we, uh,
have agreed upon.
Uh, so with that a little
overview, we'd like to begin our
presentation this year's, uh,
joint priorities.
And our
Our priorities this year are uh
titled.
Uh, 2025 stability and progress.
Uh, our partnership goals, uh,
focus on ensuring stability and
progress in our public education
systems, both are imperative,
both are possible.
So some of the challenges that
we see coming up uh this session
are that approximately 15% of
New Mexico's public schools
budget comes from federal
funding, higher than most
states, as you know.
Uh, we understand this critical
funding sources at risk with uh
developments at the federal
level.
Uh, second, with our, uh, even
with our recent efforts and your
assistance in increasing the
salaries and uh for our uh
educational personnel, the
salaries don't keep up with the
cost of living. A recent, uh,
uh, survey indicates that salary
increases that exceed increases
in the cost of living would
entice 60% of our teachers to
stay in their teaching
profession.
Uh, long term. This is, uh, more
critical in some localities
because the cost of housing
often exceeds uh what's what's
available to them, and salaries
and cost of uh housing also
affect the diversity of the
workforce, uh, as teachers of
color in early career teachers
are affected disproportionately.
Third, our students, families,
and schools must prepare.
For the possible destabilization
effects of mass deportation, uh,
which would increase the
attendance and truancy uh issues
that are already so prevalent in
our schools. In Mexico
lawmakers, districts, and boards
of education should enact
measures to protect all
learners, all learners
regardless of citizenship.
And finally, an important
responsibility of uh local
school districts is to adopt a
school calendar that meets the
unique needs of each community
as expressed by staff, students,
families, and community members.
This responsibility should
remain in the hands of local
officials who are best equipped
to make this important decision.
We'll now proceed to uh share
with you our plan for addressing
these issues.
And I'll turn it over to Mr.
Rose. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, good
morning. Good to see those of
you who have gotten to the
rostrum, we appreciate each of
you being here today.
So we want to talk about the
funding side of things about the
state equalization guarantee and
the necessity for two things to
think about sufficiency and
stability, as Joe said.
All districts should be allowed
to imagine, design and deploy
the instructural programs that
meet the needs of each of their
communities.
By ensuring that the SCG has
sufficient funding for
discretionary local priorities.
In your practice as a
legislature over the last number
of years, we've done a great,
you've done a great deal of work
in House Bill 2.
It directs how virtually every
dollar is expended.
We believe we need to rethink
that methodology. There are 89
districts with 89 different
motifs and let me remind us that
we currently fund on the average
in your determinations and state
equalization guarantee.
Let me just for a minute define
what that means. Average means
that half of the districts get
less than half of the districts
get more than the state average.
And so it could be argued that
we developed deficits in some
districts because your
intentionality isn't designed
and delivered to meet exactly
what districts need to have. We
believe the local districts need
to have sufficient funding to
help leverage that and do what's
necessary to fit the local
priorities. You had a great
presentation yesterday, uh, from
the Santa Rosa schools.
If you saw that when they're
given the ability to make local
decisions and local design, what
kind of dynamic comes out of
that.
We don't want to lose that
notion as you move forward into
the appropriation. We need to
ensure that sufficient SEG
funding addresses those local
priorities, including salary
differentials, which we never
seem to do business with in
hospital too.
For uh specialized roles such as
band directors, coaches, and
department chairs.
Now, we support the proposal by
the funding form of task force,
it increases the secondary
student funding factor to assist
with increasing program costs
and increase at-risk funding and
making adjustments to the
funding calculation process. We
believe in fact that as you push
it through formula, we will make
the right decisions locally,
including career and technical
education and other issues if
given the appropriate funding.
This is something we
I think that's key to that
recurring revenue for residency
programs. We hold residency
programs in high regard. They
are effective. They provide
efficiency and sufficiency for
districts, and we urge you to
continue that effort, um, and we
suggest that you expand that to
successfully work it at
alternative preparation models
for principals, counselors, and
social workers along with
classroom teachers.
Let's look at the whole spectrum
of student support.
Capital outlay.
We ask that you invest in school
safety, maintenance, and current
technical education programs by
reducing the district's matching
requirements.
We also ask you modernize school
buildings with renewable energy,
uh, with solutions like solar
panels which pay for themselves
through utility savings.
With rising temperatures,
upgrading HVAC systems is
essential to ensure students and
teachers have the learning
conditions they need to have to
succeed. We would like you to
Protect
Local operating reserves.
This state is set aside you as a
legislator set aside tremendous
numbers tremendous dollars for
future issues just like public
schools have.
And I know there's a lot of
debate about are you holding too
much cash, we would argue that
we are planned and properly
positioning ourselves for those
issues in the future.
We also believe that you need to
increase our instructural
materials budget, and we'd like
to add the caveat that while we
rolled instruction materials
into the state equalization
guarantee. I want to focus for a
minute on those districts that
are below the average.
Here's the argument I would
make. If you intend to put a
dollar in for instructional
materials.
But if you're below the average,
you're gonna receive something
that's in deficit compared to
the intentionality of you, the
legislature. In the past we've
used between the line funding
for instructional materials.
We'd like to see you.
Reconsider placing new
instruction materials dollars
there.
Because a book is the cost of a
book for a child, no matter what
district they're in.
And final finally
transportation.
Transportation needs to be
fixed. We believe that every
student deserves to be
transported to school, but we
recognize that we're not
sufficiently funding that
through the current formula.
We need to give a respite for
those districts who are
receiving less than they need.
They are taking from their
operational budget or their
operational reserves to pay for
that.
When that is not the
intentionality of this state
statute on transportation. It is
said to be an in and out of pay
for cost model.
In fact, it's not doing that. We
ask you to, to consider
ameliorating that problem.
I'll now back up and go to
salaries and I believe
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Whitney Holland, president of
American Federation of Teachers
New Mexico. My task is to talk
about salary recommendations. We
asked to look at a minimum
salary of $30,000 for our
educational assistance.
Furthermore, we suggest working
towards adjusting or indexing
these salaries to the level or
level one teacher salaries, so
we don't have to continue to
visit this every single year.
Provide a sufficient
appropriation for an average 10%
wage increase for all
educational personnel and
increase the current
three-tiered minimum salaries to
5,506,500,075,000. It's
important to ensure funding
reaches every district to
guarantee equal raises and
mandated minimum salaries for
counselors, social workers,
nurses, and all support
personnel that are essential to
addressing our students' needs.
We look to advocate for
significant raises for
classified staff to reflect
their essential contributions to
our schools, ensure that all
critical support personnel,
including secretaries, clerks,
custodians, food service
workers, bus drivers and
instructional assistants receive
equitable and competitive
compensation. And lastly,
increased salaries for
principals to attract to retain
experience effective leaders who
foster positive school cultures
and meaningful communication
with our families.
Well-compensated principals are
better equipped to support our
educators, which
produces turnover and creates
stable, thriving learning
environments that benefit
students, families, and staff
alike. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. um, Mr.
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, and hardworking
staff. My name is Mary Par
Sanchez, and I'm the president
of the National Education
Association in New Mexico, and I
would like to talk to you today
um, about attendance, social and
emotional learning and
behavioral supports and
resources. Um, continue to
invest time in invest in paid
time for educators to
collaborate.
improving job satisfaction,
student outcomes, and teacher
retention. In bad equity and
pedagogy to foster inclusive
environments where students and
families feel valued and
engaged and emphasis on
engagement over compliance will
result in increased attendance.
Prioritize funding for social
emotional learning, youth
mentoring and restorative
practices to build student life
skills and improved behavior.
And finally, and this is not a
shocker to anybody, uh, continue
to fund um at risk programming
Indian education Act, Hispanic
Education Act bilingual,
multicultural education, PE,
fine arts, career in tech career
and technical ed and community
schools. These programs are
essential to provide resources
and to engage students. These
programs are key to keeping our
students in school.
As New Mexico saw 119% increase
in chronic absenteeism from
2019 um and 2023, the largest
increase in the country. And
back to you.
Mr. Rens. Thank you very much
and Mr. Came members of the
committee. Let's talk governance
just for a minute.
Our current governance
structure.
Leaves are uh leaves our
education progress vulnerable to
political shifts.
And in fact, instability.
We believe that that needs to
change.
We believe that reinstating the
state Board of Education is the
best solution we can find at
this point. This selected body
would offer continuity,
transparency, and accountability
compared to the Governor
appointed secretary system,
which has seen 5 leadership
changes.
In the current administration as
an example.
Thank you. I'll turn it back
over to.
I'm doing middle school. OK, I'm
sorry. I will also do middle
school, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
So we also believe the middle
school education deserved
tremendous attention. It in fact
is our, our biggest sinkhole in
our K-12 pre-K12 system.
We believe that adolescents, the
age 10 to 14 is a period of
rapid development, second only
to infancy.
During this stage, students
experienced significant
hormonal, emotional, and social
changes, making them
particularly vulnerable to
anxieties low self-esteem, and
risk-taking behaviors, we
propose the following.
Reaffirmed the developmentally
responsive, challenging, and
equitable middle school
experience. It's not just a
small high school or pre-high
school.
It is something different we
believe we need to support
staffing ratios for middle
school so that they can create
interdisciplinary teams, also
known as Families or small
learning communities. That
process is successful, has been
successful, but unfortunately is
no longer, no longer
sustainable.
We believe we need to establish
specialized licensing for middle
school educators, emphasizing
expertise in early adolescent
development to better support
students and families through
this critical stage.
Mr. Chairman, I think that ends
our joint.
presentation
I'd like to just summarize by
saying this is our plan for
stability and success, and we
appreciate the consideration you
have given us in the past with
all of your hard work and all of
the improvements that we made in
public education, and we ask for
your continued support and
consideration of our top
priorities. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, if you all
would stick around, we'll get to
questions after we have all of
our.
presentation. So New Mexico
School Board Association, some
Joe's.
I'm gonna stick around.
All right. Welcome, folks.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
My name is Pauline Haamil,
president of New Mexico School
Board Association, along with me
is our executive director Joe
Yin, our vice president, our
President-elect Marvin Hateil.
We also have another guest with
us with is a board member Harman
Gonzalez from Santa Fe.
Um, you all have a handout of
our
Presentation.
And on our handout um on the
front page is our vision and
mission.
We are made up of 24 members.
Of the resolution legislature
Committee.
Throughout our state, there are
3 from each region.
Our annual NSBA initiative is
the legislature process that
enables local school board
members to express their
opinions on current educational
issues. These opinions are
collected through a resolution
development process following a
comprehensive analysis of all
resolutions. The NSPA
resolutions and legislative
Committee recommends legislative
priorities to the members for
adoption at the recent NSBA
annual convention 2025
Legislative.
s were adopted and now represent
the collective voice of New
Mexico 89 districts and 400
school board members.
Our guiding principles are
unfunded mandates, local
control.
And uh funding.
And I will hand this over to Joe
to go over our um resolutions.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, President
Jaramillo.
As
Uh, Pauline mentioned
Oh, are
Delicate assembly are full
membership last week at our
annual conference, adopted our
legislative program.
We had several, uh, new
priorities uh inserted, and I'll
go over our top priorities for
you this year. Uh, the first, of
course, is local decision
making, local control. We
support local decision making,
uh, authority of school boards
and oppose legislation and
executive action that restricts
the ability of local elected
boards and superintendents who
respond to the varied and ever
changing needs and and
challenges. We call on the
legislature.
support legislation that affirms
and expands the authority of
local elected school boards to
independently develop and adopt
educational policies and rules
that affect the educational
needs of students and
communities they serve.
Along with the local control,
we, we, uh, recognize that
school planning decisions should
not be a one size fits all, uh,
proposition and supports
legislation and flexibility to
allow local school boards again
to make decisions about
calendar's length of school
week reentry and instruction
based on relevant scientific
evidence and community needs.
In the area of adequate funding,
we ask that you uh support
legislative action that keeps
all school personnel employed
and vacancies filled, invest in
substantial increases.
salaries for all personnel to
remain regionally competitive
and provide a competitive
benefits package, including a
decrease in employment,
healthcare costs, uh, for, uh
for employees and provide
educator housing assistance when
possible.
Uh, the, we should also fund the
core education mission.
Which supports a stable and
recurring funding resource and
flexibility as we mentioned
earlier, uh, we feel that many
of the uh education mandates
should be adjusted to allow uh
consideration of districts that
are large, medium, and small,
and full funding of
transportation expenses, Special
attention should go to
addressing the possibility of
restrictions in federal funding
and timely award of initial,
final, and carryover funds.
And processing the request for
payment by the New Mexico Public
Education Department.
On the last page of our handout,
the uh remaining priorities,
school district operating
reserves. Again, we request that
school district reserves be
preserved and protected without
penalty, as they are critical to
keeping the doors open and
meeting needs uh that are
unspecified at this time.
students and staff safety. We
support legislation to provide
direct aid with the flexibility
necessary for school districts
to meet the critical and
ever-changing school safety,
cybersecurity, social, emotional
health and housing needs of our
students and staff.
We also support the extended
learning programs and
flexibility in those programs.
And uh and to round these out,
uh we support legislation that
will continue to fund culturally
and linguistically responsive
training,
uh, cir uh curriculum and
materials. We also support
reporting and accountability to
ensure students are provided
these opportunities to engage in
the work necessary to create
changes in our schools to
address educational disparities
as required by the Martinez and
Yazi lawsuit.
The area capital outlay, we
support the continued reduction
of local matching requirements
and easing match waiver
provisions for standards-based
and systems projects, removal of
matching requirements completely
for school safety, pre-K, and
career tech facilities. Also, we
support funding of programs uh
like AC and HABC uh replacements
and upgrades that we've seen uh
uh uh increased need for recent.
And finally, we join as our
partners have in supporting
passage of a joint memorial to
ask voters.
Uh, to approve a constitutional
amendment to reestablish the
state Board of Education as an
independent body with the
authority to appoint a state
superintendent of of education
with funding and oversight for
robust and accountable uh
education system for all
students, educators, and
communities.
So again, those are our top
priorities this year, and we
appreciate your consideration of
them as you make those tough
decisions during the next.
Thank you.
