We'll call the committee back to
order.
And
These features print yes.
Good morning ladies and
gentleman chairman Chavis
members of the budget committee
I'd like to thank you first for
I I was here for the majority of
yesterday we were all here and I
saw the arduous work the two
conducted like to thank you for
your time and we're back at it
again and I'd like to thank you
appreciate the time you've given
to these entities.
And with that I'd like to say
that
I've been in this position for
three and a half months and my
name is Khan at that is the
chief judge of third judicial
district.
I I'd like to introduce my right
hand in my left hand because
three and a half months is just
not enough time to learn
what I need to learn to present
to you my right hand is agency
of the Amanda all very who is
our interim C. CEO and on my
left hand is Mr Delgado also and
interim CEO helping me get
through this process and get our
court in line.
Our focus today is we we focused
on three aspects that was the
security of our courthouse the
education and training and the
fair compensation for employees
the third judicial District
Court is requesting
consideration for an increase of
four hundred sixty four thousand
five hundred dollars to our
general fund budget for FY
twenty five which is a three
point five percent increase from
FY twenty four.
We to get a great into
consideration being good
stewards of the monies that we
receive and and looking to see
what we could do to improve our
function.
We're asking for fifty five
thousand dollars for an unfunded
J. is to position at the
District Court clerk's office
we're also asking for seven
thousand two hundred dollars to
reclassify and administrative
assistant to a program
coordinator in our treatment
courts rescue for ninety
thousand three hundred dollars
to re classify three
surveillance officers to court
probation officer one one
surveillance officer to a court
probation officer to and one
surveillance officer lead worker
to a court probation officer
leave workers.
We're requesting seventy nine
thousand one hundred dollars for
an unfunded to judicial
specialist lead worker position
at the Los crucis magistrate
court.
Fifty five thousand five hundred
dollars for a J. S. to position
for a pre trial services program
and this is an expansion request
we heard yesterday regarding pre
trial services.
We're asking for thirty four
thousand dollars to support the
increased cost of the domestic
violence special commissioner
contract and and along with that
there are two security requests
twenty one thousand two hundred
dollars to support the increased
cost of the Los crucis
administrative security contract
contract and eleven thousand
five hundred dollars to support
the increased cost for the at
the Anthony magistrate security
contract.
We're requesting one hundred dot
thousand dollars for training
costs for judges and staff and I
know that's come up before today
and yesterday and finally ten
thousand two hundred dollars for
the delete me annual
subscriptions and with that will
stand for questions.
Thank you we'll turn to Mr
Clarke the inquest.
Thank you for your presentation
welcome to to this process thank
you CEO of our.
Said this is my first time
sitting on on this side of the
table but I've certainly sat
through many years of
presentations and I've got a
state I was a little bit
surprised reading through your
requests because it seems like a
very modest request compared to
what I believe I've heard the
third asked for in past years
so.
I don't know if there's a
question in there maybe there
will be coming up but I just I
want to.
Say that I noted that and and
maybe we'll talk about that a
little bit more as we go
through.
You.
I moved a lot of money out of
the two hundreds last year three
hundred and fifteen thousand
dollars that's a substantial
amount would you could you
please give a little bit of an
explanation of how you ended up
with that much extra in your two
hundred as we know like for your
eyes are directed to I will
occur to sell the very thank you
for.
Mr cari last year our vacancy
savings came from two
instructions that we had we had
a magistrate judge that was
state became vacant it was
vacant for about three months we
also had a District Court
judgeship that was vacant for
about four months.
We also have been experiencing
significant turnover that's due
to compensation and just
different factors and that's
what contributed to our
vacancies.
In addition to that you
reverted ten thousand dollars in
that three percent magistrates
increases that we got is that
related to that vacant judgeship
at the magistrate court.
Mr chairman yes okay.
With the hundred thousand
dollars that you've asked for
for training can you find a
little bit more detail about how
you came up with that figure.
That that I'd like to start and
of course different I must with
that are planned it when we we
discussed this budget request
was.
I don't want meant of two
thousand dollars per judge and
that would be R. nine District
Court judges and R. seven
magistrate court judges within
our judicial district that would
be a total thirty two thousand
dollars.
This would enhance their
abilities to attend out of state
trainings and and primarily my
focus was looking at the
national judicial college there
there costs are rather high and
if we now have a for lack of a
better word and alignment or and
or statement stipends I can seek
the training I would want in
Reno or elsewhere and then seek.
Scholarships to seek other kind
of assistance from the National
just traditional college but
that would be a trend of my
choice preferably to an
organization such as the
national position traditional
college they're also the
treatment trainings outside of
the state that would enhance our
abilities of to include
evidentiary training in in other
locations such as Louisiana that
would be federal type of
training that we could learn
different aspects of evidence
and evidence response from.
I'm also looking at the fact
that we do have some
tuition reimbursement we have
one individual that is seeking
tuition reimbursement as we
speak and lastly I want to
include my vision our vision was
to include.
Our employees and have
additional training such as.
Fundamental accounting
principles maybe through the AGA
national organizations
maybe fraud.
Type recognition training
through through organizations
such as the CFE
and looking at that kind of
training to enhance our
financial abilities to enhance
our clerks abilities and to
train individuals to move up if
they chose to in a financial
realm and look at how they could
do to move into a position such
as Mr guy does and this all very
consent I now have some training
and I want to move there that
way we're expanding that
knowledge and.
Enhancing their abilities and
lastly and and this is one that
that I recognized.
Rebuttals on evaluations are an
interesting thing that I just in
toward.
Lack of a better word but Edward
And I find and found that the
skills or the abilities of
evaluating employees are lacking
I think a good sound training as
to how to evaluate how to
document how to put into words
how to avoid the halo type of
facts for this individuals just
perfect when there are others
some very very strong positives
and very very strong negatives I
look at a very fair and more
robust evaluation so that when
we do fill out far valuations it
is true it is documented it has
been addressed and that's what
I'm looking for for our
supervisors and upcoming leave
workers that's my
My belief and I I I do believe
that we all share that that
training aspect in those wishes
again also not knowing where the
the C. E. eyes going this is
also a request to say how are we
going to enhance that type of
training and may be.
Help center are individuals to
training.
Thank you.
In regards to the increase for
your domestic violence special
commissioner contract you
mentioned in your justification
that there have been
An increase in.
Sorry I don't want to
miss Representative this an
increase in your cases which has
led to the contractor needing to
work more hours.
Do you have more than one
commissioner are at hearing
officer Mr chair and CEO Akari
we have only one and.
We lost our TV commissioner and
we are now utilizing our
supervising attorney to pull
double duty.
But after observing yesterday
which is very beneficial process
to watch this happen we crunch
the numbers just to give you the
up to date numbers as to what is
occurring now and this is done
last night and I'm gonna defer
to our interim CEO Delgado
please okay Mr chairman members
of the committee we we ran the
case numbers for Benny TV cases
filed in fiscal year twenty one
twenty two and twenty three we
had six hundred and thirty eight
and twenty one and seven hundred
and ninety five in twenty three
R. reopens went from forty three
to two hundred and twenty one
and the hearings from fiscal
twenty twenty one to twenty
twenty three started at eight
forty four are and are now at
twelve oh seven.
It it and CEO okay Mister chair
I'd like to add to this one of
the duties that that we all
share is the signing of those
documents after the D. V.
commissioner does this and I've
been signing them you know
caring a lot of that share and I
see that.
There are just many as opposed
to two three years ago I served
as DV commissioner many many
years ago and my signatory was
it was judge Martin and you know
I've Carrie handful today it's
two batches daily of DVD cases
requiring a a counter signature
so I've seen this and I think
we've all seen this.
Domestic violence is grounded
and we're seeing it by way of
findings and that is why we like
this commissioner the speaker Mr
chaff.
More funds than just this part
time commissioner getting paid a
good amount but this is now
become a full time job and you
see this over and over again and
currently are supervising staff
attorney is just over what but
she's carrying the duty and and
bearing the flag.
I hope that answers questions.
Here it mediation fund balances
sizeable and has grown over the
past year do you have plans to
put that money to use somewhere.
Miss Mister chairman right yes
we do have plans to put that
money to use I've been speaking
to the program madam chair
mediation and discussing what we
can use the fund balance on for
FY twenty four we did increase
that are really right for our
contract mediators.
And.
Going to continue to have those
discussions were looking at
trainings are looking at.
How many
are on all of your mediation
semi contract evaluator contract
mediators or do you have in
house staff to do it as well.
Thank you Mr curry their
ultimate contract mediators.
And I know this is getting
really NIT picky in looking at
how you spent some of the money
that was transferred out of
here are two hundred category I
see a couple of places where it
mentions maintenance courthouse
maintenance paint and courthouse
maintenance at twenty four
thousand five hundred that's a
pretty heavy expensive what what
facility was that for
Was why was that not the county
covering that
Can you can you explain that
expense a little bit more.
Mr chairman to curry for that
painting courthouse maintenance
work with the county has not P.
pertaining for House this past
fiscal year we are prepaying
court room repainted to
returning rooms and we also
paint repainted and judge's
chambers.
I understand the vacancies with
the judgeship sorry unique
challenging position to be and
you mentioned some other things
in your request about why you've
had higher vacancy rate than you
wanted and some of those don't
seem like things that are going
to change anytime soon you're
you're going to continue to
compete with federal contractors
and and things of that nature so
could some of these re classes
be covered by those vacancy
savings that will probably
continue on for the future.
Mr Chairman the current.
one of the things that were
planning to do with the vacancy
savings that we've been seeing
as R. J. S. to.
We had a test to find out
because they're below the
minimum.
Then they can receive an
additional eight percent when
they come off of appropriations
so that's going to cost us an
additional tech thirty two
thousand dollars with that being
said it's created pay inequities
among start seven other chance
to use that we're going to look
at and see what we can raise
them to what for each we can
reason to based on experience
and their time at the court
we're also looking at some pay
inequities among started
judicial specialist supervisors
that we would like to address
and then we have three out of
cycles that we're going to look.
And so with that being said we
do need the additional funding
for some of our classes okay
great thank you for that
explanation and have to keep an
eye on what you're doing said
that.
I can stay competitive with you
and not lose.
We have a lot of people I keep
an eye on you but.
That's all the questions I have
thank you thank you other
questions on that stuffy.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
good morning couple questions
one about the.
The.
The items on the the U. S. state
your two hundred the money moved
of the tunica Graham some of
those look like they have the
potential to be recurring
expenses like your software
licenses
that was almost eighteen
thousand dollars and wondering
if you have of money allocated
in your operating budget to
cover that I'm going to expense
going forward.
Mr chair judge Duffy
For our software system we do
have many allocated for
reoccurring expenses but with
regards to the software that we
purchase it was three plays art
adobe licenses that were going
to expire and and some of our
Microsoft.
How often is it necessary to do
that.
Okay so it's something that
eight if you didn't have enough
in the general fund you that
would be more of a special and
not and in part of the General
Fund.
Got it okay the other thing
forty thousand dollars for
microfilming tell me a little
bit about that.
Since we're hearing about giant
boxes of files taking of the
fourth floor metro.
Mr chair and members of the
committee that but the courts
before us explained but there
file room look like that's
exactly what I file looks like
we have so many files in boxes
because there's no more shelf
shelf space we recently started
at like a trial paperless for
domestics and that has helped
tremendously with not having to
have any of the proposed files
on the shelves
We with the last fiscal we had
some money allocated for sending
it out to get Michael found and
that's just what we're planning
to continue to to make room
because it's you guys can come
to.
Bill Chappell over there also
and you'll see how crazy the
file room is in house expanding
into the old law librarian we
have files and paper everywhere.
I'm what's the planted to tackle
the rest of it then I know
you're able to fund some of that
to vacancy savings what's that
what's the plan for the
remaining need.
So we are waiting for the new
fiscal Mr chairman members of
the committee we are waiting for
after July first to see what
other monies we have to allocate
for continue to send our files
for microphone okay
so it may be something that we
expect to see a special from you
in August.
okay lasting have eleven vacant
positions what are those current
vacant positions and what are
the efforts to try to fill those
right now.
I'm just looking at the term
positions I'm sorry the
positions of the term positions.
Thank you the very quickly and a
lot of these are in progress
when I look at when you look at
the number two are are courting
second of officer to.
Currently it is has been will
extend as an internal Judiciary
only posting extended until
Monday we received two
applicants out of that first
posting and so we extended it at
the judge's request so that is
now going to close on Monday we
start looking at others and Ms
gonna skip around here we have a
court manager three we're
currently also at the end of
recruitment there and we have
fourteen applications interviews
will begin quickly we're and
hopping around I apologize for
that we also have the a program
director for the.
Treatment courts that is also
closed we have eight eight
applicants for that position and
we have a domestic violence
hearing officers or TV
commissioner is also currently
being advertised.
Last check we had seven
applicants has not closed yet
but will close this week I would
get those selections done
quickly as far as the others
they are in progress is for
recruitment but I can't give you
any closing dates on those right
now what are those remaining
that covers four of the eleven
positions what are the other
seven positions that are
currently vacant.
Mr chair judge at the we have a
financial specialist position
that speak and we have an
interview scheduled for that
this month on the twentieth we
have a certified court monitor
position that they can't we have
that currently posted to the
application for we have to
extend that.
We also have study of the
security position that we just
received for this fiscal year
we're looking to get that go.
And then we have.
We have to surveillance officer
positions are vacant look we
have applications in their
scheduling interviews okay.
And then we have a few days to
positions that are vacant that
they're about to make an offer
of land and the post in the
other right it sounds like you
guys have been doing a lot to
actively recruit also a lot of
high level positions in your
court that had been vacant so I
imagine that has some impact on
your vacancy savings to but I'm
glad to hear that you're
working hard to get this filled
that may reflect on my
presentation but yes.
It doesn't so good job
okay and so I just I wanted to I
was asking about that I wanted
to see if there's any
duplication any requests or if
there were any kind of lingering
vacant positions that could be
used
through judicial specialist
program I'm not hearing any so
that satisfies my questions
thank you very much.
Spares include our you thank you
Mr chair Senator quick follow up
to to get this question just for
my own and learning about your
court a little bit.
It's in I agree with Mister car
that I think with the size of
your court considering the size
record three and a half percent
very much request
so I heard you say you are
recruiting for a
Program coordinator for your
treatment courts and that and
again this is a seventy two
hundred dollar request so it's
not very large but it says that
your wonder request admin
assistant to and to project
coordinator program coordinator
for your treatment courts and
you have multiple program
coordinators that manage your
your different specialty courts
are just one or just
A little more specific on that
for me Mr chair members of the
committee for the the drug court
we do have family treatment
court veterans treatment court
and.
Given out at quite so we have
one program manager for that but
for the different courts they
have administrative assistants
or what we're hoping to have a
program coordinator so program
manager and also a program
coordinator.
Is that correct yes yes okay.
Thank you for internet question
just wanted to thank you.
To our civil the morning
morning.
A couple of questions I'm sorry
if if was mentioned before and I
just I didn't hear it so there's
two request for
one is for judicial specialist
to and a judicial specialist
lead worker that are both
unfunded are these vacant
positions.
Mr chair and the state that they
are currently vacant positions
vacant okay have have they been
vacant for about how long.
Probably since we consolidated
the magistrate courts about
three years okay.
And then on the DVD commissioner
contract what's the current
amount of the contract.
I believe sixty three up pardon
me Mr chair of math with.
We have sixty three five hundred
is the current contract Matt.
I
to increase that to ninety five
nine from a from under yes.
Wondering how much what the
difference would be to.
Fire.
Person that the contracts
already a hundred.
Have you guys thought about
this.
Sting a person an FTP.
I certainly didn't.
Southwark Mr chair and stuff
right we did discuss hiring
creating an FTE but we decide.
and then on the reversion it
says ten thousand from the
supplemental funding that that
you're here is district had
received was there any General
Fund reversion estimates.
Mr Chairman support and right
now we're just projecting to
revert to.
Since.
And and that's those are all the
questions I have thank you.
The question is a question about
the
The chance to for the patrol
Services program I definitely
want you to succeed and I'm
wondering if it's possible to
request they can have to do is
just ask for the funding that
sounds like you're trying to
recruit everybody into vacancies
that is true I have Mr chair and
Mr Bevin that is true
We're we're trying to recruit
everyone we can having some
difficulties is is you've seen
special for the higher level
positions so we're looking at
expansion requests there
were four requested additional
requests which carry modest
amounts of focus nine seven.
Senator chance that you can
manage that within your
probation given that that we
have one question.
They
are.
But you know it's in the this
probably probably dollars in the
PSC budget
some of that.
Of those who think you can do
that Madam chair right now and
carry for fiscal year twenty
four
On the guess what I'd like to.
That's possible because the in
terms of being able to keep
these people I would think that
doing it immediately and trying
to figure out a little in the
seven thousand dollar cost would
probably be more successful in
town them Hey happen if we can
get more money next year some.
And I agree with it Mister chair
Mister seven I agree with you I
think if we could somehow work
that out but I would course act
as the sole very she knows the
numbers but that is actually a
good approach these individuals
are vital to us and.
The deal with the drug court
clients.
They're also they have
additional duties and I I want
to to support this they have
additional duties of needing
them and and fulfilling that
promise to them is something
that should be done quickly and
I agree with you.
The other day I had.
An attorney who was not.
Doing well in our court into
courtrooms and I was someone
down there and I was accompanied
by one of our surveillance
officers and I ask for a
portable breath tester and I ask
them to come with me and sure
enough it was an appropriate
request and.
We use them each and every day
in our courtroom I could have
says locator Picacho Avenue and
for those of you that know
Pikachu Avenue it is truly a
very functional drug operation
street and we're we're on it.
When people come into court they
don't want to miss but they're
going to come in and they're
impaired and they're not enough
in there just really we have a
lot of problems in our
courtrooms when we called the
surveillance officers they are
there on our call and they're
administering you representative
they're doing exactly what we
need to proceed forward if we
need to revoke conditions of
release and I agree this is the
vital and pushing it forward
would be a good thing Sir that's
my approach five twelve million
dollars to spend on personal how
do these things right now and
project manager production
structure here for looking at a
record number just you're gonna
have a vacation somewhere all
that I've heard of all that they
can position for some person out
don't know yet they can.
The risk losing the people that
are vital to my operation and I
want to recognize in the in the
fashion trying to do I the
committee increase in.
I would urge you to consider
that it's also to the challenges
are completed for the finance
committees especially with I I
know these are important numbers
to the court but they're really
modest numbers for those folks
and they're just the same
question I asked but they're
already got the answer in their
head that you can manage the
surface is really important you
have done this already because.
Doesn't help you hope to do this
in July of next year so.
And we can consider.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman.
Mexico in the questions you
mentioned we're gonna have a
okay do you want to go okay you
mentioned that you were at an
active recruitment for I think
to surveillance officer
positions.
So are you gonna come back in FY
twenty six and ask Terry losses
to court probation officers one
each
should they have been posted as
quick probation officer wants to
begin with.
Mr Chairman Sakkari
we what type of surveillance
officers right now we would have
to evaluate our budget to see
what.
I.
Okay and.
So in the she's request for CBI
the minor Center nine thousand
replace one of the few farming.
Hundred thousand that is
dedicated to
scholarships I see the third
requesting a hundred thousand I
can guarantee that a fiscal
twenty I still have a bonded
funds for those kind of things
our intention is to get there
But I I just want to keep the
committee to be we're remember
that assuming we get a refund
for the replacement of the
funding which I feel kind of
half of the hundred thousand
there for that purpose offices
doesn't all go to the third
district but it is out there and
I'm a believe me I I know we've
got maybe another one requests
at least one of the core which
requested those funds for most
courts many courts have taken
advantage of the opportunity to
enroll but they're absorbing the
cost because again pretty modest
So I would I would encourage you
to consider.
Observing those.
Costs and that the size of the
need to have another errors
which again there are modest
it's not a huge budget budget
increase but I'm just thinking
about will appear when the
person.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
thank you Sir.
Okay I have a couple questions
how much staff is an Anthony.
Mr chair and members of the
committee there's a judge
of the worker and three clerks
with the leave workers out of
bus crucis because but because
the supervisors on maternity
leave the lead worker goes and
covers those three quicks so the
there's a supervisor and three
clerks are you asking for a lead
worker.
For the for the for the Los
crucis my district was.
Since last Christmas.
The the not not a not a question
but just a comment I I really
love what you're doing it with
your training on like fraud and
for and and then just the
different things that are close
to I think it's really important
and I think that when you look
at that they can seize you know
some of the sometimes people are
dissatisfied because they're
overworked that's for now
sometimes you're dissatisfied
because they don't know their
job and they feel like thank no
one's teaching or training them
and and so I love that you're
looking at that and I I would
encourage all the districts to
do to do that it's just a really
a good just H. R. policy to look
at developing your your folks
and then you said something
really key to which was a gives
them a potential to move into
other areas so our our clinics
can be a little bit stagnant
sometimes just you know we
waiting for supervisory from the
worker but they get some of
those other soft skills and
financial management or even
hard skills and those types of
things I I think it really
creates paths for them
throughout the judiciary and
even and even and opportunities
for the entities to hire folks
with then instead of having to
advertise a little long lead
time for hiring processes those
tactics I I just thank you thank
you for that approach and I
think that's that's something
that all the the higher
judiciary look at Mr chair
members of the committee.
That is one thing that we've
noticed is the people that we
are bringing in we're recruiting
and they're bringing in their
coming in have those aspirations
and it is not limited to the
clerk's office but they aspire
to be something else and that's
where we got the idea to say
well let's just developed them
even further so that when we
need someone in finance and the
solemn varies looking there are
select individuals within our
group to say let's move on a.
And I appreciate that coming
very much
thank you provided because your
question train.
Thousand include tuition motion
it one individual.
Exactly.
University.
Yes.
The proposal okay thanks thank
you very much thank you for your
presentation the seven include
one final word and because
force.
I got over my nervousness with
that.
Again I think you.
For putting up with me
I started with the fact that I
I'm I was not this is a very
nervous aspect but I thank you
very much for free during me and
allowing me to speak and most of
all I think my two partners here
for presented the information
that I was not only open aware
of but I'm learning and I thank
you for your patience I
appreciate your please for
please please consider approve
our request.
Thank you thank you.
Move on to the eleventh.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Are we still morning.
Somewhere somewhere in this yes.
It does doesn't it.
My name is Denise rebel and I am
the CEO of the eleventh judicial
district magistrate court with
me today.
Is Roberta where to Joan she is
our CFO and John water on our W.
C. L. I'd like to first say
thank you as with everyone how
much we appreciate the process
that we go through in this in
this now new budgeting world has
a new CEO I find it keeps me
very focused and also makes it
very easy for me to present to
you.
Our needs and a very quarterly
and an just an orderly way so
when I when I said when I sat in
this seat last year my very
first time I made three
commitments to this committee
I committed to fill a vacant
positions I committed to ending
the practice of depending on our
vacancy savings to manage our
budget and the along with that I
committed to coming to you in a
phased approach.
Asking for funding to
adequately staff our operations
and and run our port
efficiently.
I'm pleased to say for the first
commitment at that as we sit
here today are vacancy rate is
at five point three percent I
know that's not what what you
can find a understand as we sit
here today I have to say that
filling vacancies was a lot
harder than I thought it would
be as you hear from many of us
and I know that you've
experienced in your districts as
well.
Recruiting is becoming harder
and harder it's taking longer
and longer but we worked long
and hard to do it and the goal
now is to keep that vacancy rate
in single digits that's my goal.
If we could stay between two and
five percent I think that would
be appropriate for a quarter
sized I'm just right now trying
to keep set at single digits
when I also took this job I I
didn't realize this until I took
the job there's a double it's a
it's a double edged swords about
filling vacancies if you can't
keep people in the seats you'll
never lower your vacancy rate it
seems like a very easy you know
the kind of a moment but it was
for me when I took this the CEO
position our turnover rate was
fifty one percent we will never
get out of double digits if we
believe like that so we worked
very hard in a three pronged
approach to our the lower that
turnover rate we've managed to
lower its now work for covering
about twenty twenty one percent
that's still not good enough but
I think with.
I think with some of the the the
requests that we have in front
of you we are going to be able
to address this.
Exit from our our our district
and come out of a much stronger
and and healthier
work environment
I think with that I and I'm
hoping you're going to see my
plans as we go forward in your
questions of life by phased
approach and I think with that I
will stand for questions thank
you and we'll begin questioning
with doctors Duffy please.
Good morning.
Right
But I wanted to do is a little
bit cleanup on the justification
that you submitted yes first is
for the committee members
And I want clarification from
you in this under the two
hundred person category
expansion requests.
you have what is labeled as to
drug court to adult drug court
positions I believe the second
of those should be the young
adult court position it because
it looks like you're asking for
two young adult court positions
all right so the second to last
item on that list should read
young adult court for San Juan.
All right just wanted to make
sure I was reading your request
correctly second you I believe
we're going to provide us with
that the list of priorities
prioritization for these
requests yes okay go for it.
So just at the very top and go
down the list as well as some
numbers into the columns you
might just give you the the
priority numbers first and I can
actually read we do this for you
guys so you can see all the ones
together all the Jews together
and all the threes after our
testimony if that will help you
in your deliberations let me
know what you want but for right
now is the tourism is presented
in that and go with it okay the
notes and things like that all
right so section a budget
request two hundred person
category existing position
funding requests.
Two three packs they're six all
right but I've I've only done
one two and three priorities the
first one is a three the second
is a one thirty to two
housekeeping if you will remove.
The human resources supervisor
we just recently lost our human
resources supervisor to AOC.
So I'm not going to need those
funds in FY twenty five so we
can remove that from our.
Yes
the bail supervisor is a number
two and of course the mandatory
rate increases obviously number
one thank you for expansion with
us thank you requests
the I. T. specialist and the
financial specialist as the
first one you Mr number once we
asked for those last year you
were kind enough to approve them
we did not survive the
legislative session some coming
back to ask for those again they
are still needed
the program manager of which I
can talk to what.
That is going to entail and
later if you want me to that's
number three.
Of course services specialist.
For bailiff Services and San
Juan county is number two.
Of the judicial specialist
senior is a number three you go
down to a pretrial services
officer to for someone pre trial
services that's a one
administrative assistant for
adult drug court in San Juan
county is a two the court
probation officer for adult drug
court is a one and then the
final one is a court probation
officer to young adult court is
number three the brand new
program for us.
Right when you look at the two
hundred.
Category conversion terms of her
I'm very anxious I I I know we
tried to to get these converted
last year we were quite
successful going through the
legislative process but I would
ask that we try again
and I have that full time.
Excuse me we have a the term
position.
The the financial specialists is
the one where probation officers
as to we'll talk about how those
tied together a bath and excuse
me the.
Financial specials one
corporation officers one and the
judicial.
Specialist senior that halftime
is a two.
Right and I promise my
commitment in an easier we we
were a little bit chagrined when
we also we selling this that.
All right let's dive right in
you anticipated some of my
questions last year during the
budget committee presentation at
the end of all of it the NMSC
approved six expansion positions
for your court that sounds like
two of those didn't survive the
legislation would happen to the
other for fill them okay so you
did receive the FTE in the
funding for two days to
positions into magistrate court
service specialists all right
thank you
congratulations Mr chair my
apologies yes if yes that's
correct thank you.
Yes
okay so I am congratulations on
reducing your vacancy rate at
the time of submission it looks
like you had ten vacancies in
your permanent positions what do
you have now I I including the
human resources supervisor at Mr
chair to check the what are the
other four vacant positions.
To perms excuse me the two turns
I'm I'm looking only at your
permanent vacancy permanent
vacancy positions.
I'm sorry but I have it on my
phone is going to fester for to
speak soon thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee the positions we
have vacant the prepositions we
have bacon are the financial
specialist a judicial specialist
senior at our don't district
location a judicial specialist
to at are just took District
Court a judicial specialist to
enter aspect magistrate court
and a judicial specialist to at
our Farmington magistrate court.
Okay.
Okay I'm.
I'm cert with I'm just going to
go in the order that they're
presented in your.
in your front front list here
starting with the money that
you're seeking
of.
Sorry before we get there in the
two hundred category your court
moved out
Quite a bit it for out of the
two hundred category it said
fifty thousand dollars is
transferred to the contractual
services category to state pay
for judicial special services
can you tell us more about what
that was Mr contract issues
working for you.
That that was go ahead yeah.
I'm touched a fee that was we
have a a contracted judicial
specialist service provider for
our Astec magistrate court and
on their contract ended on June
thirtieth and we're not we
didn't renew with us in this
year and we needed that we
needed extra support because of
the staffing being short
staffed.
And Mr chair judge that he and I
can speak even further to that
that was one of the the judicial
specialists that was why we were
seeking one of the reasons why
we were seeking one of the
judicial special positions last
year was because we wanted to in
that contract right and you
received the FTE in the funding
to make that a permanent
position within your
organization chair that secondly
the wonderful okay thank you I
would I was wondering about that
Okay for the increases you are
requesting a little over ten
thousand dollars for your W.
court CEO when we classify your
position from a CO two to a CO
three is that correct.
Miss Mister chair yes yes that
is correct okay without any
additional expansion of FTEs
how how many you records gonna
have some employees if we don't
have I'm sorry how many
employees will that employee
supervise.
All of all four of
Mr chair just of him so I don't
have that number right off the
top of my head I will tell you
this though we have a hundred
and forty one now we split John
and I split the
Supervision so it's it's about
half and half right now.
That's a long way of asking does
this employee meet the criteria
for the re classification into
the higher level position.
Mr chair judge of yes yes thank
you to introduce another.
Yes yes.
In in Mr chair just if it let
them speak to this for a moment
if you will in this may be my
nineteen coming in in the in the
new CEO but at some point at the
right after the consolidation
there was a discussion among the
CEOs about how to decide.
At some some methodology of how
to decide if CEOs would stay one
twos or could there be threes
because historically a CEO three
was only for the second for
metro our districts was one of
those that met the criteria and
the CEO position if two or three
what we haven't done and I don't
I I can't speak for any of the
other districts I can only speak
for our district but we didn't
do what was then take that look
that rationale and apply it to
our our hiring administrative if
of positions like R. W. like our
CFO and like our HR industry so
my goal and you see it might be
a charge left out of this
because I don't quite know who
we're gonna recruit I don't know
what their qualifications will
be at this point but part of my
goal is to to raise those
positions to a level where I
think they should be and they
have just been left of all
My my fault line just for
clarification on this when I
look at the criteria is for the
CEO three preserve the W. CO
three position it listed as a
job requirement that their
supervisor three hundred
employees and so that would seem
to only apply to metro and the
second but it sounds like there
is an exception for your
districts and putting the cart
before Mr chair judge Duffy I
think I'm putting the cart
before the hard hard before the
horse but I'd like you to run
with me on it we're gonna be
going to a you see in requesting
an exception for both of these
positions because right now the
the way that the
the way that the our job
descriptions are written they're
both for metro and second only
and so I would like to to start
that conversation and and be the
the the first one to ask AOC to
to re look at those positions as
we are going out you know
further out from measurements I
think you're anticipating some
of my questions here I was I was
wondering if you had consulted
with AOC and this and I know
that this is not necessarily
budget committee matter but if
you're asking us to fund a
position I want to make sure the
employees will be able to.
Move into the position they're
asking us to fund and it sounds
like as we sit here today that's
not possible Mr chair in just a
few I I you're exactly correct I
should have consulted with AOC
before I made this request what
I might do with it though and
stat can you make it as a
special.
I.
I hate to wait another year if
we have to if we are successful
and I have to wait another year
but I understand your concern is
there any reason why these races
couldn't be implemented within
the current compilatio for these
positions I think we can afford
to do it yes not afford to do it
but if there's room within the
confirmation for these these
raises yes okay so there's
another way to do it there's
another way to do it without the
requests okay.
Yes.
Again as with the previous
quarter
These positions are critical
amounts are modest and it's
forty four thousand dollars it's
less than ten percent of what
you have to hundreds.
I don't know why you're trying
to continually hoping will be
classified do this starting next
year from now.
Why would you move these issues
now by either submitted to S. C.
request K. request with an
exception of course to get the
position you want like in this
case for the DCO three four as a
as an out of cycle request
saying look
you know we can just I based on
our secretary have one in here
already at six thousand dollars.
I don't know why you're.
Doing this in a recurring budget
question will she even started
till next July when it appears
you have capacity to do these
and now.
Within your funding your ability
to fund the need to say you
could have.
I don't know why we're doing
now.
If you if you have the funding
and you can live with it it it I
would just do it because I would
rather do it now and watch my
funding to make sure I can meet
all the other this is my two
hundred job here but it looks
like we sure could do that with
these all these requests
One two three the four ninety
dropped a little in Mr chair Mr
captain I appreciate the
direction and I'm more than
willing to do it that way again
this I am still learning so I
appreciate the budget committees
Direction.
I can certainly do that this
fiscal year but will not be
asking in twenty five for
recurring funds for it so I'm
not finding the money in my
budget each year.
You have the money in your
budget now.
I'm gonna find room in my budget
for the money now.
It's not a budget committees
advise it's my that's fine I
appreciate your
patience I don't know what the
budget committee will do in the
talk about this tomorrow but
they've you know if I'm sure if
the decision is no we don't
support this week these requests
will come with a copy of from
the committee saying we believe
you should more.
The better achieve these goals
through something like just just
request them now Mr chair to all
the committee members I
appreciate the direction and I'm
comfortable with that.
December what.
Anyway I have others that I
would I would press more than I
would do this because I think
this is sounds to me it's very
flexible and it's very doable
and other paths.
Back to the topic please start a
truck to the church I appreciate
that I mean some of this is is
AOC AOC jurisdiction so I
appreciate the.
The comments I'm gonna move on
from the from those requests
because it sounds like you and
just you need to be in
conversation about hi gonna move
forward on those
in terms of the expansion
requests.
The.
So the I. T. and it's just a
renewal from last year's
Last year's requests which the
budget committee approved yes
yes yes that's correct I'm
wondering only on this position
from last year to this year is
just impacted at all by the
expansion to services the need
for this position.
Mr chair a judge Duffy notice
not can you speak to that well
when they're talking about
expansion of services with you
mean.
Person.
We have.
Not received information that
they are going to be adding
person to our area.
So as far as I sit here right
now I know that I have to.
I. T. specialists who cover six
buildings.
Hundred thirty six miles apart.
We have a danger even letting
one of them go on vacation or
take time off because if
something happens in one of the
Courts it's a two hour concert
how fast you drive but it's at
least a two hour it's eight two
hour drive to get physically if
you can't fix it remotely.
so I am not aware that it is
going to affect our district at
all.
Turning to your financial
specialist request it looks like
you're asking for one additional
plus the conversion of a term to
Perm is that correct so this
would be an additional two on
staff in your court last year's
justification had requested one
financial specialist position it
was approved by the budget
committee I look at your numbers
to support the justification is
here and it actually looks like
the work load information the
presented is less this year than
it was last year so I'm
wondering what supports to
positions this year instead of
the one that you requested last
year and I'm gonna pass this to
reverted because she is the
person that manages the
Activision I can speak to it
much better than I can.
judge Duffy one of the things
with the the information that
was provided the stats regarding
our financial activity is last
year it was taken later in the
fiscal year it wasn't taken
assume I'm we wouldn't submit
our budget as early as we did
this year so that's one of the
timing differences and are
saying this year's request
doesn't capture rate for the
whole year got it thank you I'm
sorry I didn't mean to cut you
off I just wanna make sure I was
understanding what you're saying
and it doesn't captured not and
we've we've we continue to see
growth in our department it's
I've had the same number of
employees since two thousand six
we consolidated and I thought
one position would be enough but
I think we have a need for two
and it's.
It's just there's been
tremendous growth we have so
many like contracts so many ammo
use that we're having to do
reimbursement for and like the
trend the number of transactions
were processing like purchase
orders vouchers operating
transfers have all have all gone
up as well as our deposits with
the POS
being implemented in our
district the term position that
you have for your district is
that currently filled or has it
been filled at all during the
past year it has not been okay
so you've been without the
assistance of that also okay.
Also if if this were approved
You have space for them and
where would they go Mr chair
just a few that's a great
question
The at the short answer is yes
we have worked with furniture
company to re.
Design the finance department so
that will
give us the space for the
employees that we see thank you.
Turning to the program manager
position for the self
represented litigants I'm
wondering if this is replacing
the position you're seeking to
re class is the program
coordinator or is this the
creation of a second sort of
program manager position in your
court Mr chair judge that the it
is the creation of a new
position
it is it is.
As I said it's a it's a priority
three I think we have other
priorities that and you've got
to make a decision.
But I have to tell you this we
are large enough now that we are
seeing we're seeing let me
explain my thought process to
this and I'm not a fan of of a
Clerk's office saying to me oh
we're so busy and we need more
people we have to support that
with data what I have family
have one of our point Farmington
District Court which is for
their family court
the clerks they've been asking
for another position for some
time and I've denied it when I
started looking at what they do.
They also handle of workload
over and above a chance to
they're managing our mediation
program they're managing our
segment facilitation program and
then they're also managing pro
saying she's is they come
through I think what I would I
still think about it but I would
like to do is peel those.
Duties off of them and let them
the J. S. twos and create the
position of the program manager
we are certainly large enough to
have a program manager who can
not only handle those duties but
there's a whole list and that
justification as well including
our our legal things we do to
the affairs a year those are
handled by the clerk's office
are spreading project handled by
the clerk's office there's so
many things that that we put on
our clerks that I I really would
like to get to the point where
they can really just BJS tapes
so that was the thought process
the whole thought process behind
the program manager and I
started I started my career in
the point as a program manager
for self represented litigant
Division in the in the third
judicial district I can I can
sit here and tell you right now
that that position I will be
coming back to you for for
support staff I believe that we
have the the.
I
believe that we have the need
for it and I think our clerk's
office has the need for it as
well.
Your bailiff position the quick
service specialist.
For San Juan County that is
correct last year you had asked
for one bailiff for two judges
how are you doing we're doing
very well try that goal we're
doing very well with that what I
would like to do with this one
is year old you will see that I
wanted to re classifying
I have a there's one that I
don't want you to to to to I
would ask that you consider very
seriously and not deny the
classification of the position
from a program project
coordinator I want to request
that they have to pay a program
manager that program manager
will handle
they'll handle court security
they will handle the bailiffs
Division date which are the
we're moving our bailiffs into
classifying them now as the the
specialists
that way they can do more they
also handle our vehicles they
can only facilities and into
loss prevention and control was
circle back to the request for
the bailiff position.
If I move if I if I move excuse
me Mr chair judge Duffy.
If I reclassify the project
coordinator who does Bailey
thing now to a program to
program manager to manage all
the things that he's doing now
and Bela thing.
I would like to replace him with
the full time bagel.
How much if you were able to
request the current will you
still be providing Bayliss
Services and an emergency Mr
chair Jessica yes an emergency
people are.
Regis to senior position to have
time position request was last
time that was filled.
I've been with the eleven for
nine years as far as now because
it was attorneys.
Diane Diane Mr chair judge
Duffy.
Probably seven years ago.
Is yes.
I would have to look to give you
an accurate and accurate
response but I can tell you it
is not until for the last five
years at least.
I want to go I'm gonna skip the
admin assistant to position and
talk about that the court
probation officer to positions
Thanks for these last three
requests that are here you have
one admin assistant to one court
probation officer to and another
court probation officer to both
of the corporation I just
earlier but then when we were
going through your list I heard
something different I would just
want to make sure one of the
core probation officer to this
is for I'm sorry both of those
are for young adult court.
Every my incorrect about that Mr
chair just a family spoke one is
for adult drug court in San Juan
okay one is for young adult
court in San Juan.
Because the justification the
legislative says for to court
probation officer to use for
young adult court.
Did you receive the amended I
didn't so this is why I'm
confused.
This could be on me I just want
to know what.
That could be any so the
You are correct that was my
mistake.
The justification should be for
one in adult court and one in
young adult for me.
So it's correct as listed on
this thing.
The summary sheet Mr chair yes
if yes okay
If
sorry I have a lot of questions
for you your request with the
slide percentage not very big
but we've got a lot of people
here and so I wanted to
I understand a little bit more
about what you were asking for
the those where probation
officer to positions for the
young adult court
that program is just starting
now is that correct.
Mr chair just at the that is
correct okay so how are you
calculating the need for
additional people if we haven't
even started the program in.
Mr chair just a few I'm happy
and I'm glad you asked that
question we ran numbers so we
ran numbers out of Odyssey and I
need to give a shout out to the
data exchange because this is
how we found the numbers because
it's not something you can pull
out of Odyssey we ran.
For the last fiscal year and the
this fiscal third loss I'm sorry
calendar years twenty two and
calendar year twenty three
January through may.
So in
We we ran the number of.
Cases that had felony charges
the defendant was between
eighteen and twenty four.
And the
the numbers for.
FY twenty three through may or
at four hundred in two cases.
So I know that we have in the
and I know that when we we look
at starting this type of court
are normal.
caseload for probation officer
will be anywhere between thirty
five and fifty five I don't know
where this gonna land yet this
is very new program for us.
So it let me back up so you can
understand the whole picture and
then money doing this the way I
am we have we have a Juve we had
a juvenile drug court.
We lost the.
Treatment provider for it and
we're not able to.
To find somebody that wanted to
treat the juveniles.
So I have I have three positions
under the juvenile drug court
program manager at PO excuse me
two PM.
What I want to do is take one of
those PO's and move them to
adult drug court so that they
can do is take some of the load
off of our drug court.
One take the program manager and
that one PO and start the adult
the young adult court I believe
we have the numbers to support
in a year bringing on another
probation officer to and I
think.
Mr chair and a check out I'll
defer to already on on the
because I know that you have
more experience in these than I
do that that was the thought
process that we came to the
table with.
sorry to repeat that looking at
something okay that's what it
was about it was about problem
solving courts just that it can
be in the meditations of of I
don't want to lose employees and
we have a true need for young
adult court John is responsible
for that young adult or you
might want to speak to you just
had the first meeting we already
have a.
A very strong
staffing group together it's
it's actually the same people
that were doing juveniles we're
just moving it to young adults
so.
That's why I'm asking for this
position and twenty five because
I think I can I can make due in
twenty four with what I have.
This year you have a quorum
provisional so to serve that
court.
You want a second yes because
the numbers are are already
showing Justin through may
there's four hundred and two
felony cases in which the
defendants are eighteen to
twenty four that's just from
January to may I know we're
gonna have enough for to
probation officer one of my
questions on the new the young
adult court is will they be
taking any of the population is
currently served by your adult
court and moving into your young
adult court program.
has adult court would be what
eighteen enough.
I I mask I don't I don't know
what excuse me Mr chair yes I
think yes Mr chair hi Mr capital
researcher judge Duffy then the.
Given that the program is so
new.
You have Townsend Here good
justification but we don't know
here out often what a court
would do particularly in the
tree record areas state gives a
special so we can put a second
person here will justify that by
showing you they handle the
caseload appropriate to the new
position and then in your next
budget talking state so let's
make this permanent because we
need to keep this person you
know because I'm not it would be
surprising if the funders look
at it is fairly contingent
despite confidence in your you
know you're like likelihood that
it'll need more resources and
it's easier to say let's funded
now and see how I do come back
pictures show service no need to
be permanent Mr chair Michelle
Lujan special you
just.
I I have a talk with Mr Mitchell
but this from sure he would tell
me let.
Given all the resources they
need because certainly want to
support your young adult Mr
chair members the committee I've
this is my if that is more
comfortable to you I'm happy to
do it that way I I have no doubt
we're going to need the position
but if we need to go home to you
with a different way of doing it
I'm happy to do that.
It does of the the to to
services and maybe just maybe
try to come in on that real
quick absolutely so I I hear
what Mr Paypen suggested and had
I don't want to necessarily to
differ is is the reason is my
understanding is you're quarters
open you have those numbers and
so theoretically you're gonna
come.
You know in in January February
and say look we we in fact can't
even we can't even ask the
people because we only have one
probation officer we have to
stop at fifteen so you may have
that support because the
programs already established
coming in now if that purpose
not gonna start till March of
next year or something like that
exactly what I think you are
from Mr Papen but you may have
that anecdotal evidentiary for
your young you're young adult
drug court and then to answer
the question it would take some
people from the adult drug court
because sometimes those people
already in the adult drug court
in that age group Mr chair just
have as I appreciate that
support your very right when you
think about it and we already
are are busting at the seams in
our drug court treatment course
so I'm I'm also trying to get
more more bodies in those seats
that's one of our our issues
that we have an employee
retention is overwork so you're
right if I I don't stand fast
which is what I hear you saying
and ask for this funding I have
no doubt that this this this
young adult part is going to
survive and survive while we've
we've already had our first
meeting it's not going to start
in March it will be starting now
Mr chair wanted to just ask the
procedural matter and don't
course had to break here at noon
might I still have some more
questions for this entity I
don't know if you want to pause
and allow the other member it to
your questioning and then we can
see what's what's out that's
another members the committee
let's just let's wrap up your
questions with us so that I will
try to be brief
I will a new skip some of these
here and I'm just going to go to
three hundred category you
wanted a special master for
court programs how many special
how many hearing officers to
have on staff
Mr chair just a few we have one
hearing officer can lose docket
is CCD CCD thank you.
How many cases
in this this is a half time
position if I'm understand the
fifty five K. is not a full time
position.
Mr chair just at the that's
correct.
How many cases with this
person's going.
Mr chair just seventy the
special master for purpose is
going to it conduct the the.
Adult the adult drug court adult
treatment court and will also be
Conducting San Juan county's D.
W. I. court for a short period
of time until the judge that
would like to take that over has
been on the bench long enough
that he feels comfortable to
take it they're not hearing
cases but they are
the the acting judge and acting
special master excuse me for
adult drug court adult treatment
court.
Sources personal be doing a
connection problem so there's
three judges of the criminal
cases that have the referrals
into the specialty court for
drug treatment court.
Think it's about a hundred and
twenty some odd people.
So we have those point on
Wednesday and Thursday we
except the last week of the
month for the fourth week of
others we have set up so there's
been a lot of times recently
with like my time I used to be
the filling for the other two
the coming to budget hearing to
those type of.
I I'm not there as much as I
could be so we've had a lot of
instances of last really two
years we're of course not held
because no judge is available.
Know the words to other judges I
can't do a jury trial whether to
this position is to come in and
make sure that we have weekly
contact with those clients in
those two drug courts when you
have a break in contact from the
forty fifth.
You see different things
happening.
And Mr chair judge Duffy and and
just greatly appreciate that
also it's consistency for the
participants if they see
different people or don't have
support we also see the failure
rate price.
Mr chair I think those are my
questions and thank you very
much.
All the committee members to
have was the questions.
If you just a real quick one
okay let's try to get to the to
the eleven some of the stuff we
have a system what is my
questions my question is do you
cover the cost of on my list.
Budgets have is in the so the
the special master and I just
want understand I guess the the
logistics of it someone you'll
contract out in an attorney
theoretically Mr chair the shop
is yes okay and and the
importance of that I'm just
wondering because.
Presiding over treatment courts
you know there's various due
process rights that include
sometimes sanctions of
incarceration and otherwise.
I don't know if this is done
around the state or otherwise
three special masters make it is
I made maybe the second could
address that but I is there an
authority for an outside person
to make those type of decisions
or would it have to be perhaps
approved by a judge earlier some
other judge if there were there
were those recommendations to
the special master Mr chair yes
I was just to give you a peace
of mind we worked that the
answer is yes there is we worked
through this type of position
carefully with AOC so that we
can make sure it the special
master has been used in the past
in other districts I don't know
that it's been
I can't speak to if they went
through a C. to make sure that
this was something that we were
comfortable with building with
the special I know that we have
special master statute that
I'm comfortable that we if we
have really so staff between our
staff attorneys and Selena and
judge early the use of this
position appropriately there's
likely an order under rule one
dash fifty three or something
appointing the special master
gradually doing it as a cop the
term special masters more
confusing is helpful it's not
truly a special master special
contract R. stature doesn't come
into play
three with the new
If you were aware that I am sure
that we do these things is very
seldom immediate sanction for
the incarceration for example
it's that that's like the last
thing you want to do.
So there on a lot of those
instances if something came up
like that a judge.
Your judicial officer would have
to sign off on it that's these
our experience defense so for
that type of section.
Good afternoon now.
I had a quick question on
reversion so years of projecting
as zero general fund reversion.
And in the FY twenty two on it
there was a reversion of fifty
seven thousand from revenue what
kind of revenue and and what are
the limitations on using that
revenue and Mr chair is at
temple gonna laugh Mr for you
excuse me I'm gonna love
reverted to speak to that.
Mister chair Mister player I
think we did not have a
reversion last year it says in
your audit report that you had
Revenue collected in excess of
expenses fifty seven seven
thousand what year sorry.
My.
We got that part.
Refer to rivers I don't think so
I'm hungry.
you.
My full.
And your term to perform
These are all vacant right now
there.
The term Department quest
conversion of the financial
specialist they're all vacant Mr
chair yes Mr okay so there's
there's no current funding
sources what what was the
original funding source how they
created the Mr chair mystified
at the original the two for the
two point are full to the the
two full positions were created
through the CSE the contract.
Many years ago is what I was
told but before my time with the
eleventh but were never fail
they don't funded no they do not
excuse me Mister chair Mister
for you know the the contract
about from the C. CD that's one
of the reasons why they were
never failed is because the
contract amount wouldn't fund.
That's on thank you.
Questions may make a comment
please sorry just a quick one
and I meant to mention this
earlier just it is part of our
task here we're supposed to be
providing entities with feedback
on their submissions and what
they can do to make our life
more helpful and then you make
your life more helpful in the
overall goal is to have the most
successful presentations
possible and I wanted to mention
that when reviewing your
submission I found it difficult
to work through all of the
separate memos that were
submitted and I would encourage
your entity to use the form
provided by the budget committee
next year to make our lives
easier because I know that the
memorandums I received were not
in the same order that they were
presented and that could just be
through uploading and then
printing but to solve that
problem use the form please Mr
chair at yes definitely I
appreciate that direction I
could tell you were frustrated I
was gonna ask outside of the
committee and what we could do
better so I appreciate thank you
I agree with that Mr chair thank
you to everybody but thank you
just at the okay I think closing
at with it being that excuse me
Mr chairman to be twelve fifteen
keep it brief and just say thank
you
twelve twelve.
I want to come back at one
fifteen.
So we do have an hour fifteen
