With.
Is.
For.
Yes.
Everybody is a there is a need
for.
The local.
This is.
President.
This presents.
More.
Residents this body.
Mr Kevin Sears present.
Your.
There are.
Your.
Okay everyone's here.
Use that will.
I used to.
But.
Maybe.
Good morning chair I did notice
a timing of having these
meetings coincide with our oral
argument which is interesting I
think smart on your part.
Keep us out of the way that's a
goal
I have a couple comments and I
know you have important business
to get to.
I want to start by thanking you
chair for your good work on this
committee we've acknowledged
many times it needs to be
acknowledged again to keep
everything on track.
Court very much values your
leadership and we appreciate all
the volunteer time this is a
heavy lift of all the things we
have going at the Supreme Court.
for our colleagues in.
Other branches of government we
do not have a huge
administrative operational
administrative operation relies
on the volunteer time of our
judges
whether to rules committee this
and we appreciate your time very
much.
I want to it's as I did last
year because this is a new
process sort of give you our
thoughts
And
We do have oral argument this
week I will be back like your
juries all come back for lunch
and then I'll leave again so but
I will be around because part of
the process is certainly both
what to do and and how we
improve things going forward so
for the committee I would ask
you to you know follow the
guidance set forth in the
strategic plan and the budget
goals of last year it's
important to communicate both
internally to all the districts
and to DFA in LFC that this is
going to be a of a process by
which they can trust that it is
forward looking for looking out
to the horizon this is no longer
an ad hoc here two year process
but this is something in which
based on the the districts
schools and building the
foundation of our judiciary that
we ask for
the money to do that of.
I also ask that to you be fact
finders not as much judges right
so you are very much fact
finding and you're gonna give us
recommendations please
understand I know you do
that these districts he's chief
judges work hard in their
individual districts they are
going to advocate for their
districts
and that we just keep the
inquiry with regard to their.
Goals
Respectful which I know you will
and stick to as I will tell
them.
To the record lastly we need to
follow up on what is working and
what is not so as you keep notes
on the individual districts we
also like to know what trends
you were saying
or what parts of the process are
not working for the committee of
the districts so we can have
feedback to make it better.
Districts that are coming before
you all have a turn around the
face you but
I don't know where the camera
summary camber sensitive.
this is not personal.
Right this is part of our
process in which we understand
you advocate for your courts we
have charges Committee with
looking at your budgets and
asking questions and making
recommendations to us it does
not mean in any regard that the
members of the committee of the
quarter judging with trafficking
for so don't take it personally.
Put yourself in the place of
litigants that appear before you
in the following way.
the short in your opening.
Stick to the record please.
Please try not to bring things
outside of the record.
And I think most importantly
save time for questions.
If the committee is not able to
get to their questions that's
what they're interested just as
you as a judge are interested in
when you take the bench the
questions you out so just
remember that and save time.
Finally to our colleagues at in
the executive and legislative
branches I know DFA in else
you've been kind enough to
attend all these meetings we
hope that this process we know
this process will bring
transparency
and some trust that the of money
you are appropriating to the
judiciary is well spent.
and then the last thing both
with regard to the committee and
the districts this is not the
and.
People think this thirty minutes
is where they win or lose where
you winter loses the rest of the
year.
The rest of time you're back in
your district operating your
district.
That's when we go and find out
whether the money the
legislature has appropriated to
assume the governor signed is
well spent.
For example within the spring
court in the AOC we asked him
for a lot of money for judicial
education.
It is my job the job of the
Chief Justice to give the
legislature feedback on how that
money spent so don't walk out
here with a win or lose.
I want you to walk out and think
okay this is what I'm getting
from my district and now my job
is to go back and execute.
So with that thank you chair for
the time of the to get your
work.
And I'll be around I know to
justice coming this afternoon
and I'll be in and out the next
two days thank you that has to
start thank.
Taking my coffee.
Okay turned over to some
administrative of announcements
Mines are read by the.
Mahrez rocks as leverage on the.
At the so from some
announcements so first image
over to our CFO there are some
handouts and there's an
explanation needed support
please our system.
The.
Morning everybody there's a
several documents back there the
most important ones are these.
Really large ones.
One is.
the summary page roll up
everybody's requests with the
details is a few pages and you
the current one says has a July
tenth to date on it so if you
have anything other than the
July tenth one please costs that
away if it's outdated
There was a request for the
junior bill from twenty four to
be uploaded all of these are
available on the drive up there
to hand out for their well the
junior open twenty four money
spreadsheet is up there the
reversions
is also there.
Agencies going to be requesting
general fund replacement for
fees that were eliminated due to
house bill one thirty nine that
breakdown sheet in there as well
There's also going to be request
for judicial and staff increases
the two spreadsheets where the
amounts are listed are back
there
and then there is Senator
caseload data sheets available
factors well.
members the committee questions
for Mr Stewart those documents
for any other documents.
Karen do you have any of the
districts for us not for us
please.
This reminder that if your
microphones are not on
Californians can not hear you.
Three to four.
Budget committee.
For the budget committee members
I also have.
Printer so if you want to.
And it was.
The questions for care.
Thanks.
Regarding a lunch whenever we
wrap up with us
the budget committee members and
our legislative staff invited
guests and the staff who are
working on that with the
committee we purchased lunch for
them so you would have gotten
Munoz from chosen from the upper
crust I think anyway figure one
of those on your own but the on
your own isn't so bad chairs
will be set up in the HM
downstairs the witness not the
for ground floor what's called
tables and chairs and across the
street for that one over here
our food trucks that all of them
are really excellent if you
don't it's for lunch go for that
I recommend any of the other
ones are good for lunch this
project was over there and
around the capital outdoor
benches sorry consent I'm going
come inside and sit in the in
the rotunda area downstairs so
hopefully I would have time to
have lunch and have to go sit
down somewhere and wait for
service from the three people
that are working that day.
Good luck with that.
Okay and just committee members
just remind everybody do of one
potential conflict this
afternoon I don't think it's
going to be one but the Supreme
Court is scheduled to go on
fifteenth justice Thompson
confirmed on Friday that he
thought that would be a fine
time but just in case this is
your arguments we may have to do
a shift for the streamlined on
that
okay then just to all the
committees before we get started
justice Thompson cover cover
everything that I would like to
also like to extend my my thanks
to everybody a lot of work in a
short period.
trying to to as close out last
year's budget start education
next budget and your this thirty
year projection and ending in
three years is difficult and so
I appreciate the the tough work
that is to do that and still
make all your timelines to get
your your and budget closed out
and also get the initiatives on
time and so I I do appreciate
all all of that and and thank
you in advance for that for the
fourth all the presentations
this morning.
Okay well let's go to get
started consolation Commission.
So a couple years ago
compilation commission was money
to review I did the deep dives
and we had a like at the very
end of the day or something like
that and I I thought that was
kind of cool.
So.
So so last year and again this
year and hopefully going for oil
if you are the first agent as we
get you back your important work
thank you so much they get on.
Yes I'm good morning everybody
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Loretta
Perella I'm the director of the
completion commission and this
is Wendy Lewis our CFO.
the compilation commission is
the official like a publisher
for the state of New Mexico we
have six F. T. E. of five
permanent and one term we
currently have one vacant F. T.
E. that we are in the process of
recruiting for so fingers
crossed we get that done
and then our general fund money
is exclusively allocated for
salaries and benefits I think
that's it we stand for questions
thank you and we'll turn to
committee members beginning with
a touch more.
Thank you Mr chair
so just to summarize the you're
asking for a basically a flat
budget and you're seeking to
fill one vacancy that's correct
and for my education what is
that they can see what's that
person do that will be a program
project coordinator so we have
to finance we have the director
who on the compiler and so on
the head of the production team
so the other two FTE currently
that we have do all the
production work we do all the
law's Department was the
opinions the admin code and so
that final person will will be
doing the same thing in the
production team that were around
at our staff will finally be
fully staffed one four thank you
very much miss rose thank you Mr
chair those my questions real
questions from members of the
committee.
I have no questions.
Thank you appreciate it thank
you so much to thank you
everyone for your time.
They are the time is two
minutes.
A second.
Mr chair if I can get suggested
AOC offered a flat budget it
might be two minutes.
Thank you.
The chairman members of the
committee I'm gonna start with a
very brief hold overview of a
cease budgets and then I believe
we're talking about the
administrative budget to begin
with correct.
We are for committee members see
that is on page six of the big
of the details spreadsheet.
And I D. for dog thank.
D. for dog.
So I want to set up the first by
talking about the fee replace
requested come from H. B. one
thirty nine to make a sum
confusion was a document upload
into your shared drive when have
pages that explains her which
fees are being replaced which
budget I'll talk about them
individually need separate
budget as a committee members
I'm sure nope we have four
budgets administration judicial
information court operations in
court services and there are
free replacement fund request in
everyone of these in all four
budgets I would just a committee
to keep in mind with regard to
free replacement
two things that we get that
money it's flat for already we
were getting this revenue we're
getting into fiscal year twenty
four and then it stops so
requesting replacement a general
fund that was part of the intent
behind H. B. one thirty nine and
that was the reason for the one
year delay in implementation of
the fee sunset was so we have an
opportunity we and any other of
the state agencies are affected
we have the opportunity get
those fees replaced so we're
talking about that the total
request in the air C. is pretty
high twenty one million a
hundred sixty thousand eight
hundred dollars that's a lot
more than we usually ask for it
something like forty percent or
something like that but fees
make up thirty seven percent of
that request seven point eight
million so we need some pointed
to be flat but it shows up as an
increase because of course it's
general fund recurring in that
twenty one point six million not
other states do revenue.
So I will reach one of those
when we get to to the budgets.
Besides that thirty seven
percent that's made up of the
replacement of fees with general
fund there's of there are five
large requests that are spread
throughout the different budgets
Eight hundred ten thousand for
lease money in the Lomas capital
spending that's in the admin
budget you're about to hear as
is a million dollar increase in
the jury and witness for per
diem.
The jet budget there's two point
two four million four
fifty our software is one point
two million in magistrate court
leases in the court operations
budget and of course services is
a little over two million for
pre trial services have those up
that's about another seven point
three million that's another
twenty eight percent sorry
thirty one percent of budget and
the rest of the makes up about
twenty percent of the budget
request a seven percent increase
over what we've got now so
that's how things shake out I'll
deal with each of those larger
quest and all the other ones as
we go through the budgets of
turn to the admin budget now
without Mr chair might be
easiest to go through the these
pages that show the individual
requests and then be happy to
take questions from your deep
diver or whoever else wants to
ask questions
first you see a section Hey.
You have to do that we have and
that we are filling
for deputy general counsel we
request recurring funding for
that position hundred sixty five
thousand salary and benefits if
you read that justification is
see all the many things that the
woman to my right is responsible
for and it's past time I feel
for deputy general counsel and
would be happy to talk about
that if needed
I think Alton most of you have
contact with Selena now and
again but everybody just contact
with our daily I mean she's
contacted by daily along with
all the regular work that goes
on in the legal services
division.
We're requesting six new FTE
ease and five of those are found
in fiscal fiscal division I
think has been static for about
seven years or so and
in that time workload has
doubled.
they have taken on through them
to use responsibility for the
fiscal management and oversight
of the court of appeals in the
Supreme Court but that's I think
that's the major increase in the
work they've got
there's also a lot of oversight
we've got a whole number yes you
can see from the narrative of of
Federal funds to come in and
state funds a commend that I'll
have to be managed and those
interactions with our partners
on the executive side which is a
big part that most people don't
see of the work of the fiscal
services division so as you can
read there's a server Committee
financial specialists into
procurement specialist to send I
can answer them the procedure if
you want somebody was not at the
podium robin Dr and that will
help they can talk about this
the next or for human resources
I should mention here in case
you don't know it at analysis
the New will be the new director
of human resources as of.
Wait yesterday no next Monday
what is today yes yesterday so
there you go
and he comes to us from the
eleventh judicial district if
you don't know that's okay
eleven he'll be great we will
all miss Linda of course
tremendously not just because
she is exceptionally good at her
job but because she's a
wonderful person but you know we
all hope to get to retirement
some day and it's her date and
congratulations to her and
welcome to Edwin
I we begin this budget cycle I
said to him that I you have to
ask for some people and she said
oh thank god it's about time
and
Sure everyone will work hard and
do a great job but when it's a
big loss and and she is she she
works so much it's ridiculous
and I'm glad she's retiring so
she can rest a little bit and
catch up on everything else in
life that you must not be doing
with all the work that she does
they definitely need at least
two people and would be happy to
talk about the justification for
those positions.
The contractual area
the jury witness summons mail
them to and the text messaging
third party vendor contract will
we believe require eight hundred
thousand dollars a recurring
general fund to fix sorry fiscal
twenty five okay you're on a
chair New Matteo is a complex
about that
we're we're jury actually this
and
It does not for the modest means
deadline Mr chairman I might as
a committee to consider whether
that should be a hundred fifty
thousand there was a legislative
appropriation of one time funds
to modest means deadline to get
a hundred thousand dollars I
think in recurring we get it and
we contract out it is has gone
by the country's going to the
state bar and the doing a great
job they want to hire more
people to help more people and
that's a great idea except the
appropriation that came through
the junior bill he was junior
said for a quick meant and
Services or something like that
which is just great but not
people and try as I might I
can't stretch equipment and to
people although with a I maybe
someday we'll get there so
A. O. C. is going to provide a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and give it to our contractor
and then go to the session.
With the optimistic view that
work that hundred fifty.
Remove from the special and and
put to us so we can request a
hundred fifty that we are
providing to the bar because
they are doing great work but
anyway that's one change that I
might Mr chair suggests the
committee could consider
otherwise we had a thousand will
be able to give them a hundred
thousand and they'll be.
Fifty short to make another
junior bill who knows we'll see
what the session.
and then the other categories
see the fear placement there for
during witness what we did on
the replacement keys would look
at twenty one and twenty two
because bad things happen he's
in the rate among that's the
among the minor tragedies that
occurred certainly during the
COVID but it's not really good
data for.
The average so we went to
seventeen eighteen nineteen
average us for years and those
are the numbers that we use if
you find that objectionable of
because we calculate based on
the last two years but that
would not be fair appropriation
estimation of the revenue that
comes in there.
We also have fun bounces in the
feet areas because they're non
reverting so those fund balances
were carefully husband did I
would say knowing that the fees
are gonna stop so anyway that's
where the fee replacement
numbers come from a rate
increase at the well for both of
these together as a hundred
thousand dollars as I mentioned
that during with this money and
then.
we'll see a number of times in
our budgets we're taking money
out of one of the budgets and
putting it in a different bunch.
And for working so in this case
admin is losing six or thirty
eight thousand five hundred
dollars that's appropriated to
the admin.
Budget for pre trial services
but a long in the court's
Services Division budget which
is where pre trial services
please when we started it wasn't
clear exactly where pre trial
and up we need money we got
appropriation so we have
probation in three different
budgets for a pre trial services
this is one of them the place I
belong is the third two court
services so we have to go to
approve our request to move that
which we have asset and listen I
appreciate them being here to
consider moving that.
Moving into admin is that
million one sixty seven seven
for jury witness because that's
where the during with this money
is that's coming from court
services so.
Removing pre comedy to point
services taking money from fort
Services we could on the math
and average that looking of
unedited out but that might be
more confusing than it already
is so that's the NM Legislature
The general questions we can go
really fast but I imagine there
may be some questions.
I will take the questions as
they come a critical turnover to
a and so I have been a Selena
great thank.
Further to it to to to have a
second question thank you chair.
Are you I think it's a no
brainer I was surprised to hear
that Selena doesn't have a
deputy general counsel she has
twenty employees to work under
her how many of those returns.
Most.
I.
By far the majority and that's
one of the reasons why she's
assigned supervision of those
people because they have to be
so the programs are located in
other divisions not admin some
of them and that's where they
belong as a program in a matter
but oversight general definitely
belongs with the general counsel
that's why she's there us so I'm
assuming that you have a and I
do think that if I do Mr chair
and chief judge I have four
attorneys right now we're about
to hire another one in those
attorneys manage programs and
all have their own staff
including.
Data analysts paralegals program
coordinators fiscal
administrators.
All right and so that answers my
question none of them are
currently sort of serving in the
capacity of what had what you
might imagine the deputy general
counsel and Mr chairman and
judge that's correct there's
I separately manage the
contracts litigation work so I
don't I I I don't have
assistance in those matters.
I think that positions
definitely a definite needs help
I want to spend too much time on
that I did have a question as to
the and I think I I briefly
talked Adriaan as we're walking
up
you know we're losing the fees
for jury and and witness funding
has there been any any movement
and so working to the deficiency
you know we have DA's offices
public defender's offices.
They've you know they subpoena
witnesses they fly then they
give us a bill
you know some I I I disapprove
some where it's that time and
four days before trial want to
pay for the hotel for someone
that testified for twenty
minutes or didn't testify
the travel agency that we use
you know tickets to fly someone
from Dallas or twelve hundred
dollars has there been any
movement to to work on and
efficiency and reduce those
costs.
Mr members of the committee.
If the drone is here I would
allow her to answer I would
point out that you started
talking about the the fees on
notice that the fund balance
began at almost a little over
two and a half million in twenty
three we spent about two million
one eighty eight that's a fifty
three percent decline a million
three in addition to replacing
the fee funding when I can be
able to build up a fund balance
that allows us to spend that
money for a lots of reasons why
that increase is needed but
I'd ask of yonder to address
specifically how she manages the
tension between trying to
accommodate the people who were
responsible for getting jurors
and witnesses are focusing on a
chief
and proper fiscal management I
guess I would say.
Hello chair members of the
committee.
Program manager
Good morning chair of the
committee.
in regard to witnesses I notice
something it has been a topic of
discussion between fiscal and
mice and our division we are in
discussion about re viewing
those guidelines the witness
guidelines in regards to expert
witnesses and regular witnesses
it is something we definitely
want to work on to try to figure
out and
just really revamp those
guidelines because one they
don't always meet the the like
the meal reimbursements in the
DFA pretty Ms those are outdated
so we definitely need to work on
those but as far as making an
initiative that's where we're
starting is to discuss reviewing
those witness guidelines as well
as expert witness statements and
that could be a topic of
discussion as well as what kind
of agency we use for flights and
to determine what kind of PO's
are in stance for hotels and
having maybe expanding PO's that
we we only pick certain hotels
that these witnesses can stay
at.
Right and then the next piece on
the jury you're asking for an
increase of eight hundred
thousand and sure we're all
aware of the cost is going up
how did you come up with that
eight hundred thousand
increases for someone's mail
vendor statewide during
management text messaging which
I I think it's helpful in
today's day and age but where
did that that number come from.
Mr chair members of the
committee and to just have as
that is so when we looked at our
FTEs as of the jury management
system we did a procurement RFP
a year ago and then we just
started with a new jury
management system and we spent
about half a million just to
implement that and that was the
best one out of the three that
responded to our R. F. P. that
was the best one price range as
well as what it can give New
Mexico statewide to be more
efficient more modern to have
the ad hoc messages included
into that system unfortunately
when we went live with that
system we don't realize how many
courts would be using that adhoc
messaging and as we found it was
a tremendous amount and it's
been very useful very helpful
but unfortunately the software
that we have they weren't able
to keep up with the email to
text that was already part of
the application so that we had
to go to each court date which
is a third party vendor to
assist us with the Clearview
Management jury management
system to utilize that system
but also utilize that third
party vendor B. court date so
they charge by text and just in
the year I think it was about
over two hundred thousand text
messages almost per quarter for
the year so it's quite a bit
that the courts are using those
ad hoc messages and that they
like I said they're very useful
and very effective and efficient
for the course in the courts
absolutely love to use them but
we do need to use a third party
vendor that is with the times
and is also reasonable pricing
to be able to give us that
information and provide that for
the state.
Thank you andriana I chair of
plenty of questions for already
but I don't know if any members
have questions for Adriana well
she's up here in the members I
was going to make one we'll go
to our legislative members
personal computable to do this.
That this may not be appropriate
for you I just got back from TA
in Chama into a jury trial I had
people travelling round trip on
a daily basis between a hundred
and fifty and two hundred miles
an hour it was an embarrassment
to me when I came to
deliberations that I was told I
could get them ten dollars for
their I was limited to ten
dollars per teacher for meals
during deliberations.
You can't find a hamburger for
that in that area is this money
going to that to to
assist in the in the
reimbursement payment for those
types of things the fund fee
will be yes I'm sorry a chair
members the committee yes the
what RT is requesting and the
fees they will be going to the
witness guidelines which also
incorporates meals and that is
to keep up with the inflation as
well.
Mr I would say and descriptive
I focused on mileage and that
hourly increases no for the TIRS
but you're right the meals you
know it's pretty silly
one of the silent killers in
costume during witness has been
the thirty three percent
increase in the minimum wage
rate over the last few years
current statutory that's great
starting this year we're paying
them twelve dollars an hour but
that's one of the reasons why
the fund schemes declining and
we knew the day would come that
this now when we would have to
ask for general fund increase
for a number of reasons one of
which is that one right that
drives costs but you don't
really see it you know in terms
of Texaco out to the jurors
unless you're really into the
weeds on jury witness but that
is one of the drivers will just
will increase the the mill rate
because I agree with that's.
Gonna get so much anywhere
recover coffee from Starbucks
management.
Can have a government with.
Thank you that's all I have to
and the yes I.
I was just going to add
we're in the process of updating
the guidelines guidelines
haven't been updated I think
since twenty nineteen fifteen
even worse.
Twenty fifteen so they're
they're very do and that's one
of the things that are going to
be looking at the stuff that the
amounts for luncheon.
If when dinner is the rare
occasion dinner is needed so
that's on.
The suspect you are right
already you're asking for a rate
increase for the two buildings
for AOC is that you the current
allocation is seven hundred and
is really only a hundred and ten
increase resident eight hundred
and ten increase for now so one
point five for AOC'S to leases
expire thousand a total of one
point five.
Okay and are those leases that
AOC is already obligated to yes
there are
yes.
All right so I should take the
blame for this so the process of
getting into the lowest billing
was actually not too bad we did
a fair amount of tenant
improvements which we funded out
of as a one time appropriation
mostly that we got we got
appropriation for the Marshall
street building and that's seven
hundred is pretty close that's a
modest increase but of the most
of the eight hundred Islamists
and that's because somehow in
the year and a half process it
took for us to get into more
State Street I was focused on
getting everybody in the
buildings time to collected us
FY twenty four budget for actual
rent money for loans so we don't
have any in the so of the
program's really happy with me
because we this sort of a per
person occupancy you have to pay
this much so each of the
different divisions that occupy
space on the third and fourth
floor limits are are having take
money out of their operating
budgets to help pay the.
These costs there so they're
really really interested in me
asking for and getting the money
in the LESC budget so we can pay
the leases and occupy the
building and they can spend
money on things the better spent
on than rent for fiscal twenty
four you're finding that eight
hundred and ten yes we are.
I I want to of course it when
that I know limits Friday is for
last state congratulations.
A report from the members you
may see her again and we're
capacity because she's open to
working on a contract and you
know if in case ever decided she
could be useful we might be
doing she might be back again on
and as you pointed out I think
it the reason I was gonna ask is
Lynette shoes probably there's
three people to affect and of
those pumps or whatever she
likes to wear
so this another eight HR
administrator is definitely
needed what is the the project
manager what projects is that
other project manager intended
to manage as I really training
and setting up other HR's around
around the state and other
traditional entities.
Chairman of the committee yeah I
would say that's part of a lot
of answers managing the
investigations I believe
it's lovely when we go for a
month or so without an
investigation but it's unusual
and they're really labor
intensive six and
they really distract from all
the things that HR especially
doing and there's lots of
projects that are the third and
and I'll just part of the state
in the parking lot somewhere
because we just don't have the
time to do them limit for
certainly can address that in
the last week if you'd like to
hear from her but yeah that's
that's my understanding of what
the project manager's going to
do.
Okay and as as an alternative is
there a position rather than a
project manager they could do
is investigations a full time
position in itself it is not
because it's episodic when we
have an investigation often it's
more than a full time job for
one person it requires a team of
people over and you know
compacted period time to do all
the interviews and all that then
they produce a report looks like
this for me of all the
interviews and everything and
make recommendations very
thorough
anytime I I think the
recommendations very seriously
don't always follow them but
when when involves a despicable
action with grievance I feel a
hundred percent conference
they've done a totally thorough
and fair job and that the
outcome was appropriate and we
go grievances thing works out
fine but it's it's a it's really
busy but it's compacted so you
have to stop what you're doing
and do that I suppose it's like
having a jury trial the future
trial someone fell in into your
lap the week from what you have
next week's gonna be doing this
and okay great of we'll get
right on that because of course
these are time critical share my
last question before I open it
up the other committee members
can you flesh out a little bit
the financial service position
you're asking for three
financial service specialist to
procurement specialist it's it's
you know I think it's pretty
clear there has been a radical
expansion in the services that
the financials having to manage
how many procurement specialists
do you currently have and how
many financial specialists do
you currently have kind of
managing that division I think
the lesson or triple all
deferred a dimple on that or she
wants to defer to somebody in
the audience I grab thirty five
The fact that the data presented
in the little paragraph was
pretty compelling in terms of
the need but I don't know how
many
Fifties we have that are
currently in these positions
that was if any any problem with
the agency I briefing from the
days of I don't have an issue
that I think it's okay she's the
expert please so currently we
have a staff of fifteen and it's
procurement specialist with I
have a purchasing Division of
about four people and I have
Victor who's who's the budget
analyst but also does grants and
such and the rest are a variety
of financial special supervisors
I have a bacon Court financial
manager I have financial
specialist seniors and just
refer business specialists have
a variety of folks
in these positions we haven't
had any expansion in quite some
time and with the work with
that's increasing and Supreme
Court and court of appeals added
on a purchase.
I think the work would be
equally distributed as opposed
to just piling on on to certain
groups on a variety of times but
it's a variety of of his job
titles that we have in New.
Spent fifteen folks Mr chair
you're going to see or you saw
request for financial positions
in the court of appeals in the
Supreme Court when those people
come for arrived
I'm sure they'll be highly
qualified but our experiences
don't come from outside of the
courts and it will require
a fair amount of training and
support.
Hearing even when they get those
serving I hope they do they get
those positions
We're standing that as I said
earlier I'm not sure that those
two courts what's really driving
I need so much as the Business
having increased so
significantly.
That's correct and and if they
did you know if they did.
Those positions that get
approved by the by the Canadian
we could look at.
My request was one financial
special senior and one
procurement specialist to handle
those two
agencies so if if the committee
approves there are requested
financial specialists and staff
fiscal staff then I could.
We reduce those requests but the
other three absolutely do need.
Manage the workload.
Justice for the questions and
the question is if I differently
than just a few.
I just want to make sure I think
you answered already but I just
wanna make sure I'm clear in my
head so if the Supreme Court and
the A. L. and the court of
appeals get their financial
staff that they're asking for
then you are saying is he
doesn't need at least one of
those people to I could I could
I could reduce one procurement
specialist position in one
financial specialists
composition the supervisor and
the other.
Madam person and financial
specialists I would still need
okay thank you you can ask for
more questions about final go
please okay the other question
is for you already do you are
you all do you have a deputy
general counsel now.
So well we're in the we're close
we're close okay see you all if
you've posted it hope we're
gonna hire somebody and so my
question is you're gonna be
paying for that person for a
year.
Before any money from this
happened so where is that money
going to come from how are you
gonna be able to pay for them
for a year but now you're asking
for it recurring there after is
a very good question and the
we've searched around and found
where we could spare pots of
money from sort of shaving from
here and there we don't have an
appropriation for this position
and it's an expensive position I
just felt and I more or less
compelled to to have H. R.
create the position which they
did and the higher into the
position and we'll just have to
figure it out because we I don't
think it's fair to operate the
way we are now I don't know how
Selena continues to do it and
I'm concerned that there are
things we can we just can't do
no matter how hard you work one
person can only do so much so
yes you could say what you can
afford money now why do need new
money to for the position.
It's kind of like the rent the
bad.
People didn't connect here and
there among the programs so that
we can put together enough money
for the position because
without it all those everything
would suffer locate this
suffering I think it's
it's not fair maybe the person
suffering Selena because it's
it's past time for this position
that's why we took what is a
maybe a a bad approach but I'm
hoping the legislature will feel
as I do that it's it's really
critical position to fill thank
you I don't have any other
questions I just want to say
that Selena is a rockstar.
I just stuff in the Mr spurs.
Thank you warning
I wanted to follow up on the
general counsel position the
deputy general counsel position
when we were at our June meeting
we approved a re class for AOC
for a deputy general counsel
position is that the same
position that we're talking
about today it is all right my
question is when we were
discussing the conversion and
whether the committees
recommended I believe the right
the representation from AOC was
that the position was funded
from existing general fund
monies at that point so my why
are we seeking money today for
that position because we have
general fund money in admin
spread out among a whole lot of
different things and like
accord  which has one budget if
you run your bacon to a little
higher than you're comfortable
with you save a little money you
can afford it so we have
appropriations allow us to pay
this person we're not going to
need go for supplemental funding
in in the twenty four sessions
but we would have to make those
changes permanent if we go
forward without the
appropriation for the full for
the position and that would be
unfortunate but that you know
that's how we will pay this
person wants to hire very soon I
hope through the fiscal year
twenty four but we're hoping the
legislature will see fit to fund
it fully from new fund said
fiscal twenty five thank you my
other question I believe we
talked about a little bit AOC
had recommended or ordered by
the court of appeals in the
Supreme Court that they were not
going to be able to find fiscal
services starting in fiscal year
twenty five and so those courts
requests for fiscal staff to
move fiscal back in house came
at the recommendation of AOC and
I wanted to make sure that your
position is consistent with that
today and that you're still
supportive of those efforts yes
very much so a hundred percent
you need to people in each of
those courts to properly manage
fiscal operations in those
courts of course our State of
fiscal is is will help and
support you in any way need.
I want to percent and I think
that's why Dippel said the need
is less great if that happens
then not we don't know what the
legislature would do if if if
anybody like her analysts for
example said well you don't need
to those businesses we put these
people in the Corpus Precourt my
answer would be that's one
hundred percent correct I prefer
that.
Last question thank you I know I
appreciate dimples
acknowledgement that perhaps two
of the staff that are requests
may not be necessary but what
I'm hearing from you already is
that with the expansion of AOC
over the last few years in the
additional employees they've
taken on especially.
Jaded in some of the other
programs that will talk about
later I am wondering if you're
truly willing to concede that
there's no need for those two
people given how large of an
operation AOC is running for the
courts.
I would I would love to keep
them I we can find work we have
to work for them but if the
trade off is that the Supreme
Court and court of appeals gets
their own fiscal staff then that
is definitely the concession I
will thank you Mr chair in
addition everything else I would
point out we just added a whole
new division.
Order education institute which
we'll be talking about and
We didn't get fiscal FTEs
message hello it's a it's a
combination of the general fund
appropriation fees are expiring
fund balance that's available
there and a whole lot of a
interesting things you know
there's travel involved with
everyone of those conferences
they hold.
We have zero people for all that
additional work we have to do
the work believe me I'd I want
to have the accreditation is it
is really critical but that's
just one brand new additional
responsibility for fiscal that's
not accounted for accounted for
whose could put anywhere else.
Thank you those my questions.
Of the sisters.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm just
gonna follow up with judge Duffy
a little bit I have thank you
for your presentation thanks for
all the work that your finance
department does I think it's all
warranted very good
justification I just want a
little bit of clarification also
I had the court of appeals deep
dive and priority one for them
was you know the fiscal staff
now Supreme Court priority I
think was an eight or nine for
fiscal staff
just for my notes and we go and
discuss this further FTE new
FTEs are a big deal.
And this is been answer but just
want to clarify I mean if if
court of appeals gets their
position Supreme Court maybe
does not begin in the
justification of court of
appeals that states that they
were about you they were advised
it would not be doing that and
and supporting taking over their
their own financials.
Red you can find places for
record education but.
Civically which positions would
that be if that's a court of
appeals gets their priority one
Supreme Court does not get that.
Second to lose one position is.
If it's true and again follow up
I'm not here to.
Really advocating for all I
still I prefer I'm I've I am
asking for all I and if the
court of appeals would get their
staff and the Supreme Court did
and I think all I are are are
valid and their sensual.
Okay thank you.
Mr Clarke.
I don't see the priority is
listed on your budget
justification.
Correct.
I don't see correctly.
Thank you want to help us
prioritize those are they all
so with regard to
A retreat the.
Person of ranking.
The I would put in the first
priority this at least through
the position for fiscal and two
of those four HR.
And for the reasons that dimple
was explaining we could
downgrade to them but they're
they're pretty.
In my in my view I think the
general counsel is
the highest priority.
Because we're going to have that
person we're gonna pay them
either they're going to get
funded by an appropriation of
the going to get funded by the
appropriation that isn't spent
on something else
with regard to the contractual
category of the modest means
deadline is not a high priority
for me to pass through for us
it's a very important thing and
were able to get the idea that
it's not critically important to
provide legal services for those
who are in the middle sort of
can't really afford it
but it's it's a pastor we we
sent out to a contractor we
won't be able to operate jury
very well if we don't get the
funding requests for during both
in the three hundred category
and in the former category and
that includes the replacement of
fees I suppose overall as a
general matter you could put a
one with a bullet next to it to
every few replacement request
all of I the because we're we're
in real trouble if we lose
million dollars here two million
dollars there that we use to of
of getting fixed three million
it comes to cities program.
And I would really like not to
have to
Shave funds from of the purpose
of occupied the blue building in
order to make the and that is my
mistake so it's so important
priority for the agency.
It's my fault that we did
request the money I'm sure the
legislature would have given it
to us when we were moving into
new facilities and lots of
reasons why that's a good thing
but.
So.
That's the those are the part is
I can give you I'm sorry we
input the numbers and the right
boxes thank you.
Thanks for the question.
So I have a just a couple so a
little more on the modest means
have intersection I think in the
justifications all we really
have is your your tier just a
little more that what what is it
and I'm I'm not familiar with it
should be but I'm sure Mr chair
didn't
just an explanation on it
because a Senator is a pastor
but
So we would be happy to talk to
for as long as you want about
what a great program that is why
we should ask for more funding
for Mr chair this is something
new it is a free telephone
helpline we're
individuals of modest means who
wouldn't be able to hire an
attorney can call and consult
with an attorney for free for a
half an hour and right now the
program that the bar put
together is staff to provide
about half time assistance and
it has been so successful across
the state and that's part of the
beauty of it this is civil legal
services help for people around
the state that
the legislature actually has
expressed interest in wanting to
fund full time staff so that the
bar can provide assistance eight
hours a day every day and that's
what that's what the increase
really is about and this is been
cut it it's it's sort of a
transformation for access to
justice strategy right now the
statewide strategy because this
has been so so effective it it
has it really is a compliment to
legal aid New Mexico legal aid
and it's something again that
legislators are very very
interested in because it has
been so successful in the wide
ranging assistance that it's
providing for cases that
legally this conflict it at and
also just much broader broader
ability to to provide that
access so it is it's a big part
of the the strategy work added
that AOC provides support to
with the New Mexico Supreme
Court commission on access to
justice this is just it's it's
all been looking for improving
improving different modes of
access and this is turned out to
be in my experience that he's a
HSD one of the most successful
programs and actually providing
that immediate on the ground
health.
To people needing assistance
researcher for the non lawyers
the legislature can appropriate
money to the state partially
plus private entities so you
can't that's that's a
actualization of anti donation
clause as opposed to the many
people think there are that part
we do not do the bar was
responsive they were the best
better so they got the initial
of funding
as I said they are getting two
hundred fifty thousand in
funding this year although only
a hundred thousand was
appropriated appropriately
so I'm wondering if of the
committee might want to.
Consider increasing this number
if not I'm sure they'll manage
within the appropriation to get
or they can try to get a special
but this this number was arrived
at I think before we realized
the complications that were in
the hundred fifty thousand
dollars junior proficiently done
so either way this is fine but
we are.
fronting we are providing them
with a hundred fifty thousand
dollars will probably to do with
that as this as a special but
the the amount for fiscal year
twenty five I would be nice if
it were to fifteen so the two
hundred with this hundred but
with two hundred they'll they'll
do lots of good work.
Exist because is this the eight
hours so that that the two
hundred two fifty what what gets
two to eight hours.
Mr chair just one fifty in RT
alluded to it in his initial
presentation that an error was
appropriated for equipment and
materials which state it's it's
staff what they need is actual
staff so Mr chair you're right
that gets from the four hours to
the eight hours.
That's why we gave them the
money and are hoping will get
worse the.
The questions on the budget you
have one other question is that
is correct the committee for a
second question if any to to
service me the second
questioning anything new
clarified.
Know any other members of
committee.
A judge I think chair I'm just
following up on what we were
just talking about I'm sorry I
didn't know anything about this
program so
what I want to know is when
people come to me with probate
guardianships adoptions that's
the three that I most get in
this area they say I asked him
to to apply for legal aid and
they said we we apply but we
don't.
Qualify for I can refer them to
this program is that correct to
get some type of advised the
only know how to fill out forms
the help file the petition and
ask immediately for hearing
Mr chairman that's that's
absolutely correct this is this
is available and if I if I could
I I will follow up with you on
other ways especially in
different case areas to what
what's available right now for
free that can be immediately
provided to self represented
litigants thank god I appreciate
Mr chair that you probably
already know she had a general
counsel deputy who would have
contacted
you all about the program of
sure this is doing everything
in.
Descent to the surface so I
understand for fiscal year
twenty four you're looking at
hiring the deputy general
counsel and and funding that and
and the current funding and in
your submission you put you
moved a hundred ninety eight
thousand out of the two hundred
category to fund statewide
automation program which are
also seeking that that.
Seeking that funding so
I'm I'm presuming that hundred
ninety eight is vacancy savings
that you needed when you're.
Finding money and that's not
money that you're projecting and
would have again that perhaps
would fund the deputy general
counsel.
Mr judge to pressure that's
correct your double talk about
her position is vacant we as as
you know because rest of
positions to a can't afford to
have that position vacant
you know we hired the beginning
of the fiscal year and we manage
it throughout the year and
hopefully we get to the end of
the year to zero not a red
number
we we manage that but sometimes
that means you have taken to
save lives and.
There's no other way to manage.
The.
Okay so not necessarily provided
to your request but just I don't
miss the opportunity so later on
in the court of appeals and
Supreme Court to hear about the
twenty compaction it is that
food does that affect your
attorneys at all others are
turning position specifically
years our positions are required
to be an attorney but is there
anything that that is impacted
on and
It's about Selena manages you
more directly so I yeah please.
Please.
Mr chair I think that the
contacts is so different okay
and and you see that I I I I
don't think the the issues are
analogous and I I don't see that
there is the same the same
impact and I just wanna make
those plays based on the request
and and these release duties
required attorney versus an
attorney positions so so I I I
thought the same as one to
provide the same I. pass that
same question with from other
the districts to but thank you
and Mr chair
H. R. and I see an awful lot of
the Attorney hirings in the
courts because often require
approval from the AOC which I
keep a pretty close eye on how
we're doing compared to people
to to try to make sure we we
have stability in the work force
within AOC I think we do a
pretty good job at that but we I
would if we had a problem with
compaction I would come and tell
you I need money to fix.
Hello thank you of and then just
a comment and no other questions
but just this these or charts
are huge and it was a struggle
to try to get that figured out
in line diagram those out it's
get worse occurring over there
thank you Karen but these are
really huge and they help you
tell your story so much better
because you know I I think
you've judges opening comment
was used by twenty people and we
we don't know that right we
don't see it but this is very
visual and is really really
helpful this is been a control
that you have on and then just
so that's one thing I really
really appreciate and then the
second
in our holy go with these
financial specialists are H. R.
administrators but in a justice
Thompson centered in his opening
that we rely so much on
committees and stuff to do the
work but on all to leave here
branch of government and you
should be staffed appropriate as
a branch of government and and
particularly in the areas of
fiscal warrior we're doing this
giant operation in the area of
HR so so thank you to all the
folks to do this work and and
thank you for your presentation
we should thank you Mr chair
with your help and the help of
the legislature will give you
more boxes
The people in the.
Okay so that I think confuse
administrator budget and I think
is stay with automation next.
We have echoed the for echo.
Thank you.
We know because Center Hayner
chief technology officer.
Better known as Cassie and
I always forget how long people
been around since I've around so
long seems like they've been
here forever but yes yes I'm
doing this that long which is
made a really significant well
you have been here with us with
almost two years that really
significant contribution in my
view to the operation of the
judicial commission division and
to hi to support statewide I
hope you feel it's reflected in
your courts and if not then
we'll be should be happy to talk
about how we could do that for
you in this budget there are too
few replacements that add up to
about two and a half million
dollars the first one is on the
first page there the first time
in the six hundred eighty three
four M. cap and cap issues for
correlation he misspoke court
automation Fund I can talk about
how that works for the fun
Bachechi it's down almost zero
in the and calf we need to
replace the fees the second page
last item ironically is the
weather for replacement and
that's the staff report on
mission the post education fees
Back on the staff this so some
pre some filing fee fee revenue
but H. B. what thirty nine
eliminated almost two million
dollars in annual revenue there
so to just keep swimming in
court automation list of
coronation fund we need that
money and with it would it would
be a gigantic hole in our
ability to operated without the
fee replacement money from the
impact of House Bill Clinton on
the SCAF
Other than the replacement for
the big ticket well there's a
number of items but you'll see a
request for two point two
million dollars for F. T. R.
software support the committee's
quite aware I think that we got
appropriation of over ten
million dollars to implement F.
T. R. of what's real time what
to call real time speech to text
that's the one so that you can
have almost instantaneous
transcription are pretty highly
effective and I understand the
more you use it the more
accurate they get so that's
terrific a learning machine
great so
there's going to be a annual
support costs of course are
running at about the.
Twenty percent is not unusual
this a little under twenty
percent of what I think will be
the ultimate cost employment but
have you given that serious
consideration
otherwise again we have people.
you may know that the speaker
mission fund has been supporting
personnel costs and did for as
long as I've been here and
I tried throughout the years to
move all those people of the
general fund we've gotten closer
or further away depending on the
legislature's ability to give
general fund money for person
and our ability to fund to
manage all the personnel costs
within the budget that we're
given so we have a positions
paid for out of the staff we've
been trying for many years to
get them all move to general
fund but in this case you'll see
eight positions that we would
like
funded through the general fund
and become per positions these
are actual existing human beings
are doing good work already so
we hope that you'll give
consideration for funding those
eight positions just a little
over million dollars million
twenty thousand seven hundred
dollars and then there's another
seven hundred sixty six thousand
three hundred dollars in the I
positions
that are new expansion requests
I believe you proofed all these
last year you may remember that
we came in asking for.
Eleven or twelve.
Last year thirteen thirty lucky
thirteen last year new approved
I think nine and of the
legislature gave us three and
we're back the.
And we need them for the same
reasons we need them last year
so of anymore discussion about
that would be happy to go over
that as well
The other versions of terms the
terms are are maybe something
that you don't need to discuss
now I don't know if you want to
hold those for different moving
because they're real people who
are getting paid but we have we
have the ability to pay the
legislature changes status to be
appropriate for free funding for
other state funding the general
fund funding.
This increases in licenses and
things like that
I would I have some good news if
you look on the second page the
five hundred thousand dollars
for the research license
increase so we're involved in a
lot of fun we when I say we I
mean Cassie
it in resources with Tyler over
the research contract we're not
happy it's no secret with
implementation of research as a
replacement for so I and Tyler
is working as hard as they can
work I suppose
making it so that is a real
replacement we're not taking the
other
access away till it works right
but in the meantime contracts up
for renewal and
Genevieve I think has been also
involved in this in the contract
negotiations with Tyler but.
we've come to conclude that
we're not going to see an
increase in the licensing costs
even though among the things
they agree they're going to put
in reserves under the contract
are the
extra services I forget what
they're called you know we have
a sign up people pay for extra
services and that's cost a
fortune and trouble in the
legislature's asked whether to
give us everybody well so we
listened and we're going to give
us everybody but we're not going
to pay more for them which is an
ideal thing but pyros just in my
humble opinion for what we've
gone through on research and if
we get it right it'll be
wonderful we won't make it the
default way for people to access
stuff try to get it right and I
don't know if this address any
that but.
That request can be removed.
Five hundred thousand dollars so
since we are you save money I
suppose this move the budget and
go on.
The president said that.
Thank you Watson.
So it's a question Senator we'll
begin questioning does not.
Chair.
Are you fund your appropriation
from the general fund I notice
that.
Twenty twenty five doubles from
twenty twenty four I'm sorry
your twenty twenty five request
is doubling twenty twenty four a
little bit this is one hundred
percent request yes.
One of the seven point six
percent.
And that was that come from so
part of that is the fees
remember this two and a half two
point six million dollars in fee
replacement so the fees are in
my budget now in the two budget
now but there fee revenue the
other OSF other state funds
right when you move them over to
general fund they become an
expansion requesting your
general fund recurring budget so
when you when you look at this
budget
Thirty five percent of it is the
replacement two million six
hundred twenty five thousand
fees so that's a that's a chunk
of it
but it's still a big ask and the
biggest is to put people on
general fund who are currently
employed there eight of them and
and have I a new positions which
we desperately need casket talk
about I could talk about less
skillfully.
The June first okay until we hit
the pandemic I think and then
the responsibilities grew
enormously and they they jumped
in along with a lot of other
people to try to make it so the
court could function what we
discovered is you can function
and you can function probably
more efficiently with greater hi
to support so we're doing almost
all of our citations right
remotely so making people come
to court I know when constituent
group that loves that are the
police officers right who can
join from their cars and all
that kind of stuff and hello
this project
fifty are is it is a huge
project that we were thinking we
get to and the Legislature let's
do it right now but benefit
everybody in the whole state and
every with the TV in the DA can
have transcriptions be heroes
ten million dollars let's do it
right now okay great you know.
Many people to do these things
so
it's a big ask a big chunk of it
like I said over a third of it
is a free replacement which is.
This flat but we need to add it
to the general fund recurring at
increases it but it's a big
increase I feel that
We have needs across the
spectrum but I think just
because
overstressed overtaxed with
responsibilities has now we need
these people these are still
positions you can't can't a
movie with the anyway I don't
know if you were interested in
casting the extraordinary
hundred percent increase in your
budget.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I just
that the increase your is across
AOC that is not all kids that
number.
I didn't understand it thank you
with respect to these positions
that I understand now term
positions where is that money
coming from
mostly the term positions a
tutor funded through the staff
revenue the fee revenue that's
going so it's totally this is
all totally fee revenue that
you're asking to be replaced
with general fund Representative
yet they're not that's not a
grant or something like that
that's that's we've had them for
these positions for a long time.
And it has always doesn't
anymore surprises but is present
in the beginning how important
that is to please the revenue
source that funds their
positions as if.
Staffer go away and they would
lose their job when asked at his
going away so.
They're not going to lose her
job but we're going to see the
fund balance declined
drastically as we go forward
because we're not getting the
fee revenue we gotta pay these
people.
And these are sours that they're
making now is that correct the
one GSD for these are these are
Sir that that Mr Chairman these
are not salaries this is the
automated cost yes including
summer filled and summer vacant
the two I think that three two
top of thank.
Thank you.
And with respect to this the
expansion for the where those
monies are what the cost to and
laid out where does that come
from Cassie.
The new general fund
appropriations so that's seven
hundred
seven hundred and sixty six
thousand three hundred dollars
in New.
That's an actual increase
expansion in the budget sorry
and gentle.
Mr chair that.
That's all I have.
Of two thousand Mr speaker.
Sorry my my question is do you
have about two point six million
that you're Representative
replace at from the M. calf and
the staff and those that money
currently funds those temp
positions.
Yes okay among other things that
yes well that's that's what I'm
asking is if you're asking
replace that and that includes
that and then you're asking
don't.
And then you're asking for those
positions to be permanently
funded are you asking so that's
in addition to that money that
you already received for all
those temp positions a new
server to get their Mr chairman
and I appreciate that you did
yes so when I talked about
trying to put all of the
employees on the general fund
for a long time and we got down
to close close single digits for
awhile but that's not the case
now
the reason for that is the
actual statute the speaker
mission statute it's a state
that that money is for lots of
things that need to supposed to
do supporting statewide
technology
we have for a very long time.
Act as if it also authorizes to
carry people on payroll I think
that's true but it's wrong in
terms of the the money in the
automation fund should be for
like you know replacement like
you all the courts not offered
to a number quicker asking for
money to buy monitors are
provide quick then we would love
we tried for a while to put the
courts on a three or four five
year replacement schedule funded
out of the automation Fund you
can't do that when you're
bleeding a million dollars a
year or more off of the revenue
into.
All we got all the people on the
payroll where they belong
because these are permanent.
Needed existing positions the
automation Fund.
Or the money to replace the
automation fund will go toward
those things that stood more of
the things that should
would like to do in this task to
do we can always do that there.
Yes.
At the end but no I did Mr
chairman of the committee I just
that again just to be clear the
totals that we're talking about
to replace the fees are cross
AOC aged certainly consumes a
large portion but for example
the M. calf that's on page one
that is court operations that is
not money that six hundred
eighty three thousand that is
not did they don't fund those
positions that is all court
operations money from fees and
so I I just wanna make sure
we're not talking about the same
the data so there's there's two
million are little short of two
million on the staff and those
term positions make up quick
math the million dollars so what
what I heard already state is
essentially potentially which is
what the statute says Jed would
have a million dollars to help
with technology throughout all
the judicial entities that they
didn't have before.
Potentially.
Mr chair members of the
committee if fees are replaced
with general fund the first
million dollars would go to pay
for our employees.
I'm my understanding is you're
asking to permanently replace
and cap six hundred eighty three
thousand permanently replace the
staff one point nine nine two
million.
Then and those monies in some
form or another funded the
Funded all of those term
positions that you guys
currently have an I'm sorry
there's one two three four five.
Listed in that in balance of the
giver take eight hundred
thousand two million is what
those salaries and benefits has
to make so no longer would you
use that funding for that but
you have a general funding for
all of those term positions and
then you have and provide six
hundred eighty three goes to
court appropriations the one
point nine nine two million.
Could potentially go to
technology rather than the
staff.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes we also currently
use staff for technology
projects it's not all dedicated
person and so that's why this is
difficult to piece part all
right I think I I think I got it
for the questions.
Mr spears and then thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you for
your presentation thank you
casting your team one quick
clarification follow up not a
question and question follow up
on the
the three vacancies of existing
position funding request and I
you said these eight we have
eight people in these are maybe
one or two are vacant just for
my notes here those three
positions I. T. project manager
senior network administrator
senior applications developer
senior those all vacant right
now Mr Chairman but you do have
funding right now for those
three just through another
source.
Okay.
And I quite that's my follow up
my question is if you do not
receive the
The two point two it's very
exact number two million two
hundred forty nine thousand six
hundred for F. T. R. software
support do you anticipate that
money in your justification
talks about
it's due to the it's part of the
palette district courts the
anticipate that if that's money
that money is not receive that
that expense is going to fall
back on to the district courts
and to the public courts Mr
chair members of the committee
yes thank you for saying that
has to come from somewhere the
hope is that this can be
centrally manage budget pay one
bill but if that is that two
point two is not appropriated
excuse my language then yes that
has to come from somewhere it
would fall to districts.
Thank you thank you.
Really great.
to think any.
I think you are the basis of the
two point two all right so the
legislature gave ten million for
F. T. R. and then what is this
I'm sorry I just don't
understand that.
So.
This is the maintenance and
operations are will continue
forever and ever as long as we
have if you thank you.
There's one time costs because
privative the second question so
secretary the questions was.
The seven.
Hi good morning easy follow up I
hope AOC currently has I think
twenty three vacant positions
three of those I think are
represented here on this list
I'm wondering for the expansion
request in the two hundred
category
if any of those currently vacant
positions can be converted to
cover these requests.
Mr chair of I'll defer to Cassie
but I think the answer is no
because we need these folks to
do the work that already exists
in the in that department so
with that in which they would be
located and these are to do work
that those teams are doing but
they need more people to do that
I yes yes thank you.
Okay okay thank you the
questions members the committee
temple the question.
Okay I I don't have any other
questions specific to your
budget request
are you to be around later for
the second judicial district
they have an I. T. request this
one make sure gonna have
something some of the I will be
here yes okay.
Yes we have had they did
coordinate that and I support
that's if that's a good step in
itself so thank you patient that
okay anything close.
Discover anything closing.
So of the I that is I think
you're presentation thank you
yes we're going to take a break
at this time please well so
committee members.
This is the we're not going to
stop the recording of
microphones all.
With that I am pretty
conversation they're pretty
sensitive based on my
experience.
I.
Start your day.
This.
Is.
Started what we do.
But it started.
So.
Okay.
This.
Stress.
Thank.
Yeah.
Just.
At
six.
It's a.
As.
The.
Senator.
As.
Yes.
Yeah.
As
soon we have a.
They're easy.
It.
Thank you for.
This is great.
For.
Yeah.
He ran.
Trying to.
I am.
What we know.
Twenty
recently.
So.
Yeah I.
Thanks.
Access.
To.
Moores.
I.
I did.
Because I haven't.
For.
The.
As.
That
Hi.
Which is.
Restaurant right.
I wanted to participate.
I see.
It's not missing.
Leaving town once a this is
on the outskirts.
You would think so.
There's.
Also.
With each budget show that is
the whole AOC.
So there's.
The firm has returned right.
Terms
of.
Twenty eight in terms and thank
you.
Right and we'll see in each of
the budgets they report for.
So let's look at.
Really.
That's.
It's a.
The report on the.
These this would be high because
this is some people.
This is.
That's why we have a.
The
answers.
Okay sure posed as.
But.
We.
I can H. up
Twenty three.
Thank you.
For the whole is.
At the Consumer Reports that's
right here that's where the
different.
There is a twenty three year.
In the.
You have a bunch of vacancies
showing.
I I don't I don't know.
Yeah I personally.
Seven.
I.
Twelve.
I also have the internal
auditor.
It shows twenty.
Throughout the throughout the.
I don't know where we have
twenty three but I have to look
at I have to look at the.
Reporter.
Raiders.
It's actually.
Yeah this.
Okay.
Seven.
The.
You
have that's.
This
is.
So.
Thank you.
Rural rural areas.
On the June.
Is.
Choose
to.
This is.
Okay they have a very find their
seats please get started.
Hello from committee can be
returned I'm looking.
Whatever.
That's the number of terms.
Okay.
Okay so we're gonna move on to.
Is the core operations division
which is cap number out.
Letter of.
Really stress.
It.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my registration factor
rector of disillusion
this phone is is kind of fun.
The there are that many request
but there's a lot of things
happen.
The court operations
To begin with workforce and has
the largest impact from H. B.
one thirty nine fee reductions
the average fee revenue
collected in law enforcement is
over those three years I
mentioned is three million one
hundred ninety four thousand
dollars and that's the.
A replacement request of that's
in there for
Sorry for quite appropriations.
I was in the wrong budget thank
god looking at the numbers of
from.
I'm saying numbers are correct
but I am correct so that's a
huge part of the overall
increase is
a quarter rations
and again as with the other few
replacement status let's just
continue on.
Just make it will make a big
difference just as a matter of
delivery of services in the.
Because.
Lord enforcement is
transitioning has transitioned
larger I sent to a
compliance program and said the
project whose heroes undertaken
transition
has created the ability to enter
into a citations on behalf
records search for people who
are non compliant try to get
them compliant without entering
work status then doing all the
work stuff of course the idea
being it's a lot better to get
people compliance voluntarily
and without award then at
interesting all that kind of
thing next time to get pulled
over
so anyway they're doing great
work and I hope that you're able
to support.
The work.
Your customer service for the
one eight hundred number it's
Is it it's.
Twenty it's seven days a week
six days a week twenty one of
fifty this week I think we.
And they have the ability to do
with people in languages other
than English so you can call and
find out really about anything
going point if you want to it's
not really limited to measure
quit citations and things like
that those folks will find the
answer for you or the connected
with the person that needs to
and what they mostly they must
provide a great deal of help for
people but they also deal with a
lot of people are really angry
about something or other more
may not have to do with the
courts and I've listened to some
of the transcripts of these
calls the boards that were more
challenging and
I don't know what's in his
training them on over there but
they they certainly are better
at it than I could possibly be
in terms hand the people who are
angry and upset maybe it has to
do with us maybe it doesn't and
they help them and
We should be doing so we can
support the replacement of three
million hundred eighty four
thousand there and sent to be
happy talked about all the
things that they're doing that
will be done with the three
million dollars.
there are some of the request
for a new FTEs
in this division
most of them the first I used to
have to do with well for more
facilities was carrying one
internal auditor the facilities
to something that we have some
discussions during this past
year with the courts about
magistrate court facility
specifically and you know it's a
of course it's a challenge from
Albuquerque the currently we
lost our two facilities people
so they have to be replaced but
we're placed one so far but
that's not really the problem
the challenges you're far away
from the locality right where
this is happening and we have
good or or not good relationship
with landlords generally good
but
We considered whether it would
be more beneficial for the
District Court to be managing
leases for the match record and
I think in the end it's not a
good idea but we could provide
better service by having sort of
regional facilities people who
would be on top of their regions
individual leases with counties
are with private landlords and
would increase our
responsiveness of both president
were people doing it and because
they would be focused on a piece
of the of the hi
we lease or something like I
don't know fifty sentences forty
sorry fifteen forty six
facilities it's a lot what about
that phone two of them are one
in Santa Fe and one and
requests.
That's a new experience for us
that's of the sea it's it's a
it's a really sound way to
approach facilities management
from a cost perspective.
but it's new area for us and the
management this is greater
we will operate with funds that
make sure the buildings are
maintained since we own them and
for the attendant to that but
that's a lot lower cost than
what we pay in a lease at the
end of which we have an old
building we have to replace
anyway so I hope you'll you'll
consider the facilities requests
seriously
I think the
Manager for this great program
of the match records pre order
explanatory but again Jason can
answer questions about that the
internal auditor continues our
efforts to review
of operations through the
auditor control group in the
master question elsewhere which
we think is beneficial to the
court's overall and is education
of one of the primary statutory
responsibilities of the AOC
pursuit budgets and expenditures
in the of course not the
favorite part of my job is
districts but that's the way it
is
I will tell you that
the significant increase in the
administrative court eight
budget for FY twenty five.
this is what we need to pay as
as well as we can figure right
now but the cost will be in FY
twenty five.
I did mention for example the
facility we're gonna own here in
Santa Fe.
back when I was younger and
foolhardy I would have thought
by now we would be done with
that because we've been at this
for quite awhile but you know
things moved at their own pace
we are now out for bids for
actual construction
plants no it's not self service
plans in Santa Fe so at some
point along the building and
we'll have a maintenance budget
that is on operations budget for
the building that will not be
close to the five hundred
thousand plus that we pay for
Santa Fe magistrate court for
facility if you've been there.
You wouldn't pay five hundred
thousand dollars here for I can
tell you that much so
At some point that will go away
but we can't I can't tell you
certainly with the last several
years experience but will be out
of the building on July first
twenty twenty five I don't think
we will be
I hope we occupy the new
building sometime during fiscal
year twenty five and then we
will be paying that
Lease obligation but.
We have to plan is that that's
not necessarily going to happen
because anything can happen in
the construction to slow it down
or get in the way let's hope
none of that happens and it goes
up for a quickly but if you're
around Santa Fe when they built
a new District Court I guess not
new anymore they ran into a like
a Superfund site right.
And it took a year and a half to
do the old boiled that had
accumulated over there from an
old gas station none of that's
going to happen at the site in
Santa Fe we're we're doing the
magic part but we don't know for
sure so that's a significant
increase of this is not a
Senator funds that we keep right
so they referred if we don't
spend them so if we're lucky and
the first available June
thirtieth of twenty four we have
a big celebration and we want to
paid a half million and maybe we
revert some money in twenty
twenty five that's very unlikely
to happen and there are
contingencies like that
throughout the magistrate eight
budget is the is this what
what's gonna happen Springer
can't tell you although I know a
member of the committee is quite
anxious to have us figure out
what the answer is
the we have a building going up
in Clovis that's between the.
The jail to detention center in
the historic district court that
they're renovating and we will
turn that building over to the
county page on it but in the
meantime we're spending I don't
know where we have to fourteen
million
on a two story magistrate
building that will be part of
the district courthouse when
it's all done so
That's my thumbnail explanation
of the significant increase in
the agency budget
You know there are that that's
of all the moving parts budgets
we have that one has maybe the
most parts that move from here
to here so I hope you will
consider that request
for.
And with that I'd be happy to
answer questions or
Yes hard questions station
which.
It was the subject of.
Mr Mr Bevin so that the three
point one eight four million
that from you to cut from the
two thousand seventeen number
seventeen eighteen nineteen
average answer for COVID okay
and and I can tell you from.
Cynthia and her group did an
extraordinary job which he took
over which was a long time I
think two thousand seven
something the fifteen year.
Two thousand
but.
The revenue wasn't even close to
that for a long time now Cynthia
had the revenue at at that point
because they do really good work
I think they're really happy.
To be going out of the business
of trying to collect the money
that pays for the programs run
from people a hundred dollars at
a time but they didn't
extraordinary job at three
million dollars will go to good
use and no doubt and and I very
much appreciate a lot of the
programs and I know it's simply
just another rock star in the in
the judiciary my question was
two point eight four three
million of that three point one
is the existing positions so
those temp positions that are
becoming permanent and it's not
listed like pre like we just did
with that man so so is there a
list of positions that are now
looking to become permanent with
that.
Mr chair and not to touch the
day that's true that's not
everything they're going to
spend the money on us without a
phone with us you know we're
gonna spend all three million
one hundred eighty four thousand
dollars yes the bulk of his
people of course and ongoing
operations.
Mr chairman of chief judge
Chavis there.
Is a list
Here that has all of so every
every position that's case
management specialist.
We have K. under especialista
use ones twos threes and case
management.
Providers so it wasn't put in
the budget request justification
and so you know in that form we
take the taps them we make them
firm so that we're aware of it
and so that so I I saw the list
I know you have staff but I want
to make sure that we you know
we.
We turn that orange to an apple
or whatever term the firm
appropriate analogy it so those
are the ones in that list that
are all listed as time.
All right and then the next
pieces so and in the
justification it says about two
point eight million is K. for
staffing that other three
hundred thousand is is Warren
compliance and in the
justification which I think it
makes sense shifting away
because you're not collecting
that hundred dollar fee but
doing what we can to ensure
better appearances see can you
tell me a little bit about what
what those programs is it text
messages going out to people
what we are we changing
allocating I just three hundred
thousand point those programs Mr
chairman chief judge Chavis one
of the things that I think the
most important thing that we've
done is we've begun to do the
research on the front when the
citation comes in that's when we
check motor vehicle and the skip
trace databases ahead to make
sure that we have the correct
information for the for the
person on the citation we've
also
started to.
Notify people before something
is due you've got a payment
coming about a court appearance
coming you've got were coming up
we also place about ten thousand
outgoing calls a month advising
people of what they need to do
to to stay in compliance and
Statewide we've seen about a
twenty one percent reduction in
failures to appear in the
magistrate court through this
work.
It's
We're we're also about to start
a project where
the because we know that the
longer someone is waiting to get
to a point the more likely it is
that they're going to be non
compliant so we're about to
start a pilot project working
with the tents the fifth and the
fourth where a judge he doesn't
have a full docket every single
day we'll take some of the
overflow traffic docket and here
though so that we can get people
moving into the system more
quickly and yes.
All right follow up I think for
Jason but maybe already so you
manage forty six thank you
Cynthia manage forty six forty
six magistrates court leases how
many of those are actually and
county District Court
consolidated or or county
building.
I used to know this but I don't
know since we don't directly I
don't directly deal with the
magistrates
Come up in my head somewhere
around ten or so but this.
Really less than ten so if tiles
red cross will return on now.
Hello this is that a low so
reduction Silver City of sort of
co locate enough to the court.
And that the reason I'm asking
that question is there supposed
to be that movie were exposed to
where we can and of course
there's geographic limitations
and otherwise so you're asking
for regional people that are you
know closer to the area there's
not as much travel but is it at
a potential.
Lower work management in the
future I guess for facilities
management and and I say that
understanding you guys do need
people obviously we've had
multiple conversations on these
issues but isn't it potentially
as we work towards consolidation
you know theoretically with the
county.
You not having it these landlord
issues are present.
Theoretically.
Mr Chairman the to to Chavez I
wish that there were work in
practice you should have been
with us on the the normal times
we have attempted to work out a
co location in Cibola County for
example or even in Sandoval
county where.
We get there in the money's then
it's not there we get it's it's
been a decade with the
thirteenth district in Santa Fe
County the thirty because I'm
not just picking on them but
those are two examples where.
It makes so much sense to be co
located with the county they
have the capacity to do it and
then we get it not to vote on
the county commission or some
kind of manager decides we're
we're invading their territory I
don't know what it is things
happen and it it it just takes
longer so we could located for
example in
Carrizozo.
After the Chief Justice and I
had to go for the county
commission together twice and I
went down there at least two
more times to explain to them
why this was a good idea to get
enough votes out of the county
commission to get it done so.
That carries through with our
landlord.
And some are great and summer
not to work with and it doesn't
necessarily make it less less
challenging
At.
Yes a bombing at a think that
these facilities positions
through AOC would be able to
also assist the counties and the
management of those co located
facilities and provide
assistance to the districts if
they're having issues with the
county for the District Court
you have a facilities expert in
the region
counties don't always have the
facilities person on staff or
available or it's not always a
priority for the county so we'd
like to be able to offer
that assistance to the districts
and magistrates courts can
currently really there's there's
two positions but you guys about
a high level of turnover in
those two positions yes and so
going from essentially to
physicians are asking you know
those would be the two main
positions and then these would
be for people in addition under
them that's correct and and you
believe that the work load
needed to manage these forty six
justify those four positions yes
in the US right now though part
of the reason for the high
turnovers is because of the
amount of travel that these
facilities people have to do and
I have to try and be in multiple
locations at one time and this
is it's really not sustainable
so that really leads to burn out
so that was the idea behind
getting these regional
facilities positions.
RTS to the internal auditor how
many internal auditors to half
for court operations as it is
three thirty.
Okay and part of that is you
know there are a number agencies
us to deal with their own
financial there's other
obligations we we added those
three in the last two years is
that right no for just one.
To been there forever but the
sorry not the people they've
been there a long time but the
positions of in there for since
I started AOC.
All right and the reason I ask
is some of we've we've had
discussion the last couple years
about that overlapping now the
district's responsibility and
audits because they're
controlling the financials there
over the magistrate court
they're receiving those yearly
audits so why are we needing an
additional auditor to to to do
that for court operations.
For those magister facilities.
This would be to help with the
both the magistrate and district
facilities now we're doing more
with doing the the special just
got its for the the districts
for the the pre trial on it and
the appeals and there's there's
I think issues that we've we've
seen come up in those audits
that
Give us some you know as some
help about.
Identifying areas of that there
we may want to develop more
standard operating procedures
for data entry purposes for the
District Court particularly on
the pre trial
audit which should be coming out
pretty soon auditors working on
finalizing that the but the
request for that on it came from
the legislature because they
wanted more accurate data on on
the detention motions how those
are being handled what's being
done you know for bonds and
conditions if the detention is
to nine and through the audit we
found that there really.
There's not that much unified
processes in the district courts
for for dealing with those cases
so it's hard for us to come up
with accurate data to provide
the legislature when these these
requests come in for data so to
help future.
That accuracy
I think this audit is going to
help us identify how to
establish better standardize
practices so it patrols not the
only area you know that we could
look at for that but it's just
it's kind of where we started
but that's one of the things
that the audit program can do
that the external audit doesn't
so external on it truly looks of
financials but the internal
audit looks at the case
from start to finish to identify
areas with data entry any
discrepancies between
what was actually ordered by the
judge in was entered by the
clerk or
what was prepared by the parties
is verses you know what was
ordered by the judge in court
kind of cleaning up
discrepancies like that but it's
mostly it helps of that entry as
well to make sure that clerks
are entering the data the same
way each time on each type of
case so those are things that we
also like to look at more for
the districts we've been doing
it a long time for the
magistrate courts so that's what
we have a lot of standard
operating procedures for the
magistrate courts that we have
developed over the years but
it's just not something that
we've been able to really assist
the districts with
until we actually look at how
the districts are doing things
how it works for that entry and
how it looks gives us the
accurate.
That on this record with this
stuff tell a judicial education
so you look at that you find
issues and use and then you
train.
Yes staff from the state
department right of course I
have plenty questions but a
limited to one more that way
obviously everybody else can
have have the floor of the
security project manager I
believe we have we have proved
that last year the legislature
approved it and then use it for
something.
Health yes I'm happy to explain
that thank you for bringing that
up it is discussed by the way in
the justification questions as
to why we did that but yes we
did do that and we want to be up
front about that so the hedges
yes so you prove the security
position and another facilities
position
unfortunately only the security
position made it into LESC
recommendation on the only
position that we ended up with
But.
Looking at the needs of a
quarter operation
I could have kept that security
position put it into the
security program which would
help the security programs.
But the facilities program would
still be struggling and you know
we already talked about how
complicated the least budget is
in the financials for
the facilities program
it also.
kind of mingles with the
security program
so which makes it even more
complicated but all of the a lot
of the money for the security
stuff comes out of the
facilities budget comes out of
those special appropriations or
capital appropriations that's
also managed by the facilities
program
so.
To better meet the needs of
primarily the security and
facilities program but also on
the court operations division
overall we decided it would be
best to turn the security of the
one new position that was
approved by the legislature into
a financial specialist position
for court operations to manage
all of the.
appropriations leases basically
all the purchasing for core
operations the bulk of which is
through the security and
facilities program instead of
having those I recreated and
causing confusion about who's
spending one out of one pot of
money having that'll centralized
through this financial
specialist person would provide
relief to both programs that
we're we're needing
additional personnel structure
much Mr chair we took over the
administration of two additional
leases for of the compliance
program the one for some program
where we have offices based in
Rio Rancho and in Los crucis
so would have enough to do for
the leases we have those those
are pretty stable though because
we're just leasing office space
but
That that just adds to the work
and you know I I I I agree with
the call hundred percent on the
financial oversight rather than
the security but.
Actually need more than this for
security personnel but.
And I appreciate maybe some
frustration the committee
approved this and it it got
through but
between when we ask for the
positions where we hit the
ground July one in a budget.
Our assessment of the prairies
change and I think justifiably
so for the reason services
state.
Mr chair of those are my
questions from committee members
I see tension Duffy.
Please.
Thank you Mr chair.
The conversion of this position
as it happened yet of the
financial specialist position
yes we are currently advertised
okay and so does that person
work on temple steamers is a
separate separate this will be
under court operations so we
decided we really need a
financial person in court
operations to handle all of the
front end of
procurement we do a lot of
procurement for facilities
manager lot of contractors this
the leases are very complicated
and they'll have different
escalation clauses they'll
expire at different points so
that it's a lot of financial
management that's in housing
court operations
before we actually send.
A request to fiscal so then they
work on the back and to make
sure everything gets approved
the DFA
but yeah we need somebody with
that financial expertise and
also kind of centralized not
housing or one specific program
but.
centralizing core operations
manager so this does not affect
dimples requested the HSD fiscal
requested anyway now this is
purely for the core operations
budget which is Mr chairman or
might seem on paper it makes
more sense not to have this
position over there put another
person in fiscal to manage the
leases right but it makes a lot
more sense to have the in house
basically in the division at the
fiscal sent aware of what's
going on with the leases and
managing these budget and all
that lot there's a lot of
documentation goes along with
those expenditures setting them
up so we monthly that
automatically and all that stuff
but I really does belong in the
in the division as opposed to it
would just be a necessary
separation if I can explain a
little bit more about why we're
doing this particular position
currently well up until now
the project managers have kind
of manage all the procurement
for in each individual program
but like I said that kind of
causes some conflict and
confusion between the programs
and
State you know don't always know
what's available in the budget
because you know Security about
something the facilities need
something also so it really will
help make things more efficient
we have one central person kind
of managing this I I don't doubt
your reasons for wanting to
structure it the way that you do
I think my question is more
geared toward if we fully
approved the request for AOC
fiscal with that allow your
division to request funds
position back to its intended
classification.
No all right
mice my other question for you I
didn't see it in any of the
individual budgets but it's on
the overall spreadsheet here
ASC's advancing again another
request this year for the
property reserve fund okay and I
didn't see that talked about but
it seems like this would be the
right fit for it
And I think my only question
long those lines is what who's
going to manage that and is four
hundred and fifty enough now
that AOC now that the judiciary
is going on I facilities instead
of three the short answer your
last question is no yeah
We're going to start somewhere
the requested relief statewide
or in this case for over many
entities have buildings and the
connected to mention in my
opening and hundred north chair
wanted probably handle them
separately but as soon as you
know we tried to initially
discussed.
Two years ago or something
having to go to the courts that
own buildings and in it over
time the conversations with
among others the Supreme Court.
It we felt that make sense have
the money in the hands of the
AOC so that whichever building
caught on fire or what happened
but we needed to use funds to
replace an elevator or whatever
it is we would be able to access
those funds from AOC to any of
the entities ninety of the
Courts that needed as opposed to
trying to figure out what you
might need a hundred thousand
here you might need half million
but the number is low hoping we
can get started there so at
least we have something New
Mexico for a lot of emergencies
in our building can't really
cover emergencies in two or
three buildings but.
You know experience with because
we need to increase the request
as we go along.
Thank you I think that was my
major concern want to as one of
the entities that owns the
building and seen how much goes
wrong with it in a year knowing
that one catastrophic failure in
our court like if we needed to
replace the H. back and I think
metro said last year to do that
would be north of million
dollars capital request right
but it's also this is something
that you can plan for and so
that's where this comes in and
so I'm concerned if it's going
to cover I introduce or not
we're not asking for enough to
protect our our assets you Mr
chairman and judge it would be
more than we have now felt if we
make it more modest maybe we
have a chance to say.
Give us the money and then
you'll see if we needed a we
carry over four fifty for four
years in a row I guess we were
wrong we will be wrong
try managing a historic building
in that has elevators that were
built in the Hoover
administration it's it's a that
we will need the money but
you're you're right to be
concerned about the number but I
I do think it's a good place to
start and maybe it'll be easier.
Request and that requires
legislation that's why it's not
in the budget it's a legislative
request with money attached to
it.
Thank you Mr chair at this my
questions Mr there's Mr Kirk in
the judgment.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
already thank you Jason I have a
question regarding the
Really the the whole.
Facilities management project I
guess I'll call it and looking
at the justification
justifications so it provides a
good explanation not necessarily
saying I don't agree with that
but I'm curious about the
conversation the thought process
on going.
You know when we started
consolidation there is always a
conversation about with local
districts takeover facilities
management it seems like that
conversation was still ongoing
I'm gonna look at this as a a
proposed solution to cater to go
to regional some curious of if
has there been feedback from
other districts and what they
think of the regional management
and then have you discussed.
How you break up the region's
already.
R. and the short answer is
If we don't expand the capacity
to resource within AOC we
probably need a facilities
person in each of the districts
private centers we need thirteen
at least right and given our
challenges with finding the
people with the right expertise
for our peculiar kind of
facilities management.
In AOC.
I would be a lot of trouble in a
lot of district courts to be
able to do that so we have
talked to people we didn't have
a formal discussion about this
with within the budget committee
or surveyed people but that's
the the conclusion is based
largely on our experience with
the challenges of managing the
facilities and that more
efficient seems to be more
efficient to have a person who's
got you know for I districts
that they're focused on rather
than
you know the whole state of
time.
I I don't know I don't believe
that districts would never be
able to find a facility I
believe and.
Some of those districts don't
really need a full time person
but when they need a person we
want them to have a person who
knows what they're doing is
familiar with the court can get
responses out of the land order
whoever it is we need to get
responses
adaptation when addressing any
further.
as far as where we would put
these positions it I guess just
depends we advertise them
statewide see who's available
and what kind of regions but
we're thinking no breaking the
state up until to four quadrants
but we probably need another
position here in Santa Fe to
help manage the new Santa Fe
magistrate court which will on
but do kind of cover the the
central areas as well.
one down in the Los crucis area
madam the southern area of them
you know we'll have to figure
out where there's.
Availability to look at the end
I think you've got an office in
the renovated historic
courthouse.
No and I appreciate the answers
I do you know it is it's kind of
a revamping of the whole you
know the whole process the whole
way we do things I don't think
it's a bad idea it's just it's
our kind of want to educate
myself a bit more in what you
guys are thinking in these
positions are housed in a
provide some and Roswell that
lives in Raso maybe they're
housed in Roswell on the cover.
You know X. number of areas
Nothing in there are going to be
up here with me.
Because you know they need to be
out there were buildings are if
we can do it.
Okay not appreciate the
appreciate the answer thank you
thank you Mr thank you Mr.
Mr Kerr in the General.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
hear a little bit more about how
you arrived at the figure for
the safe surrender event how
many events do you think that
will be able to do what to those
expenses cover
Are those events successful I
know we just did one and the
twelfth was it successful in
your opinion.
Thank you for the answers Mr
chairman
this is an example of how cities
transition from one forced to to
compliance we should do more
roundups we try to go sneak up
on people and and grab them
because that are outstanding
work which is allowed to arrest
uble complete one eighty on the
approach when we say send a
postcard out to the people who
you know don't are compliant and
say listen you are weren't going
to get arrested on the side of
the road when you're driving ten
miles over the limit please come
in next Saturday's to wherever
well you've experienced it and
we'll see if we can get this
taken care which happens most of
the time
and I just put in a plug for
cities group but sit there how
conception addresses going to
get us that what we need to do
on saves around Mr chairman
members of the committee that in
the in the four hundred category
so that will cover advertising
supplies
and we're trying to do a ten
events for fiscal year.
And.
Yes the Alamogordo that was
incredibly successful I would
have been happy if we've seen
forty five or fifty people
through the door we solve many
more than that plus the people
called and secure their issues
over the telephone we were at
two hundred and seventy nine.
Within a couple of days after
the event that was very
successful two hundred and
seventy nine people who don't
have to go to.
As the chief judge Thomas is
likely a okay so we need at
least two eighty.
It reduces it to seventy
thousand we can get that number.
Make three.
It questions to secure.
I guess I still just.
I don't know I.
It's.
Is the sixty nine thousand based
off of what you spent and
Alamogordo times ten or I just
am.
Feel a little shaky on the
justification of that amount
still Mr chairman members of the
committee so it is not just what
we spent in Alamogordo but all
of the events that we've done
over the last five years again
that the personnel costs for an
R. two hundred category law
enforcement costs of any will
come under the three hundred
this is just what we need to
perfect the advertising and the
supplies for the event.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr hi and this one but
I appreciate the effort is to
get assessed for more money.
Protection I would do more we
were happy with the success of
the event so I want to make sure
it's.
You know that other people can
have the same thing success.
To learn thank you Mr
on the the replacement
I notice that your war fund
balance.
Started.
Add slightly more than two
million dollars is down to about
seven hundred
Would you spend one point three
on.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we spend it on two
hundred expenses three hundred
funded for.
Person both in the.
So I would say for example this
lot over time evolved into this
appropriations because we're
operating on weekends are doing
the same Surender than something
like that so I authorize and all
moreover time for her group than
any other I would say for
example
I think it's money well spent
and I think like the success and
I'm part of this is an example
of why you want to Senators I
was gonna prior to this fiscal
year we were also spending on
the leases for the more offices
in Los crucis in Rio Rancho that
was coming out of the warrant
Fund but we're able to get
appropriation to cover that
under general fund for the
starting this fiscal year.
That was a significant expense
as well and if I would just add
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the the program
shifted from
what's coming and how much to
should we collect in order to do
this particular thing instead to
making sure that we're providing
the best most of global services
to people across the state and
so are the the reason that we
have reached into the fund
balance more in the last.
I fiscal year than ever before
is because we change the full
authority of of how we do our.
To be very kind of saying we
stopped really done in people
for their hundred dollars and
focused on doing other things
and because the success of the
program as I said Senator my
collecting three million a year
for a while they had enough of
those to be able to make that
transition but you know we gotta
keep going.
So if you if you're successful
in getting the fee replacement
this fund eventually will go
away.
Yes I guess the rules yes.
In fact I think the legislation
on really tax my brain says if
it was assessed before.
It can be forgiven from
collection now so correct we
don't expect after July first
next year the you know in and
another fees you collect them
for ever you know you can open
up a two thousand six K. while
you're collecting money but we
don't expect it to be revenue
into the fund.
Thank you Mr does my questions
for
questions from.
Of different physical question
regarding the internal auditor
the statement you all making
your justification.
Is that
This supports our goods a good
starting point for setting
fiscal matters misstated the
dockets however they're only as
good as the information is put
into the system by the courts
and I guess what I'm and that
you can kind of touch on this I
just wanna make sure I
understand it seems to me to
make sure that you don't get
garbage in garbage out is that a
good SO P. in the beginning so
you don't have garbage going and
so can you just flush out a
little bit for me on that point
about SO peas yes so that will
audits really help us kind of.
Figure out where we need to
develop SO peas because auditors
the audit bench different point
Missy the deal with the courts
are doing things differently
entering data differently
and also work closely with with
digit staff and see what kind of
the best processes for from
their perspective as far as
creating reports
So.
The audits if there's not in SO
P. already developed
the will identify how the courts
doing it and make
recommendations
to **** or whatever committee
needs to develop the SO peas
joker for whatever works
To develop SO peas based on
the way it's probably working
best in whatever court is doing
at the the way that provides the
most accurate data and then they
can take that from the audits
and say okay this court is doing
it this way and this works well
when you run the reporting
inaccurate data these other
courts are doing it this way so.
Let's develop innocent people
based on on the way that it's
working in this particular point
in I should say Mr chairman and
for a long time I thought it was
a mistake to column internal
auditors because the word
auditor
it's confusing because you think
you're getting you know the kind
of are you get from your
external auditor and people
think they're you know they're
gonna come after about the money
in the process of an external
audit is much less pleasant than
dealing with the folks who do
the internal audit Charlene and
her they do they do great work
and they really present the
information in a way the says we
would like to help you work.
More efficiently so you not
killing yourself when you can
handle these things in a way if
you if you follow state
procedure that would help they
don't dictate they don't change
procedures themselves the report
through the work that they do
with the courts and the as
Station so those get sent to the
places that could address the
issues in these and now you
know.
you know Paul is a strong woman
but I will put too much on her
but this will eventually
integrate with
the education is to do what we
need to be training or clerks on
where we train them for the
first time in a long time I know
where the high high incident
areas where District Court
clerk's were certainly measure
quickly just need training
because we see consistent
challenges in those areas that's
what it's for not to.
You know published reports say
substances such accordance
mismanaged or what thank you.
Thank you.
Since okay I have a couple are.
Hi.
If I make sure I have a I have a
motion.
And that in the budget
justification Turner category a
large portion of that three
million is supposed to be term
the from it's my understanding
and it's not listed there and
when we make our deliberations
we do need to just that.
so if you look there's no
positions there but under the
justification it indicates that
two point eight million is for
salaries.
So I I want to move that they
find that prior to our
deliberations all the term
positions that they're seeking
to make the program.
In the a revised budget
justification to include ups so
consistent with other requests
correct.
so a motion to require that you
resubmit your request your cover
sheet with the
the state specific positions
second from to discreetly at a
discussion.
Okay call vote left right judge
judges more this chart does the
food bank yes differently to
discuss this matter the district
early Mr speaker Mr from my
understanding to talk about in
the section and question to the
three point.
Twenty four million which people
are going to be could put on
general fund.
Yes and so I think said to have
a list here but it's not in our
network and so it we want to
make sure we see that so we can
do that forth with.
Okay so if you questions in a I
love that you guys answered
many RTS many homes I don't have
to I don't have to just real
quickly okay so you could where
is that financial special is the
one that you said using the
security person what what did
you put that person.
so they'll be I guess not Andrea
they're not on there yet they'll
be us
under me but not under specific
program so it'll be
yeah financial admin position
for the entire division
directly supervised by me
Senator Mr because course is
positioned in FY twenty four
which is.
Where we are ten years old and
this is what what what where
they were going to be where they
are okay I'm still okay thank
you for that
The
at the center of a few questions
of course if you want to come
back up
The.
The answer to so the percentage
of the work you do now see you
you talk about compliance with
first of all are you done so
just understand that I really do
the the percentage of FDA FTC
FTE work what what does that
look like and and there's a
point to a the question so if
you would Mr chairman and and
when we're talking about working
on the warrants the failures to
pay are by far the largest
category.
I'm sorry the smallest category
with the largest category is the
failures to appear.
Right that that's helpful
because I think bill to pay that
mean I don't know but I think in
a decrease with the limitation
of the funding will be
collecting fines but that fees
will be gone so this that should
really go down.
quite sure people act rationally
every citation will demand to go
to motor vehicle and then
refused to pay because I can't
do anything.
Is that the okay so thank you
for that and then on on the same
kind of the same the the the
well actually different Sen
central entry program for the
tickets so point that out now I
know you were looking at doing
that kind of more a statewide
for for that.
Mr chairman we have what we have
staff in Carlsbad Los crucis and
reworked.
For for the central entry what
what what what what districts
are you doing that work for.
Which districts.
They're close to the microphone.
Concern over his.
Currently we have the third the
fourth the fifth the six we have
some of the event.
we have.
The twelfth so but some of the
twelve some of the line.
And that's about it we currently
have twenty seven of the
magistrates courts we have
seventeen left Mr chairman
members the committee for those
of you who don't know this is
Desiree Martinez can she run
that citation process the.
So it and so twenty seven
seventeen left so that the
ultimately the plan to have
meant for everybody or is that
is this just kind of district by
district magistrate court a
magistrate court is there a roll
out plan Mr chairman we do have
a roll out plan and it is our it
is our goal to have the services
offered to all of the magistrate
court in the state.
Because presentations are just
in the distaff like all
incredibly and since like twenty
sixteen to study that planned so
just wondering you know as that
continues then you I don't know
if you need more people to do
that work or the ability to do
it because I stations are down.
One at have an idea that's a
look like there's that there's a
combination of of factors Mr
Chairman number one is that
automation so the tracks up has
decrease the amount of.
Of data entry that we have to do
we believe that we can absorb
the rest of the match reports
with our current staffing
because it's not just the
citation processing that's going
to see improved efficiencies
through automation same is true
in compliance so as one gets
busier we anticipate that one is
going to get a little less busy
and so we can we can balance
that way okay thank you and then
you mentioned part earlier about
this in the tent the fifth and
the fourth using using judges so
what is that.
Look from the side just using
the judges are using judges
statewide or or or so we have
identified judges in the tenth
who have agreed to take on
additional traffic cases when
their dockets are not full and
then we have identified
point in the fourth and the
fifth who could use some extra.
so instead of us a traffic
defended to wait forty five
sixty days for arrangement we
can get them in and stay within
their own have been seen within
the thirty days as as we look
for calendars that are less for
so we're gonna try this out
using the tenth with the fourth
and the fifth see how it works
and then we'll take the show on
the road.
I think it's great because one
of the it really allows I think
maybe to have some some evidence
if if we decide to go back with
the the statewide initiative to
to allow the traffic statewide
for magistrate courts I think
that it'll be really good to
have some data there so thank
you for that I think that
clarification
C..
the so data the lowest facility
you all feel manage the Loomis
lease so yes that's the one of
the.
things at the facilities program
will be taking over it was kind
of managed as we're moving in
by carry on or I don't know if
you all know Kerry but she would
to kind of manage the whole AOC
move process and then
jaded and CSD which have the
bulk of the positions there
Lomas
have been kind of managing the
facility but yes going for we
want to centralize it to be
managed by the facilities
manager at an agency so that's
something that we've been
recently discussing and and
transitioning that
responsibility to.
Court operations.
Okay I think if you that's all
my questions back to committee
members as is our second
question required to just have a
job anything.
With one.
Thank you I will get the hang of
this by Thursday
What I'm really doing ten more
enforcement events and I I guess
what I'm asking is we're leaving
out some of the districts and
you anticipate doing these every
year and every district has that
work how do you decide.
Mr chairman members of the
committee if we if we saturate
the state with the infants
then they become less effective
instead of be compliant to the
court people will just wait
until the next event rolls
around.
so instead and so when we do
these events if we do them let's
say in Talbot county any person
from the entire state who have a
warrant that resides within a
fifty mile radius of that court
will be invited doesn't matter
who issued a warrant Phillis Los
crucis rock pool and so we do
In each of the events.
Take care of of the people in
every single district because
they're out they're all invited
so it's more about finding the
populations of people and then
going to those locations to
invite thank you that that helps
find a lot of contacts for with
these look like my second
question related to that is if
you do an event in Taos county
for example is the expense the
same as if you were doing
something into a bigger area
like the second are the cost
equal per event.
What is a very by location Mr
chairman and members of the
committee the event will vary by
location for things like
advertising
of course the at the amount of
staff that we would devote to a
smaller district is different
than the amount of staff that we
would devote to say the third
fourth or the second also the
number of we call them
invitations that the postcard
that we sent to people saying
Hey where this mechanism that so
those that would increase as
well I will say when we have
attended events in the second
little spent anything we just
kind of show up and wait for the
match rate people to come on the
side but we were hoping to be at
the third the end of clothes for
the end of the year and that one
will be significantly more
expensive than probably what
we're going to spend in the
eighth.
Thank you was requested some
questions the sisters really
quick question not budget
related is your you just hired a
new statewide facilities manager
is that person here today is not
is actually on the road okay our
security manager okay I want to
meet him so okay a lot of travel
involved the.
Okay so I'm in the questions of
specific does it is it just just
used to have to Jason like a
lease payment schedule all of
you guys still have that to talk
about what each court is being
paid by lease we do have that
yeah and use tough also have a
prioritized list of of
Backstreet courts today still
maintain that list has been
looked at we do have both of
those lists we may need to
update the prioritized list and
so so not for this budget
initiatives but I I really I
want to ask you to work with
that judge Martin and his
subcommittee on the performance
because we're gonna be doing a
lot more with with facilities in
the affirmative evaluation and
that that lease information the
timelines of the leases and that
privatization is me really
really critical to that
performance evaluation and then
to speak to some of the work we
want to trying to the line up a
district court's image records
replacements and such so so look
look for a request from his his
subcommittee for that and if you
need to do some work on it
please do additional kind of
heads up that's coming I think
it R. as in closing.
No okay all right very good
thank you for your presentation.
So I did originally have
scheduled.
For services and as in the
morning and I I don't know the
numbers we're we're ahead of
schedule in terms of what the
get adjusted schedule
party do you think quite
services could go and the next.
Fifty five minutes do we get
from it's a big it is a big one
seal
I don't care about breaking it
up I mean if you wanted to you
know call time at five to twelve
and state will come back.
Whenever you want to the defined
to
the committee is been very
efficient on the budget so I
think we can do it but if you
wanna wait that's fine too if
you want to break it up that's
fine whatever mess that we go
forward okay okay.
All right so we'll take from a
vote but by consensus will push
forward so RT let's hear from
where services.
Okay.
The services the there's a lot
of programs for services because
here he is the director of court
services.
the.
Sure.
Again part questions follow the
purple tie fifty.
Let's uh Mattel paid to the
directors a set of point
services and we put
For budgeting purposes and
everything else you'll find
court education institute that's
Chasey now right portage cations
to in this area but Paul is the
director of that I believe that
eventually be a separate
division like a separate budget
will have a fifth budget for
we've been having so much fun
with our friends in the
executive and LESC over PTO
getting that done that figures
worth.
Trying to move the budget too so
will but the budget finding here
but that will be true for ever
anyway
Services so
That the there is here
another affect me to be one
thirty nine that has to do with
a cord education institute and
those of the fees occur J. C.
three dollar fee
the average generated revenue is
nine hundred seventy nine
thousand seven hundred dollars
so the only.
Appropriation I think directed
toward predication is that one
of that is replaced that with
general fund.
so that's one of those it's a
flat revenue but it's an
increase in our recurring
appropriation so therefore it's
an expansion in terms of you
know the general fund recurring
So recurring.
So and that's about a quarter of
the request in this budget which
are substantial
there's a transfer to the jury
what this program in the admin
budget of million a hundred
sixty seven thousand dollars and
mentioned in the previous budget
as a transfer out of
the court operations to court
services of twenty nine thousand
dollars for pre trial services
try to move on the money
particularly for pre trial into
one budget because for
no reason that makes a lot of
sense that.
Apple has to manage.
The funds for pre trial services
in three different budget so
anyway we're trying to move that
money in this case jury witness
which will move out but coming
into
the question is is funding
from court operations so anyway
just want to make you aware that
as you see the money she some
negative numbers that's what
those are the big activity in
this budget is pre trial
services and trust services is
of course a major initiative by
the judiciary and at the
direction of the Supreme Court
AOC was required to establish
pretrial services in every
district
and followed legal evidence
based practices in doing so as
you're well aware in the second
district in Albuquerque the
second judicial district and
metropolitan court have been
running pre trial service
programs and we have an
They haven't gone into it
Bernalillo county to do anything
different with pre trial
services except as you might see
in this budget to fund three
positions in the second district
expansion positions for pre
trial in the second district try
to alleviate the burdens on the
county but aside from that
working on pre trial in other
districts so we got a lot of
money from the legislature that
was under probation for two or
three years at a time to get
going and
That was certainly appropriate
and allowed us to go into the
districts and higher pretrial
services offices and other folks
to run the purpose of the
national beginning in the I
think this fiscal budget of
fiscal year twenty four we ask
courts that had to happen status
pre trial services program to
get them funded on their budget
so they're managing their pre
trial services program of their
people and we stop paying for
them and we go to somewhere else
and the fund positions
Representative permanent people
in the air see that will be
managing various aspects of pre
trial services going forward
one of them was a surprise to us
two years ago when the
electronic monitoring group was
formed at the direction of the
Supreme Court and now that unit
which operates in Albuquerque
seven days a week twenty four
hours a day except one bad I
think it's only twelve hours or
something
Following those on electronic
monitoring in the districts were
pre trial services seven
implemented whether that's just
a electric monitoring or scram
or whatever we're trying to
monitoring their under.
In addition to electronic
monitoring there is that the I.
PSA unit which is a background
investigation and public safety
assessment unit and if you do
criminal cases as well
W. services you seems reports
from PSA which are supplemented
by a background investigation
which gives you more information
than you would from the PSA and
PSA course
indicates where persons history
indicates they should be on a
superficial then you've got AOC
staff of course that oversee
like Kelly who manages the whole
program we're trying to do in
this budget is to fully fund for
nearly.
What will be the permanent cost
to AOC to manage to run the
operation of pre trial services
when we're done we are hoping we
finish in fiscal year twenty
five that's right two years we
have right first twenty four is
an ambitious program to
implement pre trial services in
the number of districts and the
ones that are left I would like
to do in fiscal year twenty five
what happened depends on many
many things these go faster or
slower depending on many
variables but that's our plan we
do that we have a pretty good
idea of what people need and you
know how much it will cost for
us to have them so the positions
that exist now through the
funding we've already gotten
from the legislature that is not
recurring amount to a little
over two million dollars this
twenty seven positions some of
them are filled and some of them
we will fill in fiscal year
twenty four and or twenty five.
as we as we finish the state in
the full scope of pre trial
services management
are is realized so.
In different categories of the
request for existing positions
that need funding that's a
little over two million dollars
million of that are these PM
positions are listed here first.
followed by the EMS folks that's
another two hundred eighty nine
thousand dollars
this is one separated out in the
the I. unit for the intake
officer and then
expansions are those that we
will fill in FY twenty four
again the funding to do so won't
is part of a recurring general
fund appropriation that's why
they're in this budget for
fiscal year twenty five so that
the people we hire we can keep
because they're funded again
this is a build up to get us
nearly to what it will cost us
to actually operate as a
permanent program the state
where we operate other programs
this is a little different but
well anyway that's what all the
funding is for
Yes more currently fill
positions you see on the on the
second page message two and
thirty five thousand program
dollar sorry and two more FY
twenty four positions that we
won't have general fund
recurring for twenty five of
them out to another hundred
thirty one thousand and.
Our service also so
It's a lot of numbers first
twenty seven positions there are
funded now but they're not
funded on a permanent basis and
the whole plan was to get to
this point and say all right now
that we know the whole scope of
the program you know in the
beginning there was going to
cost five million a year fifteen
million a year and it depends on
many things I think the
determination to move the staff
that are in the district court's
into the court budgets is really
sound and we this this request
is predicated on the idea that
that will happen and I think
that's right you should be
managing the courts should be
matching their person not AOC
but like a drug court program or
something like that we have a
lot of oversight we have direct
responsibility that's what this
program is so large because the
I. TSA provides as report
providers press to everybody in
all the districts and EMS will
monitor electronic monitoring in
all the districts so it's a big
program from fast we need to
make the funding permanent
I dissipate the legislature will
carefully question just about
whether all these people are
needed in FY twenty five I think
it's prudent to plan as if they
will be and I think that's the
right thing to do and I think we
might get there
Kelly is enormously resourceful
and the folks that she's hired
are working very hard to make
that happen so I think the
budget request is appropriate
for pre trial services even
though you know that's more than
half of the request in this
Division fifty seven percent
requests goes to fund these
positions of professors we have
a health has expansion positions
for F. P. R. for a
First quarter measuring to
clinicians and support.
What is something about which I
know little but
To know all that much because we
have the folks here are experts
in these things and Scott is
here to talk about how this
person for folks would integrate
with programs in the various
courts in behavioral health
services
but the have a health is asking
for about four hundred eighty
thousand dollars for those
positions to do so pilot
programming and for traveling
training which that seems like a
modest request to me
Representative additional
request for the other things
that are in the many programs
under court services and that
includes from us Roadrunner
access to justice a fifty
thousand dollars the court
pointed attorney for contracts
twenty seven thousand four
hundred dollars in contracts in
process two hundred fifty five
thousand five hundred the last
one is a little bigger but it's
predicated on the loss of of
federal funding revenue stream
which we can talk about if you
want us to
That's those are the requests
across the court services
division as I said it's not
surprising my focus on pre trial
services because it's a big ask
and it's a.
It's a turning point in how
we're looking at the program we
think we know enough now.
How many people are gonna need
how we're going to operate we
don't expect any more surprises
in expanding we're doing
although the early delegate
release programs will be folded
into the implementation but
that's not something for which
for us for funding
so with that be happy to try to
answer questions for lean my
friend Matteo to answer
questions about the various
complicated
aspects of the Courts services
division budget.
This call I should ask you
chairman the same thing for
questions.
That thank you very at Mr chair
of members of the committee
wanted to introduce a at RT
mention them already but we have
our senior statewide program
manager Kelly Bradford he's here
to discuss all things pre trial
and we also have Scott Patterson
statewide behavioral health
program manager to discuss
behavioral health requests.
Rob Mitchell series does all the
drug court work for us which
integrates a lot overlaps a lot
with favor health and if you're
learned about the decline in his
the fund balance you can ask
about that
but those programs are doing
very well and it's of the they
have a point of emphasis with
when I'm in a budget request
there have been a point of
emphasis and increase from the
legislature and I think Robson
actual job.
Trying to the maintain what
we're doing and provide useful
resources where we look like we
could.
That they could benefit people.
Thank you.
Thank you I will approach
committee members for a
questions and policy request
talk but education for.
beginning with the just.
From Martin R. Matthew.
All I prefer
more well judging to me or to
him.
Your vote.
Thank you dear
RT and.
Maybe moving slower this morning
I should be that as I'm
understanding your presentation
you said that twenty seven
positions you're asking for have
been funded is that the
secretary well.
Yes we have funding for them
through twenty four for the
current year and we're going to
hire but the some of these
people have been higher they
will be higher during twenty
four and twenty five.
The funding runs out in fact the
close the circle on the what we
need and what we have it's I'm
not sure we have all the money
we need through twenty five this
point
what we don't but.
We'll go as fast as we can with
the money we have the time the
legislature's been really great
New Mexico has been good about
allocating the money over like
three years period to implement
appropriately and the budget the
money so we can get where we
need to go but so we have money
and Kelly knows budget better
than I do on this but as I said
it's a it's a bit of a challenge
not not not the least of which
is as I said before the money's
in three different places so you
gotta try these money up over
here over there is a limited is
the service is a one time
appropriation got certain things
that can go for not other things
in the meantime we're trying to
fund
validation studies in the courts
outside of Bernalillo county
because that's important for the
PSA to be validated.
Lots of things but I think
thank I could stop by state a
yes we have the money to carry
the program forward at least end
of FY twenty five but so is this
that anticipating that these
positions will be filled if it
is how many positions to now
have fill.
For the.
I have a different Kelly knows.
Chairman of the committee so
really we were asked we're gonna
be hiring in FY twenty four
eight new positions five of
which are background
investigation public assessment
unit and we need those five
additional positions because as
we add on to jurisdictions
currently working to launch in
the twelve we need to add
additional staff to handle the
more the increased workload that
that staff is going to have and
the B. I. PSA unit as we call it
they work seven days a week
twenty two hours a day the other
three positions are going to be
in our electronic monitoring and
supervision unit the emotion
Authority refer to and that too
is to as we add on additional
jurisdictions but the after
hours monitoring we need
additional people in order to do
that so those are the eight
positions that will hire in FY
twenty four we do currently have
the funding but we're using that
one time funding that we got we
got three special appropriations
in FY twenty five two of them
were five hundred thousand
dollar appropriations that we
use to start the EMS unit that
unit has never been permanently
funded so we've been using this
one time money to staff and
expand that program and we
received a four hundred million
dollars
a four million dollar just.
This budget that's.
Four million four hundred and
four million dollars special FY
twenty two and that's we've been
tapping into since FY twenty two
and we will run out of that and
FY twenty five so we do is we
start with our reoccurring money
that we get every year which is
about two point eight and we
basically spend all that down on
salaries pre trial is about
ninety eight percent go straight
to salaries when that runs out
we start tapping into the
specials the two five hundred
thousand dollars specials read
received those are gone so what
we're left with is the four
million and we've already been
using that and this fiscal year
we plan to use about two point
eight of that in FY twenty four
and we're hoping on the have
about eight hundred thousand
dollars of that left in FY
twenty five so we've really been
trying to stretch this the
special appropriations as much
as we can so we can continue to
expand and move into sites.
So at the end of twenty twenty
five to these cost revert to the
districts or this this could be
continuing in just his sorry
these are staff yes okay so this
ask is is to find AOC free trial
just program the money for the
AOC positions which are
primarily housed in Albuquerque
the local site implementations
where we fund the program
manager and patrol officer
positions
this last year all the
jurisdictions that we're in now
got their appropriations so now
they have that and their general
funds the new sites that we plan
to work with in FY twenty four
twenty five will use some of
that the million that will have
left in FY twenty five but we're
going to be seeking a special
appropriation to fund those on
the front and and then the
courts will ask for that money
and their general fund request
and twenty six or twenty seven
we'll continue to fund those
until the courts get their
positions.
With respect to the behavioral
health.
Were these positions or asked
for last year and you didn't
get.
That.
Twelve of Representative members
the committee they were not we
got we received two positions
last year that we are going live
with recruiting since the S.
fiscal year just started these
are additional positions that
are in alignment with some of
the expansion projects were
doing pilot project was and also
the expansion of the use of
friends of navigation Court
navigation appears throughout
the United States also
throughout New Mexico.
Would you explain again what ari
was referring to in the pier
absolutely so.
Support workers are individuals
who have lived experience and
systems so individuals would
experience with severe mental
illness substance use disorder
many of the ones that we're
looking out for
The the front secured worse are
folks who actually have lived
experience in the judicial
system for people who have been
in front of a judge whether it's
you know simple
I'm gonna say simple and all the
judges can laugh at me a simple
competency issue where you're
seeing the person thirty five
times a year because they're not
being connected what a certified
peer support worker can do and
what a clinician can do is
connect folks to meaningful
services that have a goal of
keeping them out of the system
or extricating them in a way
that is a more beneficial so
there's some federal guidance on
certified peer support workers
that folks go through specific
training which in New Mexico we
partner with the executive
branch to make sure that the
folks who are being used in
courts are I'm cert similar
process that we have for
clinicians in that they have
specific training part of the
goal for this request is to also
increase the capacity of those
folks to understand how to
navigate the system itself the
traditional system and the law
enforcement criminal justice
system.
just positions being sub because
their evidence based justified
they are so there is definitely
in need for more research into
the use of peers specifically in
the court system however there
is a I think a good and national
body of evidence of supports
that using certified peer
support workers in peer support
workers can move people out of
additional.
Contact with the justice system
so you see that sometimes in
communities through C. I. T.
teams sometimes you see it
through court navigation
projects sometimes you see it
through a for the projects we're
doing in the eleventh you see it
in the use of craft so training
the concerned care givers of the
folks with the justice system
how did not interaction the way
that would lead to future law
enforcement involvement and how
to interact the way that would
increase and improve the
likelihood of somebody seeks
treatment for in cages and
whatever processing to engage so
there's some research good
research there should be more
reserves.
Thank you.
That's a different the other
questions from the committee.
Sakkari.
The judge mark.
We've been talking a lot about
care support workers and and
really in support of it
I'm wondering how it would look
to have them house at AOC is
that this the place they need to
be or do they actually need to
be and the districts.
And.
The hundred and twenty thousand
dollars for all three of these
positions Madam and then the
workers are all budgeted at the
same amount is that correct that
is correct Mr chair person and
ever expanding so Corey
definitely I think in in the
future they can and should be
health probably international
districts part of the reason why
I'm asking for them to be health
issue at this time his as we
move pilot projects out to a
provide that kind of
foundational guidance for
individuals four point similar
to your court this doing a
navigation pilot project to have
some central people that they
can rely on for additional
assistance the other reason that
I'm asking for the house and AOC
is to make sure that we're in
alignment with what is happening
on the other questions other
sections of government and also
the federal government so some
of the projects include trying
to come up with not trying to
coming up with specific training
and qualifications for somebody
to navigate the system when we
look at what I asked for part of
the reason I ask for hundred
twenty is that you all were so
generous last you to remind you
that I was lowballing myself
with my other physicians and so
I looked at the a recent
reorganization that the
executive branch did it for like
positions bumping them up to
category eighty to eighty five
which for us would be like a K.
K. and L. Allen and M. Hey what
are you Sir internal forms and
it's called the from myself and
of the benefit reform process so
when you all with us and that
really puts us
at for Kate Kate position a
little over a hundred thousand
something it's all the benefits
and and and el al which would be
probably what I've been going
for for the statewide program
manager more **** I think if I
looked at about a hundred
eighteen so find some wiggle
room but it's in alignment with
someone with what's happening in
the private sector right now but
also in alignment with the.
Budgetary reductions that occur
in the executive branch.
Thank you.
Scored in the questions.
I just want.
Thank you Mr chair of following
up on that peer to peer
Support.
Tell me a little bit more about
your pilot project what have you
done so far.
So looking at your support will
propel the projects so we've
been working with pre which the
office a few recovering
engagement and also the HSD in
HSD to develop some really
specific guidelines for what an
individual would need to know in
order to work successfully in
the court system but some of the
pilot projects engaged in our
really pilots through some
jamming CTE funding that we
received in FY twenty two one of
those is support navigator pilot
project in the twelfth judicial
district that isn't using the
pure but is using somebody with
I think I need from lived
experience in order to connect
folks to those services
The reason for this I ask is
because we are looking at
rolling out a couple of specific
pilot projects one is a
competency diversion pilot
project that we're hoping to
roll out for judicial districts
that looks at those hi utilize
hers those districts are going
to be in the third metro the
twelfth and fourth those high
utilizes who end up coming from
the magistrates and the district
court's multiple times for those
misdemeanors that really are
related to severe mental illness
and lack of
Lack of meaningful connection to
care so those pilots will
hopefully go live this year
the.
Forensic navigation pilot
projects we met with the
executive branch yes they were
looking at a roll out of that in
January of twenty five.
And.
Yeah I'm just trying to gauge
the need and you know you got
funding is going to start this
year and so I'm just trying to
figure out you're already asking
for an expansion for programs
you really having launched.
Thank you so.
Martin and members the committee
the funding we ask for last year
was actually for
A clinician and a business
specialist so we asked for those
positions we did not ask for
your support worker positions
last year we were looking at how
we're going to expand the work
for the bureau of department
does and how it supports
Judiciary yeah we are.
Hoping to be out in front of
what the national trend is of
we're looking at integrating
folks would experience so this
is not replacing or expanding
the position for you all funded
last year that started eleven
days ago
But it is to supplement them in
some way.
And then I noticed that last
year you were requests received.
Some training and you're asking
for additional training what
training do you plan on doing
this year and what would this
supplemental training be looking
for so some of the training
dollars is really looking at
doing
community specific traits
floodwaters Amal mapping
competency specific trainings
making sure that we're bringing
in experts in the field to
provide that training and also
making sure that we're doing in
a way that is responsive to a
specific Courts need so in the
last year that of course is was
the behavioral health summit we.
And put on that revolves
individual small through three
counties there's also been some
some mapping done in specific
districts and there's also been
some
Kind of subject specific
training for for.
Judges for court officers we've
also worked across the visions
we work with seo due to make
sure that there folks were
responding to people who are
experiencing crisis or trained
mental first aid so that's what
I'm looking at
Increasing access to across the
the state with middle for state
QPR those things that judges may
benefit from but also the court
staff the the clerks the the
bailiffs may benefit from as
well have you worked with miss
control about forty eight added
to her new division absolutely
yeah we got we actually reflect
on that and I think one of the.
To further answer the question
you didn't ask but maybe you'll
get to you have brought us and
brought us a really good idea
last year about.
How do we increase Education
about and you do your math
specifically for judges across
the state so we did team with
project echo last year and with
NCSC to have a cohort of judges
who were trained in the echo for
the judiciary so the small
cohorts we've been working with
polished Division and we also
had a meeting with UNM on Friday
which is the day on Friday
looking at how we can better
leverage echo to make sure like
the judging jhal can get that
information thing to so that's a
question you just last year that
we didn't fully answer that we
seek to answer this year.
I think it thank you for the
answers and I think those are
all my questions Mr chair on to
stuff in than to disturb us.
I thank you
I apologize if this is a
question that everybody else in
the room knows the answer to but
from where I sit this is a
little and familiar to me and
what I'm wondering about is it
what what extent AOC is managing
pre trial services and what
extent districts are managing
those individually and I'm
asking that because we have
districts making requests for
pre tell service expansion and
I'm wondering if there's any
duplication in those requests
and so I'm trying to understand
what is it that you're entities
doing and what is left the
districts and what's the end
game for all of those Mr members
of the committee
the districts are.
The the request asking for I
support one hundred percent or a
higher number if there is such
thing
because that means they're
getting local control over
people that were hired by them
but with our money and then we
get the money back and and it
can go to the first district
twelve district the places are
implementing now to hire people
that eventually they'll come to
you and ask for funding for so
the districts will have a pre
trial services staff members of
the they manage directly.
Just to oversee the whole
program is in charge of many
things one of which is to ensure
the best practices are continue
to be following all that and
this particular area then it's
data intensive from the get go
from the beginning so with this
fly a measurement that occurs to
tell us are we are we staying
within the right lines within
the district and if we are great
they're doing terrific us with
they need any help support
whatever is always something
going on but it's also an
interesting program because we
need a lot is going to number
twenty seven people.
Right which we didn't have this
year of five years ago.
when we had Kelly that was one.
That long ago so but it's
teaching because we're
performing a statewide functions
so when they the the the I. TSA
you they provide every judge is
going to see somebody who got
arrested overnight with
background investigation report
and a public safety assessment
when before they see that person
on the bench in the set
consisting of of released.
That's a lot of work we could
have done it district by
district but it would be a lot
more people doing in the B. it.
It's good for them to have the
Senator being together.
And so those are generated
usually overnight by the unit
that's located in Albuquerque
our permanent staff includes the
EMS people who are doing.
Outside of Albuquerque they're
doing the monitoring of the
electronic monitors when the
court staff is an important so
overnight which is when most of
the violations occur as a whole
protocol about how they deal
with those violations and things
like that dedicated court staff
handles the daytime and you
handle the after hours exactly
because often the emission if
it's not a serious violation
which is not actually.
But I happened but it's
something that the staff was
communicate to the day staff
people who were supervising
these individuals Hey this is
what we got on Mister Smith we
contacted anything that's okay
but you know to inform them
whatever the interaction occurs
that and then you've got the
sort of admin staff and Kelly
oversees the whole program and
they generate all the data in
our staff and and all those
things so just you will forever
far as we can tell eventually
find the background reports and
the PSAs for everybody in the
state of the court in the state
for all the criminal defendants
get arrested overnight into come
to court and they will do all
the electronic monitoring on the
off hours records not open from
eight to five and of course that
Mr staff will oversee best
practices and some people to
trainings and etcetera etcetera
etcetera so that's the those are
the big pieces that are going to
be with A. O. C. and how they I
hope the integrate well with the
District Court personal our
staffing in a particular
district the the supervision of
personals order by the judges
when they sent conditions of
release is that.
One and.
And just to to kind of give some
numbers so for the M. S. unit in
the month of June we're in the
first the second the third and
then incentive on the Lynsey
County the M. S. unit handled
thirteen thousand alerts that
came through just after hours
and so that's really the and as
we expand that out we're gonna
need a few more folks they're
pretty efficient but once were
in the entire state those
numbers will definitely go out
and in the background
investigation unit the B. I. TSA
unit over the last year and
we're in about twelve counties
now they've done fifteen
thousand four hundred and five
background investigations and
PSAs so far so as we add on more
sites we need a few more folks
we don't think we need to double
our staff but we do think we
need to add on about five more
to make sure that we can provide
that support to the point
all the time so that's just kind
of that is our tremendous amount
of work and numbers that go into
Mr most important in this budget
we need to move them into
permanent recurring funding this
is well I suppose a program
could die from lack of funding
in fiscal twenty five to twenty
six but I seriously doubt the
legislature's going to do that
because they've been extremely
supportive of the of the program
but that's what this budget
doesn't moves New Mexico
permanent funding steps.
Thank you very much that was
very helpful I appreciate Mr
chair that was my question and I
was not a.
Russian few people know the
answers to these questions and
I'm sure.
Not a very few people in this
room know what existed in the
pre trial in all its various
parameters participate.
Convoluted kind of
Representative.
At Mr chair of the judge I also
want to mention that part of the
AOC staff obligate well
responsibilities are data
analysis statewide data analysis
for pre trial which is a.
It's a huge undertaking but all
the numbers that get reported to
the judiciary to the Supreme
Court to Legislature Kelly's
team takes care of all of that
and anything to do with the the
PSA implementation of our
interaction with Jed in creating
the protocols the report that is
all handle administratively
through AOC so there's a lot of
background work and then there's
a great work happening on the
District Court level it's with
the supervision but lots of
administrative details handle by
her staff so they're very busy
as an example as the summer into
fall we're going out to our
sites have been lost for a
little while and we're doing
contacts so we're going and
spending three to four days on
the ground as a team working
with the local program the
program managers judges running
a bunch of data to really see
where they are in their
implementation if they're
hitting the different benchmarks
and making recommendations
to make improvements if there
are any.
But you to service my question
was answered okay any other
questions from I I I have follow
up Mexico with thank you share
this goes back to behavioral
health.
I know when we were talking
we're talking in the criminal
area first second third or
Division lies I have a civil
docket but I see these people on
tiaras regularly it seems in the
last year and I have no place to
send them so what happened all
enter a restraining order they
go back on the street then I get
a requests for a contempt
citation additional no place to
send them because I've been less
I refer this to the to the A. R.
is there any plan to integrate.
the civil type of.
Disorder to the in this year
program.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you judge Mathis right us
enough.
No just.
The the answer is is yes through
the Springbrook Commission that
often competency we have been
doing some work with national
experts and with local experts
looking at if there are ways
that we can just number one the
current public statue that we
have the believe what's written
in seventy eight seventy nine so
couple decades ago and then also
looking at how we can
potentially expand access to A.
O. T. services which are
primarily civil we have met with
some other states to look at how
you transfer somebody in a
cleaner or more consistent way
between criminal and civil
dockets to make sure that people
can engage in like in a T. which
is a this is an outpatient
treatments type program where
they can have access to case
management they could have
access to services part of the
goal of rolling out navigators
or friends appear specialist as
well is to be able to connect
folks with services regardless
of whether it's a criminal case
or civil case in the last twelve
months since the commission has
been active we have produce some
educational materials for
attorneys for family members for
members of the judiciary
to better understand that
process of the happens what do I
do this a different if it's
criminal office is a different
office civil in how do we
connect people to.
Meaningful services I think a
short simple as somebody from
the twelfth judicial district
one of their constituents really
having conversations with the
mother of the person keeps on
going up back into the system
and figure out how we can
connector to unpaid supports and
rate supports in a way that is
makes it less likely that she'll
have to call the police for a.
Yeah explosion of some of their
happen at home and also less
like that this person will be
having contact with law
enforcement so.
I think that is probably work
that is going to take multiple
years to do
To begin to address that we were
invited to and participated in a
competency to stand trial of
civil competency Policy caddy
with them since we have members
of all three branches of
government and Representative
from the governor's office
trying to tackle that no way
that's going to be
amenable to all three branches
and also amenable to folks on
the ground and so what part of
the funds that you're talking
about in this request what are
they gonna go to something like
that.
Yes the training absolutely so
the the three hundred and four
hundred category those will
certainly go towards that also
they will go to support the work
of the commission that is really
engaged and how do we.
How do we adjust the the ways
that we deal with behavioral
health from the judiciary New
Mexico in a way this can be
meaningful.
Thank you that's all I have to.
It is.
Free from the.
So we have a situation of eleven
we don't have.
Whether it's State.
Public defenders are supposed to
do yes.
These mental health things very
these funds in the and of course
we can get that out because a
lot of times what you have you
have somebody from had District
Court and this bill court St
from there.
So it's a little awkward you
know live representing you.
Let's come up with a person on
this case stand out on the case
right of.
Mr chairman and teachers curly
love to give you like a
politically vague answer I think
we're we're.
Engaged in that conversation
without a really clear solution
at this point so some of the
work we've been doing with some
of the counties Dona Ana County
in particular is looking at how
do we make sure that those like
I'm able to process that those
folks that are being paid for
through county funds missile
funds how do we make sure that
we're not duplicating services
and how do we make sure that we
are
sure information a way that is
meaningful so some of the work
we've done to the state support
familiar faces which the eleven
that's been involved in as well
is having discussions with
Genevieve's team County teams
and judicial districts on how
can we start to share some of
that information in a way that
you know if the municipal judge
in
Farmington gets a case that they
may have access to the same
information or to the
Find of competency or
incompetency in a way to be
helpful and also doesn't
Violate anybody's.
Right so that's what long winded
way to say we're aware of the
problem and working to find a
solution and don't have a great
one.
a couple questions from the
chair so Apollo on on the J. C.
responsibilities now to see it
see I
is everything they're doing now
transformers and my specific
examples with request more than
two days later the talks about
they need some travel money
because
this is moved from from Chasey
with the C. I. and so I think
you're familiar right now people
who do travel for conferences of
face to magistrate training
there the rooms are taken care
of afterwards there's there's a
travel voucher that's processed
by by UNM everything's paid for
out of that that G. C. are all
those processes transferring are
you adopting all those or is
there gonna be a need for
entities to pay for their own
trial.
So I would it Mr chairman
members of the committee I
would.
I would
have to say that we are in a
transition period right now and
we are staffing the division
right now it's myself and we
have two additional staff that
we just hired.
And we're working towards having
scholarships as you can see in
the request for FY twenty five
and we do have some funding to
provide scholarships and this
fiscal year as well to cover
Registration fees to cover some
of the the hotel accommodations
in the specific case of
magistrate the magistrate court
conference that's coming up in
August or or conclave that any
the stall that happens inside
the state okay so what we're
looking at right now is to cover
obviously the the the cost of
the event at the event so the
meals the venue and and the
accommodations of course and
that is what we are able to
cover right now in terms of
travel reimbursement.
Getting mileage and everything
that falls outside of business
hours and that is something that
we're still in the process of
figuring out how we can handle
that because right now we don't
really have the capacity but.
As I mentioned scholarships is a
priority to be able to
support judges who want to take
training for example like the
general jurisdiction training or
other trainings offered by the
national judicial college for
the national center for state
courts in that case were able to
cover scholarships for the
tuition which is significant in
addition covering the hotel
accommodations which in the case
of the general jurisdiction is a
two weeks.
Program.
I hope that answers what it did
I just as of just wanted to ask
those monies I just wanna make
sure that was going to be in the
that we actually acknowledge
that for every entity or that
was not be absorbed inside of
the the the C. C. I. I guess
maybe we just don't know yet.
Well the status quo is the.
At the courts themselves fund
the parts that are not covered
by Chasey and then clinched the
mileage and and all that right.
Right so it depends on the
audience to yes but the status
quo will get worse we're looking
whether we can of the more
inclusive of the whole thing
plus this policy ten people to
trainings out of state that the
court would otherwise have to
pay for well Tracy my I don't
know.
As though we would.
Okay thank you and then that
there's a just a small
discrepancy in that reversion
numbers that it's it's so it's
so minor it's it's it's dust but
I it's bugging me.
So through reserve version
amount of access to justice of
ten thousand six hundred and
then the the the the.
Explanation you account for
eight thousand of that but two
thousand six hundred it's it's
an account for your reversion
again it's it's very small
numbers but
There's an estimate due out
later that have to be someone
else the faster right now yes.
For the concert night.
I don't know the answer to.
To Senator Mr chair the
discrepancy talking about yeah
so it and we got gonna break it
I don't think it really fits
that is good for the discussed
here just don't get that result
what is it that thank you okay
any other questions for the
table.
Okay.
Mr chair and the paucity to my
left those pressures and.
Encourage me there are requests
for five positions to be
authorized and the funding for
this I positions would be coming
out of the nine hundred thousand
dollars tax the fee revenue will
be turned into a permanent
funding so you don't see funding
request for the five positions
but we would definitely
appreciate you forward into the
legislature request for those
five positions to be prone
positions that way.
All will be able to continue to
expand that that's likely will
end up with a dozen or more
people in the division
eventually but we need to know
we need those and
she's she's rapidly filling
positions so the services can be
provided that need to be
provided.
Those Grizzlies.
Mr chair I'd so parties so those
five positions it looks like at
up to about six hundred of that
that not almost million dollars
I I you four thousand seven
hundred of.
All right so the other four
hundred thousand that you opened
up that question for.
Yes in the in the narrative of
fuller explains where the other
of funding would go.
Fifty thousand in the three
hundreds for
Well for what it says in person
and online education for the
people here and for hundreds is
where the other important twenty
five goes part of that's for the
LMS the learning module system
what is it the learning
management user management
system.
And the other thing stated in
the the paragraph under four
hundred your quest under court
education services which in the
future import education
institute.
I don't know if you see what I'm
about to say thank you.
And they make up exactly the
nine seventy nine whatever that
number is fees.
Mr Cheryl out the state.
I didn't do the reverse this
number the sisters thank you Mr
chairman.
Question cordage occasion so I
see where the nine seventy nine
seven is going so currently with
core education Paul are you the
only employee I was up until
last week.
Okay but right now we hired
Jamie then and then she comes
from the from the nineteen and
core operations and so she's a
transfer actually from for
operations and migrated to Roush
the joined from that additional
information Division and her
first day was yesterday.
And her strong technical skills
will be very crucial on for us
so that we can successfully
launched of launch the learning
management system that already
was talking about and and doing
all the system configuration I'm
working with the benefit that it
in addition to other
technologies that can be seen
coming up.
And this week hopefully will be
wrapping up to more recruitment
for an attorney senior and for a
an event planner which will
really need.
Okay and so that's I positions
potentially so where the hell
are those five positions funded
for FY twenty four.
General fund we have one point
five point six million existing
running that you guys have for
this now well it's new funding
yes FY twenty was it was passed
with the legislation that
transferred Chasey to a station
was fully from well I accepted
through sixty two thousand.
For the purposes one point six
one at this nine seventy nine to
that the between five for fiscal
year twenty five and it'll it'll
probably grow after that but you
know we'll go we can justify
that we'll get there okay but I
can tell you cause very positive
person but you should see how
happy she was to tell me about
her new employee yesterday.
She needs a lot of help and
she's getting better at that
there is a wonderful thing to
see.
Thank you.
Okay thank you for the
presentations are you closing.
I know I cover the the C. I.
which I want to make sure that.
It's a I just yup
You had a division that's just I
mean just a remarkable stuff and
we have a
the drug courts transformational
in terms of how we deal with
with folks in those are now I
would just expects them to be
the way they are and it's it's
it's wonderful stuff
federal services again
transformational I think we're
really changing how we do
business and really affect
really improving people's lives
and amazing way and and Mr
Paterson the same so this is
really really exciting because
this is stuff that's really
affecting people human beings
are very very very special way
and helping to move through the
through the judicial process so
thank you for the work you're
doing thank you for starting is
one to becoming and and growing
in the work it is Mr Paterson
and of course the the C. CEI
well that's the be the same
thing is going to transform our
doing education so thank you for
all your work it's really really
encouraging and makes me
