Good afternoon everyone I'm
window dressing I really just
wanted to just come and say
thank you for the work that you
all are doing I was able to
listen to little snippets from
earlier today when you were we
can argue over the calls and if
it's notable that the
thoughtfulness of the questions
and how much work you have put
into understanding what's been
presented by each but so far at
least AOC
but it was it was notable to me
to to listen to that I've
participated in this process for
a long time and I'm very pleased
with the direction it's going
and so thank you very much and
then to turn things over to our
chief clerk she knows much more
about what's being presented
today than I am but I'm sure all
chimed in as appropriation.
This.
Thank you Steve good afternoon
chair Chavis and respected
members of the budget committee
thank you for providing Chief
Justice Bacon myself and then
pull this opportunity to appear
before your committee and to
discuss the US Supreme Court
budget initiatives for FY twenty
five we recognize our
responsibility to be effective
stewards of taxpayer money I did
want to point out in FY twenty
three we had a very low
reversion rate essentially point
zero seven percent which we are
very proud of in fiscal year
twenty five we have some primary
goals first we would like to
expand our offices Precourt
Council there is an increased
volume of work at the New Mexico
Supreme Court due to our current
increase inserts and rates
granted by the court and the
associated increase in the scope
of work that is assigned to our
office is pre import council the
office must be increased to keep
pace with the to honor the
court's commitments to reducing
its time to this position and
it's.
Clearance rates it will help us
eliminate our appellate case
law.
We also are us to expand our
clerk's office with one
appellate paralegal currently we
have had increased overall
Extensive requests coming in
from the public as well as
internally from the judiciary.
That will assist us in
responding to New Mexico
citizens we have also asked to
create an on site fiscal office
with the core financial manager
and a financial specialist that
was based in consultation with
AOC fiscal dimple and Robert
particularly we need a system
that has strong internal
controls as well as checks and
balances for the Supreme Court
and historically has been a
separate fiscal office for the
Supreme Court until recently.
part of our ask is also targeted
compensation in the Supreme
Court as well as the court of
appeals has been noticing some
issues with attorney
compensation one we need to be
much more competitive with other
governmental entities in other
words and often times we need to
ensure that our attorney
classifications are competitive
for.
Ten year as well as the time
hiring that we are.
Essentially asking for the best
and brightest to join the New
Mexico Supreme Court we need to
make sure that we attract
qualified applicants based on
ten year
so we have a targeted
compensation initiative.
Also in our budget request
there's some re classification
request a night watchman to a
night watchman supervisor and
Cherney assistant to an attorney
associate a rules clerk to an
attorney assistant and that will
ensure that we are competitive
and creating a career track in
the Supreme Court there's some
other create increases in the
contractual category to account
for price adjustments some
utilities we've noticed an
increase in our bills
particularly during the winter
and summer months maintenance
for to account for repairs we've
asked for funding for state or
of New Mexico law licenses to
allow for professional
development of the justices in
our staff.
We have asked for an increase in
travel that's important to the
professional development of the
justices and the entire staff
there's a ask for a retreat for
the justices.
Oftentimes that is an
opportunity to provide strategic
planning direction the vision
and goals of the New Mexico
judiciary's wells Freeport.
are law libraries ask for new
copier lease the copier is over
ten years old and it needs to be
replaced lastly we have a
commemorative compendium project
that is helping us honor retired
justices and their legacy and
impact to New Mexico law I stand
for questions.
Thank you Mr so to start
questioning with the to turn.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much for your
presentation of got a few
questions about.
Your expansion request
he said that.
Your workload in the Supreme
Court has been increasing of
late so can you give us some
idea of how much it's gonna.
I was.
talking with my W. this morning
and we were looking at Sir grant
rates it's increased in the past
fiscal year about seventeen
percent so we've seen an
increase in the amount of cases
and the server grant right over
the last two years are those
discretionary jurisdiction a
mandatory jurisdiction.
both of.
Okay
and then looking at the
performance report looks like
you've been.
did a pretty good job on your
class right so far you managed
to keep it within you know like
one or two percent over the last
three fiscal years.
How would I essentially doubling
the size of your staff attorneys
office how would that help you
with that Clarence right.
A judge Martin all take this one
because it's large I think only
a justice can really talk about
what that that looks like at
this point.
we toyed with the idea of adding
additional law clerks.
Largely with a few exceptions
law clerks are not highly
trained yet they're at the
beginning of their career and
certainly they are helpful no
question I my walk looks are
fantastic
but we need more kind of fully
baked attorneys that can do the
work of the court and we don't
think expansion of the court
itself is on the table from five
to seven justices we have room
on our bench and no room in our
building
and I don't think that would
actually move cases faster
because we act as a body
we don't sit in panels unlike
the court of appeal so expansion
in terms of of justice doesn't
really accomplish the same goals
as expanding the district to the
court of appeals for that matter
by a judge or two judges because
we're not splitting the work
we're all doing the same work so
it's having those fully baked
attorneys that can really do the
heavy lifting R. in addition to
the increased cert grant right
last year court modified a
little bit but last year was up
twenty seven percent that's an
extraordinary increase in in the
work of the court and that
doesn't include extraordinary
rents and we spend a
significant amount of our time
on extraordinary rates and that
the rate of extraordinary writs
starting with the beginning of
COVID the caring through now has
just been
Almost crushing and those are
the those extraordinary rates
are largely the types of cases
where you need the grown up
lawyer to weigh in on what can
be very very complicated and we
often don't have the the benefit
of state the court of appeals
weighing in fort it comes to us
we're doing the the work at new
and work and work creating what
is the law the state of New
Mexico.
So we believe that an increase
in staff council is is really
important
the all use myself as an example
the pressure on staff council's
offices such that I've sent to
projects to the staff counsel's
office in four years because
there is there aren't enough of
them for me to be able to share
the work of my chambers with
staff counsel's office.
So that expansion to us is is
the more sound way.
To grow and meet the demands
that the court is experiencing
now rather than alternate ways
of expansion that other courts
might typically explore.
And the Chief Justice thank you.
How many log purchases each
justice have to to have you
considered adding additional law
clerks teach justice instead of
C. expanding your staff attorney
we have
the reason that's not on the
table as we again we need fully
baked lawyers.
law clerks are fantastic it's
one of the things I love most
about my job but it's a
mentorship job.
it's teaching them how to write
it's teaching them how to review
a record it's teaching and what
the law is I mean they're coming
right out of law school.
I need lawyers that are mature
and have some experience legal
experience under their belt
before they they join us so that
I can trust that they can both
look at the legal issues in the
case but also have some
understanding of what the
effect.
That will have on the rest of
the judiciary that's what I
spend a lot of time explaining
to my law clerks like yeah I I I
hear you.
In a perfect world you are
correct.
But you're not considering
because you don't know the
impact that will have on the
trial court's.
Because they don't have that
practical experience so adding
law clerks is to us is not not
the answer and then it creates
more oversight work for me.
Staff counsel I don't oversee
the staff and so we have a
director that that does that
Neil bell is fantastic is a
brilliant manager he's a
brilliant lawyer I am able to
leave it to him to chair the
Evan flow of staff counsel's
office rather than me taking on
two more twenty five year old.
Brand new lawyers.
And I know that they're cheaper
but.
A lot more work and I notice in
your mix you're asking for three
senior attorneys into associates
how did you come up with that
balance.
Senior attorneys are going to
have more experience and so what
we're gonna focus on that but we
also recognize that there's a
career progression within the
judiciary we're really trying to
build that career progression as
as Liz noted even talking about
some of the re classification is
focusing on some of our
attorneys that have come in it
at kind of a base level they're
not in our staff counsel's
office there in the clerk's
office but we're trying to have
that career progression and also
if you go in and ask for I
seniors your eyebrows are going
to go up even more than you are
with three and the three into
split but we're willing to
invest in attorneys have a
little bit less experience in
staff counsel's office but more
experience than fresh out of law
school.
And that kind of leads to the
compression question you one of
your request is the increase
salaries of to address the
compression it is that's part
and part of the analysis the
bigger analysis you you'll hear
this from chief after of those
well we sat down with one that
in some under and looked at the
salaries of our staff council as
they compared to say the second
judicial district.
Our staff attorneys leave us.
To go to the second judicial
district.
we we lost one of our most
talented lawyers.
Because of the second judicial
district was able to pay her
thirty thousand dollars more
than we were able to pay.
As we have not addressed to that
that challenge the appellate
courts and address that
challenge that I'm aware of in.
Probably more than a decade.
So it's compaction in Google
competition.
And then there's also the some
expansions percent paralegals
both to support the staff
attorneys office and parts are
force yes.
our paralegals are the working
version of of the Supreme Court.
Currently the with the the
number of justices in the number
of attorneys that we have the
wait list to get at what we call
a tech which is the first round
of the editing of an opinion the
wait list is now in excess of
six weeks.
That's how much work they're
processing everyday all day
long.
and that that kind of delay
under our performance measures
is unacceptable we can't meet
our performance measures if
there's a six week delay in
editing just doing the first at
much less the second or the
third that's how many edits an
opinion gets
and so if as we increase they
can't keep up with the number of
justices and lawyers we have
now.
The collapse without corollary
expansion Liz also in the
clerk's office desperately needs
a paralegal we we have that
position filled and then through
unforeseen fiscal issues that
position is not filled and more
and it creates a real drag on
the ability for the clerk's
office to deal with all of the
various court orders that are
going on all of the time two
weeks ago on a Monday morning
Liz received fifty MCA's
memorandum of court action that
in turn those fifty have to be
converted within ten business
days.
And it was a loss at doing this
work and they couldn't they
would very much benefit from the
help of a paralegal who can
assist with.
And part of the re
classification goes to your
rules committee support and one
of those paralegal to support
the rules committee which also
want to create a career path
that believes in the
justification can you educators
how many people are in your
rules group.
So we have a roll clerk
currently and we have a rules
paralegal but the rules
paralegal does a lot of support
for the clerk's office for Emory
quest for a myriad of other
duties so she's not a full time
roles paralegal so essentially
we have two people that are
helping governing the entire
rulemaking process
but it's really one point five.
Okay thank you Mr chair create
the answers to my questions at
least but thank you members
costs of it okay all right we
have a four poster with that are
you to judge Duffy chief judge
Chavis.
Some.
Thank you Mr chair you mentioned
that you didn't have the space
for additional justices do you
have the space for all of these
people.
Your question the answer is yes
we have we have staff space in
what we're now calling the
garden floor because nobody
wants to work in the basement.
with the with already in his
group moving out of our
building.
We haven't been able to convert
what used to be H. R. into
spaces that's dedicated for the
paralegal so we move the
paralegals who were sitting in
like pretend cubicles in the
whole way in staff counsel's
office into their own space and
that's freed up some additional
attorney space on its stock
council's office we just don't
have chambers available at all
thank you.
Thank you just a few.
I thank you
By the Supreme Court as of the
time of the initiatives had
eight vacant positions I was
wondering if you could let us
know what your current vacancies
are.
Yes our current vacancies are at
eleven percent we had had the we
are looking to hire a W. law
librarian that was graciously
funded by the legislature last
year so we are going to be in
the process of hiring the W. law
librarian
last year we also had some
unexpected budget events that
had we had to use vacancy
savings to make sure that we
were fiscally solvent.
I understand those concerns
of your current vacant positions
what are the plans for the the
remaining seven that you've
identified in the process of
hiring for those state needing
to keep this open this year.
So we are in the process of
filling them we have an H. R.
senior administrator that's
scheduled to start July twenty
fourth so that's wonderful
she'll be brought onto the team
we also have retired appellate
paralegal
so she is planning to start on
July twenty fourth as well so we
are making concerted efforts to
recruit for those positions
right now Anderson with an
operation your size that that
having a vacancy rate it at ten
percent or higher is is a real
hardship on the court and that
with your entity size that a
much lower vacancy rate it's
really kind of essential support
operations do you have
sufficient funding to fill the
remaining vacant positions and
are you going to be seeking to
do that going forward.
Yes we this fiscal year will be
tight it was we proposed a very
modest budget so we.
This year in fiscal year twenty
four it is a three percent
increase to our base budget so
it is going to be a tight here
but we do want to make sure that
we fill those vacancies.
Regarding the clerk's office
extension I'm sorry listen going
to have you hate me asking about
this I know I've been a pain in
your side about the compilation
commission aspect of the work
but I wanted to ask if the court
of appeals does take over the
processing of opinions for
publication does that alleviate
the need for one of the
paralegal positions or can you
quantify the amount of work
associated with that task.
I will give you some numbers for
background and some kind of work
that the clerk's office does.
we are responsible for the
entire attorney admission
process we have right now one
paralegal that's assisting me
with that and she doesn't just
do the release of the opinions
she does much more with the roll
of attorneys like swearing in
ceremonies for example she
processed over a thousand two
hundred twenty three requests
for certificates of good
standing she is processed
already over five hundred and
this year she is processed a
number of certificates name
changes withdrawal suspensions
reinstatement some more Ms
In terms of and I attorney
information changes she's
already processed over a
thousand Attorney name changes
and that's why we need to find a
better way of making those name
changes but in answer to your
question she is drowning and
she's over well thank you.
last two questions are related
to the staff attorney requests
I understand the benefit of
having staff attorneys the state
with the court for number of
years the institutional
knowledge that builds on having
employees that don't change over
every two years like our law
clerks do
so my last two questions are one
I was hoping you could speak to
the years of experience at your
current staff attorney group
brings to the court and second
regarding the targeted
compensation you would requested
a hundred and six and I'm
wondering if that is enough to
cover the current I think you
have on staff or if that
contemplates the expansion and
that would cover it of the full
coverage of ten.
So I'm consultation with chief
judge address we wanted to make
sure our courts had parallel
tracks for the both the court of
appeals and the Supreme Court
for our expansion of.
Making sure that our
compensation was in target with
a key measures so we had done we
have been meeting with Lynette
and Sandra AOC HR to make sure
that our.
compensation is competitive and
will attract people we had based
our numbers and we're still
waiting for some analysis
because we need to have a plan
that structures are staff
attorney classifications and
compensation for our budget
that's in line.
so I guess the answer is we're
still waiting for some of that.
Services LCS in terms of the
number of staff attorneys the
that the one of six would cover
does that only cover the I or
with that also take care of if
your budget request for approved
in full any received the five
additional positions in that
department would you have enough
to implement station for those
those new hires as well.
I only factored in the existing
staff I did not factor into that
for staff increases for the.
the expansion for the FTE okay
the.
This
year.
Staff attorneys yes so for our
staff attorneys in the office
spring court council we do have
attorney seniors so we do have
in that division we have I
attorney seniors in the clerk's
office we have myself we have
was that who's a very
experienced
Appellate attorney and she
served as my deputy clerk we
have Kristin Edwards who is a
deputy clerk of court and.
For getting.
That's it but I'm I will say T.
judge Duffy unlike the court of
appeals we don't have anyone who
has the tenure of twenty five
years.
They're hoping to I mentioned we
are hoping to we've had in my
tenure on the court which is
approaching five years the staff
counsel Office save for one
attorney has completely turned
over mmhm they bring various
years of experience with them
Neal bells are really good
example of yes many years of
experience just not all in the
in the fall but he has now.
Thank you very much those are my
questions thank you to discover.
Chief Justice Sir miss Garcia
and so it you'd have an
expansion released adding an
attorney and two thousand
nineteen and the justification
Mrs essentially doubling and and
I.
With all respect I I think here
the workload and I heard you
know the increase and and the
rats but that seems like a
dramatic increase so is it
planning for all the programs or
is this really the current need
of the court.
Not sure what you mean by
planning for all the program
well it planning for future
needs I'm sorry maybe okay that
that that falls it's it's both
we don't see the work of state
courts disk decreasing and we
don't see the work of state
supreme courts decreasing impact
they are increasing federal
courts are unfriendly to almost
any litigant in the country and
so we're starting to see the
issues that typically are
presented to federal courts
coming to the state Supreme
Court so it's a combination of
current increase in planning for
the future are we have for the
first time this is the first
time that the courts really had
a conversation about what does
the court need as opposed to
what does the judiciary need.
And the Supreme Court has passed
itself over.
Over and over and over again in
deference to the needs of the
District Court.
And this is the year that I.
That the court is very concerned
about where we're going as a as
a body and a half I find we are
asking for what we.
And that a follow up to what the
court needs a C. temple sitting
there and on a request you have
a financial specialist I know
some of the roll between temple
and and and Liz bouncing back
and forth is that something that
really you do you guys the
Supreme Court does want to bring
in house yes that it's listed as
ten but it it seems like fun and
make sense no knock on renewable
but having it with and so it
even though it's listed as I
guess what it at ten priority
that is a large priority for the
court.
And two fifty Chavis our fiscal
person and using air quotes is
Kenny Mitchell who is an
administrative assistant to two
justices she is currently doing
that work under temporary pay
increase.
she's good at it but she is not
a fiscal percent she just as
good at chasing down PO's and
yelling at people and that's
that's not appropriate checks
and balances and I think the the
best person to ask if we need
our own fiscal department at the
Supreme Court is simple yes.
I.
Asian.
But I think it's a it's a it's a
testament that doubles the
please.
Usually benefits are chairman.
And members of the committee
it's mutually benefit because
the I don't I don't think
they're getting the benefit of
an in house fiscal staff they
don't they're not getting the
benefit of of of of of fiscal
office that's solely focused on
their needs and their and their
books
we've you know we fit in when we
can you know Liz emailed marquee
mailed and.
They're not getting the full
effect and they deserve it and
it H. R. in fiscal the backbone
of any agency and I've I've feel
like they're they're.
We're not giving them what they
need.
So and from my perspective it
would help us with like not only
best practices but internal
controls and checks and
balances.
Thanks for the question the
other questions from the
committee Mr spears thank you Mr
chairman quick question as kind
of a follow up to the fiscal and
HR thank you mention that you
you say you have a new HR
administrator senior starting we
will have one starting in a
couple weeks okay so looking at
your request along with court
appeals which more each other in
some ways with the finance and
H. R. is this a new position for
the Supreme Court the H. R.
you've always had H. R. we've
always had an HR specialist but
we've had some turnover in that
position so we're asking you
know it's part of our base
budget okay.
Thank you.
Choose from okay Mr.
The
agency requests for it will.
Yes yes.
And
congratulations for your initial
higher very happy to see that
given the doubled that the
request almost the size of the
office the committee had some
hesitation about that and if.
They heard from someone for what
they're just heard from you that
the court financial manager and
the committee specialist are
high priorities.
After this will happen but if
the committee discussions that
to conclude that maybe
to return as soon as a one
attorneys social financial
positions would be significant
expansion with that the work of
all this is very different areas
one is substantive one is you
know the steps which need to
operate the organization.
It would be a step in the right
direction I'm not gonna say be
completely workable and in that
he would have I think you just
would have to add in the
paralegal because expanding the
attorneys without corollary
paralegal work just means things
are going to slow down even more
in the processing of our main
function which is writing
opinions yeah I kids with.
losses.
I recall the December twenty two
twenty one
movement in the corner
on attorney salaries as well as
other staff.
Can you
talk about that and what that
did for the order and why
additionally is appropriate to
provide associate.
I do think for morale and for
retention
it has helped enormously to have
the staff attorney an entire
employee increases it's really
led to having our staff
attorneys and everyone in our
workforce very I mean it's
helped with retention and
turnover but we just have to
recognize that the Supreme Court
we need really our most seasoned
and experienced attorneys
and that leads to for us just
making sure that we have
retention of our best and
brightest of the Supreme Court
and it turns the focus
the other positions most of
which also in our okay in terms
of whether placed into.
RT the the I think as you know
the the big change in our staff
compensation started by looking
at our lowest paid employees
which were the that building
over the staff to it is the
gentleman that you have all seen
out there cutting grass with
scissors I mean they they are
the most dedicated amazing
employees I've ever worked with
their love for our our building
in the space is it gives me like
goosebumps there they're so
wonderful we were paying them
less than eleven dollars an hour
in a live in Santa Fe.
and it was just nobody had
bothered to like look under the
engine so we started there and
then so what we need to look at
all of our at every single layer
of employee and in doing that we
we found other inequities I
think those types of inequities
have been largely resolved at
this point okay so this request
will close that issue and and in
good shape.
Okay thank you.
Senator yes of have a follow up
question is.
I forgot to ask about one of the
little items copyright Spence
your question ten thousand
that's for lease yes is it not
cheaper to purchase.
So we've had this issue too we
have purchased and it's been
more cost effective to for us to
purchase a sharp copier so
that's a recommendation I can
take back to the law library I
just know that they've had
traditionally had a lease for
the patron copier okay in the
other thank you so there's three
others in the building that you
please I'm we have.
We have one in the offices
spring court paralegals we just
bought it so that was great we
do have one on lease in the
clerk's office.
Thank you I just wonder if that
should be a special incentive
part of the general fund request
but we can talk about that
later.
Thank you your question.
I don't I have a question a
into the two comments I think.
Probably just for clarity just
rename that retreat for justices
the strategic which I figure
that's what it was for just the
so like a thirty in terms of
what that might be
and then to that overarching Lee
this is really a poor message I
think the committee needs to use
to see with I think they'll see
requesting the Supreme Court
request which is you know
treating this branch of
government like a branch of
government like a administrative
office is in charge of a branch
of government and then putting
the the HR in the financial
aspects into the entities as
they are and I think we might be
the water sometimes when we do
that we do it because of cost
savings and the like but I do
think the approach by both the
court of appeals with little bit
spring court and of course AOC
it's highly I think it gives you
a proper proper due respect to
the the this their branch of
government so so thank you
discuss it to justice.
Appreciate thank you so much
your time together.
Thank you.
Thank you we'll move on to.
Where the bills.
This.
It is
Which is in front of the.
Where.
For from.
My books in the class.
Welcome to touch with everybody
right thank you it's great to
see everybody if you don't mind
chief judge after but the court
of appeals mark Reynolds are
chief clerk and double to Fauria
are acting CFO on behalf of all
of the judges of the court of
appeals I just when I think this
committee's work so much all of
your time in reviewing our
request and all of the judicial
entities requests before I
proceed with my opening comments
I have a housekeeping matter the
performance measure data that
was presented for the court of
appeals
is an accurate as best I can
tell just an example our
clearance rate for FY twenty
three that just finished is it
one hundred six percent a
hundred and six percent it was
reported at thirty nine point
nine two percent the other
performance measure data there's
really no way for us to know
exactly how that how that was
calculated I believe it came
from an Odyssey report but we
can't vouch for its accuracy so
I apologize for that I'd also
like to take a moment to express
how proud I am of the progress
that the court of appeals has
made over the last few years for
the last five years we have had
a clearance rate of over one
hundred percent.
We've also reduce our backlog
during this time I am the court
all ten judges on the court as
well as our staff attorneys or
law clerks are clerk's office
our paralegals we are all
dedicated to reducing the time
it takes to decide appeals in
our court.
Of course there's a lot more
work and ground and then needs
to be covered at the court of
appeals and we come to you today
with our FY twenty five budget
request this request was
developed after careful
consideration of a couple of our
internal court of appeals
committees in consultation with
AOC fiscal I and to some degree
in collaboration with the
supreme court you all of noted
some similarities between a
request I'm not going to go
through each of our individual
requests I know you all have
seen those but I did want to
provide kind of a broad overview
of our request our FY twenty
five budget request fall into
three key initiatives at the
court of appeals these are in
line with the New Mexico
strategic campaign that was
developed last year under the
leadership of Chief Justice
bacon our first key initiative
is a timely or disposition of
appeals as I mentioned the court
is dedicated to reducing the
time it takes to decide appeals
so we can better serve New
Mexicans and improve public
trust and confidence in our port
a number of requests fall into
this category and frankly just
about all of them could but
there's two private broad
categories that directly
following to timely disposition
of appeals.
First of there are a number of
requests or is designed to
improve recruitment retention
and training of our employees it
is critically important if the
court is going to meet
performance measures to retain
our staff attorneys or law
clerks are paralegals that are
clerk's office staff the second
category to improving time to
disposition is our new judgeship
request.
This is a significant request to
my knowledge the last time the
court of appeals order a request
has been a number of years I and
I do want to find just a little
bit of time and hopefully a
little bit of simplification to
our long written request a
written justification.
At bottom the judge of request
is designed to position the
court of appeals to meet
national standards for
intermediate appellate court set
by the national center for state
courts.
Our judges are committed to
meeting the standards they
represent a levels of timeliness
that must be achieved to fast
serve the public the national
center sits both shorter and
longer term bench matters bench
as it measures excuse me for
intermediate appellate courts
out while the court of appeals
is close to meeting some of the
shorter term measures.
Frankly it is not possible for
us to meet those longer term
gold standards our with our
current resources we have to
minimize still the delay that
occurs after court once appeals
are ready for decision.
This delay directly stems from
the backlog of general calendar
basis those are the cases that
have gone through full briefing
and they're sitting ready to be
decided the backlog can result
in six or more months of delay.
To eliminate this delay we must
significantly reduce that
backlog it's been persistently
above too hot two hundred cases
over the last twenty or so years
and we estimate that it should
be around one twenty to one
thirty to eliminate that six
month delay.
Again the last time that there
was a significant and lasting
reduction of the backlog was
back in the nineties when three
judges were added to the court
of appeals.
Since then the court of appeals
case that has increased about
ten percent and the backlog has
remained by and large over two
hundred cases an additional
judge will directly address the
increase caseload help reduce
the backlog and improve our time
to disposition.
The point of the second key
initiative in our quest to the
is the effective administration
of the court.
In recent years a court of
appeals has not had or sought
adequate funding.
To fill critical administrative
positions of the court this
includes a CFO position an HR
administrator a deputy clerk of
the court and administrative
assistants for our judges and
our attorneys.
I think this has predictably
resulted in an overburdening of
our judges are chief clerk and
our attorneys with
administrative tasks that could
and should be completed by
administrative professionals
funding these positions will
free up judge time and attorney
time to focus on deciding cases
and it was also in a more
effectively run court our third
and final key initiative in our
request is courthouse security
and infrastructure.
The court owns and operates
Albuquerque courthouse we have
no County provided security
maintenance or janitorial
services since the courthouse
was completed about fourteen
years ago we have not had any
security personnel at our
courthouse.
This was of course never an
ideal situation but with
increasing security incidents in
our lobby and our parking lot in
recent years it is no longer a
situation we can tolerate.
Additionally in recent years as
our building ages are building
upkeep has increased.
Last year our repair and
maintenance costs were
approximately seventy six
thousand dollars during this
time we had to defer maintenance
upkeep and repairs to stay
within budget system the five
thousand dollars doesn't capture
the full extent needed for
budget and building operations.
The increase in the four hundred
calacatta gory aims to cover
these costs so that we can.
Really maintain our building in
Albuquerque.
Again I really appreciate your
time thank you for your
consideration and we're happy to
answer your questions
institutions questioning of the
Mr Senator.
There thank you to get more for
your.
Presentation investigation of
the really help very of
Questions.
God and your throughout the
days this morning
I think the first offer online
clarify just as we did with or
is.
And and had to leave I know the
answer.
But the this is what the court
appeals wants is to take over
there.
The financial component of.
Correct today I want to do as
well absolutely yes and I'm like
the Supreme Court you don't have
an HR administrator now and you
want to H. R. administrator
that's correct there's no in
doing that type of work just the
AOC for them okay.
That either way
I have a question about the.
If you get the if you receive
funding for your attorney and
there was numerous I thought
avenues to try to accomplish
your goals
a new judge a the card the the
mediation program yeah junior
bill funding for pro tem do you
anticipate trying to pursue all
three of those regardless I mean
yes you want to judge you you
want to the mediation program
and still want to seek
additional junior bill money
down the road that runs out of
believe in FY twenty five the
continue if you receive the
judges the want to you want to
protest judges also.
I thank you Mr spears I think
the short answer is yes we would
anticipate pursuing all of the
avenues
we have I believe recurring
junior bill money
and I don't know that there's an
expiration date on that retired
judge Bustamante is is willing
to stay and provides
judicial services through the
end of this fiscal year but then
home he will be officially
retired I but we do anticipate
using the reoccurring junior
bill money for additional pro
tem assistance either off other
ships from time to time.
and participation help of
mediation program the
contractual services a hundred
thousand dollars
That has the potential to be
impactful but we anticipate only
being able to complete a
partially twenty five to thirty
mediation says complete not
successfully complete and so
that that may be a good Avenue
to reduce cases before they get
to our case backlog before
they're fully briefed briefed
but really the most impactful
requests that we have in order
to reduce our general calendar
backlog of those are the cases
that go to chambers that go to
judges and so an additional
judge is the most directly
impactful a request we have for
that.
Perfect now thank you for for
that answer and I did enjoy it
you know I learned a lot about I
don't know much but I learned a
little bit about the court of
appeals just three request I
thought it was very interesting
to read a there's a sense in
here that I want to ask you to
elaborate on a little bit it it
said we believe the only way to
accomplish this with any
expediency is through the
addition of another judge and
you're able to see first hand
the benefits of an eleven judge
through the pro temp services
just a judge Bustamante
infirmity those that did not go
into the deep I like I did
additional talk a little bit
about what that you're he was
able to yes judge Bustamante was
able to accomplish sure and more
seven if I am missing details so
judge Bustamante
join the court of appeals as a
pro tem judge a year ago last
the beginning of last fiscal
year and this last fiscal year
he's he's part time judge he's
obviously an incredibly seasoned
talented court of appeals judge
he has taken primarily civil
cases over this last year I
believe he's been assigned
twenty five civil cases it may
be slightly more at this point
and he's resolved somewhere in
the order of twenty basis so
those are twenty cases that
without judge was to Monday
would still be those cases are
other cases would still be
sitting in our backlog so it's
been hugely impactful.
Judge Kevin that add to that is
we have tend to I have tend to
assign to the very difficult
cases the ones that have records
you know a couple feet higher
boxes full of them so his
contributions have been even
more than just those twenty
opinions he's put up these been
twenty all that tend to be the
harder cases for court of
appeals take the longest to
determine okay.
No that's great thank you thank
you for that in answer my
question about the mediation
program I did have
on the attorney's.
I believe.
You're asking for.
On your staff attorney the staff
very situation far if I recall
you have your hiring to twelve
are filled you tend to hire one
more in this fiscal year is that
correct.
That sounds right.
And so in asking for an
additional attorney position.
I guess.
Attorney associate do you feel
like you be you'll be able to
fill all these positions if you
you had a couple more to another
attorney position are you gonna
be able to keep those full.
Yeah and and just to clarify we
do have the F. T. for that
internet associate position
we're just seeking the funding
it is been we've had a vacant
Attorney position
I think essentially since before
I joined the court five years
ago so it is a set at this point
in unfunded positions so we have
the SCG we just need the funding
and I do anticipate of this last
hiring cycles we had a lot of
interest and I think that
particularly if we can
accomplish the target a
compensation structure that
we're looking at what the
Supreme Court and a C. H. R. I.
that will be able to fill those
positions and retain people
okay.
Mr chair Kevin if I may the only
thing I'd add to that is of that
are chief appellate attorney
positions currently vacant if we
do have somebody acting in that
capacity right now so we're
anticipating this fiscal year
being able to hire to the staff
attorneys matter fact it's in
process right now and we do
think we have the funding of
this fiscal year to hire the
chief appellate attorney so we
just need the funding for that
last attorney associate okay.
The my last question I joked
about at lunch a little bit but
it's a serious question did you
consider asking for two
judgeships.
At Mister chair Mister spears at
thanks for that question I
I think we we dead so you know
we had quite a few discussions
and our internal budget
committee and and among among
our judges twelve sort of makes
sense it's very it's very
divisible by three and we sat on
panels of three but given the
amount of time it's been since
we ask for new judgeship on our
court we wanted to take a a
somewhat conservative approach
and see how impactful one
additional judgeship could be
for court see if we couldn't
accomplish what we wanted with
our backlog there okay no great
answer again great justification
I enjoyed reviewing it thank you
very much for your presentation.
This isn't table Mr spears.
Okay any questions for the
committee to trick you into
tomorrow and.
Not I just wanted to ask you
about the year a quest for the
security officer supervisor and
security officer and so I'm I'm
coming from actually knowing
about your security or lack
there of at the court of appeals
because we are going to be
having trials there and I
remember talking to your prior
chief and and look of panic on
his face like wait here to be
how many people into this.
and so what I'd like to know is
what are the types of things you
all have had to deal with
recently where you feel that you
need the security officer I'm
not saying you don't need it I
just if you just find that the
fax the support insurance mark
would you like to sure the not
fun things to talk about Mr
chair and judge
Of people start with this and
I've been here since two
thousand thirteen two thousand
fourteen maybe in the first five
years we called the police three
times
but I think it's a lot of people
have seen it there's just been a
drastic increase in incidence on
Rulli people at our courthouse I
think it's similar to what other
people have experience so
way within the past three months
I think the UNM police have been
out about four or five times of
litigants are much more unruly
causing a scene in our lobby of
not leaving upon being requested
to do so and we have nobody
capable of of doing that of
handling that situation
we just had to get to to much
detail somebody come in and very
unruly bangs his head be
building this hand on the walls
there was blood all over the
lobby UNM police were called to
to remove that person just last
week or the week before we had
to call you please for a very
suspicious situation in our
parking lot we're one of our
judges was leading out the
employee entrance and we have
nobody to look after judges as
they go to their cars and it
turned out the nothing happened
with it but you when I went back
to look at the footage and.
This certainly could be possible
this person intended ill will
towards our judgments can have
that situation it said we we
used to kind of fly under the
radar with that situation and we
were lucky days are over of that
and and so we've got to have the
security guards there and just
because I don't know and you
said it before if you don't know
an answer to something just ask
is so how does that work with
the court of appeals in
Albuquerque and UNM in terms of
please oversight how does that
work work that we call them when
we need them
we have brought them in recently
for a security assessment of our
building they'll help with
things like that we called you
because they respond much
quicker than they do so they
just a police force for us they
don't do patrols around they
don't have the staffing to do
that we've asked to do that they
it's not capable for for
everybody's got staffing issues
so yeah it's just a matter of
their police force for us that
the way PED is for the rest of
the city is supposedly
appointment and do they have the
jurisdiction come into the
courthouse and and make an
arrest or something like that
that's I'm trying to figure out
are they just and they providing
benefits for our security for
outside of the building but not
inside and that's what you're
needing.
I don't think they can get to
the building without us letting
them into the building I see
yeah okay thank you.
Please on the on of to to thank
you please so I'm going to miss
this but I see request for three
security officers and when this
why have zero now correct three
is the right number.
Correct yes we consulted with PJ
Montoya at the a security
manager at AOC and he's done
security or is in the process of
of doing a security assessment
for a building and he stated
that three was an appropriate
number for the size and scope of
the job.
Circulated in the building
codes.
well that's probably a good
thing
I think of our courts.
Match rating district courts and
how security works in them and.
Three full time folks seems like
a lot unless you're gonna have
one circulating within the
building which.
Given the wrist restrictions on
how you can circulate in that
building seems.
Is it really is it really
necessary because the problems
you have from outside as a
restricted really to the.
The lobby area or in the event
you have a quarter open they
kick it I can't get up stairs
with that person would be
circulating that thank.
Yes and and and no I don't I
don't want to get into details
but it is it is possible to get
upstairs and judicial Stan
chambers with without
Without the necessary security
and then we.
It was recommended that we have
somebody basically doing foot
patrol right so walking around
the building inside and out our
parking line as you know it's
just it's wide open to the
public it's not at all cover
there's not even a bar to get in
and out and so to have an
officer available to walk around
to check the area you know we're
right on UNM on UNM campus and
then to have House have three
available because people take
leave right and so well maybe to
could cover on a day to day
basis most things people are
sick people take leave ex
etcetera and so three is is
really I think the appropriate
number of be somewhat PJ had
offered to us.
Okay somebody has about the
course was courtroom although
it's on the campus to the
research on very busy road with
bus access of people off the bus
and wander over the court first
whatever reason across the
parking lot from you NMAA tried.
For.
To think anything else thank you
we'll go to touch Martin.
Thank you Mr chair mark chief
okay so looking at your request
your.
Asking for three administrative
to system positions what are
those for.
Sure as as described in the
justification are currently our
judges have new administrative
assistants and so I and neither
does our chief judge so when I
want a report done I do the
report myself that doesn't
necessarily require a lottery
and all cases and it doesn't
necessarily require date require
a public official and so the
idea is to provide needed
administrative support for
judges and also goes for our
chief clerk for our staff
attorneys who end up doing a lot
of data compilation X. that are
on their own
and it just.
Eight uses a lot of attorney and
judge time that could be
directed towards deciding cases
more efficient that's right.
So you're talking about the.
And data compliment on compiling
information you started your
presentation with a disclaimer
that the performance measures
are inaccurate.
So how do you plan to address
the deficiencies in the
performance did absolutely and
mark is been doing that for a
long time and so I'll let him
take that question in terms of
how what we've been doing to try
to get these measures correct so
you all can rely on them and we
can rely on them and I'm sorry
Senator asked the question okay
what measures were taken to
correct to the what the numbers
are coming out just because in
FY twenty two it was reported
that your clearance rate was
fifty eight percent and FY
twenty three it's thirty nine
percent that's what the what the
data we're getting from J. at
the apples to apples comparison
sure
so what are you gonna do to if
you if you say it's wrong forty
indeed fix for yeah and I've
been working with did on that
for probably like a year now I
would say on many reports that
come out about a C. for the
court of appeals and then that's
one part of it with the
clearance rate our report it was
as clear to me a long time ago
that the report isn't capturing
all of our dispositions Sir
credits capturing a certain
number of opinions formal
opinions but not summary
calendar opinions and I'm not a
lot of other types of
dispositions a disposition
orders and and I'll their locks
and all sorts of stuff so I have
sent to jail to work with sands
who's in Windsor on this for the
most part of a list of all court
of appeals dispositions that
needs to go into that report
they are are working on it I
have some frustration with it at
the time that it takes I would
L. up make that clear but yes
there is some work going on
right now and has been for a
while to get that report claim.
Because one of the performance
measures that I look at was the
number of new cases and.
I think even as recently as last
year you were unable to compile
have any new cases yet coming in
you know new civil our new
criminal.
for the fiscal year and in your.
In years initiatives supporting
the new judge you've got that
data so we're to come from.
The judge and if if I may we
were always I've always compiled
new cases coming in just Odyssey
the jet the reports that we all
rely on for performance measures
they didn't I A. tabulate those
by hand every month and we we
track those on a monthly basis
all new cases coming in each
month then we have them annually
at the end of the fiscal year so
we internally have been tracking
all new cases for for as well as
dispositions is is that the US
reports have been able to to
come out okay and this is
I believe you said just
Bustamante was able to help you
with twenty of your complex
civil cases what is the what's a
good average for a court appeals
judge to produce and in fiscal
year sure that's a excellent
question a judge Mr chair so I
think once a judge's sort of up
and over the learning curve and
it does take a number of years
some some judges estimate three
years learning curve some
estimate five years of of a
learning curve I think we could
expect our judges it if they're
able to focus on their caseload
to produce somewhere and the
order of twenty five to thirty
opinions here.
The twenty five to thirty and if
you have twelve in my calculator
because I thank you for your
daughter you're getting about
five hundred and fifty new cases
a year.
let's see judge Martin.
Thank you all this this last
year this last fiscal year that
just ended.
Hi and a seven hundred forty
five new appeals.
So judge Martin those are all
new appeals all cases from the
district courts that isn't the
number of cases that end up on
the general calendar for.
For for general counter opinions
okay.
A lot of those cases are handled
through the summer crop counter
process for another means of
dismissal or stipulations
something along those lines.
I'm I'm trying to to help you
get some numbers to support a
new judge I think it'd R. and.
You know given the number of
cases that are filed and if you
only have eleven judges now
twelve.
They would save is now ten ten
currently one pro tem and
requesting a and eleventh.
Elected judge okay.
going back to the security
issues
during the the capital request
you requested some glass and
some doors how will this the
security officers compliment
that.
Well I I think the obviously the
capital request go to making the
building more secure and
addressing some of the issues
that may permit folks to get to
secure areas in the building I
that the people act as a
deterrent of course for folks
coming in and being disruptive
but then just offer our staff
and our judges if there is a
security incident offering
assistance and and getting
somebody outside the building
escorting if need be a judge or
our staff to their cars in the
open parking lot and so I think
they do complement each other
very well but they're both
necessary to ensure security or
courthouse Barton doors you need
somebody lock sure that's a
better answer or at least a
shorter one.
Thank you much Mr chair those my
question to traffic.
Thank you chair a chief judge
I'm not quite understanding
relationship of judge Bustamante
with respect to the new judge
and and pro ten judges as I'm
understanding your presentation
the new judge will not eliminate
your backlog judge Bustamante
has put a tenant at clearly
everyone understands that you've
got a significant backlog it's
hard issue or will you still be
using pro tem judges and if you
are where is that in your
presentation I'm not
understanding where what amount
of money we're talking about for
future pro tempore even with
your new sure thank thank you
judge and Mr chair and so the
the the source of the pro tem
funds currently and in the
future are reoccurring junior
bill money so we have a hundred
fifty thousand dollars as my
understanding of junior bill
money that recurring every every
year and don't expect that to.
To be eliminated so we will have
the money to use for our future
pro tem's regardless of of what
we do with a new judge and so I
and I think your point of judge
Bustamante has certainly helps
with the backlog and an eleven
judge with would also help but
it is a a long term project at
the court of appeals and eleven
judges not going to have
an overnight impact on a backlog
that's persisted frankly for in
some form for twenty plus years.
Thank you that's all I have been
members of the committee our.
heard from mark that you expect
to fill the position for the for
some of the state thank you for
calling in.
That's a big job.
The the kids will fill in that
position leave it all the need
for the request for the W.
appellate court because as I
understand it part of the
stress.
The chief clerks relates to the
absence for example
of some of these folks and I
would think the chief repository
would be one of those folks.
I.
At RT and and Mr chair I I don't
think filling that chief of
holiday tourney is going to
alleviate the need for for a W.
clerk position
Currently mark just has has too
much to do and has too many hats
to where but even the height of
clerk of the court is is is too
much for one person to handle
and so at the moment we're
having to send over quite a few
substantive motions that would
normally be taken care of and
house in the clerk's office over
to the staff attorney division
so their attention is diverted
away from processing summary
calendar basis to motions work
and so that deputy clerk of the
court I would certainly address
that so that our staff attorneys
can focus more directly on
summer calendar and and and
hopefully general counter cases.
I'm just looking for a place to
plug in the HR administrator at
a higher priority than number
four on the
number three rather on the
requests there I definitely of
support the court financial
manager and financial specialist
positions and
I'll be happy to talk a
committee about that if they
need money put as the directed
us but those positions in HR
administrator I really I needed
from the perspective of the Mr
across the court I want to turn
to the table to that you
provided this relates to the
judge request.
So
I see in the text the discussion
about General counter Simon's
we've only got data on the table
back to two thousand nineteen
because I read in the and all
the data for basis for the ten
years from two thousand to two
thousand nine and then from two
thousand ten to two thousand
nineteen and you know this fewer
cases now by five or six percent
fifty one cases a year I see the
backlog steadily increase of
course over that same period of
time I know we went through a
period where
more with five years you'd be
the most senior judge there
right I am and you know.
That is definitely disrupts the
ability of the court to function
rather than observing one new
court of appeals judge every
three years and most of them
turnover in the space of two
years so a big impact but maybe
address for the committee why
the decreased K. low point and
K. so that's not that big a
difference but we had ten judges
backed them
To handle the cases with full
much lower backlog we have ten
judges now plus we got a pro tem
and the backlog is there and we
want to another judge to handle
the in a relatively the same.
Facially anyway the same case
losing number of publications
file.
Sure thank you RT Mr chair do
you mind if I jump in on the
market and then you can you can
fill in the gaps but to just
just looking at at the data
already looking back I think you
said two thousand nine you're
looking at some of our backlog
data or even further back those
are two thousand on the ten year
period first of the ten years
leading up to two to twenty
twenty I don't pay much
attention COVID stuff but.
Sure so you know there's there's
a period of time where the
backlog of in certain years is
below two hundred I still think
frankly that the backlog figures
were seen and that ten year
period or to hide to meet the
national standards set by the
national center for state courts
the model time standards I
really do think the backlog
needs to be in the order of a
hundred twenty two hundred
thirty seed have to go back to
the nineties to get to that on a
even somewhat consistent basis
and at that point the court was
only able to maintain that low
level of of backlog a healthy
level
for three years ninety four
ninety five and ninety six so
it.
We don't have time to
disposition data.
Really at much of much at all
but particularly we don't have a
dating back twenty years that
you're looking at but we do have
this backlog and that way we can
estimate that cases are so gonna
set three four five six months
before there on a judge's does
for decisions so they're still
the late bills and here I agree
the court was hat was able to
maintain a lower backlog than
than than we are at this point
in time
but I I still don't think it was
low enough in the challenges are
systemic that is tends not
enough to handle the workload
verses what if we gave you would
forget funding for yet another
pretend that we had to put times
working for another two years or
so we will get it to where it
needs to be a state hundred
twenty and then the ten if you
would keep up with it but
instead I believe which is
saying is not will will start
losing ground right away if that
happens that's right yes if I
may already I I would state a
little bit stronger than to to
hijack trips I don't think the
court of appeals has ever met
the standards of the national
center has now put before us for
the longest time I think pretty
much from inception until two
years ago the court appeals had
one performance measures which
was clearance right.
And the national center has
showed us rightfully so that you
need to be looking at other
things other than just to clear
tree you need to be looking at
how long all of your active
cases have been sitting there
and how long the cases you
decided how long you take you to
decide bills those are not the
the never things of the court of
appeals tracked or looked at
until recently and when we
compare where we are where the
national center has said that
intermediate appellate court
should be you cut a long way to
go there's no way this court has
it ever been meeting that and
that's why it's systemic and
there's no temporary fix to this
I appreciate that are from
spending time this billing
during the session with a few
lawyers that are in the building
then they definitely would like
you to go faster and I know the
chief justice's first same thing
from practitioners in your you
know and I appreciate that you
hearing it to.
That's it.
To to to this.
Chief judge of trip but I was
gonna ask you know is in the in
the trial court's there's been a
huge influx and self represented
litigants that create that are
involved sometimes in complex
civil litigation and I don't
know at the appellate level if
that's easier more complicated
on rolling that that ball of
yarn and so even though the
caseload numbers may look lower
or or the same as they've
consistently been I I again I I
know what the trial court we
spend more time trying to
unravel that that yarn and I
don't know if that's a similar
effect that you're you're
experiencing at the appellate
level thank you teacher Chavez
Mr chair I don't unfortunately
have data on how many of our our
civil cases involve self
represented litigants but just
anecdotally they they do take a
long time when they they reached
out just us and they often times
reach judges us they they are
cases that end up on the general
calendar fully briefed
and the process of of figuring
out what the issues are
researching them and and doing
one's diligence is is time
consuming.
A couple of questions for small
COVID really impressive on your
creative approaches to reduce
the backlog of the within thanks
for the telling that out that's
that's really helpful
the the the mediation services
so it looks like your successful
that in FY seventeen and so
they're looking for general fund
funding for that that would help
as well as six thirty to thirty
cases potentially resulting yes
Mr chair but thirty five thirty
cases that would go through
mediation that I can't imagine
having a one hundred percent
successful mediation right but
but if the a good percentage of
those cases even even a quarter
of them thirty percent of them
that's it a solid chunk of cases
to be resolved they're going to
be civil cases perhaps some of
them quite complex.
and so at the moment I'm not
sure that's really because this
is from FY seventeen will have a
new data maybe that's better as
a special.
And this time of the do it for a
short period of time evaluated
see what it does to your
caseload or make its program as
a general as a as a total
corporation that the committee
will talk about that for hi
terms your data
C. give me lots of numbers right
and and I love the history and
I'll try to keep this
appointment as a lead history
but it really is it really
becomes
Is so much to try and so end up
you know dental drafting the
side and do a bunch of mask is
just so much there I'm trying to
find a logic for at this point
that you guys are asking for in
terms of the second second
judges and and I'm not there yet
I'll just be honest to you I I
see a lot of pens being set up
but I don't see that the the
connection I see a caseload
overall that's gone down I see
they bring it up certainly we
have justice was some or a to
just a month a four separate
timeliness and COVID stuff
But I'm not I'm not sure I'm
there yet okay and so are these
videos I'm not a voting member
of apartheid record but but I'm
not sure I'm there yet in terms
of you needing an additional
judgeship or not I see a lot of
pence's said I just don't know I
see a logic for the Kenexa Malik
and and close enough attenuation
to say Hey they need another
judge but a hundred pounds
that's that's kind of where I'm
at and that the numbers are
great it was to I don't pull out
the numbers look like RT said
because Senate begs questions
the lead back in nineteen ninety
eight so wanted to support those
two in thousands of public
probably out liar years and and
so you know net technologies I I
think that that's because of the
challenges for us of that that
makes sense sharks so that's
just some feedback here
I think you answered all my
questions any other questions
okay in the second round and
of because if I missed Mr chair
could I I just of course just at
I do appreciate that our judge
of justification is somewhat
complicated we don't have a a
workload study to work from as
some district courts to
and it really took our our court
examining some pretty lengthy
has historical data going back
not just ten years or twenty
years but thirty years back to
when we last added judges to
record
and it's really that lined up
with our the current court's
commitment to meeting national
standards and that is a new
thank that the the court is
really taken
and interest and being able to
serve New Mexicans better by
timelier disposition of appeals
and so are our ultimate goal is
to reach the model time
standards from the national
center for state courts we're
not there we're we're getting
close and some of the short term
measures but as mark said
in order to to reach that gold
standard set by the national
center we need more Judy.
Additional resources we need
more judges in order to take
down that backlog that final
column in the data that has
persistently been above two
hundred even with the courts
where we had judges collective
experience a hundred to a
hundred twenty years of
experience of of experience at
the court of appeals they still
had backlogs over two hundred
and so it's a commitment from
this court.
To timely disposition and a look
at that backlog that she's been
pretty pretty persistent for
years and years and the way to
reduce that as a an eleven judge
thank thank you the thing that
goes around for additional
questions Mr spears and Mr
button in my house thank you Mr
chairman had two quick follow up
questions one really for already
you are well for both chief
judge of New Orleans you're
currently receiving junior bill
funding that you're using for
training conferences right right
so and it it states in your
justification that that was a
dish Education etcetera etcetera
did not cover that expense is
the.
C. III.
Going to cover any of those
expenses the believe already.
you know as a Paul was
addressing which was here
Mr chairman of the committee the
hope is yes
we know renters to to try to put
a staff together I don't know
that we'll get there in fiscal
year twenty four but this is a
twenty
C. was.
To twenty five I just left on it
so I wouldn't have to jump up
well I enjoy watching it jump
up.
The.
In FY twenty five I would really
hope for that the whole point is
to make the CI you know the full
service education center for
everybody in the judiciary talk
about judges but also staff as
well and to make it not so
burdensome on the courts to
actually get education for their
staff and judges but can I
guarantee that we'll be there in
FY twenty I know not from where
I sit right now I would like to
be the okay.
You for that and the quick
follow up question on security
you know going from zero to
request for three or other
avenues explored on security and
use with.
UNM anything else whether any
other avenues explored on
security besides having your own
security officers thank you Sir.
yeah we try to get you in and
provided for us we were going to
pay them of course they just
don't have the capability of
doing it we reached out to APD
same story
we considered contractual
all those things were considered
and but in consultation with the
AOC and court security manager
that having our given that we
were right unable to bring
police force into our building
our county doesn't do it for us
the seem to be our only it
wasn't our first choice but
after for those other options
it's it's where we landed.
Thank you.
Okay thank you yes I have some
questions about the
compensation requests three
hundred thousand dollars two
hundred and ninety seven
thousand dollars in compensation
requests
I think between you in the
spring quickly convince a
committee that the second
district over pacer turns and
should be you know put under a
watch or something like that but
I see that
you know you talk about a five
percent pay disparity with the
law clerks and paralegals in the
Supreme Court but I don't see
that.
Number anyway I didn't see it
for the staff attorney
composition you refer to the
section and they pay more than
you are but
I wonder how far behind you
think you are from the Supreme
Court and maybe the committee
would like to hear from you
about your approach to
classification because I believe
these are at will I mean these
are classified attorneys was a
Supreme Court as I.
Just a Chief Justice these these
are the cut there that will in
the Supreme Court and the
different ports different jobs
but if the different you know in
the classified for purposes of
the reasons we classify people
it does make a difference in how
they get it Analysen terms of
appropriate compensation.
Sure yes thank you are you Mr
chair but yes our staff attorney
division so we have
approximately fifteen attorneys
were fully staffed they are all
classified employees except for
our chief of college staff
attorney and so we appreciate
that there is going to be a pay
differential between our staff
attorneys and the Supreme Court
staff attorneys who are at well
there there's going to be some
differential but over all even
taking into account that we've
got classified employees and
other courts may have at will
employees based on the years of
experience for a number of our
attorneys that specialize
work that they do we've had to
difficulty with retention we've
lost a number of returnees just
this last year to the attorney
general's office and so
there's a rate differential
among us and other courts and
and people are picking on the
second but at they tend to
either attorneys pretty well but
then there's there's another
rate differential that matters
just the executive branch and
and we're losing some of our
attorneys are referred over to
the executive branch this is a
real of disparity in your in
your turn over you know you've
got the average the average is
average amount of because about
thirteen years it's kind of
unfair because you've got two or
three there were a year a couple
more there two years obviously
there is some concern over
amongst those among fifteen the
turnover five every five years
that's really not a whole lot
and then you've got really you
know long term people and it may
be that the classification
question makes a difference in
terms of how long hold on to me
even if the salaries and as high
as it would be.
They went over the Supreme Court
for example and they got it at
will position but but given that
I know you have at least nine
college you probably have to
discuss this with the one of the
committee said you know to
address the pay it in equities
would help us because we would
see the logic of getting them
closer to the Supreme Court
similar kind of staff if they
were both in the same situation
with regard to.
Whatever classification does he
perceived job security or actual
job security however you look at
how would.
How would you feel if the if the
committee were to say we can
approve that recommendation on a
consistency between the way the
two courts handle the these two
kinds of staff.
I would urge the committee not
to do that.
So I can get and and let me
speak to that
so I I don't think our
competition as the Supreme Court
and I and and the Chief Justice
and Liz Garcia have been
gracious and working with the
court of appeals in attempting
to tackle the compression issue
salary issue we have in our
staff both of our collective
staff attorney division and you
know competing with other courts
and competing with the executive
branch in retaining and and and
get a new staff attorneys so I I
don't we're there's not the
competition I think that you
maybe Lane out between the
supreme court and and the court
of appeals and the court of
appeals appreciates again that
if our folks are classified
there's going to be a rate
differential with the same job
classification over the Supreme
Court if they're out well
and frankly I RDA I don't know I
don't have an HR professional to
advise me but we have
We have many many attorneys at
our court that have been here is
classified employees and even if
the ten judges decided that they
need to be out will that seems
to be a problem in terms of
changing somebody's job
description I have to accept it
actually it's their option thank
you so I don't believe we would
have many folks accepting it but
they are still doing hello work
for the courts it is
very and powerful work working
on from time to time
precedential opinions working on
entire case files I it is a
different type of job I think
that in many of our staff
attorneys are just records and
so I think the job
classifications at A. O. C. H.
R. is looking for looking at to
find the appellate courts is
appropriate for both courts and
it's appropriate both as an out
will classification and a
classified classification so I
would please urge the committee
not to condition the targeted
compensation for our staff
attorney Division on them
accepting at will status
I also think that the evaluation
process we have every year the
focal point of violation that we
I just went through is really
beneficial for staff attorneys
are they have specific measures
to meet and they all get very
detailed evaluations as
classified employees and that's
a real benefit to the court to
have those evaluations so again
I would urge the committee not
to do that okay thank you.
No other questions thank you
very much thank you thanks for
your time thank you commitment
is what we're looking at
schedule but I think you may
want to take a break now before
we get into the the second
presentations of that word.
Well this.
Thank you heard about those kind
Reconvene at at three o'clock.
The couple quarters.
To.
We have a stable.
You know.
By quarters.
They're working on that if you
get an extra five percent.
This
is a question just to.
Trying to justify his.
You have the capacity to.
His name is because how you
spend.
They got a whole lot more money
is more than.
We want to track is.
Senator competition with the
states and there's a.
Committee has.
A statewide initiative little
pieces for this for that not all
approach because some of them
said.
Well this is trying to get.
Because of the competitions
with.
Six and a half.
I.
Just.
Representative.
How you as.
Yes Representative.
Yeah.
And.
With new people.
New people in the.
Six of those.
It is.
No.
Replies.
Our little ones.
So I was time but.
Four years.
If this site with.
The one.
I am less which is.
Two hundred thirty four percent.
Have enough money to.
The staff hired attorneys I.
Attendees.
One.
I I is.
This is.
Just.
Thank you.
This.
Yes.
Question.
As.
And.
There's
Right.
So you're sure.
This.
She's.
The.
We got this.
Thank you.
There there's we have a time
when there are.
Yes.
The.
This was.
To get the source.
Change the screen on it so we
could send it off.
It's good.
So.
Use
terms.
I'm I think
is right so we use.
These.
What's.
I mean that means these.
The.
Well the last.
Two to one percent.
Two point two percent.
Thank.
I was.
Right so this is one yeah this
is what our last year average
was.
Yeah leisure which is fifteen
percent.
There is.
The.
Uses because it is.
Yeah.
Okay.
Two things were laughing at.
If you.
I have.
I was you can start showing up
in your name on the list for
cooperative.
I tried.
Respond
to.
Never.
Now.
Thanks.
What
Is.
As.
No.
Want to.
The activities.
She.
Right
Mexico.
We have a thousand.
They could not including.
So that.
Right.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay thank you.
Thank.
Yes.
I was nervous about the the
morning in the.
According to.
Yes.
With the.
Services that.
With these.
Okay creek Pueblo called the
committee back to order and we
have the second judicial
district.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Reward I'm the chief judge of
the sectors district with me
today is catena wants and CEO
citing judge Jane levy from that
family court for the second and
I'm not from Malina excuse me
from our CFO from the second.
I want to.
Take a moment to.
The
budget committee expand
impressive to be able to watch
the evolution of this committee
over the last year particularly
this is my first time live in
front of you through this
process as my colleague
judge ranking listed in for the
last year so I I appreciate the
opportunity and I appreciate the
time that was given to the
second judicial district.
In our budget request the second
has taken approach in line with
our strategic plan.
as noted by justice Thompson
this morning that we don't just
take in their own one year if
you we look at where we're going
on over the next two to three
years and into the future.
certainly and looking at our
budget request overall it's
about a sixteen percent increase
if the budget committee in the
Supreme Court orders to be so
generous as to requests every
single one of our request.
However as noted this is
reflective of kind of short term
immediacy and longer term
planning and initiatives
and leading the budget committee
and the Supreme Court for now
what the second judicial
district courts vision is for
its court where we are right now
what our needs are immediately
and where we're going I can
assure you if the Supreme Court
through the recommendations of
the budget committee approved
every single request we are
making out we could utilize
every position we're asking for
to improve efficiencies to
improve access to justice and to
reduce burnout and turnover
that would like to go ahead and
focus on
our priority funds and our
priority to use in our budget
request a priority one if those
were approved to that would be
three million seven thousand
increase in our budget or nine
point two percent increase the
soffit to include the priority
too so that would bring it up to
a twelve point nine percent
increase with an additional one
point two seven five.
We are seeking for new FTEs with
three of the positions and do
judgeship according to judge and
TCA and court monitor.
We are looking to request six
term positions be converted to a
current you forgive our type
those were not being
proceed with the new initiative
in our budget request and we had
our type of going from person to
term that is not what we're
asking to do we apologize for
that and we are utilizing a
Levin current positions
and sticking our funding
requests.
our biggest priority I will be
honest with you is the judgeship
for the family court.
we'll go into more detail in
terms of that judgeship but I
also do want to be very up front
with this budget committee that
we are evaluating our numbers
also for the civil division and
it's likely we will be back
before this committee in the
future looking at an additional
judgeships I do think the
judicial work load study and our
data will support that this year
and in years to come.
Our first budget request focuses
on our foreclosure settlement
program I know this budget
committee knows a great deal
about that program so I'm going
to a lot of detail I think we
spelled it out one of the
challenges that we've had and
FSP is that this is funded
through the mortgage regulatory
fund we will continue to see
general funding for this one of
the challenges has been with the
compensation increases we were
under funded by the time we were
looking at the statewide rollout
and so what we've had to do this
restructure that program we also
did have a meeting with the
Chief Justice
and on the statewide rollout we
evaluated the data and through
that meeting with the Chief
Justice and at her request we
are requesting an expansion of
an attorney associate that's one
of the.
One of four new FTEs that we're
asking for your suitcase full of
the eight hundred sixty five
thousand four fifty five for the
FSP programs.
As you all know we also started
the initiative over the last
couple years and moving out of
the CSC contract anything those
employees into general fund
again that's part of our move
from positions that are turned
to current it's just a number of
inefficiencies with relying on
the funding for the sixty day
contract it's not access to
justice it requires oftentimes
parties to come back time and
time again for hearing because
the limitations of the child
support enforcement division
contract or so restrictive.
We are seeking as I indicated
the new family court judge
position.
again workflow studies we
spelled out in our justification
indicated that the second is
five point seven judges assess
the work with study we have
received three judges two of
those judges have been assigned
to the criminal division one was
assigned to the children support
division.
And we are now seeking of this
for the family court.
we've provided our information
regarding pretend use there's no
pro ten use for our family court
division.
And as you can see in the data
that we provided we're starting
to see increases across the
board.
Reaching to a pre pandemic
numbers in fact what I will say
in terms of the data we're happy
to answer questions on that as
we go forward from but what
we're really saying is of
significant increase in the more
complex cases that come before
family court and a reduction of
I was at the less complex
complex an attorney driven cases
such as the CD CD cases yes
Representative division faces
six.
One of the challenges that I
just think we need to
highlighted in the workflow
study is where it's just a
relations domestic violence
orders of protection are
weighted in the workplace study.
originally it was rated at one
twenty then dropped to one
seventeen although there was a
recommendation in that work but
study that more line just under
the wait for sex offenses which
was five hundred and thirty one
ultimately reduced to four fifty
one.
that adoption that
recommendation was not adopted
we've provided the chart to give
you some context of the
breakdown between the weights of
the two thousand nineteen study
the original two thousand seven
weeks and then the final
recommendation.
Just as somebody who has done
family court work and somebody
who's done this think like to
work and work and I look at the
weights forty seven faces I can
tell you
There is there's a flaw when it
comes to domestic relations
cases and the weights given to
to those cases we are seeing
growing complexities with these
cases of educated.
We provided some data and some
charts for you that that reflect
that these cases are on the
rise.
We have new cases in terms of
the extreme risk fire protection
orders and the special immigrant
juvenile status cases that are
also on the rise in addition to
our family court judges deal
with emergency orders of
protection twenty four seven so
they're on call
just similar to the warrant
calls that many of our
colleagues address.
and those are not ever counted
in their K. eight.
As I indicated earlier to a
closer look at the trends in
cases that require far more
judge time are higher than two
thousand nineteen numbers so
when we look at kinship
guardianship as we see them
those places are higher our
domestic violence cases are
trending higher than two
thousand nineteen as well as a
parent is K..
And so we are seeking that three
hundred seventy eight for forty
one for judgeships panel support
staff.
In addition we are seeking
funding for two point services
specialist those are essentially
kind of floater positions that
really help to support other
divisions they are trained in
jury and are trained in our
purchasing Division for
monitoring it's currently only
stocked with three and so we're
requesting to more to really
support that staff and to be
able to expand the use within
the port we are also seeking
three judicial specialist
position
one which served and our special
services division we are getting
ready to roll out no like tronic
exhibit database that we will be
piloting and there's a real need
for that division to have that
additional support
because it's going to be a lot
of up front work but will
provide a lot more efficiencies
weekly to the District Court
District Court judges the
parties as the appellate court.
We are also seeking to a
judicial was two for the
criminal division as I indicated
previously we've had to a new
criminal judges but we have not
had any increase in staff and
the judicial specialist to
support that division
Despite the required to be in
the point of with criminal
judges except for jury trials to
provide support work and it's
really a challenge right now
with not getting the increases
staff with the increase in the
judgeships.
Also in line with our strategic
plan is the expansion of are
self help dispute resolution.
Person we are seeking to legal
office specialist in part to
assist with the uptick in
mediation request but also to
support the continued efforts at
the scribe a program we've been
able to utilize the request
force scraping which is a
nonprofit agency which is
wonderful it although it
presents a number of challenges
and so what we have seen is
something that should take an
individual party about thirty to
forty minutes it's taking three
to four hours and so this will
help really speed up the time
and table to serve more people I
think more efficiently and it's
it's clearly an access issue.
For a pretrial services division
as many of you may know
Bernalillo county pre trial
services yes all started in in
our court Amberley accounting
has been funding those positions
all but three.
and of the twenty one
We have three that are funded by
the court eighteen of the
positions are funded by
Bernalillo county and three of
those are positions that will be
funded and fiscal year twenty
four graciously by AOC the
county had requested to meet
with support the state can watch
what's happening across the
state as pre trial services is
really being supported by the
judiciary around the state and
so they asked us to to start the
conversation and moving these
positions into general fund so
we we're able to meet with the
county with party and Carl and
we talked about best practices
we talked about current
caseloads of pretrial services
officers in the second and
that's when AOC
Was very gracious in providing
us three positions to get us
through this current year we are
seeking to move this year seven
positions into general fund
living them from term to term at
a cost of five hundred ninety
six thousand eight.
We are also seeking a software
applications developer
that a cost of one hundred
twenty three thousand six ninety
one.
as everyone knows and and spend
a large topic of conversation
technology has been a
fundamental key component to the
work of the judiciary and port
operations and that is not
slowing down.
the second has been leveraging
and software developers to begin
building platforms that we would
hope to be able to share with
other districts and share the
statewide again we are piloting
the exhibit program and so we
hope to be able to effectively
use that and to be able to share
with others
our C. E. O. on her vacation
went take a tour of the line
a district in Florida which was
extremely eye opening and
members of the second and budget
will be going back ideally later
this year
what we hope to be able to do
with with the software
applications developer is really
look at building out
port management systems that
will that will streamline
everything into kind of a one
database we are also looking at
improving working on developing
a program similar to that that
this and the
nice district that would make
remote interpreting much more
streamlined much more efficient
we did have a meeting the second
with Cassie and she supported I
are requests for this position.
And then finally in terms of our
priorities winds we're seeking
training funding of a hundred
eighty seven eight hundred
he anticipate allocating a
portion of that for
to achieve CEO the presiding
judges.
Managing attorneys and rotation
of I additional judges.
Throughout the state the years
being able to go that and a CM
for napco conference and then
subject matter expert training
to be available to our judges
across politics divisions listed
those out there.
Without a stand for any
questions thank you to judge
will turn to to judge currently
in.
That.
This is
This is current to.
Three all of the request for.
This
Mr chair early.
Please.
I think I understand your
question so if I'm
misunderstanding to please jump
in
Of the.
Of the request we're looking at
using existing FTEs for.
Let's see one two three four.
Five six.
Seven positions.
we've got a couple of positions
that are in our hiring queue on
our FTEs
I think you're you're looking
more of a breakdown on every
concedes okay
is.
What you have already.
So I just want to know for a for
a moment when it if we're only
looking at the priority ones
which was what I was focusing on
that in terms of the conversion
from terms of term
that would be sixteen positions
that we're looking at changing
from.
Turn to prepositions because
we're asking for general funding
for a CCD for pre trial services
as well as FSP.
One is sixteen.
Yes.
Mr chair to to really consider.
So in may.
last year we had an average
vacancy rate of fifteen percent
in may it was down to twelve
point two percent.
our vacancy rate is driven
largely by our turnover rate not
position sitting there unfilled
we do have a number it is a.
In the big scheme of things it's
a small number compared to what
we have is
if we were to get the funding
for our.
a priority one requests that
would leave a total of.
Thirteen and a half percent.
I'm sorry thirteen and have
positions four four percent not
filled.
Without the turnover.
The state of New Jersey at six.
Twenty.
Two six.
Twenty percent.
C..
For over.
So.
It was turned over and then it
was an inability to fill
positions we've had to extend
recruitment over and over and
over again during COVID
positions that we would normally
fill in one cycle we were
filling in three or four cycles.
Okay.
so switching topics will that
the question was how much money
did you move out of your two
hundred category how was it
using your answer was You moved
a hundred thousand a hundred
dollars or a hundred thousand
five hundred thousand okay.
from three hundred into the two
hundred what what because that
why did you have to move from
three hundred to two hundred
well number one or vacancy rate
did drop as you could say we
want you know we you know we
were you know looking at the
trends for the last couple of
years we do our best to you know
make those projections we did
see a drop at the end of the
fiscal year
which was a great problem to
have
Plus I think we were just
You know did using our crystal
ball on you know our unfunded
judgeship and
some of those things that we
just didn't deliver to cycle
yes.
Put it into your what what judge
ward said is chief judge we're
sort of the number one priority.
Can you explain to the to the
committee.
How is the family law or
domestic relations division
structured I again I'm having a
hard time you're you're so much
bigger than them most other
districts I'm just not I'm not
following.
Certainly
And before you answer I'm sorry
and Representative do you
consider the child support
enforcement judges or judge with
the current to be part of that
division.
Or is that separate because of
contractual funding.
So I'll explain its to members
of the committee and and chair
the the way it's structured is
we have for judges and hearing
officers total that here
domestic.
That's Forsman cases and also
domestic violence and so they
hear all of that in any new case
type for instance the special
grand juvenile status basis
that's forty that comes to us
so any case type that comes in
there is ours and so that's how
it's structured right now and it
used to be structured that we
had a domestic violence judge
that has been transitioned
actually as of July one we all
had a TV docket that we helped
her with but now we have.
Essentially each judge has about
fourteen to fifteen hundred
cases half of those the third at
this party okay and so then on
the child support enforcement
when they got moved off the
contract last year to general
fund right.
the just yeah it was one hearing
officer got there is a hearing
officer okay and now you're
asking for a judge into hearing
officers for seven and a
different part of the family
division we're asking for the
two existing hearing officers to
be moved off of that contract
general fund and they were
asking for a brand new judge
entirely so the judge positions
are not funded by CCD at all but
we did have originally had three
hearing officers and then we
have support staff and to those
hearing officers are extremely
limited in what they can do and
so we were able to.
Court and the legislature we
were.
Hearing officer off of that and
the plan was to continue looking
for because that is causing a
lot of problems where you have
that are not that busy I think
in the next.
And and so is there anything
that.
The the you're kind of touch you
know what I was curious about
this is it not possible for the
ones that don't have the
contractual constraints to help
with the contractual work our
reserves is the is the load out
of balance for that does so
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it is a situation
where we can we can share the
load and in fact the way that we
work is that we do every balance
as necessary as presiding judge
if there's if it's getting too
heavy or we're just not getting.
But the issue is is that if you
have a contract that says you
can't do certain things then I
have to I can't have them do
that we can cross streams.
But but we have to be.
Straight the job and really it's
domestic violence is to issue
their child support cases have
reduced significantly compared
to every other case time which
is just launched straight of the
surface our experience to
So that you're trying to move in
twelve staff.
Same circumstance from
contracted general fund so that
they can also brought now what
they're able to work on.
Yes essentially what we're what
we're trying to do is and it's
sort of an and it argued in the
alternative I remember being a
lawyer
But
but essentially what we're
saying is is that we want to
move it's broken out so we want
to move some of the tech support
folks off of the contract and
then and that would be the the
within priority one that list
and then the priority to is down
below because I had a priority
one the judge and we didn't want
to come and say can we have all
of this what we really need is
Is to be able to move some folks
continue that process to get
them off of the contract at the
same time our focus is on the
priority one judge not moving
here.
Okay.
Okay.
on the foreclosure settlement
program
can you explain that.
What I read was the last session
which is I go see what we're
trying budget between last
budget hearings in these budget
hearings you were appropriated
seven thirty six thousand six
hundred dollars non reoccurring
that was designed for certain
number of people you laid out in
your justification but you had
to do it a different way to make
it work is that what yes because
of the compensation increases
the aid and general fund money
we the eight percent we would
have received and so we are
going to be.
Underfunded outside of our
budget for this and so we really
have to look and restructure
And I won't say fortunately
because it's a huge huge loss
but what did occur is that our
program manager who is
exceptional got
a wonderful opportunity and has
left us
which provided us the
opportunity to go ahead and look
at that position
reclassify that to an attorney
so that can run manage the
program but also take a caseload
we're gonna have to forego being
able to to hire one of our
associated tourney's right now
because of funding issues and
then as I indicated when we we
met on the statewide rollout we
took a deep dive into the data
across the state everybody's
foreclosure numbers and what the
team does and it became clear
that to to be able to even go
for it we already know that we
need another attorney associate
and the Chief Justice asked us
to go ahead and put forth a
request and so what districts
are are you helping I know you
say statewide but I don't think
it's truly statewide would but
districts not that it couldn't
get there but but what districts
are here at are you helping with
now so so currently right now
we're we're in the third but the
roll out is to be in every
single district according to the
Chief Justice with
with the focus being on those
that don't have an.
program in place right now
and so it's it's everything I
think right now except for.
Thirteen the first and I think
the legend.
Are you in discussions are for
fact finding or record ordering
with with all the districts and
what they have and what they
think might need the reason I'm
asking is is the for for example
in our district we talked about
this at the budgets hearings
last year.
We do it with a contractual
mediators that we have and we
have our own little rules about
wants answers file to get
referred in those type of things
and it works but it seems to be
substantially less.
Dollars associated with the case
than this that's an it is but it
just seems like it to me I have
done an analysis so if you're
gonna have to ask these
districts what the need or you
saying this is what we do in the
second here we come we're here
to help.
So so that is part of the
planning is for the program to
actually set up a meeting with
all of that the chiefs as part
of the discussion that we had a
good earlier with the Chief
Justice is again we have we lost
our program manager we're in the
the process of hiring attorney
supervisor and so we don't
anticipate this kind of really
Getting into a kind of ramping
up really and start of August
September and so we plan to have
meetings with the chiefs
of all of those districts
regarding the program what
What are program would need in
terms of some access what your
point are able to provide in
terms of staff and and how we
coordinate this yes I will use
all of those things okay.
Okay this is this is one of
those ongoing goals.
At least the last year maybe two
years ago I can't remember so
this is the third year for the
yeah I assume it's going to be
on going.
Tell you to eat until you get
the expansion truly statewide I
would assume yes I I mean I
think that that's the intention
that it's a very successful
programs it's you know it's it's
helped so many families I know
and then our with me and many of
that the hearings that we had
last year where we had
legislator after legislator
commenting about the fact that
F. S. P. outside of Bernalillo
county was was hoping that
constituents and so we think
that there is clearly going to
be in long term ongoing need for
this program and it's here to
stay.
Of.
That's a little bit of the
judgeship.
I'm never sure with the number
so we have the caseload numbers
that were given out
Your justifications talked about
the five point seven recommended
twenty nineteen and then you
have three so far
So is this you look at civil in
twenty nineteen you have thirty
thousand three hundred and
twelve civil cases that include
to miss relations cases you know
I'm I'm not trying to give you a
pop quiz and Mr sufficient if
that's included that civil
number not.
I assume it is but there's no
other categories so.
Yeah Mr chair and to check yeah
it does it's it's it's the thing
that sticks in New Mexico.
That we're just and civil okay
yes that's that's what that's
what I thought so I guess what
I'm trying to get it with this
with talking about that
specifically C. got forty six
thousand and sixty one total
cases of those like I mentioned
thirty thousand three hundred
twelve and you skip ahead from
nineteen to twenty three now you
have thirty eight thousand nine
hundred and six so your down
seven thousand you've got a
little over twenty six thousand
two down four thousand and
civil.
Your Division allies is is are
not something you can do in the
civil division to make to to
make that difference of course
we don't always have just add
into a division your way down.
Make any sense about moving the
split judgeship visualize from
civil to domestic.
The committee okay so I would
argue that the the.
Waited long caseload study for
twenty nineteen is cute on civil
side we highlighted the reasons
why there was a judicial
advisory committee that made
various recommendations it's not
clear to me how
For example a civil a complex
civil is less
Carries less weight than a civil
tort claims civil tort claims
the two thousand seven study for
example had that at five hundred
and thirty nine in twenty
nineteen it went down to ninety
two.
So it's it's really hard to.
I think a draw a comparison when
we're talking even though the
numbers have gone down slightly
we are we are trending back up
but we have to take into
consideration also the weights
that were assigned in the study
our.
Maybe not fairly representative
no fans okay I think I don't
think it has much value in for
example just with civil cases
they closed the civil cases they
don't count towards anything and
then you have all the post
judgment education issues that
you're still having hearings are
still drafting judgments you're
still doing all that and that
counts zero I mean I'm I am no
fan of the.
The study I just I just wanted
to just looking at broad numbers
that you know it looks like
you're way up with your domestic
relations cases our family law
cases it I think there's no
doubt and it looks like you're
correspondingly then down maybe
more than just the four thousand
because of the increase with the
with a family laws that make any
sense you only lost four
thousand bit a chunk of that is
that you gained.
Yeah and I.
Mr Chairman to touch early and I
don't think you know civil could
reassign the judges they are
they are drowning as well I mean
there's the judges are there on
the weekends there there early
in the mornings
yes and I just think if there
was a weighted caseload study
that truly captured
You know the work involved I
still think would be about five
point I think would be at least
a five point seven with the
current numbers today.
So.
I think that the other thing is
that both of them families
settled families actually are
are trending right up again it's
it's pretty high and what
they're seeing is what we're
seeing which is an incredible
and housing it's statewide but
the number of self represented
litigants is of and so the time
that it takes to do even some of
the simpler cases it's just it's
because people need to be heard
they need to be told and so
there's a lot so I think for
nine AM the civil the civil
drive.
Getting more complicated just as
the family doctor and so the the
number
part because lacked.
The complexity of the cases and
and also that some of the
devastation that we serve has.
The thing else on the internet
another judge teachers workers
trying to say so I I would have
Mr chairman to discreetly you
know kind of in a went back to
it to where we we talked about
it which was kind of in our
priority threes which is the
attorneys
staff attorneys for the
division's and the complexity
and the amount of work for even
just individual cases is just
increasing exponentially and we
gave the example of just one of
many many recent cases where we
had twenty five different
motions for summary judgment in
one case followed by.
Thirty separate motions and
limiting just in one case
that the work that's that's why
I wanted to be fully up front
and fully disclose that I intend
to be back here in the future
looking for a civil judge
position I don't think it would
make sense and
I would not be before you any
further if I moved a civil judge
into the family court division
really just need a new judge for
that position.
Of so how does the so how does
the staff work because you're
you're wanting increase staff
looks like.
Is probably overstated across
the board and in your different
divisions partly civil family
and criminal
division you have.
Okay
so do they help them in you you
if you want the handful of the
attorneys in the civil division
which is what you just talked
about
then.
Does that not help the existing
judges are does that create more
work for the existing judges are
to take some work load off of
the judges I don't have the
usual because we we don't have a
we have we have a staff of one
staff attorney in each county
so.
And I think ultimately I mean
staff attorneys are are really
they they really are essential
to to the work of the court I
mean I the.
In terms of every single one of
our divisions the complexity of
cases his.
Increasing we've had increased
number of criminal justice we
haven't had any increase in
staff attorneys we never had a
staff attorney and family court
we never had a staff attorney
for we finally got managing
attorneys that do a bunch
broader scope
and so this is certainly is
support that is needed for the
judges judges it is our priority
three and and this regard
The complexity of cases I can
the amount of motions
and I can go into guided the
challenges of every single one
of the divisions but again I I
would assert to you
that are our number one priority
is that junction the judge.
There's other question I'm sure
other people other people the
committee will have somewhat I
want to hear a little bit about
the I. T. program.
that's that's intriguing to me
it looks like you're asking for
about a hundred twenty three
thousand if you're gonna use
existing employees and that's
because.
The state is no FTP so is it an
existing it's an existing
position it would be
Request to to to post this
position for that software
application developer
and yeah I mean we're we're
excited about that the
possibility of this opportunity
and and I can.
Actually let us to the speaker
little bit to this because she
got to see some of this first
hand of what they were able to
do in the north and I just
really brought home to us
there's certain things that we
should be doing
as as the judiciary when we rely
on different vendors who do not
share their coats than problem
solving in real time does not
happen and there's so much delay
and there's some really
incredible things I think that
we could be doing and we need to
be thinking about this it
follows that your strategic plan
intermezzo of you know really
harnessing technology
and like I said we we
met with with Cassie because we
wanted to make sure that that
did was supported by the US and
you know we talked about
partnering on all of this and
and being really clear
communication to be able to to
do this work that I think it's
really exciting there's so many
things we could automate that
would save.
People time of the Supreme Court
talked about issuing
certificates of good standing
from the member of our in three
states and two of them it takes
about ten seconds online to say
I need a certificate of good
standing you put in your
information and have a PDF that
you download.
so the the it's exciting to me
on that but that's all the time
I'm gonna take because we have a
question over here so to stretch
this into a stuffy.
so a lot of times we when you
add a an attorney in that you
you can sometimes take away
hearing officer and I know
sometimes a hearing officer
commissioner because they make
recommendations and the judge
has to affirm them and if
there's a projections and the
judges hearing that so if you
thought in asking for that
position and perhaps converting
hither commissioner hearing
officers for that Mr Croatians
positions you don't have a
little bit of that redundancy.
And members.
And that was we started there
but the concern we had is that
we really needed to.
We averaged eighteen amber.
That we have
Reviewing all of that.
For that and so I think to me.
Really bad.
Sir to a judge to actually deal
with the docket that we have.
Everything instead of having
somebody already has.
Anything.
Average sixty.
There every fall and then.
R. and and when I say that I'm
very cognizant of with the self
represented litigants in
particular this division it's
really taking a lot longer to
sort through that the claims
everything that needs to happen
and then I think all traditional
entities appreciate the need for
staff attorneys am I correct if
we added this these new staff
attorneys that would give the
second seventeen staff attorneys
for thirty or if this judgeships
approve thirty one.
No.
Okay thank you list twelve
already in there and then you're
asking for five new ones okay
twelve and then I can present
for for new ones.
Sixteen okay so that's right.
So sixteen attorneys for thirty
thirty thirty one judges.
And and so the reason I ask is
like I said I I think a lot of
you know judges around the state
would be M. yes in the sense
that if every judicial entity
had one.
Had one staff attorney per to
judges and so it seems like you
already at least have an hi Liz
at least as I looked I didn't
see any other judicial entity
that has that many staff
attorneys per judge so is there
any way to reconcile that for
the second.
I can I can tell you that our
staff attorneys and and our
staff attorneys are primarily
with our criminal division and
and our civil division again we
haven't had staff attorneys for
children and family so we kind
of just got the managing
attorney that has a much broader
scope of of work that they do
and it's.
Both of those divisions the
amount of work that
That the individual judges have
it's it's just critical that
they have the staff attorney
support like I said the a
perfect example as kind of and
this is one case in terms of
high volume in terms of motions
for summary judgment motions and
lemony the complexity of cases
the new federal law state law
causes that faction that come
into play on the criminal side
there is such
I think hi intense public focus
and public interest and and all
of the work that's done
and it's it's critical that we
are providing to supports for
our judges and to being able to
to meet those needs to to be
able to address motions and
really complex difficult
situations in a timely manner
provide those supports to be in
the courtroom with the judge
during incredibly complex and
high profile situations where
things need to get in really
quick order
so I I absolutely think that
it it it should be the standard
that we have enough staff
attorneys around the state to
support judges I I'm very
grateful for what we have but I
can tell you that they are.
Working incredibly hard they are
very busy individuals and I I'd
worry in terms of our.
Is that their workload is also
so high and increasing that
we're facing issues around burn
out and at risk of losing them
if we don't make life a little
bit more.
I mean of all in doing.
I'm to Travis Mr chair point of
clarification we actually have
ten staff attorneys and for
managing attorneys there's a
distinction between what a
managing attorney does what
staff attorney.
So you have fourteen total
attorneys though so for managing
attendance for four additional
for additional staff attorneys
so the second would have
eighteen total attorneys.
I will more than that if you
factor in what we have an office
P. in some of the other programs
but they're not they don't they
don't stay don't perform like
staff attorney type work for the
division's.
Right now and I know you guys
have to tap dance around court
rooms and space you actually
have space for for new judge TCA
income where monitor.
Yes.
Mr chairman and and chief judge
I we do because I have cried
enough to the county and they're
going to build us new chambers
next.
maybe painting the tribal
ourself.
That so that actually the one
thing we do have to face staff
attorneys are going to pay any.
Right
now.
I thank you does nothing and
then the it's just there's thank
you so if your staff attorney
requested approved are you
willing to stipulate that you're
not going to hire anybody from
the court of appeals.
Well if they apply.
Have a couple of questions and a
few of the different categories
that you requested
This is my second year I
graduated last year we talked a
lot about the foreclosure
settlement programs I think in
the thirteenth and in the.
Eight yes thank eleventh
so if if you if you're able to
successfully expand your program
and take it statewide I'm not
recalling how the other programs
are funded and so I'm wondering
what the budget impact is going
to be in the other entities if
you take over for the entire
state.
In a you may not be the right
one to ask that question but
surely thought of it.
So that they can in terms of the
implementation of this program
statewide this is this is part
of the strategic plan in terms
of
and an initiative of the the
Supreme Court it is very unique
because the first time that a
statewide program will be run
out of support
you know are pretty Justice felt
very strongly and and and
reiterated at our last meeting
again that
that the second had a program
that had best practices in place
that had the procedures and
process and the outcomes that
that wanted to see
and so it was
through that process that these
requests for for me to to
increase the funding many of the
Courts actually do not have any
program any funding around FSP
over as we look towards
expanding and look at
working with jurisdictions that
already have programs we we
don't anticipate anything
happening over this next year
that's going to interfere with
with those programs that will
certainly be in communication.
Thanks on the line my question
is maybe a little imprecise I I
I can't recall off the top of my
head like how the thirteenths
programs funded if it's a
requests if it's general funding
so what what can we expect to
see in terms of the impact on
the other courts in the next
budget cycle as a result judge
steep I apologize yes the
thirteenth received last fiscal
year received our last session
received a request to to move
that to general fund okay so
they do have a general fund for
that that program
and we know that this are
requests has been supported by
this budget committee as well as
the Supreme Court to seek
general fund
the legislature has has soffit
to to keep this under mortgage
finance authority and will keep
pushing forward because it's it
really needs to be in general.
I it it I understand why the
second wants to move it in house
I guess what I'm trying to
figure out is what do we need to
think about in terms of other
courts were currently receiving
funding in you're gonna take it
over so that's maybe not a
question for you but that's
that's something that I'm
wondering about
Mr chair judge Duffy
it that'll be a phased approach
and so they'll be time to flush
that out we will be taking over
the thirteenth this next year
happening on.
I don't mean it has ideas about
how she once.
So that's something we need to
be thinking about for twenty
five.
had a couple of other questions
bear with me here
I know chief judge early as a
question about this your current
hearing officers and for the D.
R. you'd said you have a eight
does that include the for
contracts right now.
Mr chair and yes right now it is
eight and there are still under.
Thank you so the total number
won't change just how the funded
will change and then the scope
of what they're able to do will
change okay thank you
districts.
Maybe notes not efficient
manner.
just a comment on your
technology expansion sounds
really exciting since it has the
potential I know you've cited
the appellate courts in your
justification is want to mention
I hope you partner with those
guys once you're a little
farther along down the road.
in that I for the Attorney
justification
just have a good sense of what
your staff attorneys are doing
how you arrived at the need for
for so give me an idea of what
your attorneys do for your
judges.
So
In terms of complex litigation
there's been a motion to certify
that they.
Similarly it's it's.
The same issues come up for
urgency issues come up on the
criminal side all of the time I
also imagine there's been cases
where emergencies come up for
civil but on the criminal side
because things move so quickly
they have to there are often
called in for on a regular basis
to deal with that to deal with
high profile cases to to assist
with
complex or high profile pre
trial detention cases and so
they're often assisting the
judges there are projects that
they get put on in terms of kind
of looking at efficiencies and
and better ways to run things
putting together SO peas
this the lower
and administrative appellate
work that staff attorneys work
on
And I I am just failing my
colleague that sitting across
from you.
I used to be staff attorney and
so I I can tell you that's how I
started with the court and so
I was I was the second number
staff attorney that started with
the civil division and it it's
very busy Burke and the
complexity is only grown over
the years
they prepare memorandum brief
say prepare
draft
it is our orders for for the
course consideration
it's a lot of legal research is
and you might well
I understand and if.
It's intense.
I can tell you from my Courts
perspective we always appreciate
the well reasoned opinion
letters that we get kind of the
second
In terms of the.
I know we were asking in just
two to Chavis had suggested you
know every court probably wishes
that it had one staff attorney
for two judges but I'm wondering
if you can quantify that or if
you've if you've quantify that
in comparison to caseload per
judge with other districts in
how your staff attorney caseload
might compare if we looked at
justice here number of cases for
your district.
I haven't done the math host and
I'm not meaning to put you on
this but I'm wondering if you
have.
That's what Mr Mr chair.
Just Duffy I know I haven't.
Thank you those are my questions
I could say there there would be
in the criminal division
One staff attorney for every two
judges we do as the chief noted
we are going to pursue a civil
judge in the future with the
addition of a staff attorney
that would put one attorney
prepare to judges in
family court that would put one
staff attorney for for judges
and children's where that would
put one staff attorney for for
judges thank you attention.
If I if we could.
This is.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for your presentation of a quick
questions to help me understand
exactly you're trying to
accomplish with the CSC contract
so you're asking for general
fund appropriation of a little
over a million dollars and the
priority one is to convert one
two three four five six two
additional specialists is off of
that contract into the general
fund correct that's priority
one.
But the the request actually is
to convert an additional one two
three four five six page order
priority to as well.
So it if all twelve these end up
as a general fund appropriation
you'll no longer have a child
support contract is that right.
That's correct okay and the two
hearing officers listed here
party to I'm assuming that if
you Senator up as general fund
appropriations I'm some of these
are currently child support
hearing officers and you're
going to convert them to
domestic relations hearing
officers if because the general
fund Mr chairman Mr spears all
of our hearing officers are
already classified as domestic
relations hearing officer okay
that's just how they get class.
But this particular fund the
strictly by the contract tents
that can only hear the child
support cases correct.
Okay.
Thank you for that clarification
so I have Mister chair and
trustee of of the.
Good afternoon.
The strange.
judge has asked for one of my
questions and on the CSE they
were receive any letters from
them this year about potential
contract reductions
Sorry so Mr chair and and I
would be happy to answer that
members of the committee I
We have not yet but we will and
we have annually as for now the
the the the thank you have the
contract production we work with
easy they were on board with the
fact that we were in the
contract and continue to to make
sure their cases are heard in
exactly the same manner
but that has been a continuous
issue as has the delta between
what our employees are actually.
And usually what happens meeting
I pitch it pretty extensive that
we meet somewhere in the middle
that's and then we come up with
an understanding but that.
Thank you and then I know
additionally the this conversion
from CCD to general fund was
supposed to be a phased approach
and and last year's request was
phase one were you thinking
about maybe questions was face
to face to I'm sorry.
The first year we got zero.
what would it would it be
possible to probably be made
maybe phase this phase this and
instead of asking for all twelve
that one's so Mr chair and
members of the committee yes the
what we've asked for is in my we
prioritize it wanted to is the
concept that we would like to
have.
We would like to have all of it
at once but if we can't then
we'll then we have faces in
there what we're trying to do is
recognize that.
As.
As I think the the thought
process was.
Courts need to consider we need
to consider how to structure
ourselves going forward not just
here here and so that's what
we're trying to do with the
money to if if if everything is
approved then that's fantastic
but if not we do have a phased
approach in here.
So then if if the judicial
specialist for to be part of
were to be funded with general
fund and then they would be open
to more to help with more work
outside of just child support
with that eventually at if you
eventually need D. R.
help with that reduce that
request because these guys would
be doing a lot more of D. R.
work than just child support so
that'll for.
Mr chair
members of the committee yet yes
I mean I up what I anticipate is
is the.
There would be a lot more
efficiencies here and so it may
not.
Prevent us from ever coming back
and asking for a chance to for
the domestic relations division
or domestic violence division
but I think it would certainly
put that off because we would be
able to to to utilize these
employees are much more
efficient.
I'd like to add that I think you
could probably ask every every
CEO here when it comes to
domestic relations court staff
that is the area where we see
the biggest Brandt.
It is really really difficult on
the staff
with the with the public with
the pro se litigants that come
in
They get the rated repeatedly
and so.
We try and schedule you know
cycle cycle them off the window
but it it's it's really hard and
we need to keep that going and
you just have to have more staff
and and depressed patients.
Now and that that the two
incidents that have happened
it's been an because and
divestitures take areas
So I just in the arbitration the
fund balances.
So the arbitration has a pretty
healthy fund balance is there
any possibility or any plans to
use some of that fund balance
for maybe a year of one of these
requests and then possibly come
back and we just filled a new
position out of arbitration fund
balance so you'll you'll see it
yeah it's already we look at
that fund balance for another
need and
We had the term position to work
with AOC it's on authorized but.
Yes we are using our fund
balance and we budget that money
to fund positions.
one more question about the
court services specialists and
alleged the you guys received
three and it was sort of a slow
start to get them
going as to how they would be
utilized and and and that's been
sort of worked out and they're
being utilized and and the
program's going well that's why
requesting the two additional Mr
chair dimple at absolutely they
of well
We had another turnover that
division so we're in the process
of recruiting so it is one of
you know it's like local thank
yes they are they've gotten you
know I verily proficient in
you know with with purchasing we
have a lot of movement going on
does as you know
the jury's the jury Division is
They help out significantly with
with the jury with all the jury
trials that we have going on
they've become certified to
monitor but those are just three
niches in our court and we're
very large court and we need to
provide support to other areas
as well and they can't do it.
Which is three of them.
And then lastly one less sorry
all the all the new positions
there's spaces.
Office space as well the funds
for the new FTE requests.
The attorneys and so for FSP yes
we have the county did some
renovations to the first floor
and so we've got the space there
to be honest I mean we've
already implemented office
sharing.
And a rotating staff because
there are some limitations
within the existing building but
we're we're working it out.
Thank you.
You're gonna have to put the
judge over metro court but
that's just a rumor I.
I see your forty thousand four
percent or program because of
the is a chronic issue with with
how much they fund versus how
much of a raise for them please
and the same thing in
And
This is CD right the trial and
I'm wondering if you and the
other courts who are on the same
here roller coaster ride.
So you get these people but the
next year they're funded at the
right number but then of course
again the increase in its time
right.
Have you ever considered
Whether that's appropriate for
supplemental appropriation or
even a deficiency I realize it's
not they're not general fund
positions.
Yes my CFO your former CFO
you know it's not something just
beside it now but I wonder if
that's not appropriate given how
this happens to you or to see a
CD it happens to the other.
A number of of course as well I
don't recall that we've ever
done that we complain about
getting under funded and we tell
the courts wealth fill the gap
to which can right.
So Mister chair already this
year because we received funding
to move one of the hearing
officer's General Fund we ended
up with a flat budget because
they use the same number to pay
our increases okay so that's
good.
But that's cool this year with
the contract right.
We're holding our breath.
Okay see it when it comes to HSD
in the good it may be a
mechanism you have to consider
in the future of the Courts on
the same kind of pattern would
have to consider
Mr chair in occurs to me that
maybe for the divisional ice
courts at least an
organizational chart would be
helpful to given that you know
the LFC archer made everybody so
happy to finally figure out some
of that fog of how the issues
organize get dissipated and I
think that's probably true is
larger courts certainly in the
second metropolitan court
probably the first maybe the
third I don't know but.
Maybe you want to consider the
committee wants to consider that
going forward the
since you do have the same
questions about her decision so
that's okay I would talk about
pre trial services.
So the county from twelve
positions at a little over two
million dollars million eight
thousand dollars and I don't
recall the county saying we're
gonna stop funding these next
year we're going to reduce the
funding twenty percent a year
for the next five years to our
out of it.
I'm here that heard them saying
was we're so happy that you are
you have a plan to reduce the
eventually find all these
through the courts budgets and
that the expensive businesses
bias is a step in that direction
so that adding to the counties
burden right Carrie Mr LC and
that's that's a great.
But given that you know this is
a big number two million and a
half dollars and given that the
county is not.
Just jump up and down say we're
gonna cut you off
I suppose what I read in your
one two three prioritization is
at the very least can't we take
for pre trial service officer to
use and fund them at three
hundred and thirty four thousand
seven hundred dollars and at
least it would be a start to
where we have to get eventually
which is the support people they
need to be funded through the
court but which I agree with a
hundred percent but I also
appreciate the county and and
I'm sure based on my experience
with the meeting said read from
the treatment people thank you
very excited if we lose me that
much progress given you know
it's a very large question the
guy west for twenty one million
dollars.
Maybe that you know that some of
the consider your budget or
something that the committee
will consider and if the
committee does consider it maybe
you want to come in at cents
those deliberations will be
closed and will be here.
Mr chair.
and so we've we've really tried
to structure
the priorities to one to three
as really closer to a faced here
approach which we thought was
kind of in line with kind of the
discussions at the meeting that
we had together
hi.
are you suggesting that AOC will
continue to fund these three
people these three positions we
don't we don't need to be
seeking that funding at this
time and that could become at
the end a place to do that until
you know we finish of the courts
and twenty I will talk with the
second metropolitan court the
more people you have funded
through your already funded
through the court the better and
at that time we would try to get
those three positions moved
moved over make sure that sooner
that's okay I finish all the
other the other twelve that's
great we can give the other
three and and then everybody
will be in your budget but yes.
So that then you'd be up to
seven out of here whatever that
is fifteen would be
I just two budget on the court
budget which is a good.
Movie in the right direction it
seems to me I'm just you know I
I will be in those deliberations
I may suggest to the committee
that that's a good idea and I
want to get chance to say with
you agree disagree or you know
like have all twelve but okay
that sounds like a pretty good
start.
Mr chair RT at eight I think
that we
I think I know the county and
then our work our working
relationship with counties and
incredibly important while they
have not said legislative are
getting ready to pull the
funding there are other
initiatives that they really
want to help and they they don't
have the ability they haven't at
the ability to even expand the
number of pre trial services
positions because of the
compensation and so every year
it's been that same issue and so
yes they're very happy we were
we were very happy with the
outcome of that meeting and
we're comfortable with the
facing approach adopted multi
year approach in terms of
service okay it seems fair but
you know.
If I may be adamant about so I
thought I'd ask thank you.
The questions G..
Please.
The chief judge of just for
clarification I've got
responsibility for the
foreclosure settlement program
the first I hadn't heard that
the first was going to not be
administering the program for
its part to understand you're
gonna be taking over the first
two.
I I'm.
Mr chairman judge Matthew
my my understanding is that we
are going to to be starting with
any jurisdiction that does not
have a program and then that'll
be discussions with all of the
chief judges as I indicated in
terms of what is it with the
what are the programs that you
have
are they aligned with this this
same type of structure that the
Supreme Court wants to see and
so I imagine those will be on
going conversations I'm at this
point in time this is brand new
again we haven't had the we only
have the initial meeting on the
rollout we don't have the
supervising attorney in place
but our intent is to get with
all of the chief judges and any
individuals working with those
programs in those point that
currently have.
Programs that means that
statewide.
They have car fans may not be
doing the statewide I am
standing I haven't heard
anything about this.
Mr Chairman just about the my
understanding is that the the
chief justice the Supreme Court
wants this program to ultimately
be statewide.
And and that will be faced in
process.
Understand that where I'm coming
from is the first is the
thirteenth in the SEC or the
pilots and so that's why I'm
confused because we do we are on
the same program back to Mr Peck
was working closely with our
administrator.
I imagine they'll be
collaboration around this I I
and I apologize I don't have all
the answers for you regarding at
the long term structure.
Thank you.
What services chairman that's
because this was my
understanding that is nothing
set in stone that's why this
conversation to occur the second
can as a lot of work to do a lot
of places that don't have
foreclosures settlement program
before we ever get around to the
end in in the end it may be that
the courts convince the Supreme
Court that the best thing to do
is let those that up and running
on program for a long time keep
them for no we really should be
one program run it all out of
the second it will merge its
programs and but he will be part
of those conversations if you
haven't been part of the
discussions already and any
consolidation of existing
programs is down the road after
they get through with the money
districts or whatever it is that
don't have any such thing.
Thank you.
The the post sorry one more on
near term to per listen to free
trial so you'd better count and
so the three that are AOC but
the bottom three
Are they just general fund.
Assistance.
Which brought three surveillance
officer background
investigators.
Or appropriations chair there's
not a.
Funding source whether it be
County or AOC the.
The bottom three or no so if you
look on.
Education these you'll see that
they're all county funded
they're all County.
Thank you.
The others.
I think we want take away and
getting not just from the second
from others is that we need to
try and track down what that's
all data looks like and start
maybe tracking those trends so
we know what that looks like not
just in the second by the all
the ports and so
that the cast.
For for to it to see if we can
do something like that if that's
possible but I think would be to
work extra work in that area I
don't have any other questions
will be asked by the committee
members thank you for your
presentation thank you thank you
Mr chairman.
The the twelfth district.
It's.
To just review in this Mr chair
members of the committee good
afternoon and thank you for your
commitment to doing this process
and and for having us here the
we appreciate that the time up
for the I moved into center
chief judge for the twelfth and
I'm joined by Andrea karr whom
you all know as a colleague on
the committee
for the fiscal year at twenty
five the twelfth is asking for
Amarjit modest budget increase
of just over four percent the
majority of our request is for
personal and we have one
contractual requests are the
first person request we are
seeking is for a case manager
who will serve as a court
navigator for quick participants
experiencing mental health
issues this request is supported
by team I of the New Mexico
Judiciary strategic plan to
improve public trust and
confidence in New Mexico courts
by ensuring system improved
individuals with serious mental
health issues are given the
support that they need to
successfully move out of the
judicial system on that for us
is that priority one request
secondly we're seeking funding
for a judicial specialist to for
our Alamogordo magistrate court.
Well case filings have been down
for a few years we anticipate
that they will increase as we
move further and further from
the pandemic the two thousand
nineteen New Mexico Supreme
Court workload study indicated
that the Alamogordo magistrate
court location needed ten point
six three staff we currently
have six filled positions and
one vacancy in active
recruitment and of the six
filled positions we have four or
less of those individuals have
four of those have less than one
year experience excuse me and
and both of our magistrate judge
positions in the Alamogordo
court will be new as in the end
of FY twenty four one is in
front of his position as
magistrate for less than six
months and we currently have a
vacancy that we hope will be
filled in in August.
Having so many new employees
slows down our case processing
and can can lead to backlog what
we we have concern our staff are
currently struggle to keep up
and having an additional staff
will help to ensure that the
work is completed and that our
staff are not work to the point
of of exhaustion and burnout
this also for us is a priority a
one request.
Lastly on the personal requests
we are seeking funding to create
a judicial specialist we'd
worker at the Otero District
Court.
The two thousand nineteen
workforce study identified the
need for thirteen point seven
nine clerks at the Otero
District Court location we
currently have eight positions
filled and having a the worker
position in the court the
clerk's office I would mean that
we could focus on training for
all of the staff in the the at
the lead worker could assist in
our staff excuse me could assist
our jury staff when needed as
well we have a lot of jury
trials
our.
In that contractual category
we're requesting an additional
fifty thousand to provide
security for the regreso
magistrate court we asked for
and received the fifty thousand
in FY twenty three with that
amount proved to be true low and
I just wasn't realistic to
contract with our local law
enforcement agencies because
anyone that would put except
this contract would be over time
for them.
so we we felt we need that
additional fifty thousand we
also consider this because of
the office the this court
security concerns particularly
in our magistrate courts we
consider this to also be a
priority one request.
and we asset you recommend for
funding for all of our requests
again we thank you for your time
we thank you for your
consideration and Andrea and I
will stand for questions.
Appreciate that thank you the
question we need to send us.
I think I may have to come up
with some creative piercing
questions.
As as I I want to start out I
mean the court navigator is
something that's going to be
indispensable in the future
throughout the judiciary and
really connecting people
suffering with mental health
in navigating the court system
and getting them to appropriate
services are you worried that
that's going to be too helpful
and reduce your caseload to a
degree with three repeat affect
how.
But Mr chairman and chief judge
Travis we are really worried
about that that was for us
anyway though is that the
question you know I think chief
judge early pointed out some you
know we have concerns regarding
the workload study and and I
think when we're hearing
requests from people I mean are
you really you know you're
seeing the need in you know you
need a judicial specialist lead
worker in the District Court a
you know is it overwhelming are
they getting behind to such a
degree that we're worried about
access to justice and then I
guess that's the question of why
you would need that position.
Mr chair chief judge have Travis
all I'll defer to order on that
but
District and I hesitated even to
to reference the workload study
all state in in this for the
reasons that chief judge of
early had wrecked reference but
it's only rules reference point
I think that we have and the
reality is there is
work backlog and over work with
that with our employees at that
we know is absolutely real so we
we know no matter what that the
number of physicians that we
have is not enough but on all
the different Andre from on.
Thank you
at our Alamogordo magistrate
court.
Absolutely without a doubt we've
had to get very creative in the
past year trying to.
Provide some relief for the
employees we've brought in
staff from AOC to help us we
brought in staff from other
locations to help us.
That quarters cannot catch their
breath and it seems like every
it we're we're losing staff
because of it we we get new
staff and we know it takes a
good year for staff to get fully
comfortable in the position
and then.
They just get so overwhelmed
that they quit so we've had a
lot of turnover at that location
so without a doubt that
Alamogordo magistrate court I
think we can put three more
people in there and still not be
able to keep that
at the District Court run a
little bit of a different
position we have seen your
employees who have
been there for a while and know
their jobs well and they are
staying on top of the workload.
But there is more that they
could be doing and I have
concerns in the future about
filling positions in Lincoln
County because we just have a
smaller label labor pool Kerry
says is a very small town and I
think we've.
Hired everybody who is eligible
to work and and we've had a hard
time filling vacancies there so
if we were able to create the
lead Parker position in a terror
District Court they could
provide some relief to Lincoln
County as well so it would just
give us it's a position that
would give us a lot of
flexibility in order to address
different means that may come
up.
Mr chair I cranked up them
microscope as much time to do.
It took questions from members
of the Martin.
Thank you Mr chair I'm
interested in this for navigator
position and how how is that
position interacting with the
program being set up by.
Mr chair a judge Martin I know
that Audrey Act I asked that I
mean I can I can talk about the
court navigator and what we in
what we're doing now with our
court navigate navigator
position what we envision were
part of the movie that Supreme
Court mental health competency
commission pilot project with
that at least eight and the
second and the twelfth and so we
we anticipate even more robustly
using that position but I I
don't want to I want to miss
that that have interfaces with
with the AOC projects all
different Adriana thank you.
Since this this is been a really
exciting position for just to
have we got grant funding
through AOC
and we're able to hires at
fantastic fit for the program
she spent nine months really
yes.
Looking at what our district was
dealing with and developing a
plan family obligations to occur
elsewhere so it's currently and
unfilled position and so.
What she has uncovered is that
There are so many places that we
could plug her and I.
But with pre trial services
strategically they're gonna be
sitting right next to each other
because there are going to be
identification that is made
through our pre trial
population that is needing
additional services that are
above and beyond what our pre
trial team can find and they
will be able to immediately jump
them over to our court navigator
who can help them and then we're
also looking at a new pilot
program with the Supreme Court
as it a diversion program
that will also have some overlap
I think with our pre trial
program so we've got a lot of
big ideas and we're really
excited about the possibilities
of it and will continue to
analyze the best place to place
them and but working closely
with pre trial is is definitely
a need that we have.
In the you know judge Snyder you
are here for the AOC
presentation but Mr Kirk was and
so I'm I'm really.
And I want to support the AOC.
You know request I just want to
know how you know I want to be
set up a competitive situation I
want to make sure that the
programs are working together
and yeah I'd this chart heard
the vision by AOC of what they
want to do with the program so I
kind of want to know how how you
you've started it is he's behind
the ball had gotten there yet
they they discussed funding so
how how's this actually rolling
out.
We are working with Scott
Patterson and his team every
step of the way he'll be in
Alamogordo on July twenty fifth
for and and that the meeting of
the program so we are.
Lock step in line with AOC I was
very excited to hear about their
ideas for peer support because
that is something that we've
discussed internally as
something that would complement
our case navigator very well and
so I I I think that we are in
line with what AOC is thinking
on just on a district level
instead of on a state level
okay.
turned into a different areas in
your.
The questionnaire your fund
balances you've got three fund
balances one of them is
described as other.
For it to be a little more
elaborate.
Specialty court
fund balance so our our adult
treatment court.
All right but you haven't spent
any money out of those looks
pretty flat.
What's planned for.
We have been funded we've had a
federal funds.
Sorry the comment we had at a
federal funding for our veterans
treatment court and that funding
is ending this year and so we
are going to need to replace
some of that lost federal
revenue with our fund balance.
Okay thank the those are my
questions thank.
Thank you checked out the state
with respect to your security
and road so.
Is the hundred thousand as I'm
understanding is a hard number
that you've contracted with the
police department that's what
you want so you can receive
thank you for that.
Mr chair to judge Matthew we
have been working again a
different artery but also a
couple things of of what what
what what I've been involved
with on that we have reached out
to every law enforcement agency
up in Lincoln County and we
can't even really get a
meaningful conversation started
in terms of we just know that
the fifty thousand is actually
not and left another after has
put more thought into the fifty
thousand request San herder her
but we just with that we could
even get the conversation
started with anyone.
We do not have a hard contract
yet we're hoping if we can come
to the table with more money
that we could get a contract in
place if not we're gonna have to
go out to our own at contract
but we much prefer.
Being able to contract with the
law enforcement.
Have some indication that.
Right so will.
Favorably consider under
thousand dollar con or something
less hope.
We we we are hopeful it but not
it's not for certain.
I'll be completely honest thank
you.
I was holding my breath.
That's all I have to.
okay a couple of.
A couple questions from the.
The court navigator I'm almost.
One of the should be a special
just because it's something
you're you're you're looking and
you said a lot of ideas of our
pilots and I I'm I'm I'm just
wanted this it will be a more
appropriate for a special then
directly to general fund so that
we could try it out for here and
have some some than some some
experience to build go back to
the legislature and say this is
what happened this is what we
did this is what what worked it
wasn't enough it's too much for
them to much right but but
something like that what why
going directly to the general
fund verses a special.
Mr chair we have.
We are already working with our
our justice partners.
On through our C. J. C. C.
through I can't even count of
our meetings we have but what
with them to robustly use that
court navigator press position
for both pre and post educated
individuals with with your
spinal health issues the so
we've already got that I can
answer questions about that much
more in more detail but so we
already had plans to really
robust use robustly use that
position on the for all of the
reasons that that you can think
of that navigator you know the
functions that they that they do
the pilot project came later I
mean we just and what late may
at our retreat at the mental
health and
competency commission do you
know develop decided to start
the pilot projects which are
will be through our magistrate
courts and diversion I created a
Qatari diversion program and
it's a great fit for but what
you can I don't believe it's
even possible to to participate
in the pilot unless you've got a
court navigator so we were
already developing our navigator
system before the pilot ever
came along so if I'm
understanding correctly it's
it's not just tied to that
program it's something that
would be just a continuous need
in our community and I think and
I'll add to that we've had grant
funding for nine months and have
had an individual in that in
that position who has really dug
deep into sheet in that nine
months she was in program
development and implementation
she did not get to the point
have direct client services yet
because that's how much time
it's taken to develop a robust
program and that's why I'm
confident that now is the right
time to seek general funding
thank you that's helpful because
with the the the clerk and an
Otero county
judge Matthews often the voice
of military affairs.
Fifty eight and I have some
experience in Otero and I and I
really
it's a bad situation did not
differ your judge turnover there
is banned I mean just for an
incredible I don't think any
other quarters has anything like
that and I'm sure that's
impacted you're you're correct
situation as well the
The the the the the I guess the
problem I have and the thing I
like to just maybe just self in
the room is you know the that
case I just so down so I'm back
you know the that case the case
was so do not you have value and
not you can look at the numbers
on on the ones magistrates
portion of you all have that but
but in front of you but you know
Alamogordo back in sixteen was
sixty three hundred cases fifty
nine hundred and seventeen fifty
eight hundred and eighteen in a
fast forward to last year thirty
one hundred it's it's like more
than half of that case was
dropped and so and I'm not
really sure more folks gonna
help I I think I really
encourage you talk about
you know maybe gauging sent this
folks to go on and health or or
putting people down there to
assist to kind of get you get
find your footing but I don't
know that there's justification
to give another clerk only but
you know the case the distance
of the supported I don't know if
any response any thoughts on
that.
We have tried that we've we've
Diane mains who works with ASC
is located in Orlando so she's a
wonderful resource she has come
in and she has has tried to help
she has
at.
We've we've brought in
experienced clerks from other
locations in the district as
well to try and help it seems
like as soon as we get them
caught up they fall back behind
again I will tell you I hate you
it is impossible while case
filings may be down there you
can not get at sentence out
without the phone ringing three
times it
that that customers.
While we don't have as many hi
filings as we did back in two
thousand sixteen the customer
service that is required there
is is very high just I mean I
could put someone there to
answer the phone all day and and
maybe then they could get their
their work caught up but I
really do think that between the
walk in customers and the phone
calls.
And just seeing how much they
are
What their desks look like on a
regular basis they really need
another person down there.
Thank you.
Okay.
This is the question thank you
for your presentation.
What is.
One of the.
District one.
Some of the.
Is it the.
moving on to the the thirteenth.
The presentation of the day.
What will be short and succinct.
You've just please try.
The good afternoon everybody I
want to thank all of you for the
work that you're putting in this
someone else said that and it
struck me that you guys have
three days here and I certainly
appreciate you giving us the
time to make our argument of why
we need to have the budget that
we're asking for so thank you
very much
most of you probably know me on
general on the chief judge of
the thirteenth with me is Phil
primarily as our CEO we also
have Chris Wolfe who's our CFO
he's with this as well
I'm not going to get into the
details of structure and
composition of the thirteenth
judicial district you all if you
have any questions on that
please feel free to ask will try
to address those as they come up
what what we're here to talk
about is really what we're
asking for in the twenty five
budget and it is consistent for
basic things
the first priority that we have
is a new judgeship and it's a
full judgeship would be the
judge the TCA and court monitor
and we're looking at that to be
in about four hundred six
thousand dollars in addition to
that and this is a well as far
as I'm concerned all for these
are our first priorities but I
think the the the legal staff
that we're asking for is listed
as a second priority and we're
looking to try to get a a
District Court general counsel
as well as a senior staff
attorney and that's we're
looking for a two hundred sixty
one thousand for that.
In addition there's two other
things that I think really base
request our base increase
requests and that's the
additional two percent for staff
compensation for with an attempt
to do the equalization with the
executive branch that's a
hundred eighty eight thousand
and also I think everyone's
probably were AOC has a a new
policy and the district courts
of the star District Court is
going to be looking at point
something together that
implements this new policy on
tuition reimbursement and so
we're asking for twenty five
thousand dollars for that the
total assets with all that is
eight hundred eighty eight
hundred eighty two thousand
dollars and is judge Snyder it
said this is a very me or ask
about five or six percent
somewhere in there
I think we're gonna be looking
at probably two different
specials at a later point in
time I'm not going to get into
those unless you're interested
but whatever I'd like to start
with this is with the judgeship
request and hopefully you guys
all received the material the we
included in our budget request
and that's four five pages of
material the we put together.
That is based on a couple of
different things it's based on
the the two thousand nineteen
two thousand twenty workload
study that was done the weighted
workload study and there's some
materials that are in that
And I think the the other thing
is the new cases filed by
calendar year we've got that I
want to discuss that in the
context of the the new case
filings in that the clearance
rate report that we got from all
of you and then also the fact
that we've got population
increases going on in at least
two of our counties and there if
you look at it compared
statewide there at the very top
of the the population increases
are that are existing in the
state so I'd be happy to walk
you through the data that we
provided I would also be happy
to start answering questions I'd
be surprised if you didn't have
questions on that data but like
I said I could walk you through
if you want me to do that first.
I think publishers stand for
questions that we don't get to
it in the questions then you can
certainly address that in the
closing that a great thank you.
Of this bill question judge
Frankie I thank you very much
the educational good afternoon
judge Franchini.
Start you just a little bit
backwards I'm gonna talk about
your priority one request at the
end okay.
So I'm looking at your priority
to which is the attorney the
general counsel you all don't
have a general counsel at this
point in the third we do not we
did have at one point in time we
had a combined general counsel
and CEO and AOC has stolen that
individual from us and so we no
longer have
At individual when did that
happen.
Well it's sort of a complicated
world you had more money I know
that now your reserve events
that occur but ever mind I I
might not and soon as it came
out okay
where would that person be house
today be in Sandoval county or
Arliss that way your plant plant
is actually the the CEO has an
office in Valencia County common
office in Santa Fe County and I
don't.
Senator office and say oh
conference room conference room
members
members one echo what I can tell
you is we dedicate space for
folks moving around from county
to county the Sandoval county
courthouse is too small to
support the staff and the judges
that are there we're in the
process working with the county
I'm trying to get an expansion
done but the the the general
counsel as well as the CEO would
be located they have offices and
and all three locations okay and
going to your quest for the
Attorney senior position how
many twenty seniors do you have
now we have no attorney seniors
may have to staff attorneys at
with a just requests okay I'm
sorry I take it back yes we did
are they both were classified as
a yes Sir so we have the two
that are on board right now our
attorney seniors they were just
request the city attorney so
states but you moved into
attorney senior correct okay and
where the those two people
located.
Again the sort of switch back
and forth one of them is more
often in Valencia County the
other is more often in Santa Fe
County but they both.
Do rotation and this third
attorney senior you would have
as well floater yeah okay and
you had said in your
documentation that the
positional support and
revitalize the self help center
slash clinic and so this is a
different formation than what
that the second has I just want
you to educate so what do your
attorney seniors do for you.
What they do right now is a
number of things one of them
serves in the capacity as a
quasi general counsel so that
individual works on contracts
works on paper issues works on
those things that general
counsel may be working on
we've got a judge is being sued
in federal court and that
individuals assisting with that
that really is general counsel
business that's not staff
attorney business what I would
like to staff attorneys to be
able to do is to support the
judges as they have difficult
issues coming before them that
need to have reserves doing
support for trials doing a
number of different things right
now with the other staff
attorney among the many tasks he
has for support of the criminal
judges
she also is dedicate a great
deal of time during the summers
now I think this is our second
year in terms so she's running
intern program which is an
initiative out of the Supreme
Court were very supportive of it
and we've got three interns that
are at the core and they're
being paid this year which they
were being paid last year so
we're very happy to have them in
this new one if you get the new
attorney senior you're saying
that that person's main job will
be to to support revitalizes
self help clinic slash center.
And that may be a
characterization where one
might.
A lot more structured and formal
than it really is
I think we've heard from many
people today and I've only been
here for half the day we have an
increasing number of self
represented litigants that are
coming to the court and they.
We don't really have the kind of
staff
this particularly at the level
of an attorney attorneys to
provide to support that is
necessary to make sure that
things are coming in and and
there.
The folks that need the
assistance are getting the
assistance and so that person
would be assisting in that but
one of the other things that we
need to have happen is we need
to have an individual out of the
three of them who is going to
coordinate work for all the
judges in three different
counties and some of rely more
heavily on the staff attorneys
and others okay thank you stand
and forgive me this is my first
rodeo so I was wondering about
your priority for where the
additional two percent for
employee salaries compensation
increased equity causation with
executive branch I read that I
was confused by it because I
thought that would be like a
statewide initiative that
setting that the Supreme Court
would push so I I don't
understand that well and and
that's a very good question and
I'm not quite sure how to answer
that except that I think the
guidance and direction that we
got RT double correct me if I'm
wrong is that we should go ahead
and build that into our
individual district budgets
typically I would anticipate
that would be an appropriation
that would be a lump sum it
would go to AOC and then they
get distributed as it normally
is so I don't know quite how it
happened but what I didn't want
to do is miss that if we need to
have it Mr chair Senator if that
a communication here for me I
was having a bad day.
Have I believe so.
I don't know how I got that we
we do have a statewide
initiative we were eleven point
two percent behind last year we
got two percent over the general
increase seeking nine point two
percent of cost twelve million
dollars I would apply to all the
employees so I suggest that
that's the initiative that we
will pursue nine percent my
point to you right.
Well as far as I'm concerned if
if AOC is pursuing nine point
two percent across the board we
can withdraw that two percent
okay
tear number five priority the
tuition reimbursement how did
you come up with a number twenty
five thousand.
What's the term is a swag.
It was against.
It was a number that we thought
would be sufficient to meet that
need.
We don't know we don't know what
that asks asks are going to be
we know how we're going to
implement it the question would
be whether or not anyone that
would request wishin and
reimbursement if they they would
all get the same amount or if
there would be some very flexing
amount depending on how many
credit hours they may be seeking
and I guess that's my question
is because I'm really judge
beach ahead on this with the N.
and J. C. trying to figure out
what the policy is going to be
in the first place so it seems
like the request maybe putting
the cart before the horse but I
may be wrong about that I what
we're gonna be getting requests
this year okay.
We already have yes I'm sure
lease so there is a proposal
tuition reimbursement policy
policy was adopted and then we
realized that it had some issues
so we propose a revision of the
Supreme Court that revision got
referred to the judicial council
which is under consideration I
suspect that when all is said
and done limits on the maximum
amount.
Reimburse right and you like
maybe you can only get
reimbursed once every three
years spent around
things things like that a
maximum amount of dollar numbers
that you can be reimbursement
individual here all of which you
know could have occurred to us
you for a while and I'm saying
that are you because we were
grappling with the very same
issues and it's.
I was hoping that when I look
through the policy I had hoped
that there would be something a
little more so we could simply
back this record without the
should be great we'll get
everything fixed based on the
first of however couple months
of experience with it and
instead of one of the judicial
council and other working around
it but so it's in flux when
we'll get that the policy revise
so the policies out there is to
Reagan doesn't give you enough
direction on and the thing about
it is to Mr chair and judge
Franchini I would I'm gonna
stand by that request we need
something we're we're getting
requests now okay and we're
talking about a year round this
point okay.
So let's go to your priority one
are you asking for the judge TCA
and monitor and my first
question is the number you gave
us for
new case file filings this is in
your document is for two one
eight two thousand twenty two is
seven thousand three hundred
eighty nine and I'm trying to.
Trying to understand where you
got your number let me explain
why I am confused because I went
back to your numbers in the
budget.
Performance report.
And for twenty twenty two for
new civil cases yes seven
thousand for new criminal cases
yes three thousand I just I'm
trying to understand the numbers
and every other document that
I've gotten through this
commission this body then your
the numbers don't match and so
I'm just trying to figure out
where did you get your numbers
okay so a couple of things the
numbers that we use and I'm I'm
guessing you looking at this yes
okay so you're looking at a
presentation that that we put
together for exaction the
executive session of the judges
at the thirteenth and the
presentation itself was a little
bit larger it was bigger than as
I only provided certain excerpts
from that and what we did was we
looked at this from a calendar
year basis so these numbers are
calendar years now if you look
at the reports that you guys
have and the one that I think
you will recognize is this one
this is a clearance rate report
that you guys got and it's for
FY twenty three it's twenty
seven one twenty two through six
thirty twenty three there's also
A report that you guys have that
is Clarence rates over a period
of years again those are fiscal
years I use calendar years I'm
sorry for that particularly
census adding an element of
confusion here which I didn't
mean to do
but what I can say is the
following
What date what both of these
sets of reports indicate or
suggest is that case load since
twenty nineteen and even before
that have been going down.
Twenty twenty February March of
twenty twenty is when COVID
kicked in and there was a steep
decline at that point.
What has happened in twenty
twenty three.
And why state twenty twenty
three I'm talking about calendar
rather than fiscal.
Because.
You all are using clearance
rates report get is the number
of new cases the number of re
opens at cetera that is fiscal
year twenty twenty three June
one of twenty two through I'm
sorry July one of twenty two
through June thirtieth twenty
three if you take this reporting
you parse it out by the first
half of the fiscal year in the
second half of the fiscal year
what you're going to see is that
where there was a radical
increase in the number of new
cases filed beginning in January
February of twenty twenty three
to the tune of pretty
substantial numbers
Valencia County that money due
up three hundred percent.
I'm sorry that's those are re
opens sixty percent in new cases
filed Bernalillo county they
were up by thirty three percent
so if you look at the second
half of FY twenty three when the
Supreme Court lifted a lot of
the COVID of things that were
restricting activity with the
courts we we saw a huge increase
in new cases filed re opens and
just the workload in general and
when we take that and we
extrapolate that out and I'm
going back to this report.
what it shows.
Is if you go to.
It's mark at the bottom
This page.
Seventeen.
This one right here it shows
that this district still needs
point eight two new judges.
And that's just based on the
numbers for
That we used for extrapolating
out calendar twenty three four
if you separated out the first
half of FY twenty three to the
second half of FY twenty three
we still need at least one full
new Jack that's what the status
is meant to convey and it is
more complicated based on the
fact that the data you guys have
our fist is fiscal year based on
what I presented is County based
so I'm sorry for that but again
the trainings this here are
consistent between the two ways
that we're measuring this
whether it's fiscal or calendar
things went down during the
COVID and as of January of this
year there's a steep increase in
new cases filed and reopens and
that's reflected in.
H. fifteen this one that you've
got you can see that the jump in
case new cases are being filed.
I hope that answers your
question and I hope that was
clear I'm not sure that it was I
will say you're you're holding
up things that I don't think
I've ever seen so that's why I
feel like I'm really in the dark
but let's.
Get the material that we
submitted with our budget
request group they're we we got
it the reason judge from Kenny's
answering as the data we have
for example fiscal year twenty
to your listing seventy three
hundred new cases and I list ten
thousand for for the fifteenth
judicial district which is three
thousand more at least than what
you're you're proposing for us
to consider that calendar year
and you touch and all the so
sorry just what I think I'm
hearing from you that's the most
important part of your data is
if you isolated starting in
January with the lifting of all
the restrictions we are seeing
an increasing caseloads that's
likely not just the thirteenth
but around around the state I
didn't look at other districts
but I looked it right for the
thirteenth your scene from
January of this year your St
it's it's starting to creep back
up even though we have had a a
downtrend since two thousand
nineteen yes that's exactly yeah
that's exactly the the issue so
looking at your document I don't
have page numbers on mine but
the new cases filed by calendar
year yes okay so what I
understood from your
documentation was that you're
wanting to do this judge should
be and the lengths you County
although it looks like there's
been thanks on your numbers
increases higher and Sandoval
County.
We just got a new judgeship in
Santa Fe County you don't think
these numbers reflect our help
with that and I guess I don't.
Where we need a new judgeship is
implants you County that
particular judge would probably
share some cases with Cibola
County okay and so I'm not sure
we we received a new judgeship
in fiscal twenty three yes I
knew that so we went from four
to five I understand okay
thank I think about some of my
questions thank you I'm.
Committee members have questions
so we've got a few okay Google
search.
the department of justice.
Thank you Mr chair okay let's
start.
Kind of where we left off.
How many judges do you have in
Valencia County now we have
three in Valencia County right
now.
And how many of Santa I and so
then that leaves you wanting
Cibola one and single okay.
And you want.
To increase that from three to
four and Valencia County
correct.
And but it would help out in
Cibola to a certain extent yes
okay so.
I was would dish Franchini that
the numbers you were presenting
you're you're you're our point.
Are undervalued compared to the
day we got from it.
So let me look at the data
you've got from Jed and that was
that that was the material that
was
provided in the the.
The drive correct yes.
That is that ten thousand two
seven nine is that what you're
saying for FY twenty three yes
thank you Mr shifted.
Show the.
This trend I'm looking at.
Going back to I think RT is one
that suggested we look at I FY
seventeen eighteen nineteen all
pre pandemic.
You're at fourteen thousand and
seventeen.
He went up a little bit in
eighteen and then you started
decline.
From that point forward.
From the high market looks to me
like was FY eighteen FY eighteen
and fourteen point three twenty
seven then fourteen twenty five
and twelve eight oh six ten nine
ten nine two two ten one four in
ten to seven nine so.
If the workload study was done
in nineteen at the high water
mark.
Your your need is gone down
since the.
Since that.
This would suggest that we have
for.
Thousand fewer cases in twenty
twenty three then we had in FY
nineteen.
And since then you've already
you've acquired we've gotten to
judges one judge just one since
nineteen okay.
And the ten thousand to seven
nine those I'm guessing and
the cashier RT can correct me on
this if I'm wrong that tend to
seven nine is probably the
correct number for all
is it new and reopen cases in FY
twenty three correct as Mister
miss.
That's what the other.
So
you know trying to compare
apples to apples.
Sure you've gone up.
The last fiscal year and you're
expecting an increase but you
gotta teach gadget already we
did.
We the.
Looking at these numbers as a
fiscal year number they tend to
seven nine is
item number that doesn't take
into consideration
the.
The increase numbers of filings
that happened during the second
half of FY twenty three and when
I say that what I mean is that's
only reflective of increases
that occurred in six months out
of twelve month here and so if
you one was to take that and
look at that and apply it to a
twelve month period it would
reflect a higher number and
that's what that's the argument
that the is that I'm making
which is.
We're going to see
an increase in cases that are
not reflected in the the annual
the fiscal year numbers that are
being used here.
And.
And I'm basing that on the fact
that the second half of FY
twenty three we saw significant
increases in civil and that's
reflected in the numbers that we
have it's reflected in fact in
this report that you guys were
using.
So.
Coming back to a two year
analysis and your supporting
documents.
I'm hoping you can follow along
with me so.
You've got one judgments and I'm
gonna stick strictly with the
twenty twenty three estimates
just everybody on the committee
can follow along.
So in Cibola county your
estimating nine hundred ninety
five cases for calendar year
twenty three.
at one judge so one judge has
nine hundred and ninety five
cases on average.
With me.
Your review okay I'm I'm looking
at the new cases and just what
K. for the year well I'm I'm I'm
gonna try to he's this is his
argument so I want to tease it
out a little bit using his
numbers part fifteen that the
numbers in the group that's
number agreements that it's
titled new cases filed by
calendar year.
Okay and I'm looking at that
okay so Cibola County your one
judge has a caseload of nine
hundred ninety five cases.
Yes.
Zoom Sandoval County you've got
your estimating four thousand
six hundred and eighty two cases
yes devided by five judges.
So you've got a case load of
nine thirty six.
Valencia County has three
thousand two hundred thirty four
with three current judges
project case load it thousand
seventy eight but if you add a
fourth that brings you K. slowed
down eight oh eight.
For the for in for the for the
lunches so that means all of
your judges would be working.
Slightly a.
Seven and nine hundred fees
okay.
Okay.
And and in theory if you go to
the next page seventeen bottom
right.
What that reflects is the need
for nine point need to join us
right.
It's more I I appreciate the
time to do it I think we have
the request I think we have the
study we have the data
I'm not sure bill pull much out
of this I think that they were
really trying to reconcile.
The case load data that we're
using against the the fiscal
year that is Representative and
I I think we I think we I think
we have the information.
I I I appreciate that I mean
there's nothing really think we
need to have I was I was trying
to tease out his argument as
compared to our statistic to see
if if the comparison.
Work from my my analysis and so
I think I did it work for your
analysis
You'll find out there's.
Thank you Mr.
You have any other questions.
Thank you judge Martin for your
question is I hope that they
were helpful just answers to
questions that stuffy hello to
eternal.
Thanks to see you you.
Previously if I heard you
correctly your attorney general
counsel position was kind of a
dual position with your cheek
your CEO was a CEO slash general
counsel correct you have CEO now
we have a CEO now and it so can
your CEO be SCO slash General
counselor what we need this is a
full time.
The R. CEO cannot be general
counsel hi.
And an attorney.
That answers my question.
All right but you have a need
for it it was less than a full
time position before you you
have a full time need and we I
think we have a full time need
there's a great deal going on
there it's again as has been
discussed there's an increase in
the number of self
Representative represented
litigants
that are participating in court
proceedings this leads to a
whole wide range of issues that
come up everything from eighty a
significant eighty eight
questions and issues that come
up to every matter is to being
sued to all sorts of things yes
we I'm fine and security IT
security issues or another one.
So thank you for that
clarification the only other
thing I wanted pointed to the
committee members is in the air
C. pile we have a case for judge
charts
it's so it's probably not
perfect considering more spread
out over three different
courthouses but at but it does
give us the breakdown of K.
projection thirteenth using that
ten thousand figure so we can
look at that and compared to the
other districts that was just
common a question and I thank
you for your presentation thank
you judge.
Mr spears.
Chief judge no one thing you
could do is increase your
tuition reimbursement requests
sent Philip Law School.
At U. N. M. I. the twenty five
thousand a year might do it.
Because this is what was a car.
You mentioned that you've
already received some request
for tuition reimbursement how
much have those requests
totaled.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we have received three
requests that I'm aware of right
now the first request was
nineteen hundred dollars over
requests for tuition
reimbursement the other was in
the process of registering and
then have a total yet so I and
the other was another twelve
hundred dollars I believe it was
and they were seeking once for a
court reporter out of state
school that they were seeking
the other one was to pursue
continuing services in the
courts so just a criminal
justice degree.
And who has been helping with
here if for as our eyes that
falling mainly on you is chief
judge Noel shouldering that
burden how are you handling
it for as eighty As those types
of things now that you don't
have as CEO general counsel
thank you for the question Mr
chairman and members of the
committee so in the last year
it's been pretty challenging I
could tell you that myself I was
handling and for the most part
we recently hired a deputy court
executive officer for district
she's also now she's been of
been trained we were going
through the process of for
filling those requests as well
so she's been helping me take
over that request because just
like two general said with ADA
requirements we have a request
coming in that way media
requests for getting from people
outside of the Courts but the
eighty if there is a big one
we've been getting quite a few
requests are coming in daily and
they're getting more intense and
I think the other courts and
CEOs of seeing some of the ones
we've been getting are going
across the district and they're
asking for this broad data and
we're we're kind of doing a
unified report of answering
those upper request so it's
important that we're reaching
out and touching base with the
other questions because we're
getting more more of these type
of data requests and to
supplement that answer which is
very good I am unfortunately
spending some of my time
addressing some every issues as
well as ADA issues in fact we
were just on the phone with
AOC'S general counsel discussing
in eighty eight issue.
And so I'm spending time on it
as well.
Thank you.
Good afternoon so thank you yes
No I just have a few questions
first is.
You have that for your fund
balances you have general
operations listed.
What is that from.
Chris Chris tried to explain
that to me.
because that was that was a
question we had in progress I'm
gonna let you explain that to
temple.
it's the that fund balances are
secure circus need products of
the chairs of the microphone
picks it up as a person hasn't
been turned on my mic.
People keep complaining that I
from out of nowhere in the world
that they can't hear me.
so that fund is in our our main
fund
that all all of our expenses
come out of and it is from.
Two thousand and ten when we
started pre trial services
we got some monies from the
counties we got some money from
Presbyterian medical services
and we kind of got that up front
in the program and start.
Until later in so that money is
just been sitting on balance and
they don't require the funds
don't revert to their county
money it's not general fund
money general fund money.
But the U. S..
You received authorization to
keep it that there's no you
don't have to reverted back or
send it back to presbytery at
the end of the grant or whatever
it was there was nothing in that
in that and you.
We needed to do that.
so put scented sitting there
could some of that be used for
the tuition reimbursements.
I suppose it could.
I'm I'm not comfortable with
that answer.
Administrative.
Six hundred general counsel.
It is well actually.
Well which is the chief judge.
Okay and then the other
the other question I have is for
your reversion a you've
mentioned that there's no
general fund reversion was there
different.
Funding source that was reverted
there is so we actually ended up
dipping into that fund balance
this year.
in there is going to be a
reversion of the.
The mortgage regulatory fund.
Some of that money we got that
up front and then you're going
to revert that back.
But that's not a general fund
reversion of right now.
Thank you that's all I have.
So I had questions about the
general operation non reverting
fund which I understand now it's
not really that but it sounds
like looks like since this is
thirteen years ago you got a
hundred twelve thousand seven
four two thousand one district
funds that you're sort of just
carrying a long waiting to do
something with is that right
immunities for pre trial this
point.
Well you on anything
unrestricted so you're referring
to it as being something that
came to general fund money.
This is the first time I spoke
to Chris about this was within
the last week or so and so I
think we need to work out
exactly the nature of those
funds to ensure take confirm
that either their unrestricted
as you're suggesting they might
be or not.
It can be used for the purpose
that in its existence it'll the
the the purpose that it aims at
originated from what I
understand it's not general fund
recurring this is the court that
carried a fifty thousand dollar
deficiency for like ten years
and this money was there I don't
know it just I'd suggest the
committee not for budget
purposes because this is this is
not general fund recurring money
but.
It would be worth knowing what
what that is and whether it's
available to the court for one
time expenditures so that you
can run that balance down I
suggest you don't carry a
community here I don't know.
Waiting for to do so that's all
I I think you're exactly right
figure out what its use but we
can use it for okay
First time in my memory your
courts not asking for a chance
to is our clerks because they
were asking important way back
in the records perhaps it
reflects a different philosophy
about things or maybe you're all
caught up on your chest to
Senate and I appreciate that
because of job can I comment on
looking for a long time.
We we received three at three J.
S. twos and what I think we're
going to end up doing is we're
going to convert one or more of
those in two court services
specialists were short bailiffs
we're not asking for a bail new
judgeship and though and we've
had interactions with wealth the
twelfth on this they're very
successfully using court
services specialist to use and
we're interested in looking into
doing that and so I think that
we're gonna make good use of the
three that we got the funding
income through until FY twenty
four okay so we'll we'll figure
that part out I appreciate it.
Please respond to case that you
want to make a for the defense
to the committee it looks to me
like at most you could justify
one more attorney senior and
then take twenty returning
seniors and make them the
general counsel because that
seems to me it would cover the
waterfront of issues you
described and would replace the
part timer used to have as the
CEO and
You know.
I don't know that I see for
council justified in the
thirteenth workload.
So maybe you want to say yeah
that's a great idea give us one
will make want to general
counsel and everybody be happy
well all rights are always
listening carefully to what
judge on New York Chavez was
asking about with regard to the
seconds request you were
suggesting that if they got all
the staff attorneys they were
requesting it would be a ratio
of one staff attorney for every
two judges nine what we're
looking at is if I get another
staff attorney
Not doubling as general counsel
we're looking at
one staff attorney for every
three judges.
And I think that that's a pretty
good ratio.
Quite a lot of courage to be
half would be really happy to
have won the three.
But that's if you have one.
That's if we had one but I would
also like to have general
counsel thank you for.
The general counsel is not going
to be a staff attorney
supporting the judges directly
general counsel is going to be
doing other things now I put I
can tell you is I would prefer
to have one rather than nine so.
I have lots of other questions
about the judge request but I
think that the water from spring
covered at the suggestion of the
chair I'll just keep all those
questions to myself.
Want to stay full list of
happen.
I heard you talking to judge
Martin I took heed of.
Please refer to it is it that.
We we are in desperate need of
another judicial officer we have
a half time.
Hearing officer that is working
full time and so what we're
still not keeping up and I'm
telling you with the way
population increases are going
in the state at least based on
what's happened since two
thousand ten I believe we gave
numbers through the present time
Valencia County in Sandoval
county or both increasing at
higher rates than other places
in the state the only other
place it may be at the same or
equal I think it's Dona Ana
third.
Budgets of two questions to.
I don't have a sense of how many
courts have general counsel
positions I know my court
doesn't I don't know if spring
court does is pretty common
thing for districts to have
their own general counsel no
okay do you do you know how you
compare how many others to.
Are you looking at me and asking
me I am I
touch Duffy I do not know how
many general counsel's there are
out there what I know is we had
one at one point in time we do
not have one now and I had one
when I was at the second.
Second is a can of worms
or a box of Pandora's at a at a
no
Chavez me cut cut you off
probably probably foreclosure
settlement program are you in
collaboration with the second on
their expansion requests and I
it may be premature to speak
about the impact of that since
it doesn't sound like they're
gonna roll out into the
fifteenth or attempt to in
fiscal year twenty five.
So.
Collaboration I'm not sure that
I would use that term I
understand that there is an
effort to try to coordinate
foreclosure settlement
throughout the state it's
already being coordinated in
certain respects throughout the
state and I think if it becomes
more formalized that improves
the program it improved services
it standardizes the way it's
being done throughout the
districts in the state I'm very
supportive of that what in right
now as you heard earlier the
thirteenth is getting two
hundred and some odd thousand in
general fund funds for the for
the foreclosure settlement
program I would like to keep the
staff that we have doing that
and I don't particularly want to
lose them they're very good
they're you know they're
excellent they're very good at
what they do and I think the way
to address that is through
I don't know if I'd be an MO you
it's not an inter governmental
agreement it's an agreement
between district courts I think
or the supreme I don't know who
would be between but there would
be consistency and how it's
being done right now our staff
were doing in this this piece in
the fifth and fourth the tenth
and the Lee County in the fifth
so we're we're in different
places I know the second I don't
know where all they are but
they're in different places so I
think it's a good idea I just
don't lose the staff because
they're they're good staff.
The so my questions thank you
very much others.
In closing.
You know I'm not sure if that's
a good idea base
where we are the closing my
closing with the hi our first
priority is to get I need to act
I understand that there are some
discrepancies in the numbers we
ran in a certain way and we ran
them in a manner so that we
could apply the weights that
existed in the weighted caseload
study what that meant is that we
drove a stake in the ground we
looked at the basis at a
specific point in time we
applaud weights to them and we
came out with a nine point eight
two number meaning we needed
point eight two the new
judgeship that's based on our
numbers as they exist right now.
I think that the clearance rates
that existed that are being
provided to this committee
Don't accurately reflect the way
increases are hitting at least
the thirteenth I would gas every
district in the state because we
saw a huge increase beginning at
the beginning of calendar twenty
three I think that's going to
continue and I think that that
population growth is going to
continue and for whatever it's
worth the county agrees with
that because when they're
talking about building that the
extension two or that new
courthouse but they're talking
about doing is making sure that
they built for growth.
and for whatever it's worth also
consolidating with Matt court is
going to be a consolidated
magistrate court district court
and they're looking at being
able to house three additional
District Court judges I'm sorry
to additional District Court
judges in Santa Fe County.
We've got space in Valencia
County right now for one
additional judge and that's
where we'd like to place this
new judgeship thank you to thank
you very much thank you thank
you.
Representative.
So everybody back in the
promotion for the committee
please up recovering as morning
looks like the second thank you
so much you want coffee tomorrow
morning for.
Yes early there was a.
Now function and that's what
still.
So so maybe one.
Right thanks brothers.
Create
a great yes.
For for work here.
In
a report.
Make
skills.
