And now we do have one schedule
change the the north us to to
switch with the tenth there was
no conflict with the tent so I
went ahead and allow that school
teachers not.
Good afternoon.
I'm done in our chief judge of
the ninth judicial district and
I'm pleased to have with me our
CEO Kevin spears and our CFO
Lucy violence wella the line is
requesting very modest increase
of what amounts to three point
five percent in our base budget
we're asking for first of all
are a request cover Judiciary
priorities our number one
priority is to add to security
bailiffs they'll cover curry
county that we we would have
magistrate coverage in all of
our magistrate courts and then
our second priority is to fund
an unfunded staff attorney
position our last staff attorney
we had an for ten years and I
heard justice Bacon talking
about institutional knowledge of
staff attorneys and we had a for
ten years it's not like we don't
have an he's just a district
judge now so.
We need another one and we like
to keep the other one maybe
until I retire or something that
so those are our request and we
will stand for any of your
questions.
It will turn over a strip of
question with the teachers
There.
The presentations this.
They would be the compilation
commission.
Yes.
So.
Two of the thirty three year and
one for.
I couldn't believe of others one
of the the preacher.
All of these services.
I'm sure so we are working with
AOC and the pre trial services
division sorry Mr chair to to to
really we're working with AOC to
hopefully in FY twenty four
existing get a program manager
hired would be funded by a to
see the way I understand it is
speaking with that agency
requests for in this period is
that we that they see as funding
for half the year for program
manager if you want intend to
roll that out this fiscal year
so we're looking at possibly
getting one higher through AOC
December January and then get a
program going and so then I
think from there you might see
some pre trial services request
there's no real way of working.
Request for.
One of the workers.
Tension and training.
Where you.
I think the tension because
that's our.
I think at this point retention
was aside from the retirements
we're doing okay in we have some
Kevin and I've talked about our
goals for example once we get
the new mad the new managers
hired we'd like to send the
managers to a training all
together number one so they bond
with each other and number two
they rely on each other rather
than going to Kevin with every
single question so we have some
of those mechanisms in place of
this.
This is what I'm asking.
Just as.
Mr chairman chief judge early we
did get some money in our budget
request last year for some
training funded so and even
through some vacancy savings we
are able to do but this I know
none of our employees have ever
been denied it's going to
training we've sent several to
trainings and we we do have
Quite a bit more budget this
year even I would say for FY
twenty four for more training so
it isn't in the works you feel
pretty sufficient talent we are
also I haven't been working with
Paul little bit on the see I
see I things and working
together on a few training for
our well obviously district wide
but and I just write statewide I
feel pretty confident more
training monies are at.
The so you that's a.
Stated the operator to.
We have received our money for
FY twenty four so we do have in
this fiscal year coming up we
have transplant correct thank
you.
the review that to.
For.
The dollar from three hundred
four hundred yes.
Mr chairman chief judge grow
that is correct and I kind of
went through and out of my own
notes to to break that down a
little bit really it's
profoundly informed category a
lot of things that typically
would typically would be special
request I. T. refresh we had
were another big construction
project adding a new program to
District Court clerk's office of
buying a jury in jury chairs
buying we bought that residents
can we bought a gallery seating
new audio equipment monitors
just a lot of things like that
we our computers were knocked
and parables windows eleven so
for that coming up we use the
money for that so we did have
probably more than we would like
because we did have a lot of
vacancy savings unintentional
really a lot of retirements and
some some turnover but it I
think in lieu of us Mr special
request we're able to do it most
is one time purchases
accomplished three other
categories we have to pay for
janitorial services and are in
Roosevelt County they don't I
don't cover janitorial services.
Sure and Mr chairman and chief
judge grow I would like to stay
because I'm proud of it the last
we've always had a pretty low
reversion in the last seven
years if you look at the
document front gate that we've
very two thousand dollars total
for the last seven years so.
Okay this.
Because the fund to which
Martin.
Our favorite topic fund balances
Could you give us a description
to fund balance thank give me
numbers no no descriptions.
Mr chairman judge more
absolutely our fund balances and
all I think I I know where
you're going with it so I'll
give you the description and
fill in a little bit on the US
one four nine zero zero
treatment courts it's and we do
have money budgeted in FY twenty
four to spend on treatment
courts for for training and and
some other things five six eight
three three zero is eighty are
in eight four seven zero zero as
mediation we have forty thousand
dollars total budget FY twenty
four in those funds we do have a
mediation program our mediator
is a certified paralegal that
became a certified mediator so
she mediates about half the time
in house and so half of her
salary and benefits will be paid
for out of our mediation and ADR
funds so we were working to
decreased us on balances but
also increase the amount of
maybe mediation work she would
do possibly even the staff
attorney to use a for those fund
balances for nine two seven zero
zero is off what we have left
and in our child support
contract from years ago we do
have we received we no longer
have the jobs for contract I
would like to state that last
year this committee did give us
funding to convert the terms to
Perm and we are request a child
support hearing officer to
domestic relations and so we
were able to solve that problem
thankfully through the through
the committees
accepting our request and that
that made it all the way through
so that's what is left and so we
have budgeted twenty five
hundred dollars and four hundred
category to get a few things and
For jobs point that'd be that
balance will go away.
Thank you Mr those my questions.
The questions.
The
question is and how long has
your
Yes I your attorney senior
position how long is that the
vacant.
Sure Mr chairman judge Frank you
need since our since it was been
cross was our staff attorney for
ten years he became a judge and
what we did is Dale for full
transparency that salary his
salary combined with the money
we got converted to out of the
jobs for money we use that to
fund our domestic relations
hearing officer and her staff so
she could hear a multitude of
cases and her clerk work
multitude of cases so we no
longer have the funding for that
staff attorney but we still have
that same need and as statute
judge more stated I'm pretty
sure that judge cross still is
secretly a staff attorney
anyway.
The budget process that's recent
the reason I think it's been
years in September correct okay
thank you Mr chairman judge
thank you think it's important
to point out that if you grant
the funding for the staff
attorney will have actually the
best ratio which would be one
staff attorney for eight judges
so we're not asking for any more
we think it's great it'll be
perfect for us.
Mr chair again judge staff is
not asking us the the questions
but I she's just a good
questions that someone answer.
Last.
Last year we did ask for funding
for the staff attorney this
budget the budget committee did
approve it as to the Supreme
Court the legislature did not we
also ask for funding for the
unveiling position which we
received and funded that is the
hired and we did ask for
security bill position last year
which the budget committee
approved however the Supreme
Court did not I think because
probably they funded are making
one
but the things that we
accomplish ask for last year
received I feel like we're
trending in the right direction
allow this is carried over from
requests last.
Thanks for the question judge
Duffy.
The department and no.
Okay and our with the courts
have held that since her actual
them but.
The question I.
State officials hope so
I think for oil.
The legislature approves of
funding I think you need one for
the judges for sure but if
there's anything that.
Is there supportive services
request when we have our
conversations with our partners.
Good question Mr chair Senator
your question I don't have an Mr
chairman and and Mr Papp and we
We recruit routinely for staff
attorney positions as well as
for attorneys for the rural area
and we do that by.
I have an open in turn policy
and I take them undergraduate
and law school and my current
intern for example as an
undergrad it was going to go get
a second bachelor's at Colorado
state I talked her out of that
so she's now gonna sit for the
the else that next.
I submit tuition reimbursement
for that.
So we can we consistently do
that as a matter of course
because I think it's good to be
involved in the community as
well.
This these.
Council that you're.
Ten but since.
This will do it I'm sorry about
that.
And so I just one question just
for clarification so the the two
bailiffs to carry are there for
for curriculum except for pre
magistrate yes administrative
and and what's there now we have
a security there now nothing
nothing zero no front door
security no.
Your reserves are wondered about
that your quit obviously do we
have match records we can either
have bailiffs.
But not that I'm aware of this
nonsense seeing every quest like
this maybe because the first one
or maybe have to sort out of
the.
That that there was a approach
by AOC on security the the
talked about security Bayliss
verses verses from our
contracted a bunch of different
options so I think this may be
the first but I'm not certain Mr
chair want to know what was
there to have nothing there
right now we don't have anything
we have an and then to
magnetometer that does nothing
to deter is nothing.
Sometimes it depends.
But I think this goes back to
two years ago the priority was
to look at security for
magistrates and and last year we
had asked for security bailiffs
with the intent on putting them
in the magistrate court and we
had we've had incidents in our
magistrate court and we've we
definitely need that security
there.
In.
The service can I can I follow
up on that because there's
limitations the we've had issues
and I think with the job
description of a bailiff and
maybe I missed what is security
bailiff to do so as their
concerns because you know my
bailiff in District Court can't
has scored someone to the jail
economic because somebody
they're there to kind of monitor
and organize the situation is
that what this person's doing or
security bailiff for they
allowed to have or do they need
law enforcement certification
Exeter thank you for the
question to Chavis and and Mr
chair so.
It was strategic on our part to
ask for this funding as security
Bayliss the reality is we have
court services specialist in our
court as well however we find
that recruitment retention seems
to work a little bit better in
order to area want to advertise
is available when they come
initially that's always going to
be a primary duty certainly not
escorting
they made to to standard Bela
functions but as they work
within our core they'll be
trained to they will be cross
training court monitoring park
work jury work as all of our
other ones do as well so I would
anticipate that if we are to
receive the funding are able to
hire these two positions by this
time next year or the year after
these would be cost escort
services specialist and we do
the back of one
on chairman Chavis is question
we currently do our best to
provide security bill just a
matter court now so it's not
like we're not did we we do it
the best that we can but we have
three bills covering district
and mag in curry county so we
tried like had heavy days heavy
you know freedom days or a trial
we'll try to get a bill of over
there to assist and magistrates
court.
To to service repair point the.
Projections could connect with
yes in addition for any question
Scott can connect them up with
crisis intervention training
none of which is going to give a
vaginal gone to do things law
enforcement I I can make a very
effective in dealing with those
challenges situation arise
unexpectedly there there I I
strongly encourage everybody
who's got Davis to strip that
was particularly to talk to
either one or both of those
gentlemen about C. I. T. or yes
collisions lots of.
I don't know much about sure
that would make the.
Suggests that good luck with the
positions.
Mr chairman we use our bailiffs
a lot for deterrence it's
honestly a deterrent.
Appreciate that.
The questions including to text
me just hope you entertain a
request and granted thank you
thank you thank you.
On to the tenth.
We really.
My name's scooter Mitchell chief
judge in the tenth with miss
Amanda Hamm accord  executive
officer.
been coming to budget committee
for a long time.
Have been enjoying you all for
the last two days with my
usually do.
Now no you.
The depth the depth of the are
you done I I just hope it's not
shared by whoever's doing it
deep dive on me.
Are
are just huge.
The easy part is we've got the
cost of the cost of living
increase six percent in our
other categories.
That's pretty easy.
The in the big sheet a couple
other places it's listed as a
staff attorney hearing officer
and drug court contract the and
the drug court contract is a
typo it's our responsibility we
put it everywhere.
That is not what that position
is all it would be as a staff
attorney hearing officer.
Time to disposition doesn't look
real bad but if you understand
performance measures that's
because I haven't closed cases.
Disclosure rates down in the
eighties never been there before
as soon as this case is closed
my time dispositions can be
horrible.
That's where I'm at.
I hope that as we went out of
COVID that the time commitment
is being a chief judge would go
down I was wrong.
I see no indication from the
Supreme Court that our time
commitments going to reduce all.
Where it's working well.
We have.
Register court almost a hundred
percent staff turnover senior
staff member knows three years.
So you know we we've spent a lot
of time on personal issues that
we hoped it would be on that but
The time that's necessary to do
the judicial job is just growing
and growing same number basis
but more more per se more of
them of study the law on the
internet so it takes a little
bit longer to explain to them
that you know.
The fact that the New York
Supreme Court rendered a
decision in eighteen ninety
really doesn't affect what I'm
gonna do this week so.
that's why the staff attorney
hearing officers critical.
It's a somewhat nebulous
description of what they're
going to do because we've never
had one.
We currently have zero staff
attorneys currently have zero
hearing officers that will I
think we have a tenth of a child
support hearing officer.
So do you know we're gonna have
to figure out how to use the.
I've listened to the
presentations for years here and
nobody can hire staff attorney.
So my whole focus on this is to
hire staff attorney that lives
somewhere else.
I only have one civil attorney
that lives in quay county.
So she can't very much be a
staff attorney because that I
would have no civil attorneys
available to come to court.
The hearing officer would be to
cover a portion of the domestic
violence cases.
But it would also be to do the
first review of domestic
relations cases.
I think you heard from the
second about the need for
domestic relations judges.
I have told people that the fact
that the car is in the husband's
name does not mean it's the
husband's car it's community
property.
And you said that for fifteen
years I can't see it any faster.
And I have to say it more and
more.
So I need somebody to help do
that.
I am the only trained lawyer in
the judiciary in the to judicial
district.
so all of the stuff that you
hear people talking about
meeting general counsel for
that's the.
Plus my caseload so.
For a long time I thought I
could handle it I suddenly
realized that I can't so I'm
really asking for a one day a
week contract position.
On to help cover amended I can
react really well thank things
come up but we do not have the
time to plan.
And that's did you we can't
function that way anymore we
have to start planning better.
We just into the drug court
contract.
We are in negotiations with an
expert in drug courts he has
operated drug courts in New
Mexico for many years he is
extraordinarily experienced in
the judiciary.
And we're in negotiations with
them he is already telling me
that I might not even need that
the drug court money I'm gonna
ask forks I don't believe it
yet.
But
Mr broom this is he can help us
get our drug court up and
running right away and so we're
going to trust him and we're
gonna payment we're going to get
it done it is time.
So the one thirty eight we built
that on the ten to fifteen.
Member of our client adult drug
court.
I've been told four times since
I got Santa Fe that their
treatment courts they're not
drug courts but I will learn
eventually so that's where the
hundred thirty eight that's what
we built it on as a small start
up the adult probation office.
This is the quick County has a
larger need for an adult drug
court the curry county.
Students speak well for my
community but it does address
the issue of do we have a need.
Will ask a question about why
don't you do a D. W. I. court to
start it's because we have
about.
Twelve D. W. eyes a month maybe
and about fifty math basis so
kind of you know we need to
address the problem not the.
Not the DWI we need to start
focusing on serious substance
abuse.
The security contracts with the
county sheriff we've.
Kelly sure.
Swapped with the undersheriff
and so that any of us have been
through that process no
sometimes it's a little bit less
congenial than everybody thought
it was going to be.
But now sort of work through
that we met with the sheriff and
the county manager for quick
County they're very interested
in entering into a contract with
us
the conversation is their
thinking about using it to
basically be a.
The take our money on a monthly
basis they can use it as a step
of money for their employees
when the employees gone through
courthouse security training
that get an extra bump in there
sorry and when the employee is
doing a certain number of hours
a month that magistrate court
they get the bump in salary.
So listen it's on the employees
you know they they have to do
it.
They can stay becomes more self
monitoring and self driven by
them.
The extra fifty thousand dollars
would go a long way.
We we can't just what for fifty
thousand dollars and splitting
it with three counties actually
long split with two of parting
County sheriff hasn't hired a
deputy so I don't think he has
the resources to provide and
enhance security for magistrate
court so we're not going to.
When I can spend any money there
but the Baca County is
definitely going to be involved.
The architectural engineering
assessment probably needs to be
special frankly you know we put
it in in the in the big request
this is no this is our major
budget hearing.
On.
It's an eighty four year old
building.
It has more patches and.
Things done to it then you want
to imagine we've dropped a
quarter million dollars to redo
the clerk's office probably
eight years ago.
And.
We have a huge need to figure
out what we should be doing with
the rest of our building.
As we seven is this the bunk
house churches to be put up by
the county during trials they
had a bunkhouse for the jurors
in the courtroom in the
courthouse.
This kind of stuff we're needing
to work our way to have a pretty
nice law library full of books.
The books there anymore it's now
it's a hearing room but it's got
walls would like in the middle
of the room which.
You work around it but it's a
problem.
But that honestly that you've
got and
Propose a from an architecture
firm it's probably a special we
understand that the.
We had ask
that'll stand for questions.
Thank you chief judge will turn
over to the judge about to
begin.
Yeah.
Last year as four hundred ninety
thousand dollars then looking at
your.
Cation.
Fifty two and a one thirty eight
is basically was the same
justification as last year.
so last year the committee I
think made some recommendations
to.
Have did you pursue any of those
recommendations in terms of
working with AOC and and
talking getting some more solid
bits about the drug court and.
What what ended up happening to
this last year.
this is the first year that
we've started the fiscal year
with enough money to pay our
bills.
Since the consolidation.
We were one of the Courts
submitted consolidation there
were some mathematical.
Confusion or airstrike I will
leave it to someone else to say
what kind of problem was we
finally got enough money and
then they didn't give us any
money for magistrate court
judges last year.
For us that thirty thousand
dollars was a deal breaker so we
haven't had time to do anything
other than.
The real basic thing
That's why I'm talking day
printed to come in and do this
and he was already talking to me
about different ways to get
grants and this that and the
other I did have numerous
meetings with their C. I mean
they're definitely supportive an
on board all.
We kept coming back to the same
things like okay you need to go
to this training in this
training you're gonna learn how
to do all of this and I'm like I
can I don't have time to get
into the streaming.
So are.
I think Dave is going to be able
to show us what training is
actually necessary so that I
don't have to go to a training
to find out what trainings I
should go to.
I think it's going to go much
better.
But without extra time for us.
Practically it's just not doing.
With respect to both Mr burned
and the staff attorney slash
hearing officer we have do you
have any hard numbers I know you
said that he thought he didn't
need all the money you were
asking for for the drug court
I'm not understanding where your
figures are coming from this
hundred thirty thousand dollars
is based on the average cost per
participant four year for eight
ten are.
Can we present it to I think the
ten people in our.
It's ten in there it's the
average price in New Mexico
When you look at those numbers
they're all over the map as far
as what you know.
There's in a.
Some courts are twice as
expensive as of the drug courts
so we just picked the average
we're gonna have to be on the
low end to make it work.
And they your staff attorney
slash hearing officer have you
spoken with anyone obviously
outside of your district that's
willing to do to do this by
video I guess we have not spoken
to anyone
I need to be in a position to
advertise when I am I'm gonna
get I'm gonna be calling some of
the judges in the second that
work with the group of lawyers
that I would be trying to pick
from domestic relations board
primarily of this is a hundred
twenty dollars an hour for one
day a week.
So that's that's a that's a low
number for anybody contracted
with a law firm for government
work I think one twenties pretty
low okay so I didn't.
Is this one twenty in the
ballpark anyway within a within
a reasonable expectation that
you can get this person for one
twenty some of the attorneys who
are appearing in my court from
Albuquerque doing abuse neglect
cases say that that one twenty
they will be applicants that are
experienced in the field.
With respect to the your
security contracts and you
mentioned that.
This was for two counties last
year you came in at ninety six
thousand for three counties
that one and a half officers I
think is what you're projecting
so so basically this is is about
the same figure you're using for
last year the last year at as I
recall said the shares weren't
even willing to talk to you
about it they weren't but now I
had this year have I have fifty
thousand dollars to.
It's it's a lot easier to get an
appointment when you have money
then when you say will you talk
to me about what might happen.
Now they're talking to me
because as one of them actually
said this is when you get the
money is the July one he says
okay we'll have a meeting.
You know like and when we meet
July fifth.
He he was he was pretty focused
is that both play and about the
county yes.
And the where is it where is the
big questions are big issue okay
the boxes.
Much smaller caseload the
frankly law enforcement is more
responsive down there just
because it's a small county and
everybody knows everybody.
The share fiscal the sheriff
made all the noises that I was
really happy to hear that I
don't always hear from law
enforcement so what's the split
between where and and doctor can
turn to dollars find out when I
finished the when we finish this
negotiations and negotiating
with both of them would
negotiating with both of them.
And with respect to your
architectural and engineering
assessment one of the things
that you brought up is that it
probably is special not a not a
reoccurring did this accounting
going to assist you on that.
I've been promised by the county
for ten years that they will
assist us with resolving the
issues on the second floor
Out of those promises I've
probably get ten pieces of
paper.
The total.
Output from the the promises so.
If we get.
It looked at the funding that
came out of this legislative
session the amount of money that
was handed out for courthouse
projects was for beyond anything
I've ever seen before and.
Pointed that out to my County
commissioners and pointed out to
the county manager.
And so I think they're more open
to doing something but they're
talking about putting it into
their normal capital budget so
we probably get to the top of it
in two or three years and.
I have a lot of confidence in
oil and gas in New Mexico but
I'm not sure if three years of
confidence so.
We're trying jump started.
The county has done a very good
window analysis.
How many of you are still in WPA
courthouses anybody.
it's can we can use your
McKinley County yeah I mean it's
a very interesting court.
Yes there is sprint Corp got me
got me windows I think and they
did their dipping into windows
took off all the lead.
Still really thank you.
Yes it's it's a steel window
it's like one eighth inch steel
with the pandemic glass that's
C. minute in with eighty year
old Siemens.
I'm on the second floor we have
send the comes through the door
it won't talk investment I can
send of.
We don't have to worry about the
healthy building because there's
so much air flow through the
windows the.
It's not a problem of.
For the jurors the jurors in the
winter in the winter at jury
orientation we tell them to
bring you know bring a heavy
vest or jacket because the city
gets the windows and there's no
way to heat or cool so they just
freeze
so you yes the counties does
some of the work they've just
never spent any money.
So I'm guessing you to I mean
there's no commitment by the
county at this time no
commitment by the county
But if we have a set of plans.
Then if we have to do I did the
last time we did it without
without County support we work
legislature for four years we
got money to do the clerk's
office.
I mean with.
We have to get the first step
which isn't is a real good set
of plans.
Last time I didn't have plans
and he was very painful we got
enough.
Thank thank you that's all the
questions I have to okay
with that Mr speaker centered
Frankie thank you and governor
Mr strips and the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
judge Mitchell Amanda.
Appreciate your presentation I
have a quick question for
already.
So.
So I'm feeling better and
better.
So in a conversation I have with
Jason Klatt he mentioned the
possibility of facilities
getting.
In house in in house architect
or contracting store that you
guys could have architects you
could go out and produce these
types of plans neat that he
would be able to take to his
county commission is that is
that so what we've done is kind
of contract with the firm to
provide a kind of a standardized
plan for match records you know
like so that we would be able to
we would have to every time we
get a match record come up with
a new set of architectural plans
of.
So we don't have an we have an
architect on staff related to
stay we will any time soon
lesson in the business of owning
at buildings but we do have a
connection with a firm that we
get in our fee for to to to do
that
but that's only reserve
architectural resource that we
okay and I know I think it and
and my conversation with him as
regarding colocation so there
was measure court moments so I
didn't know if that was a
possibility or not
and then my follow up question
to judge Mitchell is on this.
So I'm assuming that the.
In negotiations with possible
treatment court contractor you
have the money for that now the
hundred thirty eight thousand
for FY twenty five is to keep
your your program going have it
up and running it has nothing to
do with getting.
This individual on contract we
have we have money right now
the.
I I'm assuming that Mr printed I
will come to terms we'll have
money to hire Dave to get
started and frankly.
Everybody says there's federal
money out there and he's the
first person I've talked to that
has actually gotten it and knows
how to get it and spend it so.
I'm feeling much better about
it.
Okay.
But on this hundred thirty
thousand or sentiment that's
operate with that starting an
operation we wouldn't have that
money to next year if we correct
if we get federal money before
then we'll start before then but
this is if we don't get federal
money this is to have money so
that next year we can be up and
running.
Do you anticipate if you receive
this money next year and ever
everything worked out the way
you wanted this hundred thirty
eight thousand would at we day
this go to person for treatment
court in FY twenty five or is
this just kind of this is this
is based on what New Mexico drug
courts are reporting is an
average cost per client per day
for here okay how exactly that
will be distributed I do not
have a clue okay.
And I'm gonna ask you.
This is I probably have a little
bit of inside knowledge on this
situation so I'm just going to
throw it out there let you
respond to it
so I know there's a child
support hearing officer that
covers the fourth the eighth in
the ten.
And so I'm curious what your
thoughts are on it if that
position were to be re class to
domestic relations hearing
officer.
Which I think we had to be done
by the fourth as the
administrator I think that
contract now
And you were able to get funding
what are maybe it's fifty two
thousand whatever it may be and
you can pay that domestic
relations hearing officer and
they can come cover DV cases in
your district you know one day a
week two days a month whatever
may be is that something that
you.
Is that a possibility something
to consider I thank you.
Selfish I think that might be a
good idea but I mean the problem
I've got is that that is a
frankly a multi year process
getting three districts to
coordinate.
we used to try and do it with
for districts to coordinate we
weren't able to get it done with
for us one of us had to.
The risk of.
It would be nice but that.
But but the real problem is is
that I think the fourth and
eighth and I.
Maybe learn from RT when federal
agencies paying for service why
do we want to try and bring it
in house and go to the
legislature if somebody else is
already paying for.
It's already been paid for
through HSD into the federal
government.
I I Representative I'd rather
spend this fifty thousand
dollars on something that is
controllable in my court rather
than having to ask a judge
Chavis and George K. goes to
rebalance their stuff.
To get a position that all thank
you for your child's first year
in officer was.
Trying to do it full time.
You're absolutely no time left
for me.
The eight in the fourth.
Would totally consume them and
then I am totally out in the
wind all if they're trying if
they're able to do domestic
relations sure yeah no I
definitely appreciate the answer
and
That's the only question that I
have.
This question I will just has to
that piece.
The state from the eight the
really wouldn't work out
logistically so that might throw
a wrench in your very very well
thought out suggestion.
The questions from committee
members of the.
Afternoon I just had a quick
clip of clarifying question I
see in your audit from last year
there was some mills
miscellaneous revenue of about
eighty four hundred.
What is that from.
So.
Most of it was actually a refund
on the old copier or something
and so that's where that came
from and we actually reverted
all of that back because we were
trying to do it early on in the
year and never got instructions
on how to do so and so we just
kept it to be reverted back but
the remaining money includes our
copy machine revenue which is
fax seals and the copies
themselves and then we do have a
little bit the is ADR and
mediation and the copier revenue
what do you do you just use that
to offset printing costs and
separate yes that's all I have
thank you thank you.
the expansion of security
contracts this is to provide on
site security at the various
courts right on site security
primarily at the magistrate
court okay because our call
interesting and and lively
discussion about having them do
extra patrols and things like
that which.
The court wasn't too keen on
that we're not doing that we're
talking about on site at the
court
They're going to structure it.
The current conversation is
there going to structure it in
part to justify giving their
officers trained on courthouse
security
Four and.
You might know what we don't
know if it was got another round
to courthouse security the stood
every two years in Los crucis
brother if they're doing it
again yeah.
Of funding no of actually having
the training for county for
county sheriff's to learn how to
fulfil their statutory
obligations are not up to us to
about the yeah
under architectural engineering
assessment a group it's a
special you know if it's six
thousand every year but I went
through the draft contract
another justification language
and I would encourage you if
you're going to get money I'm
gonna spend about an assessment
please make ADA an explicit part
of the assessment I didn't see
it in the contract I think you
address you briefly mentioned in
the description but I didn't see
it in any the specifications of
the contract need help in that
regard feel free to talk to
Peggy Caldwell whose IDA
statewide ADA whatever it is
program coordinator whatever it
is and I think she's currently
got a request for the courts to
do self assessments on ADA but
if you're going to get a
contract with an architectural
and engineering firm.
I I hope I would ask you to
seriously consider putting an
ADA assessment especially in
that building has lovely nice
wide hallways but otherwise has
I believe some challenges with
regard to ADA compliance Mr
chair and Mr Pippen that was
discussed when they came to just
even physically look at our our
facility the only compliant ADA
restroom in the building right
now is on the first floor and so
we have talked about is it even
possible to adjust the bathroom
in the jury room and then what
could we do in the in the
hallway bathrooms and making
sure that they are wide enough
so that was discussed I will
make sure it's in the contract
we were surprised we direct the
I think an assessment of the
first additional District Court
which is a very old at all and
some of the non compliance
they're really surprise me like
certain door handles are not
compliant which I use every day
and I never would have thought
would be paid again complained
so anyway I suggest you put that
in there and if you do so you
might wonder County that if the
if the experts come back and say
these are ADA noncompliance
parts they better be ready to
fix some of so you know but
that's a year from now to
discuss if you get the funding
just keep in mind but I hope you
put so specifications on ADA
assessment in in the contract if
you get the money will
definitely include the ADA in.
Yes once it once then I then it
does come high priority for the
county.
That's correct.
It's it's the law after.
Okay questions for the chair so
Really it's really more of a
COVID the
talk about the drug court in the
from the federal funding that
still has the time
I was just looking at I I don't
think you guys have a reply for
sentencing commission grant to
look at their awards they they
did a word someone may work for
begin in July but they held
money back and they're going to
have another round of
applications for I think drug
courts very much in line with
sentencing commission and all
the things that is a whole
nother round because Smith from
November to begin in January so
that they do something or so I I
just I hear you saying federal
money but those have timelines
too and I think with that think
the past for next year I agree
with the the comments made by
the committee members that
Staff I think many of these are
specials to include the staff
attorney hearing offers for
because you don't know if it's
even a viable request you not
sure there's even if somebody
wants to do that do that job not
counts I mean Mr chair the the
ability to hire somebody of
Albuquerque that's willing to do
this job is really not in
question because I'm structuring
it as a video position most of
the courts are structuring and
I'm gonna have to get Supreme
Court to agree they've some of
them have agreed informally most
of the state courts are trying
to bring someone into their
building to provide services in
their building I'm not even I'm
not.
All I'm asking somebody do is
appear by video for eight hours
they don't have to drive to to
come carry maybe twice a year I
don't see the yes the the chief
judge I think it's a but the I
think at this point system it's
a proof of concept because we we
don't need so it's just a small
thoughts
and I appreciate we might have a
different opinion on I
understand but also could you
maybe with your consultant to
look at funding from the state
assistance for your get started
before this money machine
available
we have had good relations with
them there requests there are
provisions of funding are just
about a hundred percent easier
to comply with and federal
reporting requirements for
example and this you can tell by
the name exist solely to provide
funding for state courts I can't
remember if treatment courts are
in there funding priorities in
the cycle I believe they are but
they have cycles are run every
quarter so you can apply.
The August is the next deadline
one of the problems we have
we're running into is is we're
the only district that doesn't
have a treatment court.
So there hasn't been a start
from zero treatment court in New
Mexico for fourteen years.
Because I've been.
I mean you're drawing for
fourteen years so I'm I'm real
comfortable this is the first
one that we've brought from zero
in a judicial district in
fourteen years.
Are you looking to survive
you're looking outside of with
with your consultant outside of
waiting for the general fund
fund you as requested.
It is urgent other questions
including two fifty.
Thank you.
Okay the the seventh judicial
district.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee and
chief judge recessed Murphy and
with me today is my CEO CFO
Jason Jones.
We are asking for
Sixty thousand eight hundred to
fill one of the three vacant
security bailiff positions to be
staffed for the Torrance County
district courthouse.
We've had a pretty significant
security risks in that
particular court house.
In recent history and we've got
new security equipment including
in New magnetometer and
Extremist sheen but we don't
have the personnel to manage.
asking for.
Five thousand increased costs
for accounting services for a
drug court participants for the
last ten years are treatment
providers have been asking for a
raise and for the last ten years
we told them no.
Would it have the funding so we
are now asking for some funding
for that and we're asking for
fifteen thousand four off
surprising computer supplies due
to increased costs.
so that's are very small request
I'm here making and with that I
will stand for questions.
The support good question.
Thank you Mr I think this issue
is.
Like with.
You had quite a high vacancy
rates
noted in here request so I am
surprised to see that you have.
Three and funded bailiff
positions how how how did those
positions become unfunded and
and why can't you use some of
your vacancy savings for that
decent address that because he's
more familiar with the history
seven supply of those positions
I just been gobbled up in in the
person we've had a lot of
changes over the years with them
like three classifications of a
lot of our positions higher
paying jobs
those positions this one in
particular that we want to fill.
We were talking about on the on
the way down today that was been
probably vacant tenure.
Between eight and ten years a
total
Right now our vacancy rate two
days is probably half of that I
I more around ten percent we
hired a couple more possessed
position since we submitted our
budget
So that's that's the short
answer to the.
And I'm not very familiar with
with that part of the state I
haven't been there yet but I
want to one of these days what
it what are your
prospects for filling that
position should you get the
funding for it.
No Mr chairman to Corey
We.
We're very hopeful to fill it.
We at this this past year has
been challenged as everybody
knows in this room I mean we've
had I don't think we've had one
vacancy for we've done.
One recruitment and hired
somebody it's been more like two
three four
advertisements and postings.
but with that being said it
seems in the in the past for
five months in the making some
headway hiring so I.
I'm confident that we could
probably get this position
filled the somebody out of
Torrance County.
You are facing some significant
security issues currently and
this is a request for FY twenty
five do you have plans in the
meantime to address some of
those concerns Mr Chairman is
this regarding.
We do
we're looking at.
Possibly some contractual type
security you've reached out to
some security companies.
Torrance County I'd I'll just be
Frank with you guys we've.
Of the with the sheriff the only
county where we.
When we called them and again
had a time.
Request ahead of time for
instance judgment he's going to
be there she has some particular
cases that you need to W. they
will send the W.
in regards to current security
issues as you're aware of that
we're having their supporters
out there that the sheriff isn't
Is forcing Representative is
very clearly indicated he will
not enforce so there's a lot of.
A lot of issues but
Yet for the meantime it's
probably going to be secure a
contract security.
And also judgment he's been in
contact with the captain from
state police for that area and
they did send state police self
as requested.
So we've been we've been doing
that as well.
So with your contract stop gap.
Approach where is the money for
that contract coming from.
Is current contractual money
that's probably we have drug
court programs to the programs
we just recently started back up
they've been kind of.
Just not operating operation so
we're thinking some of those
funds can be used for this in
the meantime because I'll see
this using are signing by the
time we get enough clients into
the queue and such so that's
that's the idea I would make it
happen so.
Hey let's get a treatment courts
now how many current
participants to having your
treatment courts.
In.
Creating committee we have to.
In Torrance County I believe
there's two.
And in Sierra County I believe
there's two so a total of six.
The Sierra County program in the
Supercopa Graham have a capacity
of fifteen.
The Torrance County program has
a capacity of I.
Legislation.
And you mentioned in your
opening that you've your
treatment providers have been
asking for an increase for ten
years is this the first time
you're asking the budget
committee for an increase.
What has changed to make you
think now is the time.
Over time in the last I've been
on a drug court team since two
thousand nine.
it was on the Sierra County drug
court team as a prosecutor I
took over the Socorro County
drug court program.
When I was appointed to the
bench so in those eight years.
There have been significant
increases and the amount of
responsibility in that.
Types of treatments that have
been provided to the
participants just due to
training and how things have
evolved over the last eight
years starting out as a drug
court now we're consider
treatment courts there's a lot
of things that have involved and
it's.
Mainly evolved around the
treatment components.
Five thousand dollars is a very
modest extremely modest yes
requests to increase that
amount.
Do you believe that that
increase is to make your
treatment providers.
Satisfied and what is the
current amount of your contract.
To answer the first part of your
question I think yes it is
enough to make them satisfied
and I'll let decent address the
second part of your question
Mister chair Mister regarding
the current contract amounts of
course fifty thousand for
treatment so it's a ten percent
increase.
And have you tried to find
places in your budget already I
mean five thousand dollars is
is.
Could be something that you
could come up with have you
tried to find it internally we
did look at the
I'm thinking with with what I
outlined with security things
like that when we look at.
Contractual services as a whole.
for the next ten years out of
sight I don't see it I know I
know it's it's it's a small
amount but I don't see it at
this point.
And then in in reading through
your justification
If there was a question that
asked how you moved here if you
moved money out of your two
hundred how did you spend that
you mentioned A. Ioke computers
Water.
Mr chairman Mr Kirk those are
all in one computers and and we
use those in all of our court
rooms most all of our judges and
and not all the magistrates but
most of all of district judges
uses in chambers so it's just a
combination computer their
little their prices normal
computer.
In that questions about the
deficiencies
Thank you the question was asked
if any of these requests are any
request needed due to a
deficiency or lapse of funding
you responded yes and your
Described deficiency is that the
court has maintained vacant
positions due to funding cuts
what are those funding cuts.
What we what Mr chairman hi.
With the when we state funding
cuts to talk about cuts that
have occurred over of many years
like outlined earlier we've had
some cuts in recent times with
that in the in the.
What we've done in person like I
mentioned we've we've request a
lot of positions to like
judicial supervisor maybe about
four Madam two things like that
over the years out of cycles for
certain staff.
That.
And your.
Fund balances are continuing to
increase do you have any plans
to spend the money out of those
Mr Chairman Sakkari we we do
currently those fund balances
particularly the domestically.
And the eighty are fund.
Right now we have no contracts
in place for those we've been
actively seeking out
Folks that would be that we used
to have the mediation fund
pretty robust in operating the
staff.
Four meters at one given time
for down to we're down to one
and then during the COVID off
that one.
And a three year contract so
just perfect to find.
Sources
we do have one prospect of a
retired hearing officer that
could do something like the more
complex stuff for us for eighty
are and probably some of the
diem stuff.
We're looking at probably
seeking out our neighboring
districts to see if there's the
senators that would be
interested in doing maybe
virtual some of it maybe like a.
Half and half virtual and in
person and maybe see if they
like to contracts with the
seventh so that's where we're at
but absolutely I mean the judges
we've been talking about for
quite awhile the the they have a
lot of cases that go to
mediation so we do plan to get
that and spend the money.
And how did you come up with the
amount of fifteen thousand
needed an office computer
supplies there wasn't a lot of
detail on the way how did you
come up with that number we
looked at on going expenses and
increased costs
there's a lot of things that are
currently increasing I proposes
machines that we have throughout
our district that's just one
small example
We don't really have a built in
funding for computers.
We have a lot of computers that
need to be question take we took
care of some of on this current
the line they can see savings.
my goal is to have that vacancy
rate.
I just mentioned if not probably
that have plagued the more on
for five percent if that's the
case we probably.
In reality we would have enough
money to.
Complete of you know of a
refresh two three years.
So that's that's the big part is
computers and the infrastructure
behind the computers.
Thank you for all the questions
I had to take care of questions
are committee members that stuff
in the different.
Thanks for.
It.
Hello.
So you have forty nine of
permanent positions for your
district
you're maintaining a twenty one
point seven four percent vacancy
rate at least at the time of the
this report was submitted that
number concerns me with the
district that is your size and I
realize that's that's.
Eight vacant positions
but I I can't imagine that
that's not impacting your lives
in a pretty significant way to
be with that eight employees
with the district your size
What are your current vacant
positions and I'm gonna set this
up and then I'm gonna ask you
more about why there continuing
to be vacant and
we'll talk more about that in a
minute but I'm wondering if you
can tell us what your current
vacancies are.
So Mister chair of George W.
So I believe we've got one
vacancy in each magistrates.
In three of the magistrates not
in in capturing.
So there's three three refills
the three bailiffs.
One in that are District Court.
And.
And the.
Financial.
Yes we now have one vacancy in
financial she just resigned last
week so
but since then we've Bill two of
those positions
so that I mean it all evens out
in the wash but so those are
vacancy current vacancies recent
day magistrates retiring
magistrate court judges no.
Support staff
judicial specialists.
So there's four vacant judicial
specialists or three three three
okay one industry and one in
district.
and the one in District Court
quite frankly we don't have the
space for them.
We've definitely got the work
but we don't have the space to
them.
Hello sorry go ahead and then
the one in the financial okay.
How long have those positions
been vacant.
The District Court positions
vacant.
Longer than I've been at the.
And.
Quite awhile and then this the
magistrate positions.
Not as long because that they've
been filled at times and then
they can at times.
And part of the difficulty is.
Getting applicants to apply and
then those who apply if they're
qualified for the positions for
example one of the vacancies in
Sierra County.
We had an applicant they
interviewed we are for the job
and he never called back he
never accepted the job he never
answered a letter a phone call
and email nothing he just
dropped off the face of the
earth.
So we had to repost that
position I mean those are the
kind of difficulties are facing.
I'm wondering.
And forgive me if this isn't
enter full question eight I ask
because this is a problem that
my court was facing and I'm
wondering if the difficulty
you're having in hiring is
feeling is that you post you
offer the position and you're
not getting a robust applicant
pool or is it that you don't
have sufficient funding in your
two hundred category to fill
vacant positions as they become
vacant and your reliance on the
vacancy savings to maintain your
court operations we have the
sufficient funding we just can't
get.
Suitable.
Applicants are people who we
find a suitable applicant and
they don't fill the position for
whatever reason okay he comes
down to money okay.
Yes please give.
Is it possible and I think what
to stuff is maybe asking if
you've had these vacancies like
the District Court position for
so long as perhaps you
reclassify due at higher level
or something so you can attract
better.
Person that might stay in that
position longer or give you a
much more robust so state having
six positions open at all times
you have the funding you
consolidate that to for
positions but they're much more
higher on the pay scale in my
kitchen better applicants.
Possibility.
Converted to a.
Different position
classification of paralegal for
example or something.
Okay that's a possibility yes.
But as you sit here today think
that in that in the two hundred
category at least in your
recurring general operating
budget you have enough funding
to be able to hire the positions
as they say set your not having
to keep any vacant to maintain
other aspects of your core
operations absolutely correct
yeah okay transaction this we
have the funding for that
the judge mentioned for one like
for pain for example in tier C.
we've had some turnover there
for various reasons somebody I
think someone left that they
just want the I think you got to
work from home job.
They left
the most recent one she reached
out to.
Well that's true we've actually
lost one for that went from
magistrate to the District Court
so you know.
And that's currently being
advertised right now
but.
That's the biggest challenge is
finding applicants like I said
we.
So we've had open for five times
and then we finally get some
pool and we do interviews.
We go to offer.
They take it to the state of.
It's hard to bring in judicial
specialists and pay them a lot
more than other judicial
specialists that have been there
for five years.
So we don't do that and hence.
You know we we tend to be people
that ninety percent that's
that's our floor we hire.
For whatever reason that's not
couldn't in terms of good enough
other state agencies are paying
at a higher rate so so what I'm
hearing with your court is very
similar to what we're running
into with our staff attorney
division in terms of other
entities offering more
competitive salaries and so
there may be a need there to
raise that an entire group of
employees in order to be
competitive I mean it's just
something to think about if you
having is endemic staffing
issues for long periods of time
there's there's maybe I need to
do other things in order to
change that situation if it's
something that you feel needs to
change.
Mr chairman to Steffi.
And I'll add to that.
And we're rural there are a lot
of state agencies that pay more
than us we also have to compete
with Mexico tech.
Ten years ago New Mexico tech
paper just slightly over minimum
wage goes to the to the entry
level jobs that's not the case
anymore so they're tracking
right so so a lot of competition
that's in support it's a tough
market County so you.
I feel your pain those are all
my questions thank you.
There's more thank you Mr chair
I differed widely just a fiesta
questions that I was interested
thank you.
I like that something with judge
Martin I guess.
Answers and ask questions.
Mr Chairman that as one of the
two from last year yes it's
better IT position at the city
that we could fill we got.
So that one's been filled since.
Right now and it's.
It's in that department it's
made our life yes we're
extremely happy a lot easier
when it comes to.
Is that that's great news you to
thanks for the update on the
left.
Thank.
I was just going to sorry.
At about
Your FY twenty one FY twenty two
versions were really high and
The the request for office
supplies and the drug court
twenty thousand dollars
and in a twenty two year
reverted ninety seven thousand I
believe
was there a reason for such a
high reversion that's not going
to happen in twenty three and
twenty four yes Mr chair missed
by a.
In those two years and years.
At least those two years we had
a suspended magistrate judge.
and so we didn't know what was
going to happen so we held on to
his salary.
We do know if we would have to
pay it out or not and ultimately
we ended up having to pay it out
once this budget was lifted so
it was a good thing we held on
to that money and until we knew
we had to revert that thank so
we don't longer have that
problem so.
You have three vacant security
bill the positions but you don't
need three security barely
showing need one.
Well at we.
Mister chair Mister have been we
would look like to fill them but
the need the need itself is for
the only for the one our workers
surveillance officers for each
of the respective drug treatment
courts.
Who double duty as court
bailiffs for each of the judges
when we have in person hearings
so we've.
Building that.
Slot in a way
so the necessity is really just
for the one to then our security
commitment in Torrance County
okay I would strongly encourage
you on the mediation front to
look outside your four counties
there are.
It's not that far to Sikora from
places where the activity
mediation practices either this
is a little far but Valencia
County no you got to be able to
pull people from there who were
willing to serve as mediators
the
Council services if you're gonna
decade without increasing the
and this funding will be
available till July of twenty
twenty four.
You know ten thousand dollars
you know as opposed to five
thousand we're gonna have
another.
I would guess at least four
percent inflation between now
and next year
I think encourage you to invite
the committee to increase staff
from five to ten and then
You do have funding sufficient
it seems to me to.
Either advertise at a higher
level offered a higher level
restructure what you're paying
your other folks so that you're
not having a compaction problem
with the new hires and
admin and when that are both
here either Lynette as a
contractor for Edwin as the as
the HR director they can help
your your tier person list
that's probably you I don't know
you have just so you know all
rights are important to the
happy to consult with you about
how to how to structure your
your situation there so that
maybe elevate some of your
current people's cooperation
second higher at a higher level
for some of these positions you
reclassify as was suggested so
that you can.
Get people in there because it
seems like
Attracting and keeping people is
harder than have you have the
money to do it what with with
the reversions and well I
understand was a little odd
oddity there but even last year
with the money moved out of the
two hundreds category which is a
lot.
Seems like you have the funding
this I think I would suggest you
think pretty creatively about
this because I agree with was it
just a few four percent these
have to be affecting our lives
significantly because these are
every vacancy in the in the
counties where you operate as a
big number because you just
don't have that many people like
if judgments was missing two
people very really under water
so
anyway we Is offer S. C.
resources to help you if your HR
person wants some help on how to
think about that and which
classifications might be
appropriate you know you have to
stay within your budget I.
Seems like to have the budget to
just having trouble at the reach
you using to.
Get people to come.
Thank you Mr.
Okay and I have not done
anything.
I just asked you.
Point and the.
To RT mentions a maybe that was
at a motion.
We would invite you to consider
Mr Pepin suggestion.
For ten thousand rather than I I
don't want to lose it.
Treatment.
Thank thank you.
Mr chair I give us a limited and
what if they could come over.
Pursuant to our earlier
conversation where I was raised
with the number of ports.
The the issue of reclassify
without waiting a year for those
folks to get and
we have to talk about that for a
few minutes or if we could do it
tomorrow but not I think we have
we have some entities in
November also of webcasting so
this model of special so that's
an.
So
What I was trying to say with
regard to the courts are asking
for funding to reclassify people
over you or to do an out of
cycle for people is that even if
successful which I doubt I have
concerns about that you wouldn't
be taking those people to where
they belong for here right which
is really not successful because
the whole idea is if you're
tired of trying out cycles
because your performance merited
for this password issues
whatever it is you need that
address now same thing if you
want to reclassify person you're
telling me we're gonna have you
do the work of a higher job
classification at both and will
reward you for in a year if if
if the Legislature grows longer
the budget commiserate mutations
let you we classify right and
none of that should be what what
happens what should happen is.
It's the beginning of the fiscal
year you should be able to
figure out the priorities that
you think you can afford over
the course of the year and do it
now reclassify the positions for
those people you really want to
keep who are doing a higher
level of work do not a cycle for
the people that are you know
whatever you can afford to get
those people whether pay should
be relative to their performance
and then is that in your two
hundred two budget in the in the
current fiscal year you can you
can do it it certainly can be
done at least the introduce us
and it looks to me like they
could do it given the amount of
money relative to their overall
budget end.
If you do that now.
It is true that the whatever if
the paid forty dollars an hour
now and taken to forty four
dollars an hour when the when
the budgets go to get crafted
for H. B. two for your entity
they're they're taking at forty
four dollars an hour it's not
they replace a what what we PAM
Laster let's fund that level
because that's not what they're
getting paid if you if you lost
an employee hired someone forty
four dollars an hour few would
be funded forty four dollars an
hour range same thing happens if
you if you requested or higher
and that's a higher rate but I
would have to be for you given
out of cycle that's approved so
I really encourage the courts to
consider based on looking at the
Budgets they have in the movie
out of the two hundred category
the versions or even if none of
that happened you can still
manage your budget.
Two vacancies or other ways we
can help if you need help to do
that now what will be built into
your budget for FY twenty five
and then not be.
Not this practice which I
haven't seen before but we're
seeing a number of instances
this year we're quarter saying.
I want to get forty thousand
dollars to increase the
competition level for for
critically important please
beginning next July which I
don't think is a very effective
way to go and I I really doubt
that the legislators I think
that was a sound find so anyway
and I did I checked with some
folks including my contract
experts subject matter experts
and I'm confident that's how it
works for the courts so I would
just encourage a budget
committee if you look at those
requests and you don't endorse
them for various reasons thank
you at by the courts to to take
this approach because it makes a
lot more sense and I don't know
why this year we got a fever to
try to find out of cycles are re
classes in our next a budget
which which I don't think
addresses actually the problem
that you worry about and I think
you make a good point RT and I
wonder how about loud of some is
just isn't in on navigation
issues in terms of the you know
we were so lockdown turns about
cycles and so for so long that
the courts are Mr chair how to
do this since this is the
approach and I think this is
been instructed to all of on
you've been very instructive to
all of them in terms of a better
way to do it and which makes a
lot more sense logically part
but I think that's why the
reason is we have a lot of
different new CEOs new chief
judges and if they just may be
creatively trying to solve a
problem that there's already in
place really good solution for
secretary Seneal courts have
been aggressive on their out of
cycle so I see what you're doing
a heck of a percent raise
okay you only funded at a
certain amount but that's okay
if you deal with your your
critical people and you're
rewarded the way they performed
for moving to a higher job
losses because after all that's
where they belong do it do it
now and of.
There are ways to manage the
fiscal impact if you find
yourself in difficulty with just
run your projections every month
and if you're for heating some
red numbers come January we
talked about how you can manage
your budget in recent million by
the end the year on the black.
Please
RT just.
For my education and maybe some
of the new judges chief judges
education.
About how long is the request
cation process taking through
your department.
Hello I defer to the limit
because I get them when they're
done.
You know I mean when the right
when they've analyze them it's
time for me to approve them or
not approved.
And.
You have to be by a microphone
of course thank god
I mean I can I can say we
followed our he's approach and
for the most part it's been
pretty fast on.
Yeah I would say thirty days is
enough of a.
That shop does all the work
before it gets to me yes and I
don't look at the plight
sometimes I got a request to
backdate the effective.
That's a different.
Issue you can are enough I will
tell you all you can do that.
And I will is that you know
sometimes that's not justified
and it's effective dates
approved despite such a request
but anyway the net you want to
talk about the request process
out of cycle process I guess.
we don't get involved unless it
pixel I don't remember
so Mr chair and judge more and
and and yes and so when we get a
classification if it's vacant it
takes maybe twenty for forty
eight hours that's really a non
issue but that the old ones it
just depends how many you send
us all at once and if the
documentation we need is there
so about ten days is about
average for every class same for
an out of cycle but sometimes
will receive from one court you
know a dozen so just depends on
it depends what's included but
the staff employed for
information processing with the
seventh amount of all multiple
employees personal have in many
so can't be that many please but
yes that would that would be
more and I can tell you that
things used to set a little
longer on the directors yes but
now we have a W. is fully
authorized to approve as well so
thank you.
With that.
This.
So you know and families jam the
only.
Right.
Any inconvenience no.
Also a silent and I interested
to know that's okay but the only
other thing I'd say is is when I
spoke to RT earlier today it is
very unusual to at
see the request for the funding
you know a year or more down the
road actually usually when you
all asked for them to be
retroactive sometimes will
receive them may or June and you
want the retro back to September
you're trying to spend money in
the back to January it's always
with the stipulation that there
can't be a request for
supplemental and and your body
the budget committee when the
moratorium is lifted has always
said at a cycles and re classes
can't require a supplemental so
not that this is a supplemental
but it almost feels like it by
implementing them in FY twenty
three or twenty four and asking
for money in twenty five.
That's my perspective so then we
get of reassurance from you that
you're gonna train admin up that
you'll be able to process these.
No wonder wonderful.
He he has to really know what
they're doing so.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you for the clarification I I
hope that reassures some people
that.
That the have at these requests.
Thank you Mr think of the thanks
guys.
I'm gonna let them go back to
the office if they want to
unless you think you want to
around.
But they're watching from the
Office of the.
Less body heat you're the.
This hot air.
It has.
Thank you chair members of the
committee I think I'm as
prepared as I'm gonna be at been
taunted by a judge the fee for
the last day and a half.
And if I'm not ready I know Pam
and I believe most of you may
all of you know Pam and and some
of you that don't know Marci
Coulter is our our deputy CEO
see our CFO
and she'll find an answer to one
of Duffy's tough to judge
Steph's questions call out one
of our vacancy part so I'm kind
of just I I think the idea that
we started with agencies
organizational chart will be
helpful in the future for
everybody and so just a very
brief synopsis of the eight
tell school faxing you counties
the northeast corner we have
three district judges we have
five magistrates judges we have
to hearing officers we have
sixty one please fifty seven
fifty seven and then for four
terms.
Fifty seven she's right and I'm
wrong on sixty one
and then adds to that we have we
have three specialty courts we
have a family violence court to
to treatment courts as to
substance abuse and our district
they have a matrix twenty people
us to those specialty courts and
then the family violence court
as a matrix of fifteen they are
almost universally full our
robust courts and we've seen
very.
Receive very successful outcomes
in our communities as a result
of those parts will continue to
to expand and utilize our
specially courts are our drug
court in the or treatment cord
and Tallis was the first gold
certified treatment court in the
state adds to our request some
of our requests will be you know
will follow the request that
you've seen in the past because
we believe there need their
something that hasn't changed
over the last couple years and
we are still asking for those
so before I get to those
requests I think I'm gonna try
to be preemptive us to some of
the questions that we might see
so I'm I'm gonna start out one
of the biggest things in a big
question I think that you might
have for the eighth is
addressing our vacancy rate and
what we moved from two hundred
how to two hundred which is a a
substantial amount and not a
common amount that you would see
from our court and the reason I
said more seasoned answers her
position was open for
approximately seven months have
contributed to a substantial
portion of that as far as
vacancy savings how we had to
judges the retired that have to
magistrate judges the retired I
I will tell you only one of
those judges presented at a
significant portion of that
that vacancy savings the other
one retired in December however
our new magistrate judge in
Union County does not require
our retirement contribution so
that was another piece that we
had and we recently had a
district judge the retired they
gave us another.
Quick piece at the end that kind
of really is the full reversion
amount that we had this year
additionally I'm sure that most
of our courts of battle but
we've I I've authorized leave
without pay more than I ever
have or I've ever seen in our
district over the last eight
years I don't know if it's a
change in the work force and
their expectations or you know
some of our newer employees have
battled child care issues on
health related issues we've also
had an unprecedented level with
our small district with FML and
also with paid paternity leave
and I don't say that as a bad
thing but it limits our
workforce and it also it also
contribute somewhat to our our
vacancy savings with with that
being said I kinda outlining
what we what we we truly need we
have three dedicated court
monitors accord  service
specialist for R. three district
judges we do not have a
dedicated court monitor service
specialist for our two hearing
officers which means that we've
cross trained as many employees
that we can have certified we
mix and match we get people to
cover but the underlying issue
is at times even when our core
monitors don't have hearings the
need to catch up on our audio on
their on their log noted CENIC
center and other
responsibilities those log notes
are imperative for judges I
often go back look at the log
notes from itself what I said in
the hearing on if they're not
done before the next hearing or
otherwise it it can delay delay
the hearings and so it's kind of
unfair to a monitor for example
if my monitors in court with me
for four days and then on Friday
there with that with their with
the hearing officer and they
don't get an opportunity ever to
have a break in actually do
those lot notes which I believe
are required within four.
Eight hours.
K. five days but it's still
aiming to Sierra a court monitor
do that within five days.
Is it is a rare exception.
so that's one of the reasons for
it for that request is really
just to make sure we have
monitors in place we're not so
splitting splitting our
resources as much as as as we've
been stretched to the Max
capacity for those monitors that
we currently have on the next
piece and I think we're still
one of the few
that is requested this and I
look forward Ortiz questions on
this this piece but all of us
have talked about we in the
districts took over
consolidation and managing the
magistrates people like Pam and
Marci I've now had to take over
a number of responsibilities
that they didn't have before
without additional staff and
additionally our core managers
in the magistrate court have an
incredible amount of financial
reporting that they have to do
that takes away from some of
their actual court and
administrative responsibilities
I will tell you in all fairness
and balancing our requests if I
we get the financial specialist
it will ease some of the strain
that we've seen
we've seen on our staff I am
completing and in particular are
magistrates courts keeping up
with their their work making
sure filings are accurate
quality assurance warrants are
cancelled appropriately warrants
are entered appropriately and so
forth I think the gorilla in the
room that we've heard throughout
this whole time and I tried to
find a way to reconcile it is
the changing caseload if you
look at the eighth judicial
district although the district
court's caseload has gone down I
was hoping really that we would
hear from judge whole fact that
I think some of that relates to
all of our courts and that the
performance measures how we
address vote in close cases
making sure were properly
closing cases and some of that
accuracy and there may just be a
very well a change of.
Of course we're not seen as many
cases in the court system I
think when I looked at the case
load data the magistrate courts
and and the eight judicial
districts are one of the biggest
reductions out of any of the
magistrate courts can't
necessarily account for that
there's huge for example inTaos
a third a third or more
reduction in traffic tickets and
traffic tickets aren't and chair
Chavez could tell us better than
than anyone in the room isn't
the largest burden maybe or or
time consuming mechanism of the
magistrate court but.
Officers are not writing tickets
inTaos Colfax and you at the
level that they use to.
may not be the pandemic and
maybe the road construction
project allows blame it on the
department of transportation
there Intel's but there has been
a dramatic reduction now with
that being said the other part
as to the caseload that I think
we do all need to reconcile and
be prepared to explain to the
legislature is.
More responsibilities that our
staff pass whether it's from the
District Court doing
doing the I instant Jane ****
for the the new requirements the
the the audits on on
guardianship conservatorship so
the guard reports the reports as
they they pertain to abuse and
neglect on responding to some
time and appropriately so some
of the internal audits by AOC
and making sure that we're doing
the quality insurance and that
our work has has improved
dramatically other federal and
state
requirements has increased the
the true level hi in the lead
and the skill level of our
clerks it's not stamping
something docket in it and
putting it in a file now when we
make these requests we've looked
at efficiencies that we can do
I've talked to a chair Chavez
I'm hoping that for the
magistrate court in most
magistrates courts around the
state they're still making a
paper file an electronic file
and then reconciling when
there's differences it's an
incredible inefficiency that we
need to get rid of and so we're
gonna try to work with that now
when I gave that case out and
one of our big request I know
judge early loves the work study
report it's one of his favorite
topics.
We all of us relied on that we
are number that we proposed was
what was supported then but
truly we worked and in
particularly with our magistrate
court and they we've brought in
AOC with brought in clerks from
Berlin we've brought in our
clerk our experience clerks from
Springer from Clayton from
Redstone and we've tried to
address this backlog in these
issues that we're seeing and
we're just we're not making
headway without additional
training so the C. I. is going
to be an important and and
hopeful I'm optimistic that it
will improve that performance
moving to electronic will
approve and efficiency hopefully
that financial peace on the
relieves are magistrates
responsibility but we need
somebody in monitoring the
windows answering calls being
there when someone's on FML when
someone's on paternity leave I
know my opening statements now
gone far past what I should have
done and so I'm just those are
some of the brief explanations
of with that I I our extensive
explanations for for our are
requests the last little quick
piece try to be quick
last year you guys approve
seventy five thousand for our
family violence court we thought
we had reoccurring junior bill
funding from the year before to
our chagrin surprise
disappointment we came in and it
was gone so we did get we were
fortunate enough we did get that
piece for fiscal year eighty
five for fiscal year twenty four
we're not an eighty four yet for
fiscal year twenty four but we
do need that seventy five
thousand to complete that
program it has been an
unbelievably successful program
so far just add real numbers to
that prior to that program and
not necessarily that'll mean the
stops but we've had in our small
jurisdiction Justin Tallis three
domestic violence murders in the
last two.
Years again educating the the
population attic educating the
offenders the victims the
families that are impacted were
really truly hoping that that
has a dramatic improvement in
our community with that both
Marci and and Miss and Pam stand
for judge Duffy's questions.
Question yes definitely.
A good opening.
Just some questions that.
you got you covered a lot you
too good
All right so we're going to year
two hundred category requests I
know that the first two year
highs to priorities were things
that you had requested last year
your these are renewed requests
it looks like the monitor
position heads the support of
this committee
didn't get approved and funded
by the legislature and the
financial position the budget
committee approved but it looks
like it didn't make it into the
unified budget but I might be
reading that incorrectly.
I'd I'd my recollection is you
did not approve that position
last year then.
Sorry.
All right thank you for the
clarification on that for the
court services specialist I
didn't have a question I didn't
understand what you meant by the
first like the last sentence in
that justification under the
number one you said this
position was also requested in
fiscal year twenty four but not
funded due to the LFC reduction
for the twenty two general
position of program manager dean
can untangle that for me.
And and I think Pam might build
on tangle that a little further
but you know when we got that
appropriation and then we you
know again we counted on we
thought we had that seventy five
thousand that was reoccurring
and then it wasn't there so we
utilized we utilized Hey you
know essentially we got part of
money they said use it for the
positions that have been
approved within the unified
budget and we utilize that for
and and Pam correct me if I'm
wrong it's that program
coordinator for the family
violence court thank.
And then the peace that we then
didn't have and I'm sorry Pam
you may need to untangle as
before I put my foot in my mouth
It then we don't have the
seventy five thousand for the
actual contract that you see in
our request now under under
contracts.
Sabes Mr chair judge that the.
so yes we had to take what we
were appropriated and decide
based on
our priorities what positions
that we can fill with that money
and of course the
the court services specialist
was on the bottom of the list
because we needed the the court
the program coordinator for the
for the treatment court we also
need to the I. T. tech we just
hired last week
or actually versus week affected
and of course part of that was
our on making contracts of a
full time permeable in that
category two hundred so we did
have to make a choice those are
all approved and just talking
about a career ladder I'm
excited about we had our court
service specialist who had taken
an interest in nineteen worked
with jade and started sort of
cross training.
Light and and and accepted him
we did we did a higher and those
are.
First IT specialists that we
have okay so the question
suit you did or did not get it's
an F. T. E. and funding for this
position and the session that
just wrapped up earlier this
year.
We.
Mr chair just a few we only
needed the funding because we
had plenty of positions
previously which we're trying to
unwind right now and and the
ones that we're not using like
for instance the junior bill
program manager now is not
funded because they to go back
so that position needs to be
deleted so but we we had we did
not ask for any FTEs last year
okay so let's see that funding
but no if thi this year you're
asking for funding in the FTE.
Sorry about that I didn't want
to bring it over here.
You want to censor.
Such Franchini can.
All rights are and are
Why do you why do you need the
it do you did you choose FTE did
you request for something else.
Let the when we were that
funding for last year.
no we have not used it for
something else we're we're we're
requesting at the next budget
committee meeting to to deal
with the position because it
wasn't it wasn't it was it was
the junior junior golf.
April funding for the program
manager is that the one you're
asking no the court services
specialist position it says last
year you got funding for it but
you didn't need the FTEs so I'm
wondering why you need the FTE
now.
Well that's very good question
Mr chair Senator stuffy
We've got a new philosophy that
if we don't need to positions we
need to delete in the current
year and then ask for and we
need them because this driving
up is driving up our our let me
see right let me backed up
historically the eight this had
a number and I I think I I don't
want to say we're unique we've
had a number of on funded
positions and the previous chief
judge kept those as a mechanism
of and get in on funded position
I'd eventually get it funded and
then we find sometimes that
confuses our vacancy rate and we
believe our vacancy rate is
lower than what we see so we've
started not with we started
getting rid of some of those on
funded FTEs and we haven't
completely cleaned it up but so
the short answer is we don't
have an open FTE for that court
service center.
I guess this is a simpler
investing in it at the time of
this report it looks like he
only had four vacant positions
And so what what are those
vacant positions.
Mr chair just stuff in the
current vacant positions are the
program coordinator position
the
The vacant position the court
services specialist position
that our person that accepted
the I. T. position real real
quick not this one not this one
another court service specialist
that's who we hired as the I. T.
person one of the three that is
not a monitor he's just and
that's that the fancy Baylor
NCAA live I'm writing it down
with.
Fancy bailiff became nineties
ninety percent I follow that
would but three in four
the the fourth one that you're
probably seeing on there is the
program manager position and
then recently and we've we just
filled
Judicial specials to and the
magistrate court okay so it at
that you had for now you only
have three.
Vacancies great.
Mexico all right.
Financial specialists how many
fiscal staff do you have in your
court currently.
Mr chair to stuffy to to okay.
When was the last time you got a
fiscal person.
In March with Marcy's thank you
Marcy was right now I think
judge Duffy's questions when did
we had get into a new position
and.
It was before hi I think I want
to say it was around two
thousand seventeen.
That's when these positions.
Was created over the top yes
okay.
Thank you didn't receive any
fiscal help with the magistrate
consolidation no just more work
and can hi Pam.
And so two two questions related
to the financial specialist
position one is wise senior the
appropriate classification for
the position not just financial
specialist.
Good question Mr chair dystrophy
because of the level of work
that they're going to do need to
be doing for instance balancing
the trial balance off of the
case management system and
understanding accounting theory
and and the trial balance also
we currently have a a senior
position that is processing our
accounts payable in our in our
purchasing although she is our
are a certified procurement
officer this person could also
be doing that type of work.
just need to Chavis touched on
this a little bit but is the
work of a financial specialist
senior impacted by the court's
caseload so does it does it
fluctuate depending on how busy
you are.
Good question Mr chair judge
Duffy I think it probably just
depends on the amount of
This off the top of my head
refunds orders to to pay all the
registry or orders to pay bonds
back that's where their
They would be affected more
because the the month end of the
month in the month and and they
do the same thing over and over
again on the month in.
That's helpful thank you.
All right three just to see you
have to help me because I am a
lawyer and I'm bad at math and I
also was part of the work load
study so I was reading it for
the first time as part of this
budget cycle it's been very
interesting to get up to speed
on all of the work that went
into preparing this
I know need to Chavis said that
your request for the chance to
use the three to just two
positions isn't entirely grant
in the workload study but that
was referenced as part of the
justification when I looked at
it I was having trouble coming
up with three employees under
the study because it looks like
they were just small fractional
allocations for a variety of the
different point into me that
didn't add up to three some I
was hoping you could help me
understand for the three came
from.
Mr chair judge Duffy page fifty
one of the
the workload study has Raton
Springer tiles Platon in questa
for.
the magistrate courts.
And the bottom number here that
says total staff surplus is the
negative deficit isn't is a
positive test a if you add up to
a point eight point eight one
one point six negative four no
six four Clayton and point
eleven for question that total
is three point twenty six.
I'm seeing different numbers
swelling you looking at because
the bottom row I see and that
pages point five seven negative
point three four mind you I have
terrible visions of I could be
looking at the server maybe I'm
looking at the wrong line.
Maybe
maybe referencing the wrong
report.
But
The the.
Have the workload study of some.
I'm looking at the bottom of
page fifty.
The I'm looking at the bottom of
fifty one but if it could be we
have different reports it's not
being.
Consistency.
Hi page for the district level
four separate for the night.
I'm I'm looking at that on the
PDF that's a polluted that
the page fifty as a magistrate
on the PDF and page forty six
has the district courts
and so.
So yeah those numbers that the
ones at least that are in that
in the file didn't didn't add up
to three so.
But it looks like maybe you have
something different.
I I definitely do okay Page
fifty one and forty seven and I
half point and if just just
something different putting that
aside I think that was just for
me to understand because I have
some unfamiliarity with the
workload study
I recognize though as to to
Chavis said that that your
justification is grounded in the
numbers that were generated in
twenty nineteen so I was hoping
you could speak a little bit
more to the need for three.
And where they would go.
What's changed to justify that
the three in in your district.
Thank you Mr chair the fear if
you want to talk a little bit
about a utility
clerk but we combine the numbers
together because
We up we definitely have of the
biggest need inTaos
and it's all
There's a combination of things
happening inTaos as as well as
everywhere else people are
becoming overwhelmed they're
calling in sick
they don't have child care there
you know all of those things
I and I didn't bring it with me
that of all for the care system
we had about a twenty percent.
Leave
experience like on somebody on
leave out of five people one
person always on the leave and
there have been days where
nobody showed up and luckily
we've uniformed clerk's offices
and we were able to keep the
window open where I the I think
somebody else had to close their
window because there was only
one person to work in the
courtroom and nobody to work the
window or the phones and so
we've we've had some benefits
with that unification in
covering that kind of stuff but
we still have a problem with
burnout and
Training.
and all of the people that are
in in and tell us R. I think the
majority of them are less than a
year a lot of them are still on
probation we're starting a new
training program with our core
manager three involved right now
and we're hoping to turn some of
that.
burnout around
in that way but.
If I can jump in and and we're
working on things I think
universally I think I mentioned
we're hoping to have an
emotional support dog
this noodle so early in favor on
we're not asking for the for the
budget committee to to weigh in
on that one I would totally
separate that requested time on
things we can do and working on
efficiencies and and some of our
requests you know again if we
have a financial service
specialist that's going to take
some of the work load off and
it's not as easy and maybe I
should have given a better
explanation geographically you
know so you heard from judge
fact that there's a triangle one
hour each way the tone from
palace's norm forty five
minutes.
Not in winter weather Clayton is
three and a half hours away
Springer's an hour and a half
away give or take depending on
all of those how you drive but
those are the speed limit
estimates there's no tickets
right now since.
So but but some of those things
and and again magistrate courts
a little different than District
Court is it is very important
heavy and from what you know
working towards us fissions is
we have to have clerks in the
courts with the judges and we're
having inTaos for example if the
clerks are in the in with both
judges that are both going at
the same time and one person's
gone or one person's handling
the window answering phones
nobody's nobody's entering
entering cases nobody's filing
madam we're working and trying
to figure out those I mean again
in the event that we don't get
some or any of these positions
you know that the efficiencies
that we'd like to put in place I
think are gonna help address
those issues and and outside of
that just on the workload study
one of the biggest things is the
information came from so we're
faulting the actual report but
it was our clerks are judges are
staff inputting what they're
actually doing and so coming up
with some of that information
and perhaps not being as
diligent as we needed to and
ensuring our staff because I
think the judges there is like a
ninety nine percent reporting
but there was a last level from
staffs missed two more questions
and you J. S. two request move
on one how many do you currently
have on staff.
Pam has a broken down by by
court.
At that that would be helpful.
All right Mr chair judge Duffy
tells has four clerks and one
chair one unified Madam
Redstone magistrate I'm sorry.
Let me back up for.
Districts JSU's.
RigCount has three district just
to use clean hands one.
Chance to no yes magistrate has
five days to use.
Representative tone magistrate
has to.
And Springer magistrate has one.
And Clayton magistrate has a
point I and there are five.
managers one inTaos when
Redstone wanted Clayton.
One is for your and one in the
claim magistrate.
Court those are the
classifications not additional
positions those are existing
positions.
A total of sixteen point five J.
issues.
For the district and I.
Either manager there's two Madam
ones and.
Three chair to swear would you
put the three if you got them.
We would we would put to and
tell someone and Representative.
Thank you mentioned this a
couple of times a consolidation
of the magistrate court in the
District Court clerk's offices
and wondering if there was any
efficiencies came there or
if you could speak to that when
did that happen and what's been
the result so so we've
consolidated the offices so Hey
can well and and all actually
all three of our our courts but
so inTaos used to come into the
courthouse on the right was the
district court clerks on the
left was the magistrate they're
all in the same area house to
that efficiency piece and I
think it is something likely
going forward is not least my
hope Representative perhaps not
having necessarily magistrate
District Court per for them all
to be cross trained but the
efficiencies as far as it's more
for people coming to the court.
We still our divisional lies we
have so you know we have our
District Court clerk Center
magistrate court clerks and
outside of perhaps answering the
window when there's nobody for
magistrate or district there's
not another efficiency piece
yes.
Thank you I think those are all
my questions thank you just a
few.
To physically it was.
So on the on the clerk's staff
the clerk issue.
do you think it's a staffing
issue or supervision other words
and I hear there's always
somebody go on they're not all
there your supervisor's job is
to turn down time off to the
fats if it's good staffing issue
or you just don't have enough
wealth as part of a man for
example that super supervisor
the manages all was out I'm on
maternity leave you know which
is a contributing factor and and
so those are things he just you
know to come up and then we have
new staff that you know they.
Leave without pay but they had a
lot of times they had valid
excuses they brought in a
doctor's note there was
something that came up but it
was I've never seen I've I've
never signed leave without pay
had near the rate that we've had
and and I have to say it it
really is pertaining to a lot of
our new employees.
Okay thank you that's all I
have.
In questions.
One I'm not sure question yes my
please fund balance.
Actually no you're good.
Mr Kirk and I were trying to
follow along with the the the
questions about the clerk need.
and I got confused I got lost.
Clarify for me again are these
J. S. twos for the magistrate
Clark for the district clerk.
So ultimately that we're gonna
use them for the magistrate
because the magistrates the
furthest behind and it's not to
say that our District Court
doesn't need help I would hope
and I think I heard from judge
curly that they've kind of cross
trained and and I'd like it
eventually to be more there's
here's our civil division our
criminal division our family
division but they will be for
the magistrate court.
And maybe that's where I got
lost was because when I review
reviewing the workload study.
Looks like the need that you're
trying to was actually in your
District Court.
Not in your magistrates court.
And that's where I got confused
but thank you for the
clarification.
That that's my question.
Given how long it took you to
fulfill your CFO position do you
anticipate having trouble should
be granted the financial
specialist senior position
filling that position.
Thank you.
Mr chair Mr for this party
that is a good question because
we started off with the position
deputy CEO.
And we could not find it to be
because that it was also gonna
be a CF deputy CEO it was also
could be the CFO and so we could
not find that combination the
requirements were that you had
to have five years of support
experience in that position so
we have that position open for
all a lot of the time and then
it was just decided we're not
going to find anybody who's
anybody with that unique
combination of experience so we
moved it to a program are a
financial manager to position
and locally that we we found.
Marci and that was open for a
for quite some time before we
act of we she actually applied
so so the longer the short of it
is we can be optimistic and
hopeful and and try to do the
recruiting there's a little
lower requirements so we're
optimistic we'll have applicants
but.
We couldn't tell you until the
positions available.
Thank you.
Yes.
And I have done anything close
just very briefly I'd we didn't
touch on and maybe it's the pre
trial services from AOC it's
supposed to theoretically start
December or January and then
we're looking to to take over
and bring those in house and
that's why we're asking for
this.
Thank you.
It was scheduled for a break of
so take a.
