Present yes.
Here is the this.
Here.
The president.
Thank you okay I don't know if
we have any announcements I I
think I the only one is just
remind everybody that the mikes
are on even during the breaks
and so they're very sensitive
so having conversations about
you know baseball that that's
that's easy but if you have any
other conversations that you
don't want the entire world
here.
Please take those outside.
Karen enhancements.
Conditionally.
Once that does.
And I get notification.
Very good.
Let's go to get started then
we'll turn to our first quite
this my first presentation is
from Bernalillo county
metropolitan court.
Chavis members of the committee
good morning to you just to.
Judge Joshua Sanchez
metropolitan.
I would.
Do that
of these matters involved
everything we know that would be
this morning is are brand new
CEO please allow us to care more
about the same time I became
chief just a few months ago and
then we have Rachel mom who was
our CFO and is just amazing with
the budget and our technical
knowledge of everything that's
been going on and we also have a
couple people for metro
according to back that are here
to support today from financials
before we begin I just want to
thank our colleagues at the
legislature for allowing us to
use this room and conduct these
hearings also want to thank the
members of the committee for the
diligence and the work that
they're putting in to be heard
you know when I became a judge
and realized there was so much
administrative stuff that we
have to do on the back side of
things so I appreciate his time
to do this away from the court
rooms within the court houses I
really appreciate that.
so we're here requesting a
couple of different things the
court is requesting a transfer
of forward funded you just
physicians.
From term to Perm due to the
legislation on the elimination
of fees it's important to make
these term positions.
It's important make these term
positions permanent as the
funding sources will eventually
become obsolete the collection
of the work the has declined
over the years in FY fourteen
the revenue collected was five
hundred ninety four thousand
seven hundred fifty one dollars
fiscal year twenty three the
court is projecting the revenue
to be a hundred nineteen
thousand two hundred thirty
seven dollars of the Courts
requesting is requesting to
transfer six background intake
officers from term to term the
court is seeing a high turnover
rate and the existing six
positions in fiscal year twenty
one turnover with eighty three
percent in fiscal year twenty
two turnover was sixty six and
currently fiscal year twenty
three turnovers of forty two
percent in order to retain the
staff positions it's crucial to
move them from term department.
The court believes that it
should have the funding
management of their tasks as
part of the Courts based
operations and not rely on
county funding the courts also
requesting general fund for
contractual services for the
private attorneys to handle pre
and post adjudication cases in
our specialty court programs
that's doing to some staffing
issues that are happening with
the public office and also
leading to make your.
Offices for our specialty point
of the Courts requesting general
fund for increases in existing
contracts for janitorial and
private security the metro court
is not currently is not owned by
the county it's owned by us of
the cleaning of the nine floors
offices cubicles judicial
chambers courtrooms probation
divisions public and employee
restrooms jury assembly rooms
elevators customer service
public area it's all done on the
contract in the courthouse is a
twenty four seven operation and
security is needed twenty four
hours a day the card is also
requesting general funds to
cover rate increases in
electricity and postage
electricity set to rise on
January first twenty twenty four
postage is going up to sixty six
cents effectively July first and
this then the court is also
starting to notice an increase
the increase in case filings
post pandemic and the court will
purchase the leading software
for judges if they elect to be
renewed or enrolled in the
program and I do open it up for
questions
I think it's more Mexicans are
dive.
US judgment.
I look in your direction and
Sanchez math.
There's more employees.
thank you Mr chair good morning
jets that is okay so
let's go through your property
one request let's start with
your
judicial specialist you want to
fund three firm positions in
court room support is that
correct that is correct and are
those positions currently filled
you gonna have to advertise for
they are not right now we will
have to approve and.
Okay currently have seven thank
Mr chair judge Martin we
currently have seven vacancies
in our judicial specialists for
court and support their to their
out for recruitment and some
others will be posting for
recruitment but we're seeing a
high turnover there as well
committee increase in case
filings I know filings are down
statewide but match report they
are not Representative twenty to
twenty five percent and that
does include the civil increase
that's probably coming with the
moratorium ending on the
landlord tenant disputes in the
starting to see the civil cases
go up so we are in need of
hiring those partitions but.
Okay and I noticed your vacancy
rate years used eleven
challenges recruiting.
We are we are having challenges
this past fiscal year we've had
about fifty seven vacancies
about twenty eight of those we
did hire internally so they were
all promotions but we've lost
staff to
to District Court to AOC and
just to other entities within
within the state government so
we are having difficulty as like
everybody else but we have been
trying to be creative we've been
of going to job fairs we've
attended I job her job fairs in
person we've done one virtual
job fair we've collaborated with
second judicial in attending job
fairs and we've even posted we
had a commercial that was
advertised and we're just we're
trying to be creative and look
at other ways to get our
postings out there we have been
fortunate just this Monday we
had ten people start ten
employees start we've hired
twelve recently so ten that
started that we have a couple
more coming in but we have some
postings that closed recently
this week so we've had about
twelve of them close this week
alone so we're really getting
out there we're trying to
recruit.
Good good I'm glad to hear that
you're trying to reduce that
vacancy rate and this is just
probably a typographical errors
in your submission
you said that your term vacancy
rate was thirty five percent
I think AOC calculate said at
three point five
thirty five the only have four
term vacancies
out of.
Thirty four so Mr chair judge
Martin I I'd not sure because we
had to hold the work positions
vacant we have about
Thirty two positions of that
percent would just not be
possible we have had thirty five
to forty percent vacancy rates
in those positions for a loan
being the weren't fund positions
that were trying to move to
permanent funding due to lack of
work collection but also we have
twenty two positions with the
county grant similar to the
second the funding they get for
pre trial impact of education we
have a twenty two staff members
and those intake officers that
were directly also requesting
six out of the twenty two to
move to general fund have had
that eighty sixty seventy
percent turnover so I can work
with the AOC but I can assure
you the vacancy rates than
higher than three percent and
our term position.
All right we can look at that
sure sure
So
how many so you're you're trying
to transfer.
For from your warm Fund to and
to General Fund
And you I guess you transferred
three last year so starting this
fiscal year how many do you have
left on that.
Mr chair judge Martin
we actually used to have twenty
five positions from weren't fund
and over the last ten years we
come to this committee as
revenues have declined to
depleted positions we were down
to seven three years ago the
kids three COVID time it might
have been two or four
we did delete two more positions
we are actually only down to the
four and two were moved to
general fund at the same time we
deleted to cities for the only
remaining out of when I started
with the court in two thousand
five hundred and twenty five
these are the remaining four
positions and in case you're
going to move forward to fund
balanced would you like me to
address that now with us yet now
we're gonna work real work
through the your request first
and we'll get to fund balance in
a bit these are the remaining
four okay these last four great
news is and then on your
background and take your us to
move six and it looks like you
move six last year so how many
left.
On that grant Fund.
Mr chair judge we we didn't move
six it was actually denied we
didn't get the funding to do
okay you didn't so this is just
a renewed request it's been a
request of on and off for the
last eight years okay so how
many how many are still on grant
funding for all six of us at
twenty two positions we have
from the county there are six
intake officers and we're asking
to incrementally at least move
the six that are quarter the
operations Mr chair judge this
program has existed with the
courts since nineteen eighty
this is one of the oldest great
supports half I'm just trying to
figure out how many got left so
you got twenty two left on grant
funding for the pre trial
background investigations okay.
Are
And then.
Let's see your
Let's go ahead and get your fund
balances I don't see your your
parking fund what happened to.
Mr chair that.
So over the last few years and.
I provided case that
conversation came up in our
submission for metroparks
history
and you will see that are
revenues have equal to her
expenditures because general
fund has had to cover the almost
ninety to a hundred thousand
dollar electric bill for the
parking garage during the COVID
there were no jurors which is a
large percentage of our
collection for that federal
court District Court metro are
there were not officers parking
in the parking garage we were
getting those validations there
were witnesses and so we had to
start for the first time using
general fund to cover the
shortfall in revenues so there
is no fun.
So do you intend to.
To start putting funds back into
it using the revenues that you
anticipate
Mr chair judge Martin.
If they ever exceed expenses
yes.
Okay and currently they're not
unfortunately Bernalillo county
had a contract they were paying
four thousand dollars a month to
have their fleet and an
officer's park in that and it
and in June so we just lost
about fifty thousand of R. four
hundred thousand dollars in
revenue and that's why in the
initiatives I tried to find the
expenses to show what the
largest expenses are that being
the electricity the
the vendor that manages the
parking garage and then the
agreement that was made when the
land was purchased between the
legislature and in that court
administration at the time we
still have to pay thirty five
percent of gross revenues to the
land holder and that agreement
will be ending in a few years
okay and a few years how many.
Two if I recall correctly I
think I counted okay yeah twenty
twenty six so the okay I and the
reason for my question is a you
know and I'm trying not to be
critical I just you've you're
tracking the funds the income
and the expenses in the last
couple years expenses have
exceeded revenues and run it
down to zero which is
understandable I just trying to
you know because that funding
this I want to know if you're
going to use it again in the
future if the effective siege
for how are you going to track
those expenses witcher mandated
by statute to.
That you have to pay like the
the lan please correct Mr chair
judge and
RT you can attest to
conversations we've had we
actually have to work on with
regards to the legislation
making the fund recurring right
now any additional funds need to
go to the debt service if I'm
speaking
incorrectly on the lawn your
interpretation RT please
interrupt me but we have to have
some things taken care of.
Sorry at one time I'm not sure
if this is continued metro is
putting the funds into the fund
and then they would.
Not revert the fund balance at
the end of the year.
Support for legislation was that
doesn't exist I hope you're not
doing that because there's more
in that way we the legislation
should be access revenue goes
right so the phone was paid on.
The killers said civilians.
I was.
And the court has reverted over
time to the court facilities
fund for the debt service on the
building which will end June
twenty twenty five over sixty
thousand dollars during my
tenure.
All right.
And then last year it looks like
speaking of reversion G. had
about a fifteen thousand dollar
reversion.
Over federal courts history then
look like you've reverted very
much a past.
And that's I and I understand
it's probably comment related
and your vacancy rates
understand Mr chair judge Martin
thank you for the kind of and a
few years ago I know it's this
to be diverted sixty four that
we did not if it's actually less
than that
but part of that reversion
actually has been what I had to
wait for on revenues
the parking fund to make sure
things were covered and if so
that was actually a a large part
of the reversion was waiting for
those July bills and revenues to
come from.
Thank you Mr chair those my
question thank you questions
from over the members of the
committee.
Our question so from the parking
garage
awhile back I had issue with the
former US you I have a revenue
for the parking garage is
accounted for by the court for
your employees you charge
employees for their ****.
Correct.
Mr chair RT the employees are
charged for their parking we do
not collect that they work
directly the management company
that we pay to manage anyone who
has a monthly parking agreement
we don't manage employees
parking thing that occurs for
them to go through that I go
through an African.
Reflecting.
Mr chair RT they have contracts
with our current vendor is as P.
plus standard parking they pay
monthly whether it be online
like they pay their home utility
bills or drop off a check or
however they have it set up okay
that's good to hear because I
was told that there was.
The revenue is collected in the
clerk's office somehow open and.
That the court actually
collected the revenue and paid
the vendor to manage at the
Nicholas of snow Mr chair RT I
was actually asked the same
question by some others in the
judiciary and I think maybe
someone misunderstood that if
someone's doing the flex payment
but that's coming out of their
paycheck could you can do the
flex parking like you can
medical for anybody who might
have to be paid for parking
you could do that but we at
MetraPark have never collected
the employees
assessment of what their parking
spaces in the employee garage
which of the lower floors of the
parking garage.
Okay now pre trial survivors
told but I'm glad I think the
difference hi I at the second I
was gonna say that's at the
second but I'll let the second
answer should just the Mr chance
and.
To be clear the folks that
place.
The the six
Term background intake officers.
There county for.
And is an indication the county
funding is going to go if you
answer those questions are and
Mr.
But the county is going to stop
providing the funding.
Mr of course there's not there's
not an indication that the R.
we're just wanting to
funding and management to take
over as part of the court
appropriations for their
employees and yes there that'll
do it little bit difficult to
keep field since their term
positions most employees want to
be permanent so any time that
there's an opening for a
permanent position within the
court the apply for that so they
are vacant quite often in Mister
chair Mister Papen we've lost
employees to general fund
positions but the program
expansion that's gone on state
I was thinking it was we're not
full so you can you know you're
not to worry about that.
Thank you for knowledge.
Okay thank you.
Jobs.
A B. to an address this morning.
Good morning I wanted to ask a
question about last year's
budget initiatives you had
requested funding for I believe
the initial request was for six
to fill six vacant just two
positions I think the budget
committee approved of portion of
that wondering what happened
during the session and if you've
been successful and moving
forward to fill those positions
I believe the justification was
to clear a backlog of cases so
can you tell us how that's
going.
Look at this.
The question the.
Mr chair judge
what we ended up doing with some
of that as we actually ended up
receiving a special
appropriation of just under two
hundred thousand dollars to hire
clerks and whatever to positions
to close those cases and so we
actually have two tents that are
starting I have already started
here this last pay period they
will be tracking I want to come
back to the committee saying
that two hundred thousand we
were able to close tax amount of
cases
the fourth floor of our court
house is to port rooms and then
secretly it's not two courtrooms
it's actually hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds and
thousands of cases of box five
of of files in boxes and is so
are we able to shut down our
storage unit that we have boxes
started as well that the second
previously had case files and on
the first we've moved everything
on site and it has been a
valiant effort on closing
felonies and other cases
specially when administration
was receiving letters of people
who couldn't get
leases apartment leases because
of background checks and
security clearances for jobs so
with that special appropriation
we're working on the closure of
the cases we did receive funding
for IT position and that is
actually up for recruitment
right now we also received
funding for two targeted the
same way we are targeting right
now for the H. R. position and
that's judicial specialist and
also for the facilities
department we received two
maintenance workers and so once
already hired ones out for
because going out for
recruitment I don't think it's
posted on the and that
maintenance worker alone has
made a huge difference and us
being able to change light bulbs
when they see them out and not
doing work orders and of the
seventeen have stats on
facilities we did want to come
with what they've been able to
do in this last year and how
this maintenance worker has
helped yes so in in fiscal year
twenty three we had sixteen
hundred and fifty for work
orders with our facilities
departments of seven hundred and
fifteen of those were for
preventive maintenance orders
nine hundred nineteen we're just
routine maintenance eleven
special projects were submitted
and nine emergency repairs so
there's a huge need in our court
this this unit is in dire need
so the operation there is only
two and the maintenance work we
receive funding for legislative
providing that third and
hopefully four percent.
You have anticipated all of my
questions I've tried and I also
I felt the pain of the court of
appeals going through the
insistence of the raft and
anytime you'd like to call us
Tonya Tauruses are facilities
director she's amazing thank you
very much we appreciate that.
Yes.
To get money for is.
Yes if you get my question to
that okay
please.
Alright.
Good morning so I so last year
you guys requested on US
security contract increase for
twenty six eight and it was
appropriated and then this year
it's going up again for another
thirty seven thousand fifty
thousand in two years.
Mr chair temple yes it's
actually already in negotiated
contract we have from an R. P.
that was done years ago what
changed with regards to the
percentage of increase because
it is you would think it would
be a similar dollar amount is
that we now because of the
twenty four seven operation have
requested that some of the
security officers live up to
what this company called the
level two security so there's
more training involved there's
More things that they can carry
with them dot com
and does so by moving up to not
specially for the staff that
work in in back with the
situations of pre trial and in
that graveyard shift have more
security after we had the
gentleman drive through the
front of the courthouse that
Saturday morning I was was not
there but I got there soon after
it was a situation where
unfortunately the staff that
were there in the media there
were there couldn't
It wasn't the best environment I
don't wanna miss speaker over
speak security wise for the
courthouse at the time so part
of that increases also just
changing that on some of those
ships that we have better
security they also got to handle
on may first someone in a car
accident at the marble went
through the doors of the parking
garage the metro park it's now
fixed GSD we've worked with them
on insurance claims
so handling those issues and
being available we wanted to
increase the level of training
involved for those officers
thank you.
Two four or one of your
supporters can come with the
courts for with that little
building that was sandwiched
that's an island between you and
your parking garage that you
purchased got to be three years
ago now something like that.
The actually that building is
being utilized for we have an
area for behavioral health
division so we've kind of
expanded to their our our with.
Separated things out so
behavioral health is in one area
and we also are bringing back
our felony pre trial services
they were in another the county
in the county building
previously so we've brought them
back as well okay great because
I was surprised we haven't seen
a captain who request the.
Two things that I know is a law
office maybe works as a as a
legal office Mr chair RT I think
what you might be referring to
this Mr Romero's hi yes okay so
what we
do is it's ministration has been
very proactive about it the use
of the retail space in the
parking garage right the parking
garage but that building was
raised along with the small
bonding building the land is
clear we still have a severance
tax fund on that we actually
what is delayed a lot of this
project is working with the city
to vacate slate street so the
street you come in on for the
employees and parking or that
executive parking goes down to
was actually city street and so
at the city hearing last month
just last month it was approved
for vacation
So we just paid the city for
that land from the severance tax
on project the alley way is in
the process of being vacated
with the D. R. before through
the city and then we can move
forward with sketching working
with engineers and architects on
that funding we are in the last
year of that bond we've spent
just over a hundred thousand of
the eight hundred initial beyond
the emergency loan that
purchased the land
I started sketching
I talked about poster boards and
other things of what we do with
that to work towards what was
the initial intent of securing
that land and securing the
courthouse and access to it okay
great Mr chair I suggest the
committee might be interested in
how in the future of that lance
was a was an emergency purchase
so it was a big deal I've been
to I've been to the parking
garage but I never paid
attention to the building not
being there right.
Mr chair RT similar to have the
second has the rolling gates and
other things I think that's part
of division of securing access
to get to the basement of the
courthouse or to the parking
percent of in office city street
that's good yes Sir thank you.
Please could to just go over the
private defense attorney
contract is it just a staffing
issue with public defenders
from Chavis members the
committee the reason that we're
requesting the money for the
private attorneys to.
This is our specialty courts one
of the requirements and best
practices is to make sure the.
That are participating things as
well as.
Do that our.
On from.
I think all of our specialty
courts they don't participate
in.
Is they just don't have the time
the staff.
My role prior to becoming a
judge was contract public
defender in the thirteenth and
the way that this bill the roll
of our specialty courts those
making sure that contracts with
the from.
To make sure that we're.
Our best practice and still be
able to find the right services
to the full participating in our
program.
Because I don't know if it's an
issue.
Seems to be pretty consistent.
Sure New Jersey started to work
there.
Do you know about a hundred
thirty thousand how many
contracts that would be.
Facing off of the contracts with
their teachers.
Our for contractors.
Trying to.
I know that we came up with that
number based upon the powers the
most likely be putting in I
really behavioral health for
program we staff once once a
month and it takes about two
hours for staffing in our fourth
quarter but there's that would
cover the court which is of the
the white for program the the
staff twice a month and it's
about four hours for staffing
plus about two hours for part
time so the special reports on
call all kind of differ in
terms.
Tried to basically best we could
off of the time and.
Thank you.
Okay.
Just a question
The the the files is there any
thought to working can those my
professors can.
Usable building space for
holding paper.
Mr chair great question it was
my goal when I retire to have
the fourth floor and see I'm not
sure it's going to happen but
it's been a valiant effort over
the last five years the court
has shredded over four thousand
boxes of case files in
attempting to focus on the ones
that have the one your retention
that existed and in each of
those boxes is usually seventy
five to hundred files so it's
really been a valiant effort on
on click staffs part and other
divisions to begin to try to
help
Records and archives is
accepting boxes again and that
has assisted us with the
felonies that are forever
retention that we had back to at
least two thousand two and
hundreds of boxes I don't have
the exact number but I can I
think it's over four hundred
felony boxes if not more have
been already turned into records
and archives and staff been
focused on that because the
station issue of course
decreases when we know we can
send them somewhere as opposed
to waiting for retention so with
regards to moving forward I know
there's electronic records
conversations and other things
going on but right now the boxes
we have some case files back to
the nineteen eighties on open
shelves I'd love to show you the
floor actually we had a visit
recently for more DFA avid was
one place I took him
and I need to block it.
no that it's it's an
overwhelming amount of boxes and
and and a large amount of space
since the fourth floor at metro
court for those of you who may
not know was initially built as
a shelf for for future growth so
it's kind of fun if you're an
architectural engineer type to
come see that fire sprinklers
the H. fax system the foam on
the walls that all of that but
right now it shows the case file
so the future moving forward I
think there's discussions
happening but the valiant effort
of going back to all those case
files continues but right now we
don't are asking for a judge
don't show any for judge so we
don't need to build courtrooms
out on what would normally be to
court on the floor okay I
appreciate that sort of general
fund question might be a special
at the end of transition that
stuff at some point the future
but it's valuable square footage
in downtown Albuquerque first
for paper I.
That's a that's a procedure when
they built the first close the
bathroom so please Neckermann to
go up or down one where the
other I think we've got the
second one the bathrooms were
put in on the fourth floor Mr
charity I was very proud that we
finally to get public restrooms
and water fountains on that
floor and then didn't have a
fake wall and were able to with
the capital project
The following year actually
build out the whole way to match
the other Holly so if you're on
the fourth floor of match
reported here in the hallway of
the front it looks like every
other hallway you just don't
know what's behind those other
two courtroom six thousand six.
Appreciate that to this point
earlier you know one of our
first budget meetings was going
to be at metro court and and I
think maybe we need to to try
and have an initiation or
conversation having that maybe
in the fall going over there and
take a look at these file rooms
again the mammoth on top of the
roof and I think that's what
it's called right here the floor
has a series of trailers on it
yet unexpected those are all
things would be helpful for the
for the for the the committee
just to visualize and and Out
Mario sentiment is I just keep
on what I should well really why
we talk about that so maybe
we'll try to do some like that
in the fall we will come out
from happy to get on the roof
yeah.
One way trip.
It's kind of hard for me these
days.
Lastly.
The committee is not a question
that just some information to
the committee than half by the
Chief Justice and I've been
remiss and and moving it forward
I need to the status of
subcommittee on vacancy rates
and and would be looking to the
entities for for help with that
for some type of nexus piece I
want to make sure that the we
include metro probably on that
subcommittee just because you
guys have had historically a
very large of vacancy rate and I
think you the challenges need to
that that subcommittee so
are discussed at that we may be
asking you all to care.
Okay that is a prisoner of the
questions so thank you please
please
I just wanted to acknowledge the
hard work of former chief judge.
Our former CEO for putting us
and myself and really good
position to take over and I also
want to thank all the hard work
for Senator Rachel they put in
really getting me up to speed
taking over this it's it's a big
task and I appreciate all the
help they give me
also with some back from finance
that is really give me a crash
course.
Yeah I appreciate that you I
think you'll appreciate it thank
you.
We are ahead of schedule I don't
know of the fifth is ready to
present your okay go from one
chief judge not just to the next
you've died Sanchez not just
ready the bigger.
Senator please good morning of
chair Mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is mark Sanchez I'm the chief
judge of the fifty additional
district I have with me this
morning Mr current credit
Crowhurst who is our
she finance chief executive
officer for the district my
district includes the counties
of the Chavis and Eddy in
southeastern New Mexico the
primary industries in that area
eight years old and gas others
are quite a bit of farming and
and we have other kinds of
activities that we take care of
their
today we're asking you to
consider and to approve and in
the future R. a request of for
roughly two hundred forty five
thousand dollars in expanded of
services of otherwise our budget
remains are pretty flat we try
to be very conservative up to
the use of the taxpayers money
to use it wisely to use it
Reasonably are not to be asked
for things that we don't need
are we have done surveys of our
cases are one of the things that
we've asked for is
A paralegal and our survey
indicates that investors
consider cases we have a fifty
and more than fifty percent of
litigants without attorneys at
the lake but assistant paralegal
would be used to help prepare
documents an orientation of for
victims who don't have attorneys
Thank you for having this this
morning I'm gonna turn it over
to canton who has more expertise
in this than I do thank you.
Morning.
so the rest of our
budget request the would be the
two administrative assistants
moving from our in our drug
courts in Lee and Travis
counties currently they are
administrative one positions but
the moving forward we would like
to a request those positions and
to the coordinator positions
that they should've been
originally and are going to be
required to be in the future for
those programs the other
positions that we're requesting
are the J. S. two in Eunice the
caseload in Eunice has greatly
increased over the last few
years in fact all the way
through COVID so the last three
years and has increased to the
point where we do need a second
person in the U. S. magistrate
court we're also requesting a
another J. S. two for the
Roswell magistrate court
in this both in the study the
the judicial study for personnel
at said that we needed to
another person and actually the
numbers ended this year
I had put eight point eight but
the number ended at nine point
one seven for that quarter and
currently we have of the seven
positions.
and then our last a request
other than the paralegal is the
part time surveillance officer
for a drug court program and
Chavis can.
Will stand for questions.
The term Mr speaker question is
first.
A good morning it's Sanchez can
I thought All Things Considered
for a thirteen million dollar
budget in FY twenty for that one
point eight six percent was
certainly a quite modest
appreciate that I do have some
questions to help you better
understand your budget
That I'm I'm curious on the
initial fifteen thousand dollar
we losses so the the
administrative assistants now
are they do they act as your
drug court coordinators the the
two.
Okay Mr Chairman so in each each
county there's administers that
acts as a coordinator as you
working to certification
and promoted me have the salary
for all the way up to the
fifteen thousand more you need
to promote the.
Is that correct okay.
And that I've I was curious in
your your J. as two
justifications do you have a our
priority in either also or
Eunice I I realize are both the
high priority is there is there
particularly one that is more
priority than the other kind of
a Sophie's choice thing but
again
You guys disagree on this of
course.
Just knowing so I've been in
both point many times but
recently of course rouse was
right there I can be done any
time of these are Eunice's a
little further away for me but
right there for me.
No.
I would say there is no I could
not place one above the other
these chords are.
sorely understaffed and we need
help.
As soon as possible and both of
these courts the backlog of the
over time is just unsustainable
this point okay and in the
universe Revenue justification
unison gel if I read it
correctly that oftentimes you're
closing the window if the court
has to go into court that
happens quite often to Wirth
it's close to the public aside
from a take place in the court
yes I mean they have to because
the clerk is the judge's TCA in
the court room when they're
doing hearings and so the window
has to close when they're in the
court okay and and this is us
obviously and you know it's not
a large court by any means but
it.
It's horrible to have just one
clerk in a court I don't I don't
care if it's the tiniest little
court in the whole state
the inability to have someone on
vacation find trying to find
coverage the ability to have
someone there if that person
resigns you know always having a
consistent
employees in a court is horrible
and Mr Chairman and Mr spears
highway eighteen is the highway
that goes from Lovington all the
way down to del Rio Texas that
is an artery for oil and gas
trucks.
Our work trucks of and it's very
heavily traveled is pretty
dangerous these days with all
the traffic down there are there
other track their other roads
along that line of you may or
may not know that the operations
in the unity counties have
increased substantially
and so that may and so that
means if there's an increase in
population is increasing traffic
there's an increase on the load
on and demand on the court so
I think that the courts have a
duty to respond to the needs of
the public so
both these courts are
great need of of four percent
okay.
The great
and then I had a couple other
questions so in looking at your.
A two hundred category the
obviously barred
A significant amount of money
but I realize that there's
there's needs you have them
listed here so my question
really and I understand you know
target targeted vacancy rates of
the positions opens to fund
these types of things but you
did leave fifty thousand dollars
in that category and the looking
at reversions prior I see fifty
seven nine hundred and ten and
so I was curious if there's ever
been consideration maybe to.
But there is money for that have
time surveillance officer the
thirty thousand up.
And I think you're getting my
question to judge in Canada it
are we do understand your
question I'm gonna let that can
answer first I'll I can answer
for if you'd be good likely to
shuffle.
That we never know when the
vacancies are gonna rise Mr
speaker sisters and Mr chair
chairman we can't really depend
that those vacancies.
I don't know why everybody
because the pace is at its best
with that those vacancy savings
will admit will exist at the
time that we have the need for
them are we do not
create vacancy savings are we do
not plan for Cape they can see
savings when we ask for money we
intend to use it a lot of times
Vacancies occurred with the for
example the judge judge are you
William Shoebridge retired
recently of and there has been
difficulty filling that position
the committee that recommended
name of the governor asked us to
go back asked the committee to
go back give it other names the
committee didn't get any names
there are no other applicants on
so there's been a delay in that
that's something that we cannot
anticipate well.
within a reasonable
Knowledge I mean we we really
cannot anticipate arms like that
on so what we're asking for is
for our consistency reliability
in these positions and so if
you're asking us if we will make
efforts to.
Keep our positions filled
we we hear you and we will do
that.
so I hate to do this again but
okay so it's very busy in the
southeast in New Mexico you know
what that.
You know what that means that
means that there is competition
for manpower.
And within power employment our
employees and it's difficult to
fill these positions and is
difficult to fill them with
people who meet the minimum
requirements and Mr happen and
I'm just Chavis from Chavis Mr
Pappy not Britney read many
letters recently asking for
exemption from the minimum
requirements the reason that I
do that or that I have to do
that is that I can't we cannot
find employees that meet the
minimum requirements for the
jobs that we are tending to fill
up but Mr Chairman and Mr spears
we we will and will not be with.
Certainly appreciate I
appreciate your answer to that.
All I was just in the state
going through comment was rather
difficult in our region
employee what this it was
Maybe different attitude about
the pandemic and.
Trying to hire people who would
agree who wanted to
goes have COVID PP
was quite difficult and so we
lost we would have a hard time
the hundred thousand will and
then last year fifty seven it
was very difficult to fill J. S.
to positions we lost a lot to.
A lot of people leaving and so
it's been difficult but as you
see we're whittling that down
this year as judge Sanchez the
we were I sat down with our CFO
we tried to
Come up with what we thought was
going to be a much lower number
than fifty thousand and because
of the inability to get some
people on board a judge with a
court monitor a bailiff package
we lost quite a bit more than we
were expecting.
Mr chairman Mr spears the
effects of COVID continue even
to the state of on.
You very likely you have noticed
in your own courts in your own
parts of the state and
throughout the nation that
finding employees is very
difficult on so well not
critical the measures that were
imposed to deal with COVID but
society has changed it's
difficult it's difficult to get
workers.
Sure thank you for those answers
again my last my last question
is looking at your fund balances
for both ADR mediation they went
up a little bit the ending
balance a little bit higher and
I did see that you have sixty
five thousand budgeted in
domestic mediation in FY twenty
forty of ninety thousand
budgeted in eighty are for FY
twenty four so you.
Just elaborate on that a little
bit you anticipate those bounces
being you have a mediator
tell me that now those bounces
gets spent please
We have mediation programs in
all three counties we went
through a period of
Of austerity in the past imposed
on us
By forces that we were not in
control of telling us that we
have to be austere
we've
Attempted to
Deal with the austerity by
being conservative in the use of
our of.
Mediation funds.
and so we are going to use our
mediation funds we have revised
our we have amended our the
Asians local rural and Services
appears in Mr Chairman to be
happy to know that what's
pattern on the rule and
affecting the north
it's a great rural areas I have
to disagree with.
It's a wonderful rural and we
hope that the fact that it's a
defect in your district will
mean that'll be approved without
difficulty by the Supreme Court
for our district
and so we're planning to dispose
of the funds in those up to
accounts
under the rules to the proposed
with a sliding fee scale
so we we do worry about those
balances being so high okay
Thank thank you judge and and
thank you can and I do want to
reiterate
you know thirteen million dollar
budget one point eight percent
increase very conservative I
thought was very good request
thank you for answering my
questions I have nothing else Mr
chair questions from the
committee.
The Sukari.
Good morning.
I was wondering if you could
talk a little bit more about
your conversions in your drug
court my understanding is you're
drug courts have been around and
successful for a very long time
so why this change now
can you just give a little bit
more life to that.
Is probably my.
Tions okay the the truth the no
one had you know they'd just
we're kind of going along going
along and then as we approach
this new.
getting their license or
whatever it is they then
approached me about moving these
positions both of these
administrative assistants and
the judges in charge of those
programs approached me and said
Hey these people are you know
doing more and they're you know
going to they're supposed to be
coordinators.
That's what we're trying to do.
Mr Chairman this is part I spoke
at length with yesterday with
the judge the courtesy and
Lovington educated to meet at
the changes necessary thing as
much as the rules require that
those that that be staffed by
people of of in these
classifications of jobs
and so there's going to be a
movement away from the family
Research beautification of drug
court to on adult drug court and
so we're going to see a more
overlap in criminal cases on the
lack and that there's also an
initiative to make to encourage
judges to impose participation
in drug court as a condition of
probation in the event that the
activation is imposed as part of
a sense
and so that that is the
direction that we intend to go
and we think that it's and in
accordance with the will of the
legislature and as expressed in
the statutes and rules.
Should try to just Chavez says
he has something that through it
here just a point of
clarification what it what it is
is you know a lot of our
specialty courts are going
through a certification process
that brought metro was here you
could detail at and as the best
practices and the role that
these these individuals are
going to have to take on is is
much greater than their current
responsibilities.
Those certifications and best
practices and hopefully working
towards better outcomes in the
fifth estate the chief those
certifications so it I think
that's really the point and if
we have it Mr Mitchell is here
you could really flesh that out
a little more for the committee
and my question might have been
a little bit selfish because
we're we're in the certification
process to and for now I'm
wondering if this is
as well.
For right here so thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr cari and just to just to
this.
sure but really I want to make a
comment I might have a question
but I can certainly vouch for
the courts challenges with
recruitment retention and
they're particularly in their
match records it's not for lack
of trying
we've sent people to help you
know that those days when they
have to ask what we supposed to
do we have you know we're going
to have to close where we have
nobody actually to staff which
is a really good position be and
there's no way that the court
intentionally say four and
thirty eight thousand dollars in
vacancies they just couldn't get
people there these challenges
would replace injection Richard
are symptomatic of challenges
with getting folks
The person hiring in the and in
your particular district in the
fifth and can maybe correctly
from wrong but I think the
vaccination requirement for new
employees is probably felt.
More significantly in the fifth
than any other district by far
in terms of being able to
recruit people to jobs yes
I will have to say.
From the beginning of COVID
Telev ended was the worst.
First part of my career.
And it was due to.
The employees and.
It's just a different attitude.
It says no and I'm not I don't
want to ever think that it was
I'm speaking ill of them because
I'm not because they are great
it was just the fact that
there's a different.
Perspective of what was going on
and it lingers today and we
still get the questions because
they saw you know the point the
smaller communities I saw the
courts wearing masks way past.
What was normal in our area and
they still are hesitant to
apply.
The court positions because they
would not they would just leave.
And they would find another job
because there is the ability to
find other positions in our
area.
However let it be clear that
that we intend to comply with
all the
I go through your budget as
thoroughly as Mississippi is
what I went through pretty well
and I took to heart everything I
saw on the justification
regarding how we measure
employee need and all that and
I'm confident that you need to
positions in the to the in the
three match record to identify
and I would urge the committee
to
Seven to the back of the room to
ask for more not to support the
budget request I actually after
I saw the numbers I've felt I
underestimated what I should've
asked for in the Roswell
magistrate court because it went
from basically one and of over
one need to over a to need when
final numbers were run in July
last year were less of our us
well than the courts further
down in the southeast where
we've seen even more challenges
it seems to me.
And this is if I could make just
one points are always of the
the.
Although we have gone to a lot
of hearings remotely which has
helped in certain ways.
Especially being able to hear
from hearings quicker and
magistrate court and and those
type of things the the
unfortunate side effect is that
people are not actually there to
sign and take care of the
business at the time of the
hearing.
So what happens is these clerks
have now an extra duty to then
email and fax and try to get out
there in the world all the
paperwork for the defendant or
the person getting the ticket
for whoever it is to get their
signature and get it back and
then get it to the A. R. P. U.
R. whatever it is out there in
the world back and forth.
It amazing to me in the the
increase in time that it takes
now to process all that
paperwork because the person
wasn't right there filling it
out as they have the hearing at
the end of the and so Mr
chairman Mr
in order.
You can tell from our
presentation that we are Hicks
and we come from a place where
there are Hicks and we have a
lot of times is no resources and
a lot of times of people who we
deal with our first generation
Mexican immigrants who may only
have land lines don't of are
using this for
our with all the skill that you
all use the language and so it's
difficult and so that places a
burden on the clerk's office to
be the intermediary between the
judge and the victims to
acquires a lot of work
and so
that is one of the reasons that
we get
there are several reasons but
that's one of the reasons get
kind of balled up.
In our in our cases.
So thank you for understanding
questions but I will say I
haven't directly talk to rob
about the request on the drug
court corners I have a high
degree of confidence he would
say yes that is a necessary and
appropriate thing to do I can do
that before the more we have the
braces if that in case there's
anybody on the committee has
concerns about the the those two
requests I appreciate that thank
you okay a couple of questions
the jail magistrate court is
that that somebody there all the
time report okay so the Eunice
one hundred center out of
sometimes holding sessions and
you know sometimes holding
sessions and that the judge but
about clerks the clerk is is one
part so she does one day and
Jalen closes down Eunice and
then comes back four days for
you know some so at least one
day we Eunice's closed.
And and then just a a point the
I'm gonna make is that you lot
of courts have a downtick and in
other cases you browse was been
very steady so I think you know
whether we have problems with
the caseload study or not we do
know those those numbers of
stayed the same and so that's
that's that's different than
many other areas of the state
and then and in unison I was
hearing you all talk about
unison talk about the traffic
flow you know and and one of the
things I was thinking through
when I first saw that huge
uptick in numbers.
Full days of the when I was
looking at that was that as a
let's play traffic me they could
just do that a different way but
it's not your other case your
civils are up your your other
criminal cases are up and and
this and so
I think there's there's there's
a need there and and then lastly
again this is just a couple of
questions on that step just that
that that comment and then
lastly I really appreciate that
last piece you sure can and in
terms of of the extra work
that's required with the remote
because I think that may be so
that hasn't really been fully
articulate we heard loud HSD
about eighty about us offer
Representative litigants and and
those reality that that's true
but sort of automatic what's
always that the deal with that
but this other piece I think is
is is a really good point and
then then just lastly
the last thing is if you have a
big you have a small geographic
footprint in the sense three
counties but the number of
facilities you have this is
really really really equipment
and so whether the that that the
AOC is managing those facilities
are free or not it's still still
brain power to drive needs to
solve landlord issues and
everything else is I I just
really appreciate the work you
are doing and and just wanted
knowledge that I see it and I
know others do as well but I
just want to thank you for the
work you all thank you Mr
chairman and I greatly advocate
for RD and his facilities crew
to have a regional facilities
manager because.
Because I
have.
To say that I have a bailiff and
I who have gone all over
district and we do that quite
often fixing items that
That we would love for the AOC
facilities manager to take care
of.
But because of the need we just
do.
I'm pretty sure they have the
highest number of facility of it
in the mail this repetitive
Revenue history yeah I think
close and and not thank you
thank you for listening to us
it's been a pleasure talking to
this morning
These consider our request thank
you.
Number budget has scheduled to
committee members because that
is for breaking our we can maybe
the six is ready we can take
there's pleasure committee.
Right let's go okay.
Yeah the sixes are so.
Right after the six.
Donna.
This.
Yes Representative.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is Jared how
effective we are joining us
today is a Angelique manuals are
CEO and Linda come out to our
CFO Chris hope you know I'm very
new having just started a couple
of months ago our CFO is also
very new having started in
December and we have an
interesting year financially and
I'm sure.
You've heard about it or seen it
in our numbers
are requests are.
A little more ambitious I guess
and we are asking for four point
nine percent increase in our two
hundred to two percent increase
in our three hundred and on a
larger percentage increase in
our four hundred plus we'll go
over we do have three counties
three District Court to for my
district courts a lot of travel
of what there's no District
Court judge full time and one of
our counties and so to
distributors travel there every
week and our program managers
are for the entire district and
they cover the travel a lot to
cover other courthouses instead
of where their primarily office.
we have some renewed requests.
A couple of new request a
renewed request Sir
Judicial specialist to a
financial specialists and for
paralegals which I can
definitely go into and
to complete the funding or fifty
four part time judicial
specialises basically full time
now and part time surveillance
officer who is the same our new
requests is
For domestic relations hearing
officer and for W. chords act
officer.
I think there is a change I
don't know if you got the
materials are reversion I think
in the prepared materials with
something like right around a
thousand dollars and it is now
closer just under thirty
thousand dollars a few other
things came in that we are going
to three birds but is still less
than one percent.
And.
You've heard it a lot as far as
a separate prison litigants I
think arch area has always had a
high number of self represented
litigants and what that's a
reflection of I think even more
now is just a lack of attorneys
we when I started in two
thousand six in in Luna County
there was a line General Civil
practitioners servicing the
county today there are two and
they're in the same for and we
are down to I think there must
have been twelve or fifteen in
Grant County and we're down to
three and two two of those are
the same for the other one is
very very part time we we do
lean on Dona ana county in the
third judicial district quite a
bit but they don't they don't
have to travel to our area to
make money and so we we have a
hard we have a very hard time at
a district attorney's office and
let Luna County is entirely
staffed out of Dona Ana County
and even one individual troubles
in the past so so our our our
challenges are immense when it
comes to work in two thousand
sixteen and prior to that for
decades we had a hearing
officer's and then right when I
came on the bench in two
thousand sixteen the budget was
getting tighter and they even
asked me to not come on the
bench for a while us to delay my
start time to maybe have a can
see savings to keep our our
hearing officer and that's not
something I was able to do and I
can on the bench and that was a
last minute hearing officers in
two thousand sixteen you can see
is in the numbers that have been
presented our case load.
Back to the two thousand sixteen
numbers thing I would challenge
you to to recall is back in two
thousand sixteen two thousand
seventeen there was a confusion
about how cases of that were
reopened for collections should
be counted when judges were
asked to sign judgments on rates
of garnishment some judges were
re opening and closing the case
I think there's hope there's
some standardization now the
same amount of work is being
done but back then I might have
been counted in your case the
case being reopened and that
it's not now so maybe that the
work is the same or higher but
the caseload is it looks like
it's the same there some
challenges anytime you work with
data going back that far because
it's just different rules and
different standardization.
I don't have a lot really I hope
to talk about our our deputy CEO
to Parker new request our
current CEO just four years
four and a half four half years
and we of course with the
consolidation we have we have
doubled the work of our
administrative office and we
lean on so much other people to
help with administration C. C.
has prepared as part of the
materials amount of overtime no
it's not called that when you
work at the corporate amount of
time that she working over the
forty hours just to keep up with
the workload and we
we're just asking for help
they're both for internal growth
we have zero nine zero we do
have a we do have a staff
attorney we have had a staff
attorney for that a bit of time
now we do have a magistrate
court vacancy that our staff
attorneys interested in and that
we may may or may not lose her
to we have had to law clerk
positions open for some time we
were able to the one for nine
months and ultimately she left
because very young and didn't
care about retirement and the
pace you thought she was going
to get and the patient got has
to come we're very different and
ultimately she could make her
ends meet I wanted a different
opportunity we simply cannot
recruit attorney helped so our
ministry of office does a lot of
work that would otherwise be
helped out by my staff attorneys
or general counsel or blockers.
With that will stand for
questions.
To to thank you begin
questioning.
The chief judge affected.
so I I do have several questions
and as your new and I'm new so
we're in this together through
together you did promise it
would be multiple choice I did
and I yes I did promise that and
so I'm going to skip my first
question to the second one that
I can actually ask in a multiple
choice fashion you are wanting
to change to J. as to to J. S.
eight and so my question is are
you doing that a for a pay raise
be it because you're wanting to
change their duties or see a and
B..
I would say it's really more I
think it's really a because they
already do that too because we
were not going to be increasing
their duties they're already
doing it they're very
experienced very you know I I
have basis in all three counties
a lot of cases in all three
counties and the the the the
clerk's office and Luna County
alright primarily because of the
employees there.
Is is never a problem they're so
on top of things they they help
out all the other district
courts they help out the match
records and it's a retention
issue if they are
fantastic employees and the
there is another employee that
is their peers that for a period
of time was sensitive head clerk
in Hidalgo county but not did
not have that title and needed
to move back to Luna County.
Women's even though she within
the kind of the entire time so
she is that level already
because of her previous
employment but they have these
two that we're talking about do
that same amount of work into
that segment assistance they
train the new of course and they
can't come on an assist with
training even if domestic courts
okay there and there and they
are cross trained to help with
administrative courts and I seen
the same answer would be for the
GS one two J. S. two and Grant
County it's the same idea same
idea we we for some reason Grant
County has much more turnover
and are clerk's office we do we
we do have
the excellent leader in it and
this clerk has been there long
enough to have that ability to
help and that's.
Want to keep that completely
okay great the one where you're
trying to change the I. T. tech
to the I. T. specialist and you
hadn't made this statement in
your documentation that you
think that if you increase it
that you have a better chance of
filling it so I just want to
know what you've done in terms
of trying to sell the I. T. tech
position like how many times
have you recruited for it on the
applicants have you had.
All of those things I was a
happily we do have one that
started Monday okay we
the recruitment opened in June
of twenty twenty two we had for
applicants none of those were
qualified we tendered zero
offers I guess three the
applicant's did actually
withdrawn that's why return as
our offers we reopened after
that
we had six applicants over the
course of the planet time is
October twenty twenty two lives
open until filled and we have
six applicants over that period
of time we offered to they did
not accept one actually accepted
and one one accepted and
withdrew almost immediately
before they ever started one
person we started calling
references and their old
employer gave them more money
and the fact.
The one that you've hired now
you're trying to change that to
an I. T. tech to ninety specials
is that my Senator at we did and
that's that's merely for
retention we have we did over
the I don't know how many years
ago we finally got approved for
nineteen position at all we have
been operating only which is
support and it took awhile to
get the first one and that that
individual was incredibly
qualified we're never going to
keep that individual and they
ultimately went to Los Alamos
and we we did everything we
could as far as flexibility in
getting the individual more
money but it was I'm and we just
want to be able to retain
perfect.
Gonna ask about each one of them
but I assume that the answers
are the same but I do have a
question about you have this one
entry or asking for twenty at
twenty eight other employees and
increasing them by sixty cents
an hour I mean but there's no
break down of that in terms of
how you come up with your number
what we can check your math
those kinds of things do you
have that documentation.
Mr chair and judge it's so
similar to shift differential
pay was sixty cents per hour and
we multiply that by twenty
eighty hours
and for twenty eight staff.
It is on page seven of that
justification.
The bottom yes the sex yes no I
I saw that it just it doesn't
matter I think you've answered
my question thank.
The talk to me if you would
please about your change you
want to increase the
confirmation for the H. R.
general purse employee.
So with the new eight percent
raise you'll be paying you are
paying them at one OO one
hundred one point eight percent
coppery show but you're trying
to get them down to a hundred
and eight.
Cooperation right correct care
and yes and as for the same
reasons what you told me before
for the other positions he.
Mr chair and and judge cheese in
addition to our HR duties she's
assumed to additional rules as
the ADA coordinator in the loss
prevention and control
coordinator.
And then on your request to have
I need is to take the L. A. S.
course you already have that
employee ready to go and they
want to do that or is this
something you just want the
ability to do if you if you can
in the future if you get
somebody wants to take the LHS
course our intent to that
employee actually recently
transferred to the District
Court so now we're gonna have to
go back at that magistrate court
and confer with the court
manager to see if there's
another individual who would
like to take advantage of that
so we made the request you had
somebody but yeah you're going
to go find somebody yes okay
currently there's not a L. E. S.
at the Silver City magistrate
court all right and then with
these increases I I didn't I
think I add them all up and
comes out to about ninety eight
thousand five hundred hopefully
my math is right in fiscal year.
Twenty one or twenty two you
move from two hundred to three
hundred about ninety three
thousand right.
Here.
And then twenty twenty two there
was a two and three hundred the
move shifted for under Senate
really about what that was in
two hundred but the total amount
was one hundred forty seven
thousand it mainly to get to my
question why not use those that
money to do these things that
you're wanting to do here to
give them pay raises the largest
part of that is has been our
difficulty in.
Recruiting law clerks and we
actively actively recruiting
architects and we it.
The two hundred get high because
we cannot hire the law clerks
and part I see that it's hard to
make a firm commitment away and
then with the one more quick we
did have we act actually
depleted some of the pay for the
other law clerk position in
order to entice at Walker dot
com.
And so it's it's hard to
continue to do that active
recruitment if we committed that
money elsewhere.
Let's go to the two hundred
personal category where you're
doing the expansion requests
regarding the
The officer Luna County you want
to change that from our per term
part time Perm to full time
Perm.
And
Can't talk to me about that why
you needed to be changed from
part time to full time.
Essentially that individual is
full time they were hired as
part time workers time and we
just we need to and from the
expansion okay and then going to
the J. S. one and at their
magistrate.
Again you want to change them
from part time permanent full
time term.
Same question sentence the more
essentially working full time
just need fifty expansion.
And then I'm going to year six
request where you're wanting the
GS one again and Grant County
the magistrate court and there
your this is a renewed request
so.
And I make in my correct that
what you're wanting to do is
get.
One and a half you want the
money for one and a half J. just
once in their.
That right the funding yes that
chair and judge yes the funding
plus the FTE okay and.
So all I have is the study from
twenty nineteen and so going to
bear those looking at what they
said is you will need like point
two three Sir staff people and
what has happened since then is
are super city magistrate court
where the.
Overwhelmed anytime anybody has
a discussion of maybe let's
close down the minutes of court
and place please talk to us
because of what has happened is
the municipal court filings are
filed one hundred percent of the
magistrate court for various
longstanding political reasons
to the point where the city pays
partial money to for a staff
member to DA and prosecutor to
help just deal with that case
load and was following one
hundred percent on the
Silvercity magistrate judge and
her staff and it got
overwhelming so now thirty
percent of that case load is
transferred to the Baird
magistrate judge so that twenty
nineteen study does not take
that into account if they have a
significantly higher caseloads.
So going to the perilous I was
trying to follow the breadcrumbs
on this so you all asked for for
last year budget committee
approved to and then the
legislature didn't find any of
them right correct all right
since I wasn't here last year
can you talk about why you need
for paralegals what they'll do
where they'll they will be they
are if we magically were able to
return to our clerks and the
committed to stay
we would not be making this
request this is in lieu of that
the amount of work that a
paralegal we're tying it to the
for District Court judges the
amount of work that they could
do to assist the District Court
judges our our staff really
That that we do have is really
so busy it's hard for them to do
a lot of the forms of in the
orders and in all the new stuff
pre trial detention all the
stuff of domestic violence all
of those things including maybe
transitioning over the extension
as process to the paralegals my
vision initially is for them to
really assist each one of the
four judges primarily and then
float to assist both the
District Court magistrate court
clerk's office with with
projects but that's that's the
that's the idea it's we we have
staff that I think would be able
to do it internally and we could
recruit a new click positions or
or we maybe could recruit
externally but since we could
not recruit attorneys we were
trying with paralegals.
So you kind of answered my
question before when I was at I
was gonna ask you about your DM
hearing officer so there are
hearing officers and in twenty
sixteen but they decided they
wanted you instead and so now
you have no hearing officers
right and they were all they're
always contractual we always had
contractual initially started
out with their so part time have
private practices and then a it
got to be a full time enough job
and we have multiple we didn't
have what we're proposing now as
a single hearing officer travel
to cover all three counties what
are they got to be so full time
that they were they weren't
doing private case load any
longer but they
You know we're still contracts
they were employees and so when
a budget crunch it that was a
thing that was able to become.
And do you can you direct me to
where I look at to see what your
numbers are from year to year to
just see how it was to see if it
is I just put I just pulled up
from what I think report from
the sheet here yes and it's just
the I think it's probably part
of what it is says it came from
currents rates but it doesn't
have any clear to rates on it on
the case number I guess yes I'll
take a look at that thank you.
And it also has the judges on it
that I just pulled it I can't
even get in my car you know I I
know if wanted thank you I
appreciate that approach I
highlighted something.
Thank you I will take a look at
it.
And that is a position I think
that would incredibly be
incredibly helpful to the judges
just because of the amount of
hearings that this this
individual could do
what what is not discussed when
there's a self represented
litigant case the case itself
may be a little more challenging
management we don't have
attorney help the judges back in
the office drafting all the
orders some of those reforms but
parenting plans things like that
take a lot of time
we we have
And we have.
All of the access to justice and
all of the additional access to
a courthouse for for suburbs and
litigants in a court like mine
the the workload falls on the
judge in the judge's office
because we don't have I have
clinics will have
you know anybody to help out on
the front end of the coming of
the courtroom many often have to
have two hearings is coming
director traffic to say this is
what will continue to come back
with and then when they come
back they don't have any way he
still going to work out some way
to make a decision and then we
don't like I said we don't have
a lot click health to help draft
our orders we where in our
offices you know probably then
it for an hour for our that the
the amount of time you're in a
hearing for some Representative
litigant you're spending that
much time in your office
drafting paperwork for the case.
We just feel like to be easier
to recruit a hearing officer Dan
has been to recruit law clerks
interesting.
So I and maybe and and I
apologize talking about the W.
C. E. O. to that you're asking
for what the way I understood
the request twenty two questions
is that.
The person who has that job
I guess who's the CEO now is
going to retire four and a half
years right and then you all
want to hire somebody to get
that person ready to take that
job over.
One of the reasons yes but what
I heard today is actually it's
because there's an increase in
work there's a lot of work that
this person doesn't you
mentioned that this person had
done a document you know show
over time did you do that is
here I didn't share it but I
have it here
You have to look for it now but
I I know that's something that
like to see and so they have an
idea because it because the
requests at this point is based
on writing is because you wanted
to train somebody is a retired
four half years not necessarily
compelling but if there's work
that needs to be done that they
need to do then that's more
compelling we can share that and
what was that with you.
Mr chair and judge and twenty
twenty one when I started in may
of twenty twenty one through
December of twenty twenty one I
had accrued extra hours of a
hundred and seventy nine hours
but I was unable to use our flex
and then in fiscal year on
calendar year twenty twenty two
from January to December of
twenty twenty two I accrued two
hundred and fifty seven point
seventy five hours and unable to
use our flex in twenty twenty
two and then when you add those
two I think it was about fifty
five.
Days and that's not a lot but
that's fifty five B. cation
days.
But I could potentially user I
mean just time.
But I do have that if you.
I can just.
It just matters that care and
get on your provide equitable
hold up on this committee.
So I'm this is more of just so I
understand it the juvenile
justice continuance continuum
services and you.
You explain it to me and then it
are you guys pay the county for
this that's what I it seems like
maybe you're paying the county
or and I'm totally
misunderstanding with this is.
Mr Chairman said I had to go
back and ask Melissa Mike how
did we we receive this JJ CBS
funding and she said it wasn't
supposed to go through our
budget but the legislature put
it in our budget so we have M.
O. use in place with the council
city when accounting and he's
also County and then they run
their program the Economic
justice continuum Services
program with that program
coordinator so there's one
program coordinator that
services Luna County and he doll
County and then there's a
program coordinator for Grant
County.
and I asked Melissa and it was
just appropriated the general
fund.
and I just assumed.
The money since it was juvenile
justice but it should have gone
to the juvenile probation office
that it somehow just came to us
years ago.
So this is yeah I have to go
back and ask Melissa more about
this so I can hear you asking
what the program is well it was
but she's gone on something else
have a question about so let's
for so.
Your what your understanding is
you are already getting
recurring funds correct to run
this program yes.
And so your your ID from what
you're asking for more money for
recurring funds but why because
one of the Luna County
approached judge Delaney at the
time and may when she was still
the chief judge they wanted to
increase
the hourly rate for the program
coordinator so judge to Laney
and formed Luna County the
coordinator that you should have
asked us you know more in
advance so we could have worked
it into our budget so that's
what we're asking for is like an
additional dollar for each
program.
Thank you so I I I can't speak
to every county but I know and
and and Valencia County and and
Santa I know that first hand
knowledge that those are those
are CYFD monies that go through
the county
for the for that continuum
coordinator which is certainly
unusual and I I am noted as well
my notes but yeah.
So this yeah.
See you're getting two hundred
twenty two thousand dollars of
recurring revenue every year
which is the transfer of I am
are you to the two counties in
the city because.
Somewhere back in time they
mistakenly appropriated this
money to which is of course not
a program we run the continue of
care goes through the agency so
It seems to me hi the proper
thing I mean that that
appropriate thing to do would be
to try to get the money moved
out of your budget and then to.
The other entities are blils
understanding of handoff is
risky because you can lose your
money and they could not get
their money but.
It's uncomfortable that it fits
in your budget right I mean I
understand just a number you can
transfer it out.
So I suppose that's fine
Minnesota money it's not.
Yes yes I mean we saw a lot of
times too often every session
some where we're gonna
appropriation that was intended
for the district attorney's
office or somebody else and
we'll see it will say can we fix
this and of course by that time
a legislature state owned to
late can fix it so they will do
and I'm are you to to to to do
that quarterly to get the money
to workforce but in the next
budget cycle we don't we just
you know we don't want that
funding and of course the
whoever it is does the at the
aspen ideas officer whoever it
is
so you know I would think about
that is you're you're carrying a
burning need to administering a
fairly significant amount of
funds making sure they go over
there and then you've got some
fiduciary responsibility make
sure they spend that on the
programs they are running
It's just you know specific
specifics today in your six
thousand two hundred dollars is
really on affected by that but
then I would I would suggest
that you consider to to talk to
the entities involved the two
counties in the city of services
to take the money on your budget
and put it into their.
I don't.
I'm looking I'm.
Double checking this right now
but statutorily I thought that
that money had to go to
municipality and so it I'm a
little nervous at.
You guys might not.
Be allowed to be the fiscal
agent for that we are not
programs that we are not the
fiscal agent passes.
the recruit funding is committed
to the District Court so thank
you Marcus yeah that's set to
receive the money your reserves
of its limited use a practical.
So that that makes me.
Very nervous we're here to fix
it and.
Okay now we have a lot of
support right now and now is a
good time to counties and the
city really right like the
program and that hi there they
would do something to be how
high we got this money going to
do something else so it's a it's
a.
As good a time as any to to work
on getting it corrected.
Thank you thank you good
question.
Moreover even escrow funds and
that.
Okay
So this is a quick question on
the tuition expenses have you
all received any requests yet.
We have not so that I I thought
it was interesting that what you
were asking for was for all of
your employees I mean you have a
sense that all of your employees
are in the us for this.
We have no sense we we were.
Something together we base it on
what we can base it on.
I think when the the federalist
Committee work is done on the on
how this should look going
forward we we can refine a
request okay very well and so
the last thing I want to hit on
on our vehicles.
So you've asked for I can't
remember what it was three
thousand for vehicle maintenance
cause of increased costs to do
provide me proof of that.
Mr chair and judge thank you
this fiscal year we did
Purchasing the vehicle so that
is going to increase and then we
also added the magistrate court
managers to make up for the main
yeah I just have a few minutes
we'll get the other one and then
for a while for the maintenance
well we're gonna have increased.
Travel with regard to the
maintenance because the court
managers are now driving our
state vehicles.
Four of
so that's what we're trying to
work towards as they attend more
training so if they have a a
clerk's training soon and the
other parks are going to train
and we're gonna ask them to take
the defensive driving course to
so we can have them drive the
state cars versus cement mileage
reimbursement so that's where
that.
And that maintenance increases
will go up for.
At field.
So it sounds like you at least
based on what I understood you
had met you had managers who had
DTCs and now that number is
increasing the number that you
know the issue to the at how
many have they didn't have a DTC
but we require them to get a DDC
so they could attend their
training in April okay utilize a
state vehicle versus receive for
I get a separate mileage
reimbursements that is our is
our just efforts to be more
consolidated it's a it's a
benefit to district employees
and judges to be over used to
stay here because and I have to
drop travel in their own car and
we want to just come in a part
of our court when make sure they
have the same resources
available to them and have to
travel.
And then finally the two
vehicles I was a little bit
confused by that this request so
it's for fifty five thousand.
It it sounds like you're wanting
to buy vehicles so it's two
things I mean are you buying
vehicles or is this is a lease
and then number three.
If it's if you're buying it
isn't that a special request and
not I mean you're not getting
recurring funding for vehicles
every year.
Buy new vehicles every I don't
think around
me to maybe should've been a
special but we we are just we're
obsolete in some of the older
vehicles we have we
got ten twelve fifteen year old
vehicles and by the end of their
life their use for the
surveillance team to drive
around town Regis.
Because we're having more
drivers and we were able to go
several years because of COVID
and and not really have to
invest a whole lot toward
vehicle fleet now ninety two
years okay.
I don't think anything else.
Right.
And then the judge more in just
a few.
You did a lot and.
But I still have some gaps I'm
gonna try and buy on the
something with the I. T. person
you said that you've
successfully hired someone now
did you hire them and add
attacker as a specialist.
I. T. tech.
And so by twenty twenty five
year expecting their duties to
increase to support the
specialist level classification
or you just want to retain them
things to turn out to to retain
I.
We're just a little.
Care that we're not going to
keep this individual because our
last I tier this is our only so
second I. T. and the person we
had for fourteen months.
So we want to really
Be competitive and retain the
individual not listen to
another.
The executive I. T. tech pay is
not competitive with the kind of
individuals we need.
But will their duties the are
there are they doing the duties
now of an IT specialist in
getting paid at and I. T. tech
level or are they doing IT tech
duties and you just want to pay
them out and I. T. specialist
level.
I mean the.
Okay so the started on Monday.
I mean they're just doing their
on boarding right now what we we
expect them to grow and learn
and be trained to be an IT
specialist by the time this
comes in yes.
And then in the in the Luna
County District Court and
damning where you want to change
that to
Judicial specialises in to lead
workers how many other clerks
are in that office.
We Mr chairman archer we have
that judicial specialist
supervisor the judicial
specialist senior these two J.
S. two and it's just one.
I.
With that J. S. winds that
you're wanting to reclassify
into J. S. T. use.
Are you going to keep hiring at
J. S. ones Ford is your plan to
eventually start.
Kind of your floor as a J. S.
two do you think that that's a
more appropriate place to start
people.
Chairman Audrey that's.
Something we've did for our they
can see about this oversee
District Court that we
experienced in may we opened at
as a J. S. Werner chance to it
just depending on experience we
were having some difficulty
filling positions so it just
depends on the qualifications on
what we can get.
And I think we've talked enough
about the tuition expenses I
think I understand how you came
up with those numbers but the
that's an alarming number to see
on there and and my concern is
I am very in support of of
employee growth and professional
development and it big proponent
of education it just scares me
if we.
Push everyone to go out and get
their bachelor's degrees and
then we don't have the jobs to
support them to grow into their
career so I've got some concerns
over those numbers but I think I
understand how you came up with
the numbers.
In regards to the increased
vehicle maintenance typically.
The mileage reimbursement is
more of an expense on a district
stand the cost of the
maintenance for the vehicles and
and so that's one of the
benefits of having vehicles so
do you think that you have.
The decrease in mileage
reimbursement by switching
people over to.
Using the state cars versus our
own cars shouldn't that.
Cost offset.
Should you see a decrease in and
reimbursement.
Do you think that there will
still be an increase in vehicle
maintenance Mr chair and Audrey
there probably will still be an
increase because our
surveillance officers
State travel
right now.
For recruiting for a
surveillance officer and he daga
county so.
Last fiscal year we had a
surveillance officer that travel
to Grant County in Hidalgo
county they use their vehicle
but see our employee and Luna
County Luna County is a big
county so there he does use that
vehicle a lot our program
manager for the Grant County and
he don't county adult drug court
program the court probation
officer they do travel back and
forth a lot from Silvercity to
large part to manage that
program and then they do go to
Deming two assessed the program
over there and vice versa the
program manager from
It comes up to assist the other
programs and the chief judges
have been traveling a lot
Back and forth to Albuquerque
and Santa Fe New now that the
COVID restrictions have lifted
we're probably going to be to.
More in person meetings and
traveling so.
It also just inflation for the
cost at each appointment per for
per vehicle is more expensive.
Thank you.
The department more than to
suffer that Mr spurs.
Thank you Mr chair and the judge
Frank you did a excellent job
asking questions I wouldn't even
thought of.
So good job on that I'd I have
very few questions one is you're
requesting a hundred and sixty
four thousand for judge and
staff training how did you
arrive at that number.
Thank.
Cation.
Third.
Thirteen.
Mr chair that's very.
there is an estimated in state
training
for fifty seven current FTEs I
calculated per diem in state and
also khaki plated
per diem in Santa Fe just
depending on where that may be
located and partial day per diem
and then there's also a
breakdown of out of state
national conferences for judges
and staff to attend and includes
estimated costs for registration
per diem and airfare.
Did you expect the.
To go every year.
But that many people every year
is it's good to requesting
recurring.
I believe that what we're
looking for is to a commitment
from our staff to growth and we
are wanting to support that we
we reached out as part of the
budget process to talk to them
about what they're interested in
and so yes I do I think we will
have high numbers maybe every
other year and so maybe if we if
the budget committee looked at
it that way and balance balance
it out that way because it is
expensive it is a lot higher
than I would have thought that
when we went through this
appropriation process and spoke
to our team about what their
interests are and how they can
grow and what investments they
needed from us in order to do
that this is what we came up
with.
And then my last question is on
your fund balances.
Could you give us a description
of got a number but I don't know
what they are.
Mr chair and judge five two one
zero zero is the mediation and
the ending balance that
correction to that is sixty
seven or eight six.
Because we have contract
attorneys that we contract with
to do the mediations in our
district and number six eight
three seven zero to eighty are.
And the difference between the
beginning and ending balance has
to do with the GST solvency
amount which
I know there's pending
litigation and it hasn't.
Been removed from our ADR
beginning balance on share this
the status of that but we do
have to and that.
Team three thousand nine hundred
and fifty five for the GST
solvency.
Thank you very much for your
answers and thank you very much
of the seven.
Thank you Mr chair good morning.
A couple of questions there's a
lot of talk this morning about
lack of attorney supports lack
of law clerk support in your
court can you refresh me on how
many attorneys or law clerks you
currently have on staff we have
one staff attorneys okay telling
that person with you.
One year one of okay
so you're you're not requesting
additional law clerk or attorney
support in this year's budget
justification input early in the
spot for a minute and just note
that in the last session AOC
received two million dollars for
rural law clerks so there may be
some opportunity there to match
up support going forward.
The whole point of it is yes we
are reaching out to the bar in
the in Los crucis it it right
like I said we've been
advertising and trying to hire
we've got I've traveled to
universities to recruit and we
we just are not able to hire.
But a path I offered him two
million dollars I do think that
would come.
I would consider that position.
your might have this.
but you don't currently have a
vacant position for Locklear so
what is you do you do okay would
you it Representative in your
budget initiatives that you're
planning to fulfill all of your
if you agree vacancies this year
we we we are we are planning we
are trying and we we.
Depending on this process we
think it's possible that we may
have to convert those positions
into something else okay I I had
misunderstood the the vacancy
rate so I appreciate that
clarification.
I'm gonna be vehicle that our is
here for a second how many do
you have on your fleet right now
how many cars you have.
Three and I mean
that are used by need to tow
package just doing that we have
for surveillance and then and
Grant County we have our lease
vehicle.
we have two vehicles for the
judges to use their and then we
have the surveillance vehicle.
Yes the new vehicle for the
chief judge since he's gonna be
doing the traveling I don't like
to mark said we purchased a
vehicle for me we do have
another PMR and.
Three eight eight total is my
math right I'm I'm I'm a lawyer
so it that's always sketchy I
think we also have a vehicle
dedicated to us so we have nine
okay nine total.
And that the hope for that has
at chief judge hope back its
vision Mr chair and judge is to
eventually house this call at
our magistrate courts because
the judges do travel depending
on refusals and appointments
judge Thomas and large bird may
have to travel to Deming or may
have to travel to Silver City
and or to their so we're just
trying to offset
Decrease the mileage
reimbursements.
Remind me how many facilities
are in your district district
courts and magistrate physical
locations do you have
courthouses we have three
district courts and for
magistrates courts okay.
An approximate distance between
two to sixty miles an hour the
county seats it's unfortunate
Senate triangle is not an online
so you can get to any one of
them and in our can you please
share the
last question is on the.
The training
We've made a similar request my
court have made similar requests
for that out of state portion of
the travel and we received a
question yesterday that I'm
gonna then ask you is any
portion of that going to be paid
by
judicial education at its in
house it AOC.
I I hope I hope so.
I know that we've got a lot of
AOC support going to that pre
trial conferences I I don't know
that we can always count on that
but they have been very
supportive and sending as many
people that wanted to go and so
I would hope that would continue
but.
I don't know okay if you may
request a C. in the recent past
for this sort of reimbursement
and have you received any for
the pre trial conference yes
okay thank you and a rough
amount on that if you have an
idea I think that they don't pay
they did not pay for airfare but
they pay for conference
registration that they pay taxes
yeah they pay for airfare and
then we submitted the
reimbursement for our hotel and
meals.
Thank you.
No that's good to know I mean
that it one of the priorities
the serious training and so it's
it's kind of an unknown for me
at this point how much of that
burden is going to fall on the
individual courts and how much
of it we can expects to have AOC
cover for us
in this is that I think it's a
question it just keeps coming up
and and number of the entities
requested I so appreciate the
clarification yeah and I think
it's it's all a little no but
there's that anybody that's gone
to these conferences it in house
training online training and
it's just hard to replace that
what you get out of the national
training for some of these areas
appreciate the.
This my questions thank you very
much.
Mr speaker I question dividends
Mr.
No questions to see if any other
questions.
Of course you have a most of
them have been answered good
morning just a few
so fund balance to set the
seventy six from the mediation
you have contract attorneys.
Right and then
The arbitration fund balance the
only the use of it was for the
GST solvency our there's no
other expense that comes out of
that.
That is correct we we have
attempted.
I say we prior to my time I have
attempted to create a program
and we have sent you Center law
clerks.
previous staff attorneys to
training and then by the time
they're trying to update have
left we've not been able to
launch the program.
I.
Sen.
And then I had a question on the
computer refresh should that be
This special request as well
along with the vehicles.
Since I assume if you're asking
the question that you are
correct.
No.
So on the training I know you
said you had mentioned that you
had received assistance from J.
E. C. N. N. as in the past for
for some of the expenses for the
pre trial but anything C. P. all
of that were your words there
are no travel for these
conferences prior to.
Prior to this request the last
time Mr chair and a temple the
last one that Melissa and chief
judge to leaning attended was
and twenty nineteen I think when
they went to Saint Louis and.
but we are program managers have
gone in the last three years to
the entity C. P. which I think
is been rebranded Justice past
conference to all rise and they
the.
They've they went down I don't
think a judge was able to go
this time but the previous year
to judges when.
Okay so this will a ninety eight
thousand point nine that.
Is requesting so it includes a
program managers and
Correct sentencing.
And it's yes and then everything
else was already asked someone
thank you.
To be clear about the vehicle
requests the priority eight
hundred four hundred category is
a fifty five thousand purchased
two vehicles yes okay so you can
have a recurring because you're
gonna buy two vehicles every
year forever.
So that's going to be a special
so.
I thought that was done.
Nice to transfer ninety three
thousand from the two hundred
for a lot of different things.
That that looks and I didn't
hear about extraordinary reasons
why have that capacity in the
two hundred categories from why
you can't a lot of these
relatively small amounts and
To be interesting if we have if
the budget committee are present
and you go to the the you know
HFC and you're talking about you
know two thousand seven hundred
for this and whatever.
Is it not possible within your
budget to.
To to do these they have a
certified you can do a current
funds but if you got ninety
three thousand dollar capacity
you probably can handle.
I don't know twenty thousand
dollars worth of.
Movement to address the salary
issues that you think are
challenging your retention I
think if our plan was to
continue to
Needed at our on our law clerk
recruitment I think we would
have that capacity going forward
but I just don't.
I'm discouraged on that and our
ability to recruit clerks and so
we we depending on this process
someone comes out of it we're
going to have to transfer those
positions to something else and
so then our vacancy I do we will
be able to so that we we need
help and that's what we're
asking for the paralegals just
we're asking for the hearing
officer that's what we've been
asking for law clerks and
there's no census committee and
the Supreme Court the
legislature they've graciously
approved us to hire two blocks
we just can't so I have sort of
because maybe Mr Chairman RT a
lot of the vacancy savings that
we saw this past fiscal year was
because we didn't have an I. T.
person on staff here and also
the previous CFO had stepped out
for a couple of months and then
I got hired at a lower rate so
there was a can see saving Sarah
that we kind of had is a one
time because now I'm on board
and additionally we just hired
are I. T. person so we're not
anticipating having in fact.
And we're anticipating covering
that seven thousand dollars that
we didn't receive for general
fund an insurance increases.
With regard to the locker
challenge
I was either differently
qualified and all that but there
is it seems to me some overlap
between the request for
paralegals a request for hearing
officer in terms of relieving
some of the burden on for
assisting the District Court
judges with accomplishing your
your work
is is either one of those a
higher priority than the other
because
It does seem to me like yes the
judges need the assistance but.
That's an awful lot of
assistance to add you know with
one of the other be more helpful
I agree I think I hearing
officer would be a higher
priority it seems to me to but
I.
Yeah actually amended.
It's a challenging process that
I'm I'm learning that everybody
else already knows.
you know we ask for those for
fairly because last year and
we're here a year later with no
help and it it it's almost and
in the alternative kind of
request I do think it would be
overkill to allow us to hire for
paralegals and a hearing officer
that's that's multiple year
growth not at let's just hit all
I would rather see what how much
help it is a main may not need
it but it that's that's exactly
what that is the.
The living over here can help
with my fuzzy memory I remember
the way I remember it the judge
position was approved for
request and then ultimately
obviously got approved because
you're here
Part of the argument was that
they'll take over the case with
spearheaded by the hearing
officer plus the gap we have
between our other judge needs
but that was awhile back and I
think that you're.
You need for some sort of
assistance this is clear and it
seems to me like the hearing
officer would be more helpful to
getting the district judges the
help they need not that you
can't use the paralegals but
maybe your law clerks maybe.
Bill would do something special
with the real justice initiative
so.
They were I will probably
encourage the committee to give
that request serious
consideration in the paralegals
it's hard for me to see the
justification if we get a
hearing officer in the six.
So some of the questions to see
if you wanted to respond to that
because they will be delivered
tomorrow and sometimes are
listen to be off and they're
just like yeah whatever I agree
yes if I was invited to the
deliberations I would say
something very similar to that
okay.
That wasn't a shot I was just
saying you.
Sounds like when I would say
thank you.
The job.
the part I'm not listening to me
maybe that's what we would say.
So containment with if this
establish the issue with the
cars but it contained in the
request was here now needing
magistrates magistrates for them
to drive the vehicles they have
to go to the defensive driving
get that certification and so
was that it sounded like that
was maybe built into the cost so
maybe you do need some funds.
To get the full staff certified
and and defensive driving the
needs to utilize these vehicles.
I think it's not that high per I
think it's something we can
absorb yes there's a cost hi.
Mr my correct if it's been a
long time since I went through
the initial certification I just
have my renewal which do online
but maybe they require you to go
in person to the initial I don't
remember.
What the excess of the do it
online I think it's longer.
I think I still have it online
okay.
Question is yes the kids had
nothing to trump.
questions so I have I just need
approach on some of these
history class one of somebody's
asked for funding for for for
higher conferees.
One of just one approach we
classes to make more sense terms
of long term of funding.
The.
Right.
Specifically it's for the H. R.
Charles drug or something level
one.
Federal court I think it's just
to get to the full time.
There are there part time right
now I'm just going to full time
FTE a request for the
surveillance officer yes.
And up do you can speak probably
more to the H. R. generalist
rather than changing to hire yes
my Mr chair I did want to re
classify her and then went
Chief judge Delaney at the time
she.
Didn't possibly agree because HR
generalist has been in the role
at two years and then re
classifying her.
I can't remember how many years
of experience she would need to
be reclassify ten administrator
or something so that's why we.
Did it this way asking for
funding.
Until she can get that years
under her about them later on
than we can probably reclassify
her to the next.
Level for the HR and can and
just a couple of things with
regard to the junior pro funding
spreadsheet the seventy five
thousand allotment to the six
that was an error it should have
gone to the district attorney's
office so we did prepare an MO
you to make sure that money gets
to the appropriate individual
and then also just to the two
hundred person category
expansion request
priority one is withdrawn I have
been working with one that Mr
Papp and temple and we just
received an email from land
that.
With regard to this position and
we can withdraw that request
just etcetera any missing then
we approve this I get an answer.
it's a PTO so one on the control
services officer one priority
one on our expansion read you
notice we're not even asking for
money we're just asking for the
we act on this last year.
Quick I just wanted to take a
brief opportunity to recognize
those CFO's and other judicial
district house Lansing.
The CFO's from the north the
twelve the third and the second
to retired CFO's far of French
and Alyssa frost so they've been
of great help is and as well as
Mario he's very very helpful so
thank you.
Yes I would also like to thank
the judge doing her fingers are
on this budget I was still
trying to figure out lots of the
job at all and to she really
helped even after she was no
longer chief and helping us go
through this process because
we're actually concerned that
this is the second time third
third time so we're all wrong
that's the experience we have
one percent of Senate three
