Is that too much awaited to.
The judge thank you good
afternoon Florida I guess I'm
the chief judge of the fourth
with me as we doll Martinez he's
our new CEO price only been on
for a few weeks also with us is
Jeff Romero here's our CFA.
this year we're asking for you
all to consider of our request
Basing crease of two ninety six
point three
for us for funds mainly for
contractual services on members
are that's our biggest ask our
second biggest ask is for
personal we are asking for two
security officers for moral and
Cemil magistrate courts we're
also asking for a
one FTE for deputy CEO
of our CEO positions become
busier and busier at our core
Especially since COVID I think
we become much much of this year
in terms of trying to find
especially self represented
litigants with services
the war numbers did go down
during the COVID they're
starting to go up again.
In the the job of a CEO has
become busier specially with
consolidation there's a whole
lot more that's required before
Robert was still in buy it from
us by AOC
I will tell you that he was in.
He was in the early usually
before me and was leaving it
late much later in the day when
our when he left we we had our
attorney position person become
our CEO and pretty much
continued with that same
Sort of work ethic so when
people are getting their at six
thirty or seven when I am and
not leaving till after I there's
keeping busy they're they're
doing a lot so we really do
believe that at this point it's
it's it's in the subsidy all
rather than just want
And at least in regards to our
security officers for magistrate
courts
I think we're seeing that our
magistrate courts are seeing the
same people were seen in
district courts and they're
coming in upset and they're
angrier and I think we have a
lot of concerns that there is
just no one there
to provide them with the with
security when they need it are
magistrates court tomorrow is
about thirty minutes away from
us our Santa Rosa court is about
an hour away from us
The sheriff's office in
Guadalupe County is so does not
have the person that they need
for there to fully fund to fully
staffed there sheriff's office
on so even though we've
discussed with them the
possibility of contract we
contracting with them they just
aren't able to do it
so we really do believe that
court security is very important
for all of our courts but
especially magistrate courts
they see a lot of a lot of
folks.
but with that I will stand for
questions.
And efficiency fiscal.
Good afternoon
The first question I have is
the.
So was it the prior CEO The
prepared this Madam since your
surgery I'm sorry what was your
name slide down Martinez welcome
aboard I hope you enjoy your
your job is just again this is
very nice to work for.
so I want to ask some questions
about I'm just trying to
understand a few things on on
the initiatives and probably not
fair so to prepare it but.
So the one in the vacancy rate
part it talks about there's
forty one point five permanent
employees excluding judges.
And then under positions.
the Perm positions or fifty two
point five.
So that's that's eleven
positions different other eleven
judges.
We have three District Court
judges and I magistrates okay
the do you know where those
differences came up but.
Reason I'm asking is because I
wanna make sure we're giving you
the right consideration for what
you want
I'll just talk through some of
this with you just to so you
know the at least the the
problems I'm having
understanding it it says that
the permanent
vacancy I'm sorry vacancy rate a
permanent Polis thirteen point
six which does match the.
The information we have from the
AOC.
that says is eighteen point
seven five percent on the terms
leaving out an authorized term
positions I don't what's an
unauthorized term position.
Chair Mister Martinez or restore
that okay because the issue list
for term positions.
So I don't I don't know what it
unauthorised as we head to head
discussion last year on on an
authorized.
There I think there were for
last year's I recall a few back
getting ready but.
I would just ask you to to clean
all that up for next year really
get a good handle on it.
Mr chair and judge what does a
hundred rice producers are owned
as we have a two of pre trial a
program.
Which of those those
Positions were now taken on by
us but previously they were from
the child support program that
was funded from them then we
would get reimbursed for those
so those at that point that
that's and we have a H. as the
and I'm and I think this
confused the pre trial program
and then a child support program
so the HSD program is the pre
trial program it just if the
truck yeah there I get those
concerns so that one is what the
on on authorized positions are
there the vacant.
They're not our food Perm
positions but they're term
compositions that that are are
under us
okay so I may be able to clarify
that a bit more sure when we
started our pre trial services
program that was initially
funded by AOC for us so they're
they're vacant now we have
filled.
Two of those positions we have
to positions to fill.
So I would think that would make
your vacancy rate.
Thank I'm not sure if.
Yes did you if you don't let me
jump in here is really quick
I hope you don't mind in the
fourth easily confuse.
I believe that probably your
term positions are the hearing
officer child support hearing
officer in the three clerks to
that I work in the fourth and
one that works in the eighth I
think it's I listed on your
still the same as it was I was
familiar with that child support
contracts of those are for
authorized positions perhaps
your pre trial would be here on
authorized terrorists okay okay.
Thank you but it's just what
what you're putting in here what
your prior CEO did that because
it doesn't match with what we
have and I know there's quibbles
about what we have.
At times but you just you wanna
try to reconcile those I think
when you submit next year
because the final thing says its
overall twelve point two seven
percent when the AOC show
seventeen Mr those are pretty
sick you know it's not rounding
errors
I want to talk with you about
the transfers out two hundred
category and maybe be and fares
still
so the way the narrative reads a
scissors eighty one thousand
dollars.
And then it goes through
different things with dollar
amounts laid out and I can't
make the math work if if I look
at if I take out the one
thousand and I add up expenses
for travel postage fuel the new
vehicles forty three to thirty
radio third unit thirteen six
and a computer for twenty eight
seven those at up to eighty five
five fifty nine eighty one so
then I put the weight Rita don't
think the ones part of that so
how much should you revert out
of that are moving out of
category two because I get a
hundred sixty six five forty
four eighty four five forty.
The does that make any sense my
question it make any sense
Mr chair judge I don't see any
tax I'm so bad with names but
this curly okay so.
It's it's it's kind of
complicated but so in FY twenty
three with the.
With the total of twelve BRF's
bar adjust but but but out of
those twelve to see three when
we're out of our general fund
that affected the general fund.
So the eighty one thousand that
you're you're noting there was
meeting in April twenty
User submitted right around
April twenty after the bomb were
torn was lifted.
But before that we did another
B. R. just in in December
December six we moved fourteen
thousand nine hundred from our
contractual category in two.
The person can go two hundred
and at that point we had
anticipated in December that
we're gonna fill some vacant
positions and we had planned on
it we really have the faith that
we're going to be able to do it.
but it did not to realize.
But I do that time the.
That point is when the are more
trained is a in in place we are
constructs to make any other
purchases so we have to live
with what we had and then April
comes around that's when we have
some extra money because there
was additional the vacancy
Justin materialize right to get
filled so we were anticipating
under projections that point
that we had eighty one thousand
dollars to move from category
two hundred into our supplies
category our supplies category
was suffering during the year
because.
In September.
Twenty twenty two we had the.
The other rule the other fifty
percent rule.
Who can't spend within fifty
percent over budget but is
September we had a big week for
the the expense to
among other things we had about
twenty three thousand dollar
expense to address some issues
in the court room some I. T.
issues in the court room so that
what to order convention.
But we have to still maintain
between within the fifty percent
rule all the way through
December so we come held on held
on.
And by the time we could address
what we're behind on.
Is when we said we we got
address some issues that we
haven't been able to purchase do
that and that kind of that time
Senator twenty eighth is when we
submitted the eighty one
thousand on moving out.
From the category two hundred
into our supplies and that was
in April at that point has
projections of things that we
need to to purchase
so we ended up purchasing the
vehicle for forty three thousand
dollars.
Those those are the big ticket
items that we purchased that we
purchased so some Bailey of
radio units the ability of the
radios that are built have had
been using is not system so they
were not very reliable.
They would cut off signals
folder trying to communicate and
within our building it's a brick
building so what certain areas
of the building the can I get a
second.
So that we address the and that
of the forty thousand dollar
Expense but all this happened in
may when we could finally
because it took time to get the
the BRF approved sure says it
sounds like I mean to cut you
off it sounds like what you're
saying is that you spent.
What's listed it is the eighty
five thousand five hundred forty
dollars but the more that you
did was only eighty one thousand
yes what it sounds like yeah
since we have that's why doesn't
equal out that that's all just
trying to get I could not make
the math work so so yeah because
some I mean eighty one thousand
we want like flat broke at that
point but we have some
additional very limited amount.
So eighty one thousand one
because only part of it but we
realize that those purchases of
the.
If I can just get to this one
sure which which these yes.
Thank you to okay yeah I I I get
it now I just
the again the the clear it is
for us the the better for you.
because there's another
difference I wanted to ask you
about so what's in your
submission internet under
paragraph eight it talks about
fiscal year twenty four general
fund appropriation and it says
five thousand seventy one point
three.
What's AOC shows and what I
think you're actually
appropriated was five thousand
two hundred ninety one point
three.
When you go to fiscal year
twenty five on your request the
five thousand eight hundred and
thirteen point eight is the
correct amount which but to get
that you have to get your five
hundred twenty two point five
you're asking for for fiscal
year twenty four five today you
add that not to your five
thousand seventy one but to the
to what I think was actual five
thousand to ninety one point
three then you do get five
thousand eight hundred thirteen
point eight do you know where
the five thousand seventy one
point three came from that's
different.
The what was actually a sees
numbers of what was
appropriated.
Two that the numbers are just so
different order like a typo I
don't think conditions not sure
what that is okay for you that's
okay I do
Know that I really but five
million two hundred ninety one
thousand thirty that's our
general fund.
Public for FY twenty four.
The chamber which one is again
say it again five million two
hundred ninety one thousand and
thirty yeah that's that's that
that's the correct number I
think that might have been
something that our previous
you'll put together and I'm not
sure okay I kind of have my
hands on that.
Okay yes you're correct.
Again I just I'm just trying to
understand so I but I support I
think the committee report what
you're looking for the the
Is there anything else you wanna
tell us about the deputy CEO or
the two bailiffs secured secured
security bailiff positions and
that's one of the what what
things that ask you to consider
in the future because this is my
second year doing being
responsible for your district
it's my fourth hearing I think
on budget it seems like like
your district always has supply
issues and you know if we need
to put in more money towards end
of the year.
I think that's just a budgeting
issue for your financial staff
at the it's can predict not the
numbers are consistent but the
categories are consistency.
and I also would ask you to
think about if you look at your
four hundred other category on
your request you got
and I just use the short answer
the four point three for to lead
me and the twelve point seven
for the increase in fuel and
maintenance I think you could.
Use the reversion money you've
got the fourteen thousand
whatever I think that could be
used for that list I'm just
wrong if somebody can correct me
if that's not possible but you
wouldn't have to revert the
money you've got it you could
done those two things in fiscal
year twenty three without a
reversion and we do need to work
on on a reverse reversion right.
Yes this is just finding a place
to do it before the end so
anyway I appreciate your
submission your time and
hopefully everybody gets up to
speed be a news not that much
fun.
That's all the questions I have.
Any questions from.
Mr Carter.
Can you describe your
administrative office a little
bit of I'm trying to understand
where the deputy CEO will fit
and what responsibilities will
they have.
Right now our CEO
Oversees just about everything
Jeff is our CFA but not on but
R. C. O. is also our CFO.
we do have someone who handles
our HR issues in conjunction
with our CEO and we and Justin
is a finance specialist correct
And so SCO he to supervise the
other managers which includes I.
T. and includes the court chair
but it also includes a manager's
for the magistrate courts
I'm not sure if that explains
it.
So this and I guess by
definition I'm and I apologize
to finish answering your
question the seat this the
deputy CEO would just assist in
those duties
because that they've just become
I think a little bit more than
what we're expecting when
consolidation.
The anticipate this position
being.
Directly supervising money your
clerk's office Sir your
specialty courts are.
Will they have direct
supervision over certain parts
of the court order they just
going to be.
And just that second to the CEO
I'm I'm I'm not sure how Mr
Martinez is envision it I am
envision it is something the
second to the CEO and as crosses
me sounds if Mr Martinez gets
hit by a bus I'd like somebody
else to be able to step into
issues and and get done what
needs to be done issues that got
hit by the bus.
Not the not the same shoes we
don't know what size will be
but.
He looks.
One of my doctor.
I guess the reason I'm asking is
because.
This is a large requests
and.
There have been other districts
that have.
Pursued other options it.
The higher administrative
assistant type position that
really serves as.
As the right hand for the CEO
without maybe necessarily having
direct supervision over
different programs and so I'm
just trying to.
Picture how you how you are
going to use this position and
then my other question is in
here your four hundred category
you have forty eight point
three.
Four
some some for that thirty eight
point seven for the dell PC your
refresh
is this says.
An expense that you anticipate
having every year or is that
something that would be better
served in a special.
I don't anticipate that it'll be
every year those are with those
would be the the I think some
new computers to replace just
older computers that we have.
So it it very well may be best
and special okay thank you.
thank you Mr chair
and then I would go to the next
item the under four hundred
category which is your bailiff
uniforms and portable radios I
guess the same questions is that
really a recurring need special.
I don't know enough about how
often they get perch so I'm
guessing the radios only when
necessary but I I don't know
about the uniforms.
Mr chairman judge I can find
some some of.
Some background on that
Even if we don't get well that's
not even look at that if we
would get the bailiff positions
approved.
A bit of a uniform cost about
three hundred dollars to to
provide.
A little bit to the and then I
was I I apologize for the
interruption I try to be clear
my question is this a one time
need or a recurring need it
would become a recurring need it
would become one because we
would have to be order bailiff
uniforms as the USM
other things happen of to play
the vacancies at some point
where we have to re hire me to
lose a bailiff
and then that we have to hire a
new bailiff that happened to us
just now in the spring that we
had to be the the transfer to a
pretrial services program for
that order of uniformed friend
boots though the whole thing.
And then he was only utilize
that for maybe a month and then
he transferred to the new
position so then within that
time you ordered the we hired a
new the live and we have to
reorder up only be looking for.
So initially I think so I think
it hands in its initial it is a
one time but it comes recurring
once you have that okay it'll
just be revolving situation okay
for the sheriff's.
All right thank you thank you
thank you for that clarification
and thank you Mr.
Senator.
Just just on the on the Baylor
state as I recall on the fourth
you guys to have like still the
law enforcement uniforms are not
having him come in a shirt and
tie correct otherwise and so
they probably need more than one
uniformed piece correct and so
having that rotation they become
more amount so it's conceivable
but it's likely probably a
special.
Other questions.
Stability of course for.
Representative.
We we go to you and then you ask
the question that.
Hello so in twenty for you you
can your agency received a
bailiff security position as
well so what's that in that a
different area of than the ones
you requesting believe that one
was for Santa Rosa Santa Rosa
okay
And then you mentioned the in
the three hundred category for
the hundred twenty thousand and
forty five thousand for that
were funded through grants is
the grant ending in twenty five
we received we received a grant
for our behavioral health court
that was from the New Mexico
syncing Commission also that's
going to allow us to start our
behavioural health court this
year but it is only for one year
twenty okay.
That's all I have thank you for
your work.
Have a question about.
You have professors all now
finally went live in June yes.
And
I wasn't sure that Kelly had
gotten underway so that's with
the pair State right so the
contract is for the monitoring
very from a I think this.
What is it so went to the river
monitor the GPS.
I believe our we have we have
GPS units that we've purchased
with the set up with us and see
commission grant
and those are those are being
monitored I believe it's twenty
eight twenty four hours I
believe it's being done through
Albuquerque.
Right so well.
That EMS unit in Albuquerque
monitors all of the EMS units
that are in place and all the
counties where we've implemented
pre trial from five PM to eight
in the.
Alert should be going to your
pre trial service officers
during the daytime.
but I'm trying to figure out why
you'll need a contract to do
that in fiscal year twenty five
I believe the contract is not
for the monitoring but for the
units themselves.
Sir Senator.
It's.
Because we've we've we've for
those units are so.
Release them I have some
assistance may come.
What happens with that cost
category is of the GPS unit
monitoring services.
Even though we're not monitoring
like physically but the cost is
a allocated for rate through the
contractual category.
The faster for the monitoring
services so so when we get
invoiced for the GPS when the
when the company sends the
invoice for GPS monitoring.
It comes out of the contractual
it's it's a contractual service
consider contractual service so
that's what comes out of
contractual yes and I think the
question is for the units are
for the monitoring of the units
monitoring of the units okay so
why aren't your pre trial
service officers getting the
alerts from the units during the
daytime because they should be
going to the M. S. people in
Albuquerque.
All the rest of the time.
Yeah I don't know that another
operations on that side of it I
just knew how it.
How it shows up on the on my
side as to paying the bills for
that but I don't know the and
and and my understanding is that
our costs are in regards to the
units themselves not from nafi
the units themselves because
those are not provided by AOC
those purchasers sometimes are
provided by the county's
preference yeah.
But that makes sense to me but
then I think you.
By the.
How do I get a patient a sixty
thousand dollars you to read
them maybe you are that's what
I'm asking I think it's for I
think it's worth looking into
right we have a we've we've
cleaned purchasing Boeing and
those through the years the the
renting them because of of.
They get damage to get.
Well the people the like Adam on
so the heart has its build and
they don't get chart you know
very larger to water.
And so if we fail.
Really start working with us we
found that leasing was less
expensive.
Not up front necessarily but in
the long.
And that's something with your
county detention centers.
Probably can save them money at.
County detention center referred
to formula for how much it is
per day.
but I bet you can show savings
to your town manager in each
county for not being in jail and
being on.
And I think we're trying to work
through that we've not been able
to work out an agreement with
our county in regards to the
equipment
so we've been we've at least
taking on the costs of getting
having making does GPS monitors
available
So never decide Representative
professor monitoring services
and I thought.
You don't need the services but
then I think I sixty two
thousand.
I'm guessing you don't know how
many units it is it seems like a
lot for the number of units out
expect you would use and I think
it's an estimate I think we have
twenty units total.
Okay what.
Yes hi.
I I just.
It's worth it's worth by two.
Yeah if you could just send an
email or something let let us
know or let me know what you're
paying for the sixty two that
would help me we will do that
because we don't have.
Recurring costs in County well
maybe we do I don't know for the
units generally they are
provided by the detention center
because it's a lot less
expensive for us to be having
them out and monitor them in
and.
Being fat in house and online
anyway okay that was my only
question I agree the other the
the for the categories the three
in the for our specials not.
Recurring but that was already
discussed.
Other questions.
I have been read Ajit in closing
thank you.
All.
So excited to see judge.
The.
Welcome we'll be ready all right
thank you chair committee
members.
Going illustrious close to it
has a built up so many
expectations that this is to
implement it for you but we're
here we being.
The visitors are CEO and I'm
Brian each other the chief judge
of first initial district are
and with that a I think that
much of our request is hopefully
quite straightforward of.
Much of it has to do beyond the
the base budget with working
with AOC are on the
implementation of pre trial
services and
With their assistance
determining what staffing we
need to appropriately accomplish
that goal.
with that it I think of the
increased staff or for the
positions were asking for our
positions the AOC has been
providing to us are these
budgetary relief and that those
as winter set amounts need to
move into our budget to continue
providing the service so that's
where those come from they're
not ideas that we necessarily
have cooked up out of our own
imagination as much as had
outside systems with determining
what is reasonable and necessary
for us in that regard.
if you have any questions about
that at those positions I should
say our to magistrate court D.
W. I. coordinators for Santa Fe
and Rio Arriba
of four agencies will specialist
are in pretrial services lead
worker those would be at the
District Court
Providing those services
only more I guess staying on the
less imaginative end of things
we've also requested three six
thousand seven or dollars for
pre trial services electronic
monitoring equipment again
working with Kelly Bradford and
John Fisher report certainly
that's been determined what they
feel is the correct path forward
and that's what we're requesting
a Santa Fe county at this time
were set on that so we're not
here asking for the funds for
that this year though you might
see those in in coming years I'm
on the more imaginative end of
things or at least a need that
we see.
How we are asking for an
additional magistrate court
judge in Santa Fe County.
And let me just say a couple
things one
I I would be remiss of and
Senator last year the having a.
Hopefully direct exchange with
it was you just Martin I'm
asking about vacancies and what
we had in the like in district
and magistrate court and I will
let you know looking at the
numbers that you have.
I can see looking at thirteen
percent and thirty two percent
vacancy rates and thinking.
What the world is the chief
judge to but I want to let you
know that.
Over that year what those
numbers reflect that's the
average but last year when we
came before you we have a
vacancy rate or match records of
approximately fifty percent.
And through the efforts of our
staff obviously led by Mr hill
and by the way she's mustered
efforts on weekends of bad job
fairs all sorts of efforts to
get people to apply for these
positions they have reduced that
they can see rate from fifty
percent or close to it to
prostituting five percent in one
year with the magistrate courts
so I understand that the average
doesn't look shockingly
brilliant but if you look at it
from start to finish I think you
see a very different picture
that's important to be
recognized along with that are.
I look at the numbers that you
have for the magistrate court
and I I just want to make a few
observations of.
One is that I.
I I'm trying to decide I
certainly don't want to throw
anyone in my district under any
buses or criticize them anyway
but.
We have some interesting things
happening particularly in Santa
Fe County with respect to our
magistrate court and with the
you know for this is the way
cases are being brought in the
magistrate court and strategies
for dismissing a re filing and
things.
And knowing even roughly how
many cases are being dismissed
and refiled the number doesn't
jive with what one would
reasonably expected to be so I
have doubts for on that front by
the way I'm I'm not doubting
your efforts I'm just that
having some suspicions of what's
being reported to you the other
piece is going from that fifty
percent vacancy rate to twenty
five percent vacancy rate much
of which was in the Santa Fe
magistrate court.
I will say and we brought and
hopefully AOC to help us with
this at least once or twice
during this past year I worry
about the way that they are.
Edit entering data to be tracked
I was built so I I I have real
concerns about how accurate that
is and then finally
in any circumstance I would wish
on no one I've had the joy of
trying to figure out designees
to come in and fill of the job
duties of a vacant magistrate
court judge position or Santa Fe
court and not a single person
that is a system that effort has
come back to me and said one of
those judges doing is quite the
opposite they come back and say
having experienced it and we're
talking the three other judges
at that court a judge to DO
whose assistance has been
invaluable in very much
appreciate for metro court and
judge Taylor in my district in
Los Alamos billing and all of
them of commented on how
incredibly busy that court is so
I see these numbers and my
request stands in terms of
thinking that this is a valid
issue and I leave it to your
wisdom whether you decide clean
up your data and then we'll
consider it for whether you and
I hope you will consider you
know what we're going to go with
it's a need to and that is going
to help make that court run more
efficiency efficiently and get
things done that's what I'm
hoping
One the I guess I should say to
I'd be remiss if I did mention
this as well which is it they
can thanks very much to to AOC
spearheading this
the Santo where we'll have a new
building it some time in twenty
twenty five I believe I think Mr
pepper was pointing out I think
very realistically I'm not going
to say it's ready you know by
then or exactly when but what I
am saying is this which is.
That court and they've been nice
enough to share the plans that
I've looked at them is set up
for a fully functional I
chambers important symbol and so
I.
If there is any gap between the
funding of this fifth magistrate
court position and the
The I guess completion of that
quarterly we'll figure out a way
to make that work in the short
term but I think it's vastly
better to have the full staffing
capacity that building up and
running versus again waiting and
now we're we talking twenty
seven perhaps by the end if I
don't start asking for it wait
until that so I do think that
that's the smarter way to go
one other piece because I do as
you might imagine this year we
have been quite a bit about
vacancy vacancy vacancy getting
people the higher and that is I
want to go back to a point that
I'm Mr pap in a district.
Does resent of fate is really
the key I think to us getting
our numbers down substantially
further and that is the nine
point two percent targeted
raise for judicial police I mean
it in this town where our
employees can walk across the
street and work for another
branch this is a hypothetical
concern many do that you know or
they just take a job briefly
similar and get the nine point
two percent now so I I really
just a pep talk I guess maybe
for those of you are going the
legislature making up its lease
to it earnestly because that is
what is really going to help us
move forward with that it happy
to answer any questions that I
can and when I can't this bill
is the minister of wizard that
certainly I can any.
Questions the question of the
sisters please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
chief judge be Chad Kathleen
appreciate the presentations.
I do have some questions on
Mexican state the the judge
position for last.
so this kind of go in order with
what I have here on the mat
Court D. W. Y. positions that
are currently for reimbursed by
AOC is that I understand the pre
trial you're encouraged to ask
for this funding eventually take
that over so have questions on
that but for that did you I
corner positions as AOCS used
to.
To do this is that funding
running out or if you don't get
this taken continue to fund it
just elaborate on that a little
bit for me.
Mr chair members of the
committee we've been encouraged
to request that funding every
year so that that's why we put
that in our request okay and I
was not on the budget committee
last year I did not look at last
year's requests you request the
two mac core W. I. corner
positions to be put into your
fund last year as well.
And what happened that did it
did it did not go through
through budget committee okay
the sky did not fall last year
but I assume one your will which
is why they keep telling us to
okay requests I don't know if
this is the year or not I I hope
we get it.
That we don't work sure no I
appreciate that answer
and looking at your reversion
amount for FY twenty three I
noticed that thirty seven
thousand eight hundred was
reverted out of the three
hundred category and the request
in FY twenty force for thirty
six thousand seven hundred very
similar number moving forward is
there is there a reason why
reverted that amount and FY
twenty three that it's you can
use that in FY twenty four
moving for for the for the
electronic monitoring equipment.
Mr chair members of the
committee just what
we received a junior bill
funding for offsite a jury
appropriations and
we had trouble finding
facilities it was difficult to
move things off of campus
basically so we are going to be
reverting some of that funding.
Okay so.
In the three hundred K. so the
would be in the three hundred
three Iglesias have moving for
three hundred that's that's a
new need you do not have
frontier secure for that anyway
okay.
Thank you and I do see the
vacancy rates are going down so
that so that is good could work
on that
and again I should start with
this you have close to thirteen
million dollar budget your
request is I have a three point
six percent so it is somewhat
modest request and I do want to
acknowledge that and looking at
your fund balances I see that
choose a heavy jacket mediation
money
Last year it looks like you have
in FY twenty four for the first
time maybe or at least in
recently budgeted some eighty
our money so explain that to me
on what you're doing maybe your
mediation programs or higher
using those funds might Mr chair
members of the committee are
mediation funds are used to
funds to court clinicians
the amount that we collect every
year does not fully funded those
two positions so we do eat into
that fund balance every year we
also use those funds for things
like postage copier supplies in
that division to funds to there
in the administrative costs
basically to run that program
okay.
And let me just as well I if I
could but sometimes when it
comes to fiscal versus calendar
I'm not the best to keeping it
all straight but
in the last few months we were
allocated some funds are by the
by the legislature that we had
requested and not knowing what
if anything was appropriate to
do with those hi I've been
uncertain we've left them on
budgeted determine what the
right way to go is with you I
graduated in the like so there
are some ideas that we talked
about about things that we could
do with some these funds
although they're restricted
It I've not taken action on
those because honestly I wasn't
sure I think until today
actually how how we were going
to go up okay.
Thank you to judge and then
again just a lot of this in a is
for me to better understand your
court your budget as well the
child support you know it's my
understanding that now that you
have a child support contract
obviously and that is a
reimbursement contract now I
know you used to not be that way
you receive the money up front
so I'm assuming this is a fund
balance you've cared because of
that have you are you able how
how do you spend that money.
Mr chair members of the
committee what we've actually
had to in the last few years we
haven't been fully funded for
the child support staff and so
we've been eating into that fund
balance every year just to cover
their sure okay that makes a lot
of sense I mean sometimes that
you know salary increases things
like that you can cover that
with your fund balance chair and
HSD gives you has given me
permission to do that
Okay thank you that's a.
Before I get to the the
judgeship I just had one other
thing that did note in FY twenty
three received fifty thousand
from AOC for mac court security
and then I'm curious did you
were able to roll that into your
FY twenty four budget and it's
no longer a need that metric
court security position Mr chair
members of the committee we need
did receive base base budget
funding for to continue those
contracts okay the future years
okay perfect this fiscal year
okay thanks Kathleen.
And then also to the magistrate
court judge position and I
appreciate your comments she
should be judged the information
that we have that I have in
front of me before I conclude my
questions really you have to
understand the four judges
asking for an additional judge
and that the case so data that I
have and I'm just going to read
off what I have from eighteen to
twenty two goes approximately
you know thirteen thousand ten
thousand eighty six hundred
seventy three sixty six hundred
and respect and certainly what
you said your explanations it
does it indicates a a pretty
significant decreasing caseload
would you like to elaborate more
on that.
Beyond what you already have the
beyond what I I already did I I
don't have a great deal more
insight frankly and buying hope
is that and again credit where
it's due the AOC is provided
some training to people and I'm
sure that we will request as
we've got this influx of new
employees additional training
and with that I suspect these
numbers in terms of their
accuracy will improve
but on the other hand again from
what I've I mean I just can tell
you all the amount of time that
has been spent trying to get
things on track
with that but to this particular
court sure I would not have
believed it if you told me at
the store and maybe I would be
chief if you told a but the the
point being that you know it.
I just have to say everything
that experience tells me that
there are some issues happening
with these numbers and I
understand that on this
committee it might be these are
what we relied across the board
and nothing else but.
It's not just me it's the people
that I brought in to help cover
the the judge was unable to
serve
all of them have commented on
the case load and how hectic it
is and so I I see the same
numbers and yet I I do stand by
the request and I'd I hope that
you'll consider it with even
with those numbers now stand.
Thank you chief judge do do you
guys happen to have the numbers
for FY twenty three an updated
number for of caseload.
In that particular court for FY
twenty three.
I I I do not okay no problem
again a I really appreciate the
request to presentation I don't
have any questions thank you
chief judge and Kathleen very
much into the deep the.
To the service.
All right I'm to trying to I'm
trying to reconcile so.
And does that work on reducing
that that vacancy rate
and I think Santa Fe County
provides a unique difficulty
that you guys will always kind
of face and working for the
judiciary what I am trying to
reconcile as if you have such a
large.
Vacancy rate there's nothing
transferred out of two hundred
so what it what happened with
all that money.
Mr chair members of the
committee we we use that money
to do
There was a lot of overtime that
we ended up
authorizing for our magistrate
courts because they were so so
understaffed
Gosh I'm sorry I can't can't
think of what else but we did
have
Those types of things and in
from you educating me as some of
our discussions I think someone
was also wasn't the recovered
classification of some of those
positions to create the
paralegals and things so what
what we've been doing in that
piece is been approved at all
the the job to the right answer
but.
What the the point is that we
recognize just I was what I
think you're getting at which is
a that last year this year we
haven't come here looking for
significant increases for for
staff and is what we've been
trying to do is in some ways
restructure so for instance we
are.
The classifieds with is some
positions so that we now have a
couple of paralegals that are
helping our clerk's office with
April requests of which they
were inundated that's certainly
wasn't helping them instant
Janice which I think on the
chief judge county for me
complain about work because they
try to get a handle on that and
then really invigorating or self
help and the second judicial
district been very helpful and
gracious about helping us we're
gonna head down there get some
tips so those are just examples
of things that we've been doing
without coming in for more money
to use in the two hundred money
to try to to provide needs
without asking for.
to physically.
The chief judge beach at I
wondered about the numbers I
know you've got a usual
situation with the DA down
they're dismissing cases and all
and re filing and all that so
I'm just wondering if there's
some.
I'm just wondering how will AOC
can even track some of that I
mean there from what I read and
I only know what I read the
paper right.
So what I read is that they
dismiss someone sometimes are re
filed in matter of weeks which
could be in the same reporting
cycle so would show a dismissal
and a new case some of more
refiled for months some of my
guests will recent articles
talking about it was a year or
more ago
I just wanted it's not really a
question I'm just wondering if
that's something.
That you can even dive into to
see if that's something going on
with just just the cycling in
the sheer number of things that
that DA's doing down there so I
mean if you read the papers and
you also know that all that's my
full.
You know that because of that
goes without saying.
I was just so our goal has been
relations here strategy is been.
Get people are top priority
frankly I know that we've been
ignored other courts but that
has been the court that has been
in great as partners and so
we're sending people over there
as fast as we up by you know get
them to apply and hired we've
does restructuring over there in
terms of set the bottom line is
it at present honestly I don't
think that I could delve further
into those numbers I mean I
think that the the problems with
the tracking and the problems
with staff training and all
those things I think that's
where I'm at right now as I said
before so you thank you thank
you have good numbers that you
have that's all I'm trying to
make decisions without good
numbers wrong trying to get it
is if you're trying to think of
ways to make sure you've got
good numbers if that's after
bill your card I so here's where
I'm at and gas and in some ways
this one telling us I don't
think that I do the I don't
think that I can have good
numbers at the moment and what I
have is you know three judges
plus two designees of working to
cover one judge's docket down
there and you know as it's been
reported struggling to tread
water in that regard which is
telling me that just you know as
an observation there's a lot of
work happening down there I also
see the same the same reports
and to have discussions with FDA
about what is happening and what
we can do because again I view
myself and we're we're partner
rate is the same system so I'm
trying to figure out what can we
do rules wise or other ways to
stop some of these problems
that's a work in progress to but
I have real doubts what I guess
I'm tell you is that I think I
said it is that I do not think
that these numbers because of
all this refiling dismissal just
the numbers that are reported
even hi they don't allow me to
look at these numbers I find
make sense I I don't think that
they do
But if I don't come here because
lack of staffing.
We interesting strategies on the
part of our you know law
enforcement law be a prosecution
stakeholders if I wait until
that's sorted I think that I'm
just going to make things worse
I'm asking you to consider the.
Thank you that's all I have
questions one part.
So
The chief just for the new
magistrate court judge.
I'm sorry I did receive your yes
type of because.
The study from twenty nineteen
showed a one point three need.
But in a Los Alamos has a
negative point seventy meaning
that full time judges caring
thirty percent of a caseload.
And is available.
Electronically or physically to
to handle some of the Santa Fe
case of it's good news that
you're getting a permanent judge
magistrate judge soon right
because governor made an
appointment on a how much delay
the be there.
At at the very least.
We look we we look at what the
dust doing and we find numbers
you know we've been asked by the
press and all that I think our
numbers for correct in that
she's dismissing all those cases
and she's not pre-filing them at
at a very high rate at all.
If she could do so someday
except that a bunch of online
now barred.
By speech are.
So
I don't understand.
I don't see the need for a new
judge
I understood from your comments
maybe trying to get ahead of the
curve on a on on on the need to
have capacity in the new
building of course for a
magistrate judge but we did that
in we do that lots of places
where we can we know you're
gonna need funds sooner or later
I don't think you need one that
we can justify the need for one
in FY twenty five budget.
Based on what we have.
There's a fair.
I I would say no.
You know again for resale I I
have doubts it it's not thanks
for the the tracking effort
isn't there but again I cannot
they don't overstate the reports
I get from the judges helping
Paints a picture of a court that
is treading water at best with
these three so.
That the definitely in their
anecdotal as opposed to the the
data based on the information so
yes this is a need now and I do
see the numbers it is true that
you know I'm not basing this
request on there will be another
room at the new courthouse but
but I did just want to point out
that I'm also not being pie in
the sky with please give me
people that I don't know how to
how was our wheat what they'll
be able to do but it is a needs
based assessment and I will just
say to that so judge Taylor
opens Alamos has been correct
doctor who willing is to you
know not just be designated but
the end to see asked to
designate the help out was Santa
Fe
The at all information available
to me is that has not always
been the case with respect to
the Los Alamos magistrate judge
so I don't.
I've my approaches is not wise
for me to bank on having such a
in that these yes to partner up
all the time and again if it's
if it's me of failing to wield
the full scope of chiefdom you
know that's something that you
can fill me in on a learned that
I can force people to do things
that It ways I don't actually
think I can't but I am basing
this on for the Santa Fe County
need and
again I want to applaud their
judge city also admits record
has been great and he's had he's
been full of ideas about chief
judge why don't you have the
magistrates on full Odyssey and
doing very supporting and some
of these things I point out
might be slightly above my pay
grade but you know there are
ideas there about how to improve
things I don't think any of them
this this the and I do think
that it is indeed and I do
understand that you're looking
at numbers and saying I don't.
Agree I guess in terms of is
that fair nothing is unfair look
at numbers Amanda you've done it
for everyone so it I I
understand that that it's it's a
different quest but the same
time I don't think it would be
fair to say the need doesn't
exist because of this report so
when a pro times are signed to
match record comes out of your
budget.
Would you have the capacity
during FY twenty five if you
didn't get it judge of one way
or another throughout this
committee or through the
legislative process.
Would you have the capacity in
your budget to supplement the
the resource should have for
judges with pro tem four would
you need that request as an
alternative if if somehow the
budget committee didn't approve
the recommend for the Supreme
Court and approved a new
magistrate judge.
Fund requesting funding for pro
tem.
To handle you know your belief
that there's a excess need but
my personally my inability to
see to see it not just.
When I try to pick pretty
careful attention what's going
on because I'm appalled at the
with the DA is handle these
things to and I just don't see
the need maybe the rest of
conflict I'm not in a voting
person like member maybe the
committee sees it differently
and you'll be just fine and sail
off into the sunset budget judge
but if you don't get your budget
in twenty five handle pro
tempore which you need to ask
for money for it before any
meetings I got delusions of
grandeur I'm not sitting here
thinking that my persuasiveness
is going to trump your influence
on this this panel
but I I am so that that you I
think we need to be an
alternate.
On the requests in the wisdom of
this body you thought that
providing some funding for pro
tem to see if I'm right rather
than creating a new position is
more appropriate that would be
greatly appreciated I think the
help is needed because or
restrictions on other fund
balances alike I'm not aware
that I can just transfer money
from some these other funds even
though they exist to to fill
that need so I think we would
need some appropriation or some
approval from do that through a
special nonrecurring funding
that's the that few weeks to
figure that out
Listen I might ask for both I
you if this committee approves
it you might not be a success
with the legislature you might
want to pursue post both passed
if the if the new judges
recommended or.
Put in the budget by you know
the the in house bill two and
then you can withdraw the
special from pro temp Fund.
Please there is zero ego behind
this request if you all with
your expertise think that
there's a better way to address
what I do believe is a very real
need please what help help us do
that so I put forth what what I
understood to be the most
appropriate way to go
I do I would request that you
make it if you think that this
is in some way and whether it's
feedback on the A. specials
request I mean I would hate to
you know for this to be rejected
come back with the special in
the world.
The beach are you already ask
for this and why did you do it
the wrong way the first I mean I
would well you all to understand
it is an effort to solve a
problem that I do believe Israel
I can tell you that I would
advice budget committee to
support a special that's what
happened if you get approved on
this or if you did any requests
anyway you don't have to spend
that money.
Right if you get it and find out
of for judges can handle it just
fine I don't know that we'll get
there are and so you know I'd.
If they don't if the committee
has approved a judge of the
question influence me in any way
it's a well and you do you lose
and I don't to bat for your
problem are you were here
yesterday I think but the court
of appeals was talking about.
Up getting pro tempore ending in
using a pro tempore.
And showing through the work of
the approach and judge how it
helped reduce their
backlog in the caseload and how
permit judgement is critical to
continue to make progress for
the judge of requests I think
it's a good way to go but you
know maybe the committee will
approve this in the spring court
will you be on your way but if
not there's other ways to at
least assure that if you're
right and there's a gap in
resource to need in FY twenty
five you'll have the capacity to
put a twenty pro to that I just
want to go in because I was here
for that yesterday because I I
can't tell you how much I've
learned are sitting through last
year both days and this year
about this or as much of them is
like and set aside I learned a
great deal thank you just a few.
Thank you judge because it how
are you.
Good.
I.
I just my main concern with the
judge request is that they need
to the perceived need to do this
just became a parents upon the
departure of a magistrate judge
in the last few months I realize
that.
It just strikes me that if the
court really on fire in its
ability to handle the caseload
this coming in this is this
would be something that we would
be aware of
before that
and so I I am concerned I
realize that that happening and
you becoming aware of it it it
you know in the timing of it all
of that on the eve of the budget
request puts you in a difficult
position in terms of being able
to justify it but I would
encourage you if you believe
that there is a discrepancy in
the data or the data is not
accurately representing the work
of your magistrate court to work
with work with Odyssey work with
the performance then like just
hope FAQ it has a really robust
understanding of how that data
collection whether looking at
it's probably worth investing
some time in your court to probe
into the data and figure out if
it's truly accurate and if not
what it's not capturing
because we do rely and that's
how we're comparing apples to
apples across the judiciary
so that that was my main comment
I think the use of pretend money
is it's a great way to do it
and so I am very supportive of
receiving that request from you
in next month all right in can I
say I so actually just so
everyone knows this the timing
of this request of in some ways
has almost nothing to do with
the most recent events at the
magistrate court in fact it was
the AOC and she our site justice
Thompson
organized a meeting is free for
some months ago because I've
heard rumors that there was
going to be a new courthouse
built in my my district but I
had never seen it and so they
set up the meeting they're very
gracious with that and we in so
I guess this does relate to
space in a certain way because I
was pointing out how smart I
thought it was that they were
adding this fifth.
Chamber in the like and it was
actually AOC about leaving the
pointed out will actually this
is something that showed up in
two thousand nineteen as a need
of the court then and so if
anything what I have learned
more about most recently in
looking through the shared
throughout the share drive data
like is how the numbers have
gone down more than I understood
since then but that was what
gave rise to it and it wasn't a
knee jerk the only goodness what
if the governor doesn't do swing
by Wednesday I need a permanent
judge it was in understanding
that this has existed for years
in again the anecdotal and it
still exists that is receiving
from the.
It please I'm sure it's me that
fail to communicate that.
So to check so I don't see any a
woman is minimizing your your
your view from your perspective
and I'm not gonna argue it I'm
gonna just maybe give you some
solace
will there's there's sometimes
there's comfort in it with it if
you're a in pain with others so
this is not a new situation it's
new to you and you to the first
because you guys have had a
pretty stable magistrate court
for for a long long time and
it's not just this current
magistrate judge situation but
judge the judge and I he he
retired like last last August
last August and so I don't think
so it's been a long time there's
been a vacancy there
but you know in Torrance County
that a magistrate those out for
eighteen months on a long time
down in down in the twelfth if
my numbers are correct that had
seven magistrates in six years
that's a turnover of magistrate
judges which has require actress
impacted their entire turnover
of the entire staff and and I
know that in the eleven they had
a long term vacancy they did do
a special for for for pro tem
and that a magistrate was on
contract for two again this year
for two years to work through
through backlog and and the like
and so
not that that makes years pain
any less but but others have
gone through and maybe our
creative solutions to to to to
the problem
and those are just for examples
I know there's probably others
as well
the I also love using touch
Taylor I think that's fully
within your your your your as a
jurisdiction to do so too does
Nader and an assigned cases and
and that you can have this he
personally assigned a case on
some rotating basis at all
doable and I obviously and I
think that's that's certainly
within your purview as as chief
judge Espanola maybe as well I
no Sir creek cases are down but
it's again there's data problems
with with as we know that with
Santa Fe was better that oppose
the Espanola but I do have some
really is.
Some creative discussions and
I'm glad you brought forward so
we can have the conversation
that we did and and I I
appreciate are these suggestions
well about that the pro tem and
just summon as they don't get to
touch the pro tempore the
magistrate programs come out of
their budget the pro tempore his
for shortages so
the end of fiscal two those up
there's may not something that
you just would really be unhappy
if I.
Ask about it out of his budget
that's right that's right so it
would not not really question
just you know a.
The the future payments.
I do and I've seen it right and
I've experienced as of done to
cover other courts in and I've
already made a statement couple
years ago that there's some
really well thank you for that
and I sometimes really well
organize courts are just cooking
also wonders and then just one
car comes out alignment and
things just go off track and and
the the time of support and
assistance and
and Sears is a pretty highly
functionally magistrate court
which Google concert phone often
now I mean it's it's it's hard
work for you does your staff and
you as the chief judge so.
I try not to be one of those
calls yeah.
No I it so I mean look I I leave
here perhaps you know not saying
we need to put money in the bank
for this request for the
additional magistrate judge of
but on the other hand I I do
very much appreciate your
feedback on other ways to
approach it because again you're
welcome is it is not a need but
you have shown me that there's
another way that's maybe better
to go about it and I appreciate
that very much and and I know
that the I'm always every story
shared with me about how things
are are worse elsewhere but all
I know is we come to work and we
do our best everyday to make our
district as best as can be and
that's the motivation behind us.
Thank you.
They also in closing of not.
I I don't have a closing the I'm
sorry.
Thank you very much thank you to
keep you in a class.
Because in the last.
There are funded.
Okay all right we have
statewide requests for this
order from here and.
Okay
Mr chairman members the
committee in are usually come up
here would love to he's a paper
that and everything else is only
two pieces of data that support
these two statewide requests.
Judicial composition of judges
that number three point four
four three million four hundred
forty six thousand
five hundred dollars that
representative sitting justice
period at two fifteen which is
the federal magistrate pay.
the proposal this year I believe
is going to be target that
number or some specific number
maybe that number.
we'll have to adjust if the
number goes higher and then by
statute set of judicial rate
increase based on the CPI you or
some other number that's a
number I would recommend.
so that
Just when pay for judges gets to
the point where justice pays to
fifteen or so.
We think we I believe the
commission will thank you know
what this commission studying
all this that that that's where
we need to be and that'll set
the bar so that we can attract
judges particularly looking at
general jurisdiction judges and
that keeping up with inflation
after that is probably good
enough that's the theory at this
point to the by statute and the
cost is three point four million
and you have a distribution
sheet that shows if we did that
would that would bring justice
prior to fifteen Chief Justice
page two seventeen and then it
goes down the ninety five
percent latter for you know I
think district judges are one
ninety or something like that
anyway.
that also I understand the
proposal begin to try to the
couple magistrates that that's a
bad word I don't know what
better time to use but remove
restaurants from the seventy
five percent of metropolitan
court judges measures currently
a hundred twenty three thousand
and I believe the discussion the
committee will have as how to
how to set pay properly for
administrative judges outside of
the statutory structure we have
now so that's the judicial
compensation request statewide
you know will make that pitch
we've done it successful the
last two years
you know we haven't had full
success with one voter resides
on the fourth floor but you know
we're we're we do have the
governors general counsel on the
committee that's looking into
this that's a real step in the
right direction if you ask me
and Holly it's just lots of
interesting questions most of
which can answer but she
promises to.
Convey the sense of the
committee to the governor and
hopefully we'll we'll get where
we need to be.
Dorm to questions on that Mr
chair or go on staff as we go to
the judges that judged percent
any questions on the judicial I
will tell you that outside of
compensation the commission's
also looking at a whole gamut of
issues like retirement and
Alexion.
Maybe proposal about elections
and all those kinds of things
but conversations with thing I
have to deal with in terms of a
statutory request in the
statewide from the request at
this point you to service so
it's just my understanding with
that statewide right now we're
taking a little bit of a a turn
and tying it to inflation from
that point and not tying it to
the federal magistrate I mean
that's the okay it is basically
the same thing I looked at
twenty five years with the data
for where the federal judges
want Manchester whatever it is
ninety two percent of the
federal judge Roy but it's a
federal District Court judge pay
the match ridge in ninety
percent of New they basically
follow inflation that's what
they do now the last three years
has been higher than had been
any other time but then in
places but higher
so you know that the the real
purchasing power of the salary
will remain stable so if we
think we have the right salary
to begin with.
That'll do it and it it I think
it avoids.
Problem some people have with
you know relating.
Time
the state compensation
requirement to a different
branch entity of government.
The you know the the federal
judiciary.
To to Feelin to forget.
One question Robert Padilla had
mentioned I believe that the
budget committee meeting last
year is that the additional
compensation that we provide for
chief judges doesn't seem
accurate or and not for the
amount of work that they're
doing wonder if there's been any
discussion about increasing that
ratio since we're going to be in
the statute anyway question yes.
I've been pushing that for very
long time and losing and I
expect to lose this time to I
think the feeling will be let's
see we've got the statute in
place.
We can come back and try to take
over the statue which has the
two thousand dollar stipend in
the ninety five percent and I
think
from different districts manage
their chief judgeships in
different ways some say where
you're chief have more
responsibilities will take away
after canceling.
Some say that and then don't do
it.
and you know I watch the chief
justice's and they work very
hard and I know.
It costs the money to be chief
of the because I spend a lot
time out anyway so I have a long
time so we should change the the
state stipend of the additional
compensation it goes to the
chiefs I'm pretty sure I won't
succeed if we're gonna be doing
a lot of other things they're
probably going to carry more.
Priority compensation by
statutory change changes to the
chair a contribution rates for
the judges in the state he's a
big things that you know
probably that when we.
We'll keep waiting on that's my
guess yes Representative it's a
matter of discussion.
A judge thinking I apologize if
this question is premature but
do we know who the R. Sanchez
going to be on this.
if the answer is no the answer
is no we have had discussions
about who will not should not be
the sponsor and who maybe should
be the sponsor but we have not
kind of identified Sanchez so
that's my answer I appreciate it
thank you.
More questions and I will decide
that.
I'm so proud
of an unpopular question for for
magistrates but kind of related
to some of the conversations
we've had the last couple days
the statute provides for for
Think I in point four hundred
point two five magistrates have
time and and then where time and
maybe just from historical is
there as there is that thank
that doesn't leave the is a
complete nonstarter I can tell
you from experience okay I just
was wondering is it is is just
someone you look at this right
and you go one thirty six half
half half half of that is still
a pretty big number for twenty
hours a week or
that's why we gonna we're
talking with to to to be checked
and I'm talking about taking the
Los Alamos magistrate and taking
some of the burden off of Santa
Fe and bring their within the
district as you know certainly
have the authority to try to re
balance the workload so it's
fair when I was directly
responsible for managing the
measure courts we tried to send
a low case load people to places
where that high K. or or need
that so much easier now because
we're doing many more like track
the Centrex anywhere you want.
by and large they're all done
electronically
but discussing quarter time have
time salaries that are not
hundred percent.
The has not interested anybody.
Legislature I I'm I know it's
there I've never really heard a
discussion about it so I wasn't
sure if that was even something
as a viable option for making
some of the some of this may be
more tenable I think the focus
is.
I actually asked if it would be
more viable to run the statute
that would just change the
percentage because measures of
centipede Italy at least the
leader of you know anyway the.
Committee where they call
You know keep percentage change
percent so we can hit cell
number and I promoted that idea
and that was rejected the
commission really likes act
just.
Take them out of the statute so
I think that's what's going to
and the reason last year two
years ago of the governor gave a
reason to is ago did you have
risen to act upon is it possible
to have a cleaner yes that's
correct just last year it was
she did feel comfortable I get
to that federal pay so in a.
You know I can certainly can
second guess water if there's
any other reasons but.
okay we are quite aware that she
has internet to anything that
gets passed and we're trying to
make it so that it's less likely
but it's got to be a two way
street and as I said of there's
been great cooperation to the
degree that the governor's
supporters platter general
counsel to participate in the
commission I think that's
terrific so if nothing else is
exactly what we're thinking and
we're asking if you if something
is a showstopper tell us please
we'll see how that works.
If there's no questions on
additional compensation.
So on the staff compensation you
know we've been trying for the
last several years to catch up
to the executive
and I guess we've been modestly
successful in that we've gotten
a two percent additional
compensation the last two years
in a row that's great.
last year we were a little over
eleven percent behind we got two
percent difference the eight
nine percent behind actually
nine point two percent the
number you have is a nine
percent number it's a big number
eleven and a half million
dollars to increase above
whatever also gonna do I assume
when there's two and a half
billion dollars laying around
they might want to spend some
more of that on it.
State employees I don't know but
whatever reason is this would be
on top of that.
the committee might think
between now and tomorrow you're
looking at a budget that.
Proposes to increase the the
judiciary's almost seventeen
percent before we get to these
initiatives and these counties
expansions of for some of us a
legislature the recurring
expenditures it would take us up
to fifty three million dollars
that's a lot that's twenty three
percent.
we could modify the us the
employees particularly for we
could put it all in there and
see workers to be consistent
with we've been asking for.
On our twelve percent the first
year and ten percent last year
you know we're making some
headway nine percent probably
where we belong to catch up.
but again it's a huge rarely
have a big budget this would at
eleven and a half million but
that that's where we are I mean
the data says when you talk
about having a competing with
executive agencies for employees
this is where our salaries are
behind now I have to say you're
doing something right that is
the courts are for sure because
our overall vacancy rates ten
and a half percent something
like that and many of the
executive businesses are running
at thirty percent.
So I have very stories about why
that so but I will tell you I
think that the judiciary must be
doing something wrong because we
pay less on average for as close
as we can get comparable
positions and we're still
running a lot lower vacancies
than we have see on that in the
executive agencies.
Notwithstanding that we need to
pay I think the pay needs to be
closer so that it's a fair
fight.
For employees.
Thanks.
One question issued in handed
out I love the request issue
that we got out for the
employees had one percent so do
we just take that multiply by
nine the request is nine even if
this is one yes okay that's how
we you know I ask H. I. what's
the one percent number for this
district for you know so I can
figure out what your employee
costs are thank you system for.
K. F. just on that sheet the
seventh is there twice could we
make one of those the eight.
Route that would appropriate we
didn't
even notice.
I did and
my early would notice.
The poor seventy heard about all
their troubles we should double
up on the seven point.
That thank you noticed.
We didn't notice that on the
budget sheet we refer to your
your first request we said it
was for process.
It's not as bad as just leaving
this that money would be more
important.
So that's where it on the
employees it's pretty.
Transference consistent with our
last several years and I don't
know which one were approved
revert on tomorrow but that's
that's all I have is fixed more
questions.
But I have not.
One thing I would mention about
complete compensation of
employees now after as of July
first.
Eleven point nine two percent
date me flipping Levin point
ninety two percent salary toward
over time.
the judges are not.
I think you eleven and a half.
Whatever the numbers maybe I got
this right about four point four
two percent behind your
employees in terms of your
contribution rate so you can
look forward to a proposal for
me the committee may not
accepted that we increase your
contribution rate with a
competition pres
to exceed tell your employees
will be paying more of their
salary then you are trying to
retire but this time to go up to
the state to fifteen into the
chair right and there at almost
twenty into the dental plan
through so that they should.
They should help to.
But there's no other questions
so what I to do now is just kind
of go into executive session at
another scenario C. support
staff you guys conspiracy about
this we talk a bit about
realization for tomorrow so that
were restricted actually one
thirty second about that last
request which is the reserve
fund I think more talked about
this yesterday.
Reserve it's on the very bottom
number column line.
Twenty six or twenty seven on
page ten no not there.
I'm.
Yeah.
For a fifty thousand of it
became official during
somebody's about to discuss my a
metric for which was today
anyway you know we've we've had
this idea we tried last year to
to get a fund for the buildings
we own right judge Duffy at it's
a kind of an emergency fund the
fear is the non returning we
have on the money let's see if
we have emerged as a building I
think we could spend a fair
amount of this on things that
come up for which the courts are
not appropriated money but we're
gonna try again the ideas AOC
will have this pot of money any
of the Courts that we own that
for that Mexico does would be
eligible for disbursement of
these funds for you know if an
elevated breaks the escalator.
Stops working or whatever it is
and we're gonna try going to do
that I just want to mention it
since it's on the spreadsheet
and I answer questions or to
have them that would be a
surprise but she's happy to
answer them
okay sorry about
that on that so deserve any more
thought given from you in the
Supreme Court about having some
kind of fund like that like a
better term contingency fund for
each district so we don't have
the issues of trying to roll
around stuff you know to be a
non reverting fund you know PED
said to some percentage of your
overall budget that would be
replaced if you used it is stays
the same if you don't know
largely because that's a County
concern you know we're protected
by the District Court programs
about images buildings I'm just
talking about to me that's a
contingency fund for for capital
for maintenance I'm talking
about kind of generally with the
districts so we don't have to
play vacancy savings games and
all that stuff because we have
no contingency funds at all you
take something like the tenth
district you know the the yes
Representative when I first came
on the budget committee I think
the tenth had the electronic
locks go out on the building and
to fix it was twenty thousand
dollars and that was a budget
buster because if there's no
other that districts have no
other.
Funds to to tap into our I I
just it just here to run a
business the our ministry to
stuff it just seems to me that
would make sense five percent
eight percent ten percent of the
budget that you have for content
steep approved spending what
have you that you have a
contingency fund that stays the
same year after year if you
spend down to come back up to
the whatever percentage it was
as I just crazy tough.
At attendees are crazy to me is
not something we discussed
confirmed in this proposal I was
focused on the physical plant
because it's it's easy to see
we've got an emergency I think
of the Tampa Water one of the
message one out for quite a long
time with some thing to be
paying them because I'd still be
elected person but you need to
pretend that's coming out of the
district's budget.
Where do you have the money for
that you do not right in the end
it's true all the other
districts changes have.
You have more money the term
things have to spend that also
would be the equivalent problem
if that happened to you in the
in the first during in the.
For seven thirty we're.
Right now so really that request
is just to be that just makes no
sense that we don't have an
ability to have any kind of
cushion especially now we're
squeezing down from the top of
the districts about vacancies
you know because that's going on
now to and that's the only place
that I'm aware of we've got some
kind of elasticity on funds so.
I'll shut up now.
I thank you.
The okay well this is going to
executive session talk a little
about tomorrow and get another
says the support staff please
