Cap fund and forty percent of
that for New Mexico businesses
there's still that technical fix
that will get done on the craft
brewers there has been an
agreement relation to lowering
the total cap for geo thermal
from eight million to four
million.
And related to the more vehicle
I motor vehicle excise tax a
technical issue that we will
figure out and and better
address in the amendments that
come forth that here after
tobacco excise I think there was
a discussion and there is
agreement that what whatever
that number looks like that we
would agree that they would go
to the tobacco settlement
permanent fund related to
military retirement that we
agree that we would eliminate
the sunset related to liquor
excise tax we agree that there
was a there was an agreement
that we put it to the alcohol of
fun verses the general fund at
but in what percent we will
discuss that here in in a few
moments so the down the list
further on remain topics of
discussion
you know this is let's go to
personal income tax I I think
that's one thing that on this
side of the on this side of the
chamber that it's one thing that
we would not like to see changed
and I'm I'm gonna be just open
and Frank about that I I know
that you would like to see the
one bracket reinserted that
would perhaps develop fifty
million dollars in the and in
the future years but you know
for all the reasons that we
stated in for all the reasons
that I believe as as the chamber
that we that we listen to the
public we listen to members of
of our house and even some of
the Senate in relation to this
not raise taxes at this time
there there's no reason to do
this kind of things that was a
huge compromise on on the
Democrats in the house and that
was something that we came up to
a compromise with our ranking
member Harper from the Senate
that from the Republican side
and so you know it's one of
things we feel strongly about we
feel that it it affects the the
right values it's the right time
and so I would say at this point
I would like to know if if it's
something that you cannot accept
then
if if it's appropriate and I'm
gonna ask this is out loud where
there's things were maybe we
don't agree upon is it time to
then begin taking those both to
say okay we we we don't agree
and so let's let's move forward
it's that's compromised.
Better so I'm looking at it you
Mr chairman and and the folks in
the state.
But I just think I appreciate
what you're doing a chairman
that they I would suggest let's
let's go down the bullets the
rest of this and then let's
figure out because I think in
order to take a vote I want to
know what the other pieces are
what it looks like turn off.
Of the same related to corporate
income tax the recruit we
including the single sales
factor you know I I we've heard
from from advocates
across the state in relation to
sometimes when when they don't
support Republican issues in
this case we've heard from those
that that that that the only
supportive of conditions that
this is actually a good thing
and so I don't want to get in
involved in too much of the of
the discussion back info from
those that feel strongly about
this on this diet for the same
time it's something that I think
we to need to at this point did
you take a vote move on or take
a vote and we'll figure it out
moving down in relation to
Health Care that's something
that if I can lean on
Representative a chair by
children because they're not to
focus on thank you Mr tears as
we discussed in this morning's
meeting for us in the house side
we think this substantial reform
and cleanup needed about the
ways we tax medical care and
services generally and including
a much more expensive deeper
look at the real help tax
provider credit of so at this
time we appreciate that you all
have a five year sunset all we
are more drawn to the copay and
deduction G. R. T. unclean the
definition of health care
practitioner and would suggest
that we not move forward with
the second one those coming in
at twelve million but that we
move forward with the first keep
the five year sunset and then go
at it at a hundred percent of
receipts from day one and just
to share on page five of.
Yes.
Page five of the packet we
brought with you all today thank
you to Jennifer and LFC for
preparing the side by side you
can see the definitions of who's
clue included healthcare
practitioner and then next to
that the beneficiaries of what
would have been the counseling
and therapy G. R. T. deduction
you see them side by side the
only one that's not explicitly
match there is alcohol and drug
abuse counselor with three years
of work experience in the field
alcohol and drug abuse prior
but we expect and have seen an
in the field that those folks
may also have the credentialing
to be mental health counselors
and likely would still be
included in the health care
practitioner definition under
their mental health counselor
credentials.
To that.
Thank you.
the gentleman just add to that
again I think this is a great
table that was prepared for LFC
you can see that.
we look directly across both
we've got mental health
counselors we have marriage
family therapist we've got
professional arts therapist
psychiatrist psychologist
registered nurses social workers
and then that not true not exact
match but probably out on drug
with phone or mental health.
I would just wanna point out so
that we also catch a lot of
other people in in the health
care practitioner G. R. T. co
pay deductible right we also
have chiropractic pain dentist
dental hygienist oral medicine I
mean the with the list goes on
you know occupational therapist
midwives so I do think.
This is a approach to actually
benefit many more people
and and I think it's a good step
thank you yes.
Mr chairman thank you the
representative for putting this
together that's very very
helpful also think on the
alcohol and drug abuse first of
all the accounts for you have to
meet certain qualifications to
be licensed anyway so I actually
do think it would be picked up
but part of that could possibly
be paid for through the drug out
the the alcohol tax that we're
putting into that special area
that can actually pay for a lot
of that and so we're kind of
picking that area up into
different areas and I think that
really helps because we're
making sure we're getting that
issue addressed through this
package.
Thank you yeah programs on the
Senator I did just want to say
thank you for putting this
together because I think you
know we're trying to figure out
you know who's in who's out and
I think this kind of lays out
who is qualified to take
advantage of these to your keys
whether their copay deductions
are actually detection G. R. T.
so I appreciate that so right
let's let's move on this list to
gross receipts I I know that in
your proposal you use up to
reduce the gross receipts by.
The.
It was an eighth reduction just
overall and so what we did is we
took we took a longer look at
this in regards to how can we
effectively if if the concern is
how do we create capacity in the
out years up we do that early in
the short term of the out years
would would reducing the G. R.
T. reduction by eight percent
over four years do anything in
in looking at the numbers is
going that from LFC looks like
in FY you know starting in FY
twenty four this is a
substantial amount of savings in
relation to the Senate's
proposal if you look on the
first page on the bottom on the
bottom
So you'll see the the savings in
FY twenty four related to that
one eight reduction over the
over the four years bring it out
is is substantial same thing
with FY twenty five and the same
thing with FY twenty six when we
finally catch up in FY twenty
seven and so we thought that
would be a a a creative way to
help affect by not having to cut
things out and fix things in a
in a way that we that we felt
was important but also be
respectful to the Senate and and
your amendment as well so
I think obviously this is
something we can come back to
and and vote on when the time is
appropriate before you go down
to the floor
Also related to the G. R. T.
trigger for reimposition if you
want to cover that
Representative Harper.
Yes so again I think we talked
about this this is the built in
trigger that if revenues fall
below five percent the church he
rate increases automatically by
point two five percent.
and in current law to twenty
thirty.
and so I think our proposals
that we just keep it there all
these things will have rolled
out by twenty seven.
I don't think it makes sense to
move out to twenty forty five
and if the legislature in five
years decides they want to push
that twenty thirty out of it.
I think that's that's fine I
think we need to move it out.
Right now.
Just on that point I mean the
other option is to split the
difference but it twenty thirty
seven.
Just because again I I do think
there's this is the the key to
this package beings set saleable
I think is the trigger and I
just think having that trigger
go away it just makes it that
much harder some and I would
just suggest we split the
difference and.
At twenty thirty seven.
We can note that I will come
back in and out I think it's
something easy enough to affect
others look at alcohol alcohol
excise tax so appreciate the
willingness to want to put that
into the of the harms the Asian
fund
at this point in time I would
suggest that if we can say
twenty percent across the board
amongst the wine beer and
spirits that I be the most
palatable this time knowing
though that there is a a way in
and in which apparently single
sales at the point of sale
surtax would would would
probably be the the best and
cleanest approach and and the
the smartest approach most
reproach but I think we're not
quite there yet something that
we could perhaps look at in the
interim but I think at this
point in time taking that first
step knowing that this will be
the first tax increase in
alcohol and thirty plus years
knowing that we're going to
affect us some of the the issues
that plague our society is is it
is a great first step so that's
what I would that's what we
would propose in terms of if
we're gonna do something that
twenty percent be what we start
and then we'll we'll we'll state
those are the issues in the
interim.
Related to tobacco taxes you
know it's one of those things
that while we did have a
snapshot within our own house
chamber of of of of vaping and
cartridges and and self
contained units the fact of the
matter is that.
We just don't feel comfortable
at this point in time really
affecting any type of change
related to that industry at this
point in regards to.
Regards to an increase on on on
that industry and so where we're
at is that we would probably see
that maybe we we study that we
have presentations to the
interim to bring it back in that
thirty day if in fact is is the
governor's wish to see that come
back in any way shape or form
just Mr on a point this amount
was agreed to by the industry
Senator Hickey sat down with the
industry two years ago they came
to us and said we were willing
to do this and so when this was
brought forward I said said that
he had a higher number I said
sit down with the industry they
agreed to this number is my
understanding so I just want to
put that on the table.
Isn't it true that this is not a
tax increase this is tax we have
any tax this portion of it.
Which is not increase we just
that's right they were felt in
the definition of tobacco
products was and never been
taxed at all.
I don't want to definitively
Representative that I just will
say that this is one of those
issues that
again was part of the discussion
during the twenty twenty one tax
discussion and I know the
industry was willing to do
something then and and so
there's a there's a loophole
there that we should look into
that before this is not doing
this really appreciate respect
that Representative
representative Representative.
Of course Senator Representative
Harper.
Yeah so so so chairman just just
just throw things some things
out here so
I'm I've been told that industry
to not agree to it from two
different representatives but
kind of what we're I was coming
from is we actually tax these
products very differently than
cigarettes right cigarettes and
and to tobacco it's it's you
know like at you know how you
know ten cents a cigarette in
the and here it's like the
wholesale value and and there's
there's liquid there's
cartridges their standalone
cartridges.
And I'm I'm actually think we
should bring these into parity
with other tobacco products
right I don't think we should be
taxed them differently but I
just personally
I don't understand why the
differences.
In our tax man right now and I
really think we should be
careful and align them all and
in a way that makes sense and I
just don't feel like I'm quite
there yet I really like to.
To just educate myself on this
more spent over time understand
that better.
Mr chair is I appreciate this I
couldn't give a damn about what
the industry said or whether
they agreed or not I've made my
position clear and and we've had
a lot of public debate about how
I see tobacco taxes and nicotine
taxes generally being incredibly
regressive and I think it needs
to be said out loud that the
people using these drugs most in
New Mexico are survivors of
trauma many of who are in
recovery from other substances
and this was the substance we do
legal I have to again put my
ignorance forward I am not a use
of these products I am still
it's still murky for me about
what exactly were taxing how
we're taxing and where the
parity comes from I appreciate
that in the alcohol conversation
we're talking about alcohol
content we're talking about what
happens with your with your with
wind spirits I can admit I mean
although I I enjoy alcohol on
occasion and in moderation so
that to me is a framework I've
had more time to understand and
think through about where the
social implications of that what
I've heard from our side
certainly again when we're not
familiar with these products
we're hearing conflicting
messages that one of the
possibilities if we do this is
to have a different kind of
commitment potentially from tax
leadership in both chambers in
both sides of the aisle to even
bring forward our own proposal
that would make sense within a
taxing free work and give us
time to learn up a better
understanding and if we decide
to move this today I could be
comfortable with that but I
would love the folks that have
done this work to make sure they
can prepare us something before
we take the final vote so that I
can go home knowing that I have
a better understanding of where
this tax falls in alignment with
other tobacco nicotine products
and and what the actual products
are with their uses are I don't
even.
Thank you.
And thank you and I I really
appreciate you know the
discussion on this and and I
think you know I have to use
these drugs in a long long time
but we do taxi cigarettes we
have tax paper it is in our tax
code it always it always has
been it was tax at a lesser
level this actually brings it to
a higher level than cigarettes
are taxed and so at think we
need to take a step back use use
the interim time to look at and
and develop a.
A framework that makes sense to
everybody and and try to come
back in next year with something
that works and something that we
can all agree on
It's no surprise on the Senate
side that I didn't support this
tax in first place of this
change and so I just think that
that's that's something we could
look at the interim and maybe
come back at the next session
and we may need to look at some
some differential sent here
because there are people that
use vaping to get off of
cigarettes and so you know with
with marijuana we have you know
to pass one medical one not the
maybe if someone's using E.
cigarettes to stay off of our
you know to stay off of actual
cigarettes you know that they
can get some kind of a doctor
thing to where they can get some
kind of not have to pay that tax
when they're using it to to get
off cigarettes because even
though neither one of our good
for you.
E. cigarettes a lot better for
you than cigarettes and so we we
need to kind of look at that
differently in my opinion right.
Yeah I was just going to take a
vote I think that we are going
to come back a little later and
and if we're not there yet we'll
get there and finally of of film
so at this point in time I I
guess we're at is is we would
like to hear your proposal I
mean we have snow you propose
above is there a way forward
related to fill that is a little
bit more palatable in the state
so we can better understand how
we can move forward on that I
don't know if you guys are there
if you're not that's fine but I
think at this point we need to
better understand where we're
at.
Yeah and I don't think we're
completely there yet so what I
would suggest is this is one
that we we need to get there at
two thirty when we take our
three o'clock we take our vote I
mean again I just I don't.
You know I think we we were
pretty clear and again we're
looking and this is one more
who's gonna put something
a response from managers ripples
of from the Senate and you guys
you know basically want to
eliminate it and the question is
what are those numbers work we
find someplace in the middle on
this and I just I'm I just need
to think more about that we
figure out more but I think by
this afternoon.
We need to come up with it and
and get their.
Representative thank you Mr
chairman and so I guess my
question on the the to the film
tax area of the US is is this
your proposal.
Yeah because that's basically.
On the side it's at all on that
site it's a nothing and so I
don't think that's a I don't
think that's a very good yes.
The you know so I I think we're
going to need to that that one's
one thing we need to negotiate
over and and try to figure out
and
so I've been working on that but
I would kinda like this I would
like to go see it against myself
and so I think we can and know
where you guys are out on this
well I I think it was clear that
when we left the discussion
earlier that you start talking
about compromises and and where
you guys could be at and I
thought maybe you would have
that that idea in your mind come
back and let us know that way
this is not an all or nothing
proposal by our side at all I
think there's respect on
mutually but at the same time
you know I I I'd much rather
feel I feel more comfortable
knowing that as we left it I
thought that maybe there was
some kind of indication that you
have some kind of of of
compromise in your mind that
that maybe we said what we could
play making maybe look at
something in the middle or
something and that's why I left
that that's what I assumed and I
I apologize if I no no I think
that's fair I also think again
this is a complicated area and
obviously an area of the the
administration's very interested
in so we need to make sure that
we're doing something it's not
gonna get the bills vetoed so I
think that's the other piece but
I just want you know when we
come back I think we'll we need
to put this to bed the next time
we meet okay this is going to be
one discussed I think we'll have
to work on a little more let's
think at this point related to
film than this let's take a
little bit of of a stab at at at
at one thing I think for
instance that I think we can
agree upon that we see value in
and that would be the locals Mr
chair thank you and I just
noticed wanted to clarify on the
sheet that we passed it looks
like the real up left is
missing.
I just want to note that five
million is already considered in
these brought tallied totals.
Is it Mr chair is an
Representative Cadena.
It was not our understanding
that it was being discussed to
be eliminated and that's why
would have shown up on her okay
cost okay Sir thank you for that
clarification so it does feel
that we're comfortable saying at
this point especially with the
concessions around language
changing the measure start point
and the additional five percent
getting the roll up like to ten
percent that that feels like
something that's been lauded
that we appreciated and and
thank you for helping us
understand why it's not on our
to debate list here I do have
just some than clarifying
questions you've heard our
position on the above the line
of credit looks like we'll come
back and take some votes on the
numbers you'll see what we've
shared here on page.
Seven.
We've asked the LESC to break
down the percent increases so
you'll see
no increase right again original
house for proposal had this is
zero with you all putting it in
where the savings is from the
Senate version again as as Mr
chair on our side has said here
where we're not trying to stick
it zero but we we want to look
at numbers and then you see that
moving up to twenty percent
fifty and then as the Senate
proposal is coming from the
administration to get that to
fifteen thousand so that's you
know our table that you all can
look at and and we have a sense
of where we'd like to and there
then to just clarify we've also
our position where we have
questions that we would want to
have further debate on review of
the interim the piece that's
coming back to me especially
looking at the bonus credit for
non resident crew again non New
Mexicans changing the the ratios
for how people become eligible
what part of their spend becomes
eligible for this incentive
again we're looking at the
thirty day thirty day session
and which the governor has the
call so this is potentially
something we could look at
moving forward we could give it
more discussion the interim
here more public comment here
get get more house members
engage in that conversation I
potentially see that on the call
current ratio.
The current ratio as we
understand it comes in at
seventy percent New Mexico crew
thirty percent out of state as
we've understood it that could
move to a fifty fifty ratio we
have concerns like I've
expressed earlier in our
previous conference committees
that that could destabilize the
hiring of New Mexico crew
particularly when you already
have the expense in the parts of
New Mexico eligible for the real
up left because you're already
paying to house Dr get your crew
out of the bigger cities
including Albuquerque and Santa
Fe and the last one we just
wanted to realize we did not
discuss out loud the element up
moving up the non partner credit
cap increase again for those
listening this three official
film partners in New Mexico
Netflix NBC universal at eight
two eight when you look at
everybody else that may come in
produce here the current credit
the current cap we have is a
hundred ten million this
proposal grows that to two
hundred and ten million adding a
hundred million by FY thirty
three our sense has been that we
like to focus on the rural up
left and then potentially
compromise with you all on the
above the line but we realize
that we had just not discussed
this at all we don't think that
happens needs to happen now
we've heard from LFC that they
haven't reached that cap yet we
understand that yes several
years ago there was a backlog we
figured out the one time spent
put over a hundred million in to
catch up and then raise the caps
from fifty to one ten we think
that was responsible then thank
you.
So considering that this Senator
Mr chairman and I did want to
cover a couple of things and I
appreciate of the explanation by
Representative but the the non
resident crew exception is not
an increase this is unchanged is
just having a here to explain
what it actually does there's no
change to that from what is
current so that's our current
set up so I do have some
proposals that I can bring back
a little bit later on that
so that that we would actually
make a change that that I think
you would like and I think you
really helping encouraging a
real movie from the
nonresidential crew to getting
the training for the residential
growth and so I do have that
working on taxes but that's
current so that's really not a
new proposal that's what we're
sitting at currently so I just
want to talk about that really
quickly and then so my
understanding from what was just
said is that that you guys are
good on the roll sewn up left.
Leaving it at the ten percent
taxes.
And then so it looks like what
we really need to work on
dollar wise where we can gain
some benefit than is the above
the line and the cast cap is a
is that right okay all right so
I'll keep working on that and
hopefully have some of that I
can bring them
home.
I've actually been working with
Alicia keys and the governor's
office on that to try to figure
out what we can do and where we
can come to on that sure
respecting your your time do you
have some equipment or you don't
Mr yeah we've moved to Florida
one o'clock so we can take some
votes narrow this down and then
maybe we're back at three
o'clock.
Thank you for that so at this
point that's isn't let's go back
to the top of that remaining
topics session list and take
some votes then let's look at
the personal income tax
again I wish is that we not
affect any those brackets or add
additional record to the top so
Mr Burciaga was here I guess you
would I conduct the vote to do
do we do with our own I mean how
does that work group chair okay
the best make a motion that
related to personal income tax
portion of the tax bill that it
remain unchanged for the house's
version
During the second no okay.
So all those in favor cemex and
I presents we can want to.
Whatever our.
I move to fast no we have a
committee secretary to record
do.
Of
course it's okay I just don't I
don't that sounds to me like we
don't yet have agreement on this
one that's the way to take it
okay and and I just will do it
again thank you so if you can if
you can let us know that want to
come back how you feel about
that that be great let's look at
the corporate income tax the
including the single sales
factor
we propose on the side make a
motion that we re include the
single sales factor to this tax
package that this point and
that's the motion
second that follows in favor
this is the right hand if you if
you're favor that.
Okay so that doesn't just.
Again my dad doesn't pass
because it's not the majority
for those listening this type
of.
Yes why it requires two on each
side in each chamber for
something to move forward.
related to health I I'm I'm.
Of a question mark on that
because I don't know for there
to take a vote if we're.
If we still have to figure that
out chairman I move that we.
The the house proposal on out
to New Jersey are so far away
and this happened because really
role.
Get seven I think about that
okay we'll find all they were so
right all right.
One death so if we look foolish
appear for.
The gross receipts.
related to the gross receipts
I'll make the motion on that one
we we we make the motion that we
pull back the rate reduction to
one eight over four years
to to that effect for the for
the.
For the budget in out years the
second.
Right now all those in favor
question.
I think I mean again I it's not
that the role of spending level.
Discussion.
I mean I I.
A point here where we need to.
The big one I mean this this
means we look at yes either way
we look at this the session this
spaces are often because of the
trigger I just want to stress
that for reasons Geno's.
The thanks to the soul.
Okay so in favor them with the
truth I think we.
Okay the tribute to those seven
schools all right I mean if if
you want to talk about I think
it would have on the table for
the trigger movement take a vote
for the trigger I think twenty
thirty seven was a proposal.
And the other thing the
difference and I think
everyone's in agreement here so
we're good with that as well.
related to alcohol
Our proposal here is that we
just have a twenty percent
across the board increase across
all alcohol types that's our
proposal on this side
I guess the second that that's
fine
All the favor I mean that of
that proposal raise your hand.
Okay this is over the if the
moves forward okay very good
thank you so we've put that to
rest of the tobacco so for all
the reasons mentioned
You know it's something that
that that we can put off and
come back in the interim but at
this point in time I think maybe
the motion not maybe but the
motion made on the house side is
that we just eliminate that from
the package itself and then the
study that better doing it and
from so their second to that
motion.
Second that all those in favor
of of eliminating the tobacco
excise taxes from this proposal
Asia and.
Okay so that bills will keep
that work on that but more
And in the film services that
we're gonna come back Mr Brent
Senator Brandt with some.
Better ideas of what we're
things are at okay very good so
at this point that we taken off
four of these things and we have
some issues with income tax
personal income tax
and back for excess tax and
filled and so Mr chair the motor
vehicle we're we're just explain
exactly where we are motor
vehicle.
The Senate and the savings that
happens because of what.
Yeah so.
So are co chairs and members so
the motor vehicle excise tax
we've made a change to the
distribution
really the technical issue to
address
house bill two is it as it has
passed both chambers and and
gone to the governor's desk
we're just delaying
the shift of it looks like.
Almost fifty nine million
make sure that that stays in the
General funds that we don't get
ourselves of fell with how house
bill.
Two was set up but then in the
out years the the distributions
continue.
A little bit of a question on
that still this is not one of
the areas I completely
understand so we're just waiting
one year on the the change on
that are we doing holding off
and then starting place and
after one year.
Is the Mr Mr tears and Senator
Brandt so
both right Representative Harper
is point about eighty two is
this correct that's the making
sure that that's right for FY
twenty four and then the phase
in is happening in twenty five
it's not a hundred percent of
motor vehicle excise tax going
out yet it's maintaining the
seventy four million going in
for twenty four and then you get
to the hundred percent of and
the axe going to propose to road
funds in twenty six.
Thank.
Forager.
Just so what something went
wrong down the other way we we
got for done what's left and
what we have left will be a
personal income tax.
Mr chair is made us here
clarifying questions since the
House position so far as the we
like where we landed would it be
the Senate bringing forward
proposals that you'll have ready
for us to vote on.
So I can tell you the respective
ten I think that's fair we did
bring a proposal forward and I
think we'll figure out there's a
compromise proposal on that
I think the issue of single
sales just on that point the
proposal is to is to save fifty
million but which was your how
how do you propose we get to
that fifty million which
brackets what tax rates so that
would be helpful Mr Chairman and
Mr chair and representative I
think that's perfectly fair and
maybe there's ability to do a
little less than fifty million
as a compromise
you know we can debate single
sales
again that's going to be just.
That's challenging maybe there's
some compromise I.
Put my creative hat on the arm
wrestle between.
Okay so that is is is personal
income tax rate if you want to
look at that.
Single sales is an outstanding
issue another outstanding issue
is tobacco and the to the and
the film was just for.
Make a progress and so what is
your your suggestion to the this
was looking if we could come at
three o'clock.
That would work because then
we've got two hours on the floor
we'll take a break very good.
