Mr Chairman.
Twelve.
They may need to use it.
What is.
Please.
All righty good morning everyone
I'd like to call the house bill
to conference committee to order
I'd like to ask that
could be noted for the record
that all the conferees up were
appointed are in are present
here today.
And we do have a
High levels of she'd that
everyone of the members would
have at this time and I'd ask
the staff to please go through
each one of them and then we're
gonna take each one of them one
by one vote for so if we could
either bill and dawn can rotate
back and forth or if you would
please.
I'm sure the first one is
deregulation licensing
department.
Proposal is to fund one million
dollars in other state funds
which is comes from the mortgage
regulatory fund and it's for the
cannabis control program
operations.
Done please.
Madam we just need to madam
chair you are muted I'm number
two yes please absolutely item
number two is for the crime
victims reparation commission
and this is for five hundred
thousand general fund for law
enforcement based advocates for
victims of gun violence and
violent crime statewide.
Madam chair item number three is
an executive agency FY twenty
three compensation additional
compensation amount of five
thousand dollars five million
dollars.
Madam chair item number four is
for the department of finance
and administration the proposal
is to reduce the the contention
appropriation that isn't house
bill two forward house bill four
and instead replace it with a
contented appropriation for
House Bill fifty five which
creates the public private
partnership program this
proposal would reduce the one
hundred and twenty five million
contingent appropriation in
house bill two by seventy five
million.
How much does that increase the
reserve.
Madam chair representative
Lundstrom it will be increased
by slightly less than one
percent thank you.
Mr Chairman number five.
Is it partly to finance
administration.
And the proposal is to strike
the contingent requirement for
Senate bill two thirty one item
seven and section ten.
The criminal justice reforms
appropriation.
Thank you madam chair item
number six is to the Human
Services Department the proposal
is for thirty million dollars
from the general fund to support
the expansion of health care
delivery system the medical
assistance program will
implement the rural health care
delivery program an issue grant
awards to eligible rural
hospitals to provide services to
indeed indigent new Mexicans to
defray the operating costs
incurred by newlyestablished
rural hospitals or expansion of
services for existing hospitals
three fiscal year twenty twenty
four.
And finally madam chair item
number seven is New Mexico State
University for five million
dollars and that's to add to
item forty nine in section ten.
For soil and water conservation
districts.
All right so let me ask the
staff to explain we're going to
take each one of these items
individually.
Will come up with a conference
report.
talk about that a little bit if
you would Davis so when you go
through the list Liz you will
but doctors some items if they
get a majority vote and then you
will take a final action on a do
pass on the committee report for
the wants of past individually.
Staff will prepare the committee
report which could go pretty
quickly we think within an hour
then copy will start also I have
signature pages madam chair that
are ready to go we
will know have different page
numbers by the time we revised
reflected the action you take so
the committee report will have
your signatures house and Senate
separate pages it'll take us
about two hours to copy the
report four hundred and twelve
copies of the two hundred forty
page document and then you'll be
ready to introduce the committee
report the amendment ready thank
you very much all right let's go
to the first item we need a
motion committee on this motion
to adopt chair that a motion and
a second to adopt is there any
opposition to that motion saying
one item is been adoption next
Senator a motion for number two
motion is often item number two.
Thank you we have a motion and a
second for item number two is
there any opposition saying on
is been opted.
Next.
Number three motion to adopt
number three thank.
Opposition to that motion
sickness adopted next.
Motion to adopt item number four
thank you is there any
opposition to that saying not
expended.
Next motion to adopt an item
number five.
Yes we have a motion and second
is there any opposition to that
motion sickness proof.
Mexico.
Madam chair I move it up item
number six.
Mmhm we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Okay.
We do have a we have three in
opposition that fails.
Let's go to the next one.
The manager moved to adopt
number seven second.
We have a motion and a second
for number seven is there any
opposition to the.
Someone also fails so we now
have a report items number one
through five that will go into
the conference report.
I think that's all the business
that we have for today if you
would want to take action on the
whole report madam chair as a
justice would you describe the
just all right off the report as
as a member with these five
items.
Senator Munoz for the most
motion to adopt the report as an
thank you for the motion and a
second to adopt the report adds
amended any opposition.
Saying that office thank you
everybody for.
Thank you.
Thank.
Yes.
Yes.
In the early.
I think I think.
Workday.
That was.
With the number six.
I did.
Mexico.
To.
