What is being here Senator
Representative thinking of what
we're gonna do first I think a
lot of folks are just and how
this process works.
Terms of the committee process
and and how we tackle the issues
that are that are before us and
and.
That's all.
From a grandson.
How else.
So we've asked role to come in
and before we get started to
explain the process of the rest
of folks out of the audience or
of can can understand the
process as we go through and so
forth so with that this.
With with your marketing pro.
Gentleman co chairs and members
of the committee good morning
I'm the Director Legislative
Council Service roads here
Graham I'm here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the process of a
conference committee and not in
support of or opposition to the
matter before you.
The matter before you is house
tax and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill five
forty seven after passing the
house the bill was amended by
the Senate tech taxation
business and transportation
committee.
Which was adopted by the Senate
and amended again on the Senate
floor and subsequently passed by
the Senate the Senate return the
bill to the house and requested
its concurrence on the Senate
amendments the house refused to
concur and return the bill to
the Senate advising that it had
refused to concur and requesting
that the Senate received from
its amendments which the Senate
refused to do.
Subsequently the Senate
president pro temporary and
house speaker of the house of
representatives appointed this
conference committee comprised
of three members from each
house.
The process for the conference
committee includes the following
and if I say report or if I say
reports what I'm referring to is
that there has to be a.
Report conference committee
report going to house a
conference committee going to
the Senate both of which must be
identical.
So no new item shall be
presented as an amendment for
inclusion in the conference
committee report unless that
item has been the subject of a
legislative committee hearing
during the session.
Boating in the conference
committee shall be by the
respective houses and a majority
of the membership from each
house is required for adoption
of a recommendation so the three
house members must vote and the
vote must carry a major would be
to the same on the Senate side
so each measure would have two
votes one by the house members
one by the Senate members.
The report for reports of the
conference committee shall not
be subject to amendment in
either house it's a straight up
or down vote you can debated but
it must be a straight up or down
vote on the entire conference
committee report well as I
mentioned earlier the reports of
this conference committee must
be identical for each chamber
except of course the respective
house and Senate headings.
Each chamber's report of the
conference committee shall
always be in order except during
a roll call or when a question
border or a motion to adjourn is
pending.
And with that members I stand
for questions.
So what are thank you Mr I do
have a question Mr Burciaga so
can we just basically split the
question so if there is a
section that we want to look at
can we have a motion
specifically related to that
section and if we can what
happens if there's not a so in
other words if I propose to
strike section twenty
and I have to votes on our side
but there's not too votes on the
other side what happens to
section twenty.
That Mr.
Cultures and and senator.
No one that motion would fails
you would not have anything to
take back on your respective
conference committees
in terms of what happens with
that section it well in nothing
at this point because you
wouldn't have agreement on that
particular section on that
motion Mr chair if I could limit
limit so if there's a section in
the bill that came over to the
Senate that we struck in the
Senate amendment.
So we have a conflicting.
We have the chambers on both
sides coming in what happens if
we don't have an agreement on
which direction to go does the
Senate amendment take precedent
or does the house original take
precedent.
Our.
And and let me just a Mr
fairness work with you know I I
don't think we're gonna say
taking the votes this morning
but I just this is an important
issue because I think trying to
unscramble and it's a and is
particularly unique the way we
get this with two different
versions and just what happens
when you've got differences
going in if we can't reach
agreement which version controls
coming out.
Mr.
Madam co chairs and members.
I believe that nothing would
happen because I mean in terms
of there's.
You would have agreement you've
already failed two concurrent
you fail to receive from those
so you don't have anything to
move forward with neither house
has anything to move forward
with that so Mister chair is
that with respect to that
specific section so that comes
out of the bill and the rest of
the bill moves forward or the
whole bill the whole bill you
would need to agree to either
strike that section.
R. or leave it in.
If you can't agree you don't
have you don't have that.
Okay you don't have a bill.
Thank you.
But coaches if I may
in the question initially was
also about dividing the question
you have in both the house and
Senate.
Rules
that you can they are or they're
spelled out a little bit
differently basically said the
same thing and I think that
would govern in this conference
committee as well our house bill
twenty one dash five if the
question debate contains several
propositions a member may have
the same divided provided the
division calls for embodies a
distinct principle or statement
of fact similarly on the Senate
side also Senate rule twenty one
dash five the question that may
contain several points Senator
may have the same divided
provided the division calls for
bodies distinct principle or
send a fax so yes you can
divide.
Any number of propositions you
have in front of you as long as
they're distinct principles.
Happy to sit in the audience
now.
I
course.
Mr chairman and rules of so kind
of with what Senator Wirth was
saying at the end once we've
kind of gone through those
section by section would we then
need to take a final vote on
whether regarding the entire
package to go back.
Co chairs and Senator yes you
need to take a vote on the
entire package which is those
things that you agreed upon
where you got a majority in both
houses yes but there are thank
you.
Mr chairman and senators and.
Members of of our respective
house members and members of the
audience thank you for joining
us this morning thank you for
the continuation of discussion I
I want to first of knowledge
everybody's commitment to this
process and in regards to the
process itself knowing that we
are close to twenty four hours
from the during this year's
session we have some work to get
done and so if I may just in
regards to proposing a timeline
propose that I guess talk out
loud about that in terms of what
I think we see and what we've
talked about a little bit just
now and what we will not leave
this committee hearing with any
type of formal adoption of
anything because we have nothing
to adopt at this point we would
leave this morning with some
type of more fundamental
understanding of where we're at
where we could probably start
striking things off of maybe
things we see that we can agree
upon and then there after again
still yet probably before noon
or maybe close to that come back
I think another time to then
talk about maybe some final five
final draft issues it is
important that he's on our side
that we go back and talk to our
respective members of the house
taxation and revenue committee
so that we can
received their blessing and at
least bring them into line about
what we're talking about here
and then in terms of of time
framing we're probably looking
at reconvening for maybe a
hopefully a final time early
afternoon so that we can have
enough time for LCS to do their
their drafting and make sure we
get we don't we're not here in
the middle of the night trying
to pass a tax package in that
suspect to the public and so I'm
I'm all for transparency and
wanna make sure we can do this
in the light of day we can and
so that being said appreciate
the continuation and so if there
are things you want to share
with us world leaders.
What.
I'm gonna be jobs I mean again I
think that we laid out eight
items
and I think what would be good
this morning and it sounded like
there was.
Some agreement on some of those
and maybe we can just actually
checked the box on what's agreed
to sell the agency does begin.
Drafting those pieces and just
see if the house has different.
Different thoughts and figure
out what we're the differences
remain to work on for the rest
of the day so maybe Mr chair
Senator maybe just want to go
down the list again of what we
came up with I just have another
discussion does that make sense.
Sure okay of thank you of the so
what we have proposed yesterday
from the Senate conference
committee members was a one is
the G. R. T. a one eighth
reduction.
And then the second book.
It with all the specials are
chairman did in in your listing
here of other things before
calls last night is is something
you want to have a discussion
openly about now as you move
down the list if you want to
read that first and then look at
those items individually and
have open discussion about that
what do you what do you think of
what I would do is go to all
eight so that leaves the public
knows what percent of proposals
and then we can come back and
and speak the ones that we agree
on I think the so that we just
go to the the eight that we
propose disabilities the public
that's listening or folks are
new out there what we proposed
in the Senate and then we can go
back and look at the the.
Entertain the topics that we
think we have some of the bill.
Okay so of course proposed from
the the Senate was the the one
eight the G. R. T. reduction.
Of also on the P. I. T. to send
their tax records to reduce to
general fund impact by fifty
million.
Number three was the a motor
vehicle excise tax to face in
the distribution over a long
period of.
On the liquor of all revenues
would go to the treatment.
And then on the capital gains
restored house production two of
forty percent on up to a million
of net capital gain on the
income.
And then on military retirement
exemption make that a permanent.
On the geo thermal reduce from
eight million to four million
and on the health care
practitioner G. R. T. deduction
increased by one third every two
years so those are the proposals
that we may and I think after
some discussion with some
agreement of.
No what we saw we're on the
capital gains it can do some of
recommendations.
maybe and so I think I think we
some programming on that craft
brewers
the use of technical issues that
need to be
taken care of on that on the geo
thermal and then the more cool
V. of vehicle excise tax.
and liquor excise tax on the the
to re distributed general fund
receipts to the.
To the let's go to the health of
the nation funding so for so.
The those are the four so
cochair.
The thank you ask chairman if if
I may for reference point for
contexts from from last night
Again depreciated discussion
that took place last evening
recognizing that the intent is
here to try to lower our tax
liability and now years
especially following up from a
press release that was given to
us after the meeting last night
from from the fourth floor
related to wanting to see
lowering of our tax liability we
recognize that we also recognize
that in our discussions and
talking back and forth with each
other at least on the house said
that more than half of of this
year's tax package our rebates
and so I think we have to keep
that in context in terms of
where we're at moving forward in
the less we're going to as as
New Mexicans are in in terms of
New Mexico continue the practice
of rebates every single year
then I think we're looking at
things we have to look things
look at things wholistic in that
in that sense so I think what
we're doing here is we're
heading in the right direction
if if albeit slowly but for
context for purposes last night
we gave the the following notes
in regards to what we saw as
well in regards to what the
house wants to see
on on the Senate amendments and
and to your point chairman
Senator we talked about those
technical fixes related to this
crap craft breweries and and
likely those are those are forth
coming to fix the captain
sections twenty nine and thirty
related to the geothermal ground
couple coupled heat pump tax
credit fix the motor vehicle
excise tax distribution
another thing that they think
they will will probably have to
talk more about our one the
single sales factor.
To related to the G. R. T.
trigger reimposition of rates
bring those back to twenty
thirty I think we can talk a
little more about those types of
things
the third one would be to talk
about you know it instead of
having to look at G. R. T. in a
reduction of a one eight G. R.
T. reduction how can we perhaps
phase in the G. R. T. over the
next three years to alleviate
maybe those concerns related to
that knowing what type of impact
the way that the G. R. T.
reduction the way that the house
may have an impact on businesses
and individuals.
I think and I'm I'm super proud
of where we're at in relation to
the capital gains deduction and
the the notion of of keeping
those of looking at the one
million dollars and having that
at forty percent yet still
understanding that that is for
New Mexico businesses and that
the twenty five hundred dollars
was still apply to out of state.
Entities
I think we're looking at and I'm
happy to look at the the the
liquor and all revenue going to
treatment I think that was the
intent in the first place and if
we can look at that and and
perhaps there is some appetite
to look at that from a twenty
percent across the board type of
aspects so that we can create
some consistency in in relation
to those types of of things
military retirement exemption I
think that we're good on this
and I think that's something we
can scratch off so
And then
There are some other things
related to perhaps the.
The tobacco stuff the tobacco
stuff knowing that we're going
to create some some of the
passively there that it probably
should go to the tobacco
settlement fund verses the
general fund but those are
things that I think we can
continue to talk about but I
know that on this side there are
some things that we have some
questions on in relation to some
of the things that you proposed
so I don't know if it's
appropriate this time to open
those up for discussions that we
can have a.
A Frank and open and candid
discussion on this.
I just suggest that Mister chair
Mister chair of the on the
capital gains deduction can we
just agree right now you know I
don't think we necessarily need
to take a vote now but I think
we should later I I mean I think
it sounds like there that was
something that we thought of it
you would thought of to yeah I
was in the military retirement
that seems like one we can check
off also on the health care
practitioner G. R. T. getting it
up to the full deduction with
the two year increments in
between I know there's also an
issue on social workers where
we're not in agreement but I
think you know it seems to me
that on the health care
practitioner piece getting that
to instead of a one third
reduction to a full deduction
there was agreement that we may
need to talk about that.
Discussion on this technicality
because we only before that five
year sunset get to the pool.
but how do you address the for
that final year so essentially
if the technical things on that
one to consider the policy the
cases in line for but I do think
that the for the do you have
agreement on is dropping the
geothermal from eight to four
okay.
Just a bit remote technical
let's check what we're doing.
And the receipts and Mr chairman
and maybe maybe you extend the
sunset the ten years on that
one.
Again as a way to space it out
but I but I get that or maybe
you don't have a sunset on that
one again it's kind of like the
military I think is a pretty
hard for us to come back and
take that away from our medical
community in the same it's hard
for us to come back and pick
where militants store for so.
Appropriateness on at that high
of.
Can you turn your thank you
thanks for the house side are.
At least our proposal for that
for consideration.
there were two
G. R. T. deductions there is the
health care practitioner one
which was a lot of practitioners
from dentists and dental
hygienists to
There are there are many and
that west and these are
deductions from copays and
deductibles which right now they
cannot charge gross receipts tax
on.
But we still make them pace
there's actually eating that so
I think it's good tax policy
look at removing the G. R. T.
from those.
the other one
this is a
A counselor and syrupy gross
receipts tax deduction on all of
their receipts.
And then I think what we were
proposing was that.
Apps we not move forward this
session with the council of
service gross receipts and with
revenue saved we could actually
paid for one hundred percent
right now for all the
deductibles and co pays for all
those practitioners.
so.
Something for consideration.
The.
then understanding on that
particular issue when it comes
to capture some therapist.
Yes some of them were actually
captured in.
The the other already.
So if you're licensed
psychiatrist you'd be captured
in that photo certain levels
depending on their license or
already in that definition so
they would actually be captured
in that some of that was
redundant
now there are some others that
might not be and that's
something that would have to
look at down the road but that
might just be a better
conversation have during the
interim we're looking at tax
policy as to what we want to do
on those particular ones that
are captured in that and why are
they captured maybe there's a
reason on that definition are.
For the policy discussions we
could have the but I would
definitely agree with making
those right now.
As it really helps the
practitioners not have to keep
the records and so I can
actually say that in two ways to
save some of the G. R. T. and it
saves them on.
recordkeeping.
And so it really really helps
clients like you Representative
Harper not as good as tax policy
if you.
K. thank you.
I I like to kind of this I I
know this is no one of these is
that and I'm not sure why they
were capturing the other but I
know we're trying to build our
they have a health you know from
the ground up and these are the
folks that are.
Literally you know as we're
doing our innovation on alcohol
harm these are the folks are
going to be you know talking to
those folks have these issues in
don't want to give in on that
because I think that's important
if we're going to build build
our behavior health system they
also need help and so I don't
understand why they are not
captured in the other and I
think that I want to keep that
conversational.
That this is just the are we
the state test you might I
suggest that before we come back
I consent to work with some
folks to prepare side by side of
this included the seven nations
have that in front of us so we
have the following that we
really good helpful thank.
If if if I may that the at the
next point related to your
number one G. R. T. one eight
reduction we have a brief
discussion about that regards to
where you're going with that and
maybe how we can come to meet
the Mr chair skin I suggest my
understanding and I've got LFC
here that can come from under
the current proposal the final
one eight doesn't go on until
after next year's thirty day
session.
And so if and and and target has
got shake yes so the thinking
would be that's the big number
if I'm correct and and it's a
hundred seventeen million
dollars and in terms of trying
to get to a real reduction
the thinking would be if we take
it off the the eight when we
come back in the thirty day
session we can see exactly where
we are and make the decision to
potentially put that back on and
be in exactly the same place
that would be if we did it Matt
I understand you know chair
light they that you know three
eight verses one half the
certainty that comes with a one
half is is a signal that's
important but I just as I
understood it the reason.
If we could still come back and
that thirty day session see
where we are and take the next
step with that eighth back on so
that was the kind of the
thinking for for doing it that
way.
reasoning
We understand that that
I would also say I think that's
why we would be open to doing it
over three years and having that
total point I go through this
bill right now because if.
the revenue estimates don't go
as planned we will be in session
for a thirty day right before
that to drop and we could delay
it or cancel it and that thirty
day so so I'm just two different
ways to look at that same.
I'm not.
We've had some conversations
within our cohort and caucus
about what happens at the
revenue estimate so common as
planned but we also want to
recognize and say out loud that
there was a significant effort
by the administration and our
member Representative Harper to
talk about here meeting the
session and what we would be
able to get there to the final
line it could have been that
over three years we either see a
different revenues or we change
policy in that it would mean
that we would potentially
holder because of of the G. R.
T. drop if we moved forward and
direction of and take care
meeting so just naming that
there's possibility maybe three
year span one because we don't
have revenues are expected or
because we have a different
shift in policy over that time
frame thank you Mr chairman.
So just as a question in terms
of the scoring I mean it was
delayed for three years so I'm
just trying to compare doing
three eights now versus delaying
for three years and how does
that get school board in terms
of the savings which we're
trying to achieve I mean I guess
that's maybe questions you'll to
is the.
Of can you get it for the five
please thank you.
Jennifer you want to come up to.
Which in the house.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
the question so the savings
would be in FY twenty four in FY
twenty five the cost would be
the same in the out years under
the current bill as passed by
the Senate and with the delay
and you'd save approximately the
hundred seventeen million in FY
twenty for an approximately
hundred twenty million in FY
twenty five and then there
aren't savings compared to the
Senate version in the beyond
years and and of course it's
depends on how you fees in you
could fees and so that you have
more savings up front and then
less in the future or you
there's several ways to do that.
So I just I would just say Mr
chair I know one of the concerns
expressed from.
The governor is the size of this
package in the out years and so
I just think if you keep.
The whole thing and kind of
phases over multiple years we're
still gonna have a huge fiscal
impact three years from now
whereas if you take the eighth
off now.
That scores out better in those
out years and and again it
allows us to come back in the
thirty eighth session and
reimpose it it if it makes sense
so again I just I'm throwing
that out because I'm trying to
understand and and and really be
rich I think all of us agree
that we need to shrink this
package down and obviously we've
got to get something that that
the governor's gonna sign.
And if I may Mister chairman I I
realize that speaking this
package down by eliminating one
eighth of the G. R. T. is is a
huge within an easy way of doing
that I think there are creative
ways and that's why I I can
appreciate where our our folks
are coming from our side of the
house side in relation to how we
can perhaps scale it down
whether we do it in a in a more
creative way where we do point
to five percent and one eighth
one eighth or or something of
that that type of flavor but
knowing that we have the
capacity as we move into the
future but you know that's I.
For conversation purposes I I
would hate for us to get focused
so much on this eliminating the
G. R. T. reduction and we not
look at other things that I
think that on our side we
brought up for for discussion
that we thought were were were
policy implications tax policy
implications and and.
Do everything up front and then
not leave time for a more robust
discussion on things in the back
in.
So I don't want to escape from
this discussion the same time I
think it's appropriate that we
also consider were at another
added items as well so if if I
may suggest and we put a pen and
that and we can revisit that
here and in a in a few moments
as we move forward on your list
because I I do have in relation
to your number two question your
personal income tax setting tax
brackets to reduce the general
fund impact by fifty million and
and what that means.
The.
Sen.
Yep I mean I think we've got our
economists here this week feels
like we're stepping kind of into
the.
Appropriations process when if
they could come up with a
scenario where you basically
moves the internal bracket such
that you're moving folks around
under which column that would
then reduce the impact by fifty
million so we didn't get into
the specifics other than and I
think that's something that they
can do and maybe you could be up
to the.
To the to the Mr Chairman
representative that would.
The the way you would yield
savings would be by expanding
those top brackets into the
lower brackets in order to
capture more of those folks in
that top bracket otherwise you
don't want to mess with the
lower brackets which could cause
increases for them Simpson Mr
chair just you know to to be
brief it means expanding some of
those brackets that we had
incrementally imposed in the
Senate version.
Okay so the initial reactions
than do that not having any type
of of table which I think at
this point would have been very
helpful but the the intent as I
mentioned last night was to was
to protect New Mexico families
was to send this package out of
the house making sure that we're
protecting those that are lower
income middle income and and the
way we were creative in doing so
was that everybody in the state
by removing the two top brackets
which is a point of contention
was that everybody in the state
would receive a tax deduction at
the end of the day so how with
this then Mr chairman and and
easy and and Jennifer then
affect those middle and and
lower middle income earners
knowing that those are our
teachers those are police
officers those are our people
that are in our communities.
Mr chair isn't Representative
up.
The the tax you know at your
direction we would would
obviously take your instruction
on on preferences for designing
this type of scenario but more
than likely we would be
maintaining the tax cut for the
lowest to to somewhere in the
middle class and then we would
be reducing the tax deduction
for maybe those earning over
fifty thousand sixty thousand.
And it would still to be clear
the receiving a tax decrease it
would just be smaller than the
version passed by the Senate
okay.
And and and and as we get
further into these discussions
again realizing I in in the
assessment of this discussion
that we're heading down to a
point where the elephant in the
room is going to be what we
doing this for is it to reduce
the capacity now years are we
doing it to accommodate I think
something that is within the the
Senate amendments that is
important to.
The alternative it is important
to the for floating point to
some people in the room but at
the end of the day we want to
make sure that we're doing
things that are important to the
Mexican families and so if you
would please.
And yes as as you all watching
saw we had tables upon tables in
the house tax committee as we
looked at much needed updates to
New Mexico's personal income tax
structure one of the things that
was most compelling to me Mr
chairs
was the conversations we've been
having for many years about how
our current bracket for captured
people with their income from
twenty four thousand to three
hundred and fifteen thousand I'm
talking for simplicity head of
household right that's the
that's a gigantic windows
spending hundreds of thousands
of dollars paying four point
nine percent and I appreciate
that through much bipartisan
compromise an extensive
conversations in the house we
did that we needed for some
brackets of course there was a
compromise maybe brought our
package to the house floor to
not increased Tackett not
increase taxes on the top two
brackets that we had created
that was a confirmation that was
that was that important to move
to represent our bipartisan
spirit to represent Democrats
from different parts of the
state but it didn't matter that
we had established a different
kind of bracket system so that
we could have more equity and
more progressivity in our
personal income tax structure
moving forward so I I appreciate
and allowed you all explain an
offer back that LFC would help
us figure out those numbers that
your intent really was was to
say fifty million by by moving
around some of the tax brackets
I think possibly for next
conversation
it would help me to see
specifically like some of those
propose numbers so that we can
discuss the more up for me at
this point it would it would be
hard to to lessen the the tax
cuts that we worked on again
because that compromise in the
house really was the heart of
our package was.
As I regional bills lower taxes
for over ninety seven percent of
New Mexicans with the slight
increase for less than three
percent when we walked back from
that we still wanted to make
sure that those lower brackets
we're facing a significant tax
cut because we think in the
spirit of this economy and these
kind of revenues we can both
plan for the long term make sure
reserves are stable but also
show up for those families so if
if we can have some options for
the next time we talk this for
me.
It's something that isn't quite
appetizing yet as we have this
conversation thank you Mr
chair just affect your I want to
be clear here that the
compromise the top brackets was
not discussed with us and the
other way to get fifty million
dollars is to put the practice
back in and so I just want to
throw that out there were some
compromise on the top brackets
because that's another way to I
mean you could put a new top
bracket at six point four
percent and that would then
bring in money an accomplice
which what we're all trying to
do here and so I just want to
throw that out because again
it's another way to generate
some some revenue and again it's
all about and and I'm I look at
and if Representative and I
appreciate very much I don't
like the idea of backing away
from.
That the Senate that the
brackets that were there I think
the problem is though when you
took off the top brackets we
lost the revenue that that was
going to bring it and that's
what's put us in a position
where the dollar number is such
that we need to find again to to
shrink this so I just want to
throw that is another another
possible options.
Mr chairman of the fund by New
York I appreciate both sides of
the conversation but.
you know that one of the main
reasons we're looking at trying
to the lower the overall
packages because that's what the
governor cans will support.
But at the same time we have a
huge revenues
and huge over six.
and so for for me at least it's
very difficult to support any
kind of tax increase in a.
Environment where we have
literally billions of dollars
extra.
And in talking to David Abbey
you know.
Without doing anything will have
one point eight billion in
revenue next year and so I think
that's that's going to be
difficult for the public to
understand why we're looking at
raising taxes.
Buyer we're we have so objection
on any love
and so.
That's my two cents on this
To figure out how do we how do
we balance government one of the
total package to be smaller.
And at the same time.
Not raising taxes in a bar or we
have billions of dollars.
And I think that's where the G.
R. T. reduction came in is
restored using at still reducing
significantly.
Just not as much so that we can
help balance the PH of the state
of yeah you know because I think
all of us agree it's not really
on either one of our list so I
think we're all in agreement
that will it's for.
and so with that that's kind of
we just take that off the table
because I think all of us want
that.
So the only thing we have the
security that's that's costing a
lot of money.
At the the the.
Discussion.
But some.
And and if I may Mr chairman and
and senators and representatives
on the point where you want to
try and transition into the film
discussion I think it's time at
this point to to talk about that
I mean in regards to we're we're
we're trying to to send things
in regards to the personal
income tax you want to affect
the G. R. T. in in certain
aspects as well when I think of
those of New Mexicans Mexican
families and folks all across
our state and so we can look at
the film discussion I know that
the Economic hero for the
feathers but I know last night
when we talked a little bit
about film and we talked about
some of the aspects related to
above the line matters
it wasn't with the intent to to
be disruptive as with the intent
to open a Frank and honest
discussion here on this dice in
regards to how does that affect
New Mexico families and values
in the overall scheme of things
related to that.
Are we doing things backwards
with with non Mexicans in money
and putting New Mexico.
On on the back burner and so
again not not with no and with
that with no intent and all due
respect to the discussions as we
move forward but can you explain
to us that of the policy matters
related to the state above the
line and I think as as our first
and probably largest portion
what we're trying to shave
things back but seeing that
above the line as a potential
seventy million fifty seven
million in the out years is a
huge huge impact to to to the
budget.
Mr chairman thank you and yeah I
I agree no that's that's a big
area yeah we also talk about the
non resident
honestly that's that's what I
have a hard time with
and so I think that's an area
that maybe we can get some
agreement to reduce you know
maybe not eliminated but reduce
the impact from
because quite frankly I'm not a
big fan of of giving money to.
So one of the other resident New
Mexico early sept it's not
priority for me that party is to
take care of people in our state
so I think with the film tax
credit we really want that to be
while those things were really
for film companies to use of
higher as many New Mexicans as
possible so that money really
stays in our.
and so that's where I have a
little bit of the issue with
that nonresident one and young
with you on the above the line
cap as well another another
issue where we're jumping from
five million to fifteen million
euros or somewhere in between
there that we can all agree on
that would be the the sweet spot
right to where we could save you
know we don't need to go
following fifteen maybe is yes
maybe it's a maybe eleven I
don't know but I think that's an
area that we can discuss to try
to figure out where where we
come out.
But it.
Thank you Mr chair so I just
want to say I have some
heartburn about the five percent
add to the rural let's just be
honest I mean that certain parts
of the state that helps I worry
that it could affect.
You know the area that I
represent but I'm willing to go
there I get that that's part of
the discussion I do want to push
back a little bit on the idea
that the above the line is not
about New Mexicans.
Our film industry and is
blossoming and it's providing
incredible jobs for New Mexicans
and I just think you know when
Netflix com's and the expansion
it's happening yeah they made
rate this would propose the
ability to pay for additional
money for an actor but you bring
one of those productions to New
Mexico and these are New Mexican
jobs and this is one of the ways
that we diversify our economy
that's really work and I know
Representative good enough I
think I saw you out it's a when
Tom Hanks was just here in town
and and he's one of those big
stars and I just so so I just
want to push back a little bit
on the idea that somehow that's
not going to ultimately help New
Mexicans because these are
fantastic New Mexico jobs and I
just I'm a huge supporter of the
bill.
Having said that I understand
the need to be accomplished and
I and I think that there is the
ability and we're going to need
to figure out how to lower some
of those amounts to provide
money it's not fair to ask Miss
shave someplace else or lower
the G. R. T. and not also asked
that this is part of the mix and
I'm good with that so I just
want to put on the table.
I'm sorry.
Okay hello.
Thank you Mr chairman members
I really appreciate where this
conversation is going I want to
again say out loud
LFC Mr Abbey in the room have
heard me push on our economists
to to do an even more expensive
job capturing the significant
economic impacts that come from
Phil it's been frustrating for
me when I'm sitting at rest of
our other places to hear this
Matt done that if we calculate
how much goes out to credit and
divided by jobs there's this
figure thrown on the wall like
every job is costing us as much
and that is not the the.
That doesn't capture the real
impactful is happening because
yes there's jobs but there's
also so much economic
development happening when the
customers need to pay a local
dry cleaner to stay open twenty
four seven to make sure they
have a turnaround on getting
those costumes back out when we
are delivering checks of
hundreds of thousands of dollars
to locally a lumber yards
because they're building out a
set like there's jobs and then
there's the the rest of the
impact so I I want to first
appreciate how much
diversification of film has
brought to all sorts of New
Mexico sectors and especially we
can we can get those productions
out applications.
and in full transparency Mr
chair this I I remember when I
saw you on the set because maybe
my apartment hunting part of the
the person that I get treatment
because it works in film I don't
remember what he was there but
typically he's the first CD I
think he's the only person the
directors guild of America up
south of Albuquerque so that's
where you get these somewhat
into my understandings about how
how connections are moving he's
currently on the issue in on on
Mexico nation working there so
the peace I really want to lift
up on where I think we said we
have willingness to have the
conversation is on the real
uplift like we said yesterday
because of we're changing the
point on the map where we
measure those boundaries
but lake the senator has shared.
We still are holding significant
concerns about changing the
ratio on non resident crew I
think especially this comes into
play to rural and into the
hearts of New Mexico that would
be eligible for the roll up left
if someone is already paying for
the hotel paying the housing
costs like needing to get
someone out into one of those
rural communities where they're
going to shoot.
And they can be that person
whether they bring their guy
from LA or bring in New Mexican
from Santa Fe or Albuquerque up
to those locations is still
worries me that we potentially
would destabilize the New Mexico
workforce by offering them the
same incentive to bring that
person the person that they know
that they trust instead of
bringing someone from one of our
film basically out to that rural
communities I think the biggest
implication there is that we can
actually under cut the
investments we're trying to make
a film in rural New Mexico by
changing the ratios on the out
non resident creating jobs so
that one I I just think warrants
more conversation when we talk
about above the line I
appreciate it and hearing it and
and while I see that we've done
and the people in this room
today have done incredible work
to to make official film
partners with Netflix and
NBCUniversal and now eight two
eight and my part of the blue
but I I still would like to hear
more and learn more in the long
run about where this above the
line credits need to come into
our incentive package including
your example that you and I were
on the same films that with Tom
Hanks and if I remember right he
shot twice in New Mexico that
here so there there's still
conversations that played like
are we a capacity with that we
have today are we making the
right investments in New Mexico
schools and trade so that more
like tuitions are available to
work here more construction
people are able to work besides
the sort of sexy ideas we think
of that everybody's going to be
the next writer director to come
out of New Mexico like we need
to keep having that full
conversation but I I do have
some curiosities then for you
all when you say where's the
number right now are caps for
this film partners all right if
I understand right five million
per production
the proposal is to triple those
caps for production to fifteen
million.
for me again that is a big
stress because every adjustment
we made to the film incentive
formulas that those still
dollars are coming back and
staying in New Mexico as part of
our general fund but instead
actually become yeah they they
don't make it here because they
become part of the eligibility
for it for the rebate on on the
production side so for for me I
think the non resident crew is
a much different kind of mission
this is already in place that
they're talking about growing it
what would be the number that
you all felt was appropriate to
start saying out loud.
Representative have a add to
that.
The.
Yeah so so chairman's at present
senators so.
So I'll just say I love seeing
New Mexico on the silver screen
I think I've told this story
before I was heading south on I.
twenty five by the Jefferson
area.
And I see this white Lamborghini
convertible pull up and someone
talking on their cell phone
while driving is like who is
this punk right.
And so I I pay a long side
And the it's Robert Downey
junior
the news you're filming one of
the
with our management is yeah
and so yeah I love singing
Mexico the silver screen that
said
but I've also not in the fact
that I really think this is
really a huge giveaway we've had
three studies done.
that looks at how much this
helps the state the first study
show that it was a huge win but
included tourism.
The second study showed it was a
huge loss and Sir is that he
said we break about even.
Right
and.
And I think if we took.
And look at our tax expenditures
if we adopt this I think Phil
will become number two.
right behind food.
and so I think any industry if
you're gonna pay them this much
money what a commitment to New
Mexico and and find you know the
the many services and things
that we see.
The the issue with this
particular industry that I have
concerns about is we hear from
them that
If we reduce the incentives or
if they provide better service
somewhere else they're just
there's not a leave and so to me
that shows that they're really
not vested in New Mexico there
are vested in the pay out not
really rather that we if we're
gonna spend this kind of money
on corporate welfare that we do
it on an industry that is vested
in New Mexico and puts roots
down in New Mexico it's not a
tumbleweed industry like the the
film industry.
Now.
That said.
I said last night that a good
tax package has seventy percent
of stuff that I like and thirty
percent of stuff that I hate
this is gonna be something that
I hate.
but
and my caucus is gonna hate but
I can go back to them and say
you know we we worked out a
compromise.
and and that compromise included
you know things like capital
gains and military tyrant and
single sales factor.
Thank you Jennifer thank you.
you Mr chair I think this is one
of those where I would suggest
that when we come back on our
next break
I would say I'm comfortable with
the federal and I and realizing
the expense and the impact that
it has
when you take dynamic scoring
and we can debate a bunch what
what I'd suggest perhaps is.
You know this is one where this
might be where the house comes
back and says here here's here's
our our exact proposal this is
what we're willing to do and and
I do think we can we can get
there I really do because what
I'm hearing is that there's room
to compromise but I also think
and then it and then the other
question too is this with the
bill signed.
So that's another piece to it.
Just a thank you for chair just
add you know I'm a big fan of
the film as well and what it
costs a lot of money but one of
the things I see these as we
evolve is the amount of the
native talent you know in our
schools and what's happening in
Gallup I I a and folks come in
and and hopefully you know as
these of Business industry grows
I know my next door neighbor is
a of the bill that would call
the the the customs so she's
always moving on back to you
just came back from I think the
state of an advocate for the Los
Alamos of films so the so I see
a lot of native folks getting
out of your own construction but
also the technical side of the
writing and all of this so this
exciting I know it's because a
lot of money but I believe from
what I could instance creates
like.
So I guess it's only to job
creation piece that I see in
this building.
You know we look at all the
things were given away this is
the only one that's creating
jobs and those jobs mean to
rural parts or our communities
our tribal reservations I think
of the film didn't come Amos
well if I think since the
nineteen seventies the and and
so we so you see that work and
and the last from my side I
can't remember what the movie
was and I was thinking that god
that looks like Sandia mountains
from the from the backs in I
found what I watched a movie and
it was going to look into and so
the and it was and in
Afghanistan I I could move that
movie was I don't over I'm not a
really big movie but it's late
night and so forth so I see you
know when I see the credits you
know the rural parts of our of
our communities to see that and
the and although I have a place
to go rental one day it was.
Going to the store to stop right
intended those Boulevard is
what's going to have to wait
for.
Ten minutes at this issue going
on of course all right.
Longer I was in a hurry I just
sat there is you I could see
here is like the rest of us you
know.
But the but anyway so but it's
it's it's you know it's costing
us but I think it's also cream
industry that I think it's clean
it's good for Mexico and it's
creating a lot of jobs so we'll
see that these.
the but by the same this year
was I actually supported film
for the first time ever and so
Senator Representative alright
that be about the.
But.
you can't really say that
breaking bad is not brought
tourism to our state.
Now not sure like the message
of.
But it did bring I mean that
that's been a big tourism you
know draw for us and I think
every time you see New Mexico on
the big screen people say all
I've never been able to check
out New Mexico and so I do think
there are some some benefits to
it that more on just the wrong
numbers that we usually see it
is like search and those of and
one of the only things we see in
this package is actually
creating jobs.
We use tax credits a lot I can
create of through a lot of
industry we spent many millions
of dollars to build space port
is still.
Is in the.
So you know I I think film is a
better investment right now at
least the space for and we
actually have a couple years ago
some people calling the
reference investment.
And you doesn't actually
supposed to have a return.
the other drainage and so I I
think that this is one area that
we do see some return on our
investment but I think there's
that we can look at how can we
make this more power for all of
us we'll go back to my office
and say Hey
maybe one of the few Republicans
of that you know will support
this industry in this way so how
do we go back and say you know
we we were able to lower that to
make it more reasonable
increased and the as we look at
in the future so I I think
there's some ways we can do that
since the government supporters.
Thank you for if I may senators
and representatives and and
before center Frank DC drink
more of the film's use.
That does the job.
Maybe too early for this over
the last day of the second seem
to be last day you know it seems
to it seems to me at this point
of time is not our friend it's
ten o'clock now and I want to
make sure that we were going to
a place we can begin to hash out
these these these issues so it
seems to me at this point G. R.
T. is an issue still personal
income taxes an issue still cap
gains is an issue still film is
in issues
that can't gains corporate put a
single sales using excuse me
single sales
My apologies single sales those
things we could probably come to
some type of agreement on likely
in short order I would imagine a
few things that we have not
touched upon yet are tobacco
alcohol alcohol I think we we
we're we're we're close we've
had a little bit of discussion
but I'd I'd like to know that we
can leave you with some better
sense of where we're at on that
and then at this point of.
Call it a morning and then come
back in and do some other things
yes Representative thank you
gentleman what that procedure
bring up the the alcohol issue
you know the the way the that
came over from the house like to
support more than the way we did
in the Senate
but honestly it's an increase
the LFC is necessary
we have been for ever putting
twenty five million dollars in
the general fund from that
I think that the big change in
alcohol taxes is that we're
gonna actually use that for you
know dealing with the problems
of alcoholism
and you know it's already twenty
five million dollar hit to the
budget but this one that I think
we all agree on.
Personally I think we should
wait to increase alcohol taxes
to where we see what the effect
of that is but I am willing to
compromise a little bit of an
but not to the point of of
honestly what what was put in.
In the the Senate that was way
too big of an increase in market
we more than doubled the tax on
your.
And the other ones were pretty
significant as well
I I feel like you're your idea
of the twenty percent across the
board is that we're treating at
least every category the state.
As far as increase
There's a there's another way we
could also look at it and that's
doing the
charge at the end of so if you
want to get to that point right
that actually the customer base.
So you can look at the three
percent.
For sale tax on your phone New
York served drinks so you're
going to four going to a
restaurant advisory for ten
dollars is going to cost you
thirty cents as an additional
tax over your G. R. T. on that
that may be a way of getting
that we're you know some of the
proponents wanted for Drake tax
doesn't really have the person
that's buying it at the store
brand home and and using home
yes there some of the acts of
our whole home but I think one
of our biggest affects.
When it comes to alcoholism is
the devil I and so if we can get
keep people from having four
five drinks with their dad and
driving home I think that that's
an accomplishment there is one
of those things up thank you
Just Mr chairman I think we're
all in on making sure the money
goes to the treatments the so
the general fund that's there's
agreement on that this is one
that that on the alcohol on
exactly how it's done.
Again I think there may be votes
to do something different that
we're not all going to be on the
same page on and I would just
suggest that we have some
proposals and we want to give
time to vote we put him out and
I think there's going to be a
situation where to into will
happen it just may not be the
same on that one also I will say
on on the vaping issue I need to
understand what the impact of
the general fund as we put it
all into tobacco which I agree
with a hundred percent I know
center if you wanted to do that
but we were told that the money
was needed for the general fund
so just just real quick and I do
want to say we've got the Senate
Judiciary Committee outside the
door so we've really got to move
more quickly and so Mr chair
Senator if you just try to
capture only the increased
revenue and not not get all of
it out of the general fund only
the increased revenue that the
about five and a half plus
million dollars Mr chair I think
we should do that for that cost
I think that's something that's
consistent with what we're doing
on alcohol and I just feels to
me like we should do that
understanding that that means.
Slide we're we're going the
wrong direction.
I I just think I would just
throw that okay I think that I
would stand by as well at this
point time knowing that you have
a committee of state waiting for
the room can we leave them with
the agreements that we have a
