I think it's.
Your civil.
The screen sorry.
I
want to make sure things are
done in the of.
Yeah.
On.
That maybe that person so.
There's an easy way to find out.
Shown on the actual so we know
we're on the have to figure that
out that some people are not as
I. T. sent.
Thank you okay so I just ask we
clarify my question which I
understand it right my god.
So under.
Under current law.
residents.
Of New Mexico.
You are employed for film
production how to percent of
their wages count.
Towards the rebate.
And of those wages it's twenty
five thirty thirty five percent
that is depending on whether it
happens.
Is the rebate amount.
And then non residents you
cannot twenty percent of their
wages and of that twenty percent
that you calculate fifteen
percent.
Is the rebate amount that's
current law.
And that we're proposing here is
that for film partners only we
increase for non residents that
twenty percent to fifty percent.
Still only at that fifteen
percent rebate amount.
That's what we're proposing here
and then the five year sunset.
I guess my question at least
after five years we're going
back from fifty percent to
twenty percent are we saying
after five years no more rebate
for non residents.
Mr chair is that members of the
committee just give us one
second to chat.
It's always a lot.
Mr chair as members of the
committee given the fact that
the other states that are are in
the movie business have twenty
five to thirty percent right now
for their out of state creating
I think that we should do the I
that we should do the five year
sunset and then take it back to
the original and really have
some discussions at that point
because right now that language
was act actually crafted by the
teamsters and the unions and
they agreed to to it with the
studios and basically what it
does is it really opens the
conversation.
Per show to see how much for we
have how many of them are here
how many of them are qualified
to work on some of these bigger
shows so I would hate to make us
uncompetitive in five years when
we look at that so I would say
that right now we are at the
we're at the bottom of the pack
so if if we want to do that and
five years I would say take us
back to the bottom of the pack
as opposed to zero because I
don't know if we'll could be be
competitive at that time but I
do think that we will have five
years will have the media school
up and running and will be able
to make those have those
conversations at that point
because it's really hard for us
to tell right now I out C. has
told us that there are people
moving here every month I
believe it was about a hundred
every month from other areas
like Georgia Los Angeles New
York some of those are people
who actually when the cap was
put on during the Martinez
administration went to Georgia
so it's hard for us to look at
that but I wouldn't want to take
is down to zero because I do
think that would be really
really hurting us okay so.
Chairman secretary thank you for
helping me understand
Kind of what this proposal is
and what how it works the other
part of this
nonresident
crew is for non partners.
Right and and my understanding
is we were doing some things
there to make it a little more
restrictive on on non film
partners can you just explain so
two part question explain what
those changes are and then does
the sunset apply to those
changes or just the ones we
talked about prior.
Mr chair as members of the
committee I'll defer to John
Clark on this sure so Mister
chairs and members of the
committee so right now both film
partners and non partners have
the same deal twenty percent of
wages can can be for non
residents to qualify for that
fifteen percent credit for non
partners because we're really
trying to incentivize partners
to to invest long term here the
partners are the ones working
with us on the media cabinet me
on internships we're actually
making it a little bit more
stringent on the non partners so
we're anticipating a savings of
about a couple million dollars a
year from this non partners
component because rather than
just saying twenty percent of
wages can qualify for non
residents we're listing out
specific numbers of positions
they can qualify based on the
size of the production and based
on our analysis of the numbers
of positions that have qualified
in the past based on productions
this would result in some small
savings this part could stay
intact after the five years it
would just be the greater
flexibility for partners that
would revert to current law
after five years sunset after I
so such a chairman and sectarian
W. secretary so thank you that
was very helpful so the sunset
would not apply to making this a
little stricter on on the non
partners we're gonna keep that
in place we think that's better
policy will drive folks to be
more partner.
give better benefits to our
partners
Okay that that helps me
understand.
that proposal thank you.
You
questions.
Okay.
I guess I apologize I one more
question on that
chairman and the secretary W.
secretary you mentioned that you
worked with us the unions.
All the skaters maybe describe
that a little bit because we we
just wanna make sure that
These changes have and all the
folks on a table Mr Mr chair as
members of the committee so
we've actually taken the last
year to put forth SB twelve of
which now we have stripped SB
twelve and put the four most
important components are and
what happened is I. out C. and
the teamsters and six hundred
all came together with the
studios during the session and
really nail down that language
so that they feel comfortable
with.
How many people are actually
here and qualified to do the
shows and it's going to be a
constant conversation that the
film office is also involved in
and we look at every show and we
say okay how many shows are here
who is qualified what is how
much is the shadow and we
really.
It the in the partners are
incentivized to use resident
crow they will obviously get the
twenty to twenty five to thirty
percent on resident crew and
they will only be getting the
fifteen percent on non resident
crew and this is like I said a
collaboration that happened in
the first few weeks of us being
here and we stuck with that
language because we know that
that's what the unions and the
teamsters want to.
Mr chair is just to ask the
unions are not here today.
No I would madam chair
Mister chairs Representative I
don't see them in there they
present and it's did they show
up in support as part of SB
twelve Mr chair as members of
the committee as they did.
Yes that thank you.
All right and then so I think I
understand this provision well
just make sure I understand the
other two.
The
the cap for non field partners
is currently at a hundred ten
million.
That proposal that we
for as as amended by the Senate
would go up by ten million every
year for ten years bring it to
children ten.
And we're talking about here is
lowering it from ten to years to
eight a year and again for ten
years yes okay.
And then.
For the last part this is the
above the line portion that
we're talking about.
this kind of two main parts to
that right there is the.
There's the total cap.
Yes the total cap right now is.
Fifteen million.
And we're proposing.
And in the Senate amendment that
total capital from fifty million
to fifty million.
The proposal here is to either
bring it down to forty.
Or to bring down a thirty five
foot increases by five million.
Every year for how many years.
I think we had set for five
years.
Okay okay so that would so so
it's either forty or reduce
thirty five but get it up to
sixty over five years I would
also give us some time to see if
it's working to see if the you
know the.
Partners that we're trying to
get to to grow are growing and
if not we could come back in and
then say okay so we're not going
to keep it keep increasing it
because we're not seeing the
effects from it that we're
wanting to see.
Okay thank you that that's
helpful and then the the last
part of that one with regards to
the current cap per production
of five million the current law
and the proposed
as in the Senate bill was
fifteen I was raised three times
to fifteen at is there any any
part of the proposal that
addresses that Mr Chairman
really the the fifteen million
really helps us bring in some of
those larger shows
which from what sectors
explaining to me is in the past
we were doing a lot of mini
series a lot of small low lower
budget shows but what we're the
industry's moving to is more of
the multi season shows like one
of my favorite stranger things
so the multi season brings lots
more money into our economy and
that's what we're trying to
attract attract so by cutting
that back what we're doing is
we're cutting back the ability
to be able to bring in those
larger ships that I get that
right.
Mr chair members of the
committee just there's been a
real shift in the industry
recently and the streamers are
definitely at the at the head of
the pack it's very difficult to
make a May mid budget to low
budget film or television show
and actually have it gets
distribution right now so we're
really just reacting to the
trends and the film and
entertainment industry in order
to get those big shows and why
it's important to get those big
shows are those of the shows
that the students going through
the media how to me are going to
get paid internships on some of
those smaller shows
there's a lot of cost cutting
sometimes that goes on there's a
lot of long hours we want to
make sure that our students are
on shows that are going to
accommodate them.
And the chairman and the
secretary Senator we're talking
about short shows are long shows
are you talking about like how
many episodes are in a season.
Mr chair as members of the
committee so there's also been a
real sea change in the industry
where there is being there's
less movies being made and more
long term television shows being
made and quite honestly for New
Mexico that could be our sweet
spot especially with our
partners net Flix it because
these are multi year shows that
keep on coming back we also have
the ability with our partners to
forecast how many students were
going to need what type of show
it is they usually run for about
nine months and then they're on
hiatus for three months and then
they pick back right up again so
it is this is a sweet spot that
we're really trying to attract
it's not that we don't want the
independent films here and I
don't think we're going to get
the mid big movies with the cap
that we have put on the A. T. L.
so really it is about these
larger budgeted television shows
that go multi seasons.
Yes that that helps me
understand the proposal thank
you chairman thank you.
Thank you but just to clarify in
the proposal your priority here
is the overall cap on above the
line and not the and but leaving
in place that the same.
Per production cap that was in
the Senate amendments to H. B.
forty seven.
Thank you so that right yes.
So leaving it at fifteen million
per production as in the Senate
amendments maximum cap being
either the thirty five for the
fourth to the thirty I would
take it above Mr chairs the
original fifty million so it and
higher than what was originally
in the Senate amendments whether
the drop four years before was
higher than what was originally
the sentiment but leaving the
fifteen million per production
cap.
Yes thank you.
So at this point Center Brandt
let me ask you that if if
there's four aspects and and and
we've already agreed upon the
role of the fifty that's that's
valuable what.
What will be for the public's
understanding look at numbers
you will be the costs that over
years move for.
For each so that start with the
The top the cast cap the the
total cost for ten years would
be eighty million for you know
total for ten years so a million
a year for total cost of eighty
I think my math right right is.
I was freezing
and then for the above the line
if we did the forty million then
that would be forty million a
year.
If you want to do five year
total that B. two hundred.
if you did the thirty five
million with the the the five
million increase then you're
saving money for the first three
years well the first two years
then just breaking even on the
third and then your creasing
after that the good thing about
that is that gives us time to
come back and look at it
so by the end of that year at
the fifty million if you do the
forty million we to stay there
And then the other non resident
crew that would just sunsets at
the end of this really just a
change in how that figured out
that doesn't really change the
dollar amount right because we
already have the maximums bills
and Mr chair members of the
committee L. I. will con who
still Clark Kent's the question
Sir Mr chairman members of the
committee after everything
essentially goes into effect
after we have had the the five
years of increases to the ATO
cap maxing out at the sixty
million after we have had the
five years of in our C. E. and
then the divisional flexibility
reverted back to current law but
keeping the more restrictive
language for local partners at
that point long term what we're
looking at is a total package of
about a hundred forty one
million dollars in general fund
revenue.
That is five years to get there
correct thank you.
Thank you for doing that work
for us I mean we we appreciate
it I think before we can.
We could we we can we can.
But just as a little bit but I
think it's important also
regarding we're at now with
eighty two to income tax and
tobacco have also have that
discussion before we move for
but Representative thank you
meant for this is the we've done
a lot of work on this and I
don't know any better I think
you're the film that around
here.
Please those stuff.
The at this time I'd like to you
know to your if we don't with
the feeling goes okay with the
film moving on.
Okay for now okay so not in
agreement okay.
Right yeah moving on for this
for the moment so thank you to
Senator Wirth on the on the
income tax in the city of the
state I'm in this channel I want
to just lay out of it as someone
who does mediations in my
professional life we're we're
kind of busy we're bidding
against ourselves here again we
have proposed a fifty million
dollar reduction and I think the
response was we want to do it
and so we're gonna come back now
and I just want to throw out we
we consider doing a twenty five
million dollars.
Kind of shave on the personal
income tax that's in the package
the.
that has on.
Three page page three so that's
that again everyone still
getting reduction in it just
slightly less than half of what
I've been proposed up front
on that front so I throw that
out there
We're still not I mean I I will
tell you I I personally have a
real issue with the single sales
having said that when a place
where we need to get this done
and again you need to votes on
this side not three.
The gets the single sales to go
away and I think the key thing
that that.
Is really driving our ability to
get something they'll be signed
as the film and I do think if we
can get the agreement on the
film.
Then again my sense is here I'm
on.
I'm probably not gonna vote for
it but I think you could
probably get two votes on the
side is my sense
and again we can get into the
whole debate in the policy about
all that but I I really do think
we're to point here what we need
to we need to wrap this up we
just don't have time because the
bill's going to get drafted and
we got to get it through our
chambers so we're kind of at
that point so that's those are
the two things on those two on
those two issues and I just
laughed.
What about tobacco I know we had
some discussion about that in
our community and I know that
the that's the issue that you
want to do that alone I know
that there was some of the
discussion going on back and
forth the of I know that we've
talked to the sponsor anomalies
not happy but you know it's a
something that we go to look at
so but at this late moment in
time we're willing to let go of
that one for now and then come
back and and really look at that
look forward.
if if if I may Mr chairman and
and Senator Representative
Representative I I can
appreciate where where you're
you're sending proposal comes
into play it's still and fax.
Helps and affects lower income
and middle income individuals to
a point where they it looks like
they still will be the the
beneficiaries of this type of
structure even if it's a little
bit lower but none the less it
focusses yet on them and it
still does not include any any
top bracket so I think at this
point if I'm wrong but I don't
see anything on here it does not
include any top brackets anymore
or you again but
There's no tax increase for
anyone on personal income tax
Mr chairman that's exactly right
again this is not.
I stated earlier in each of us
have our own opinions but it's
time to compromise and get the
stuff.
The.
Okay
at this point we appreciate what
we've come this far and if if
the only the only thing that's
that's a keeping us from getting
the signed
can you guys show with them your
thoughts and I think maybe if if
if this is something that.
One listen to give the company
noble to it think we're we're
we're there.
Yeah so so I'll just.
Throw this out there and please
share your thoughts
so chairman and chairman
chairman
The going down from ten to
eight.
of the the total cap over ten
years I mean I I appreciate that
which is ten years is is.
There's a lot can we either make
it not ten years or lower that
amount just a little bit more
because I'm looking at a hundred
forty one million dollar film
packages looking at is is there
some room for negotiating that.
Making an offer.
We have to offer is Mr chair is
is drop it to five a year for
ten years on the total cap or
keep it at ten and do it for
five years.
But getting to fifty million
increase out of the hundred
million that was originally
requested.
Mr chair and members we can we
can hear a lot of compelling
arguments but certainly this is
something we have to go back and
sell in the house that
Was pretty decisive with they're
not interested in pursuing this
is part of a tax package and not
just that you know a standalone
conversation debate that
chairperson and representative
of I appreciate that and and I I
think that
you know understanding of why we
want to do that.
I think I just got a text
message.
The table.
This is about this so I think
it's a good compromise might be
the that we look at doing
Eight million for five years.
that's even better because they
were they were.
Just ten for five ten ten
million for five years is what
they option was the that's the
one number we go eight for seven
years.
I
think it is the we.
I just throw out though it seems
to me if we're doing the five
year sunset doing ten for five
it just and we have a look again
at five years it just feels like
that's better and that just
keeps the number where it is so
that I would just suggest we
need to propose that ten five
ten for five years that that'll
work.
Talk about above the line okay
yes above the line.
For now it is the we're hearing
that we're behind other states
and that's something New Mexico
isn't any policy discussion
we're having Mr tears
Because our our our chamber is
still want to have conversations
about this and the total cap
today's at fifteen million what
it feel like to double that cap
to thirty million and
potentially come back to that as
we can start to see and measure
what those above the line
increases do if we can see.
You know that it's bringing in
the bigger projects that you all
say are coming to New Mexico
currently but currently yeah.
Services that.
Production.
With
in my yes so if you all wanted
to talk about the production
have either increasing it we of
course know that today it's at
five it's currently fifteen I'm
more concerned with that cap
overall.
If if to two productions
apparently went out at the same
here at fifteen it would that
there's only two or three
productions whether we get you
to thirty or forty is still only
to the production so I'm not
sure if you all want to bring
the production cap down from
fifteen because it potentially
right means that there's four or
five productions that are using
above the line in that town in
that tax year but you know where
that might weigh in.
Mr chair as members of the
committee we would
So let me tell you a little bit
about what's going to happen
with me but this cap on so
during the Martinez
administration we had a cap and
we ended up going into a backlog
unfortunately that backlog was a
hundred and eighty million
dollars and we didn't know that
when this administration came in
so we really want to avoid that
in addition to our main partner
right now is Netflix that's not
a secret to anyone they are out
there in their building or
stages so by putting this fifty
million dollar cap on we are
capping the industry right now
we are saying that we do not
want anymore production here
than is already here and that's
very unfortunate because Netflix
had planned to build sixteen
stages so they will need to go
back and figure out if they need
to stop constructing and that's
a real problem so by taking this
down to thirty million I think
everyone in the room has to
realize that we are saying we
want to know more business in
New Mexico so if we have fifteen
million then
there can be very few films that
actually come here in this big
space in this long term
series space so if you could
actually what it what is the
offer again Representative
Cadena Mr chair.
point us to where in the Senate
amendments we're looking at the
cap as it was explained to us
there is already a cap in your
speaking it speaking as if we're
implementing a new cap I mean in
my mind we're talking about
raising the cat but isn't there
a cap in place today Mr chair as
members of the committee there's
actually a cap for non partners
and that is a hundred and ten
million but the idea was to not
cap our growth of our partners
because they have committed to
being here for ten years they
have either leased or purchased
facilities they are helping us
pay for the media academy there
providing paid internships for
students they are really and it
with us and so that's the type
of Mr chair system perfect is
there currently a clap cap on
above the line.
Credit as it comes back into
this incentive.
I'm not asking about the
hundreds your chairs members of
the committee there's currently
a cap of five million in the
current legislation for above
the line so we can't incentivize
anything over five million and
that's why we've had a little
bit of a slow here to be honest
with you that is Mr chair spur
production correct that is
proposed is the current cap per
total the total so
Mr chair as members of the
committee it was this fifty
million dollar cap was put on
the.
During the drafting of these and
these amendments into the tax
package there is not a current
cap on that overall.
The Senate amendment.
Okay that's helpful okay.
Okay so so thank you just maybe
up.
We reframe it brings all backed
together so I think we
understand now I think there was
some I personally misunderstood
I thought there was an existing
cap for the above the line.
And that we were increasing that
and so just to free for
everything there too two things
were talking about above the
line right now there is a five
million dollar cap on purpose
production and that's it what's
in the Senate proposal is that
we triple that to fifteen
million production but also add
a cap of fifty million dollars
Mr chair members of the
committee that is correct all
right and that Mr chair for
partners yes Representative the
support from.
Then
coming to where we're at right
now
We have not talked really about
changing that five to fifteen
million dollars.
but we had talked about perhaps
lowering that fifty to forty.
Or thirty five with the five
year increase of five minutes
year and then there was some
talk about well if we were to
thirty and then did it go up all
the way to fifteen you know
maybe you had it at.
You know ten and then you have
three productions that you have
before you hit the cap I think
that was kind of the the
question that.
We were we were just wanted to
get your thoughts on.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we have actually
talked to our partners about
this and to that fifteen million
is very important for them right
now we are not getting these big
shows do I imagine that for five
of them are going to come next
year no I don't so they would
actually rather have that
fifteen million with the thirty
five like Senator Brandt
suggested and then you know in a
few years time we'll have more
data data and we can actually
look at it and see what's going
on.
Okay so
that was super helpful chairman
and secretary and and John thank
you for helping us understand
that so so then I guess we would
propose for consideration that
we go ahead and maintain that
fifteen million dollar a hearing
from you on that so that's
that's a three times increase
the knowledge in that role I
think we keep that.
And then we propose that we do
thirty five million without the
build up increase let's come
back next year and the following
year and see are they going up
to that amount are are we
starting to see a backlog and
then we could talk about what
what should we growing up to be.
Misprint Center and and
appreciate that
but I would really prefer to
just leave it at the forty
million if we're not going to
that way they can do a couple
of.
Fifteen million and then maybe a
couple of smaller ones I just
think we need to leave them some
room to be able to work with cap
doesn't mean you're a region
it just gives the secretary the
ability to work within that
range and so
we can forget about my great
wonderful employee ID of the
five million increasing every
year
but if we could have it at forty
million with fifteen million
each production I think that I
could support that.
I just southern are and.
She at the when I was looking
at.
Something else I'm sorry so.
so so so chairman Senator I.
Well I think we're a responding
over five million at this point
which is a great place to be
right when we talk about the
whole package
and and I think
I understand you'd like the the
forty I think with like the
thirty five I think it's a big
deal that we've.
Agree to go from the five
million to fifteen million.
you've come from fifty to forty
one if maybe you could just.
Come to the thirty five.
With
the federal funding the fifteen
which is ten so I matched your
tend by going.
Well as both given so so so
chairman if if we want to play
the have if you want to find out
if we were to play bass we we
came up two hundred percent
appreciate.
I mean but but to come to a
settlement.
Is that something that we can do
I mean I've for squabbling over
five million dollars I mean
seriously.
Where we at at this point to get
it done Mr chair isn't I'd love
to hear from the secretary one
more time if that priority for
use that cap or the per
production allowance.
It is that it right now Mr chair
as members of the committee
We are hurting the industry
right here and so if you're
putting me in a difficult
position
I do think that
We.
Give me one second.
Thank you messages I'd also say
that we're we're getting some
numbers on the table that the
industry asking for instance do.
In favor if we could just step
out in the hall yes.
Thank you.
Also.
This.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair Senator and
the really appreciate your offer
we do have one counter offer so
and I and I think you might like
this so if we keep it at the
fifteen and then go to thirty
five we would like to add in a
five million dollar specific
program that is specific
specific to the native American
Community
And so I'm gonna let the Mr
Shendo Jr mention though
described the program which is
offered for that period of thank
you thank you Senator Brandt I
just want to put out there been
talking to Netflix one of the
things that we talked about the
beyond the training of of the
old line skill creating
positions but net net for us
instead of going to be launching
this year to career development
program for directors and
writers that went through
mentorship and shuttle placement
on on the Netflix series so each
year they will select to the
participants for this career
development programs provide
opportunities for emerging
writers and director to shadow
director or writer during pre
production and production for
one of the three episodes on the
streaming service so that
application their plan to start
you know this year that will
hopefully get our our native fo
communities and students and and
folks interested in this career
opportunity to have the
opportunity to to to have these
the internships so Mr chairman I
think you know this is a great
opportunity to really help
develop the native American
workforce give them some
opportunities that they may not
have currently and and I think
anything we can do to help our
brothers in the tribes is a
great thing so thank you.
Let let me begin by by making a
few statements and I think this
this is to the point of.
Of film right and and the
principle of of how we got to to
this point on a Friday afternoon
trying to determine where things
are at and the fact that on on
this site when we hear
statements that.
This is not to to do meet
anybody to insult anybody but
when you say that we're gonna
cost New Mexico jobs we're gonna
cost to Mexico opportunities
that we're not gonna be able to
compete.
Knowing that.
There is a.
Sense and a process here that we
could we can bet these things
and this is not the process that
I think this is that that's
appropriate develop these types
of issues and so I I take great
great offense in regards to how.
Three people in the entire
legislature may cost New Mexico
jobs that's not fair.
I go back to David wanted to
know that are letting people
know that we need to get this
done.
We're we're we're literally
hours away from being done with
this legislative session
To be honest with you I mean I
I.
I don't well being a native
American I don't like the native
American aspect being thrown at
the last minute just for the
sake of trying to garner of both
that's that's that's a that's a
poor use of a of a race card.
And I say that not not not not
to be.
Not to be insulting but I you
know if that's that's not okay
so what we're where I'm at now I
think we're at is what we keep
the forty million.
We'll keep a single sales factor
we not touch pit.
So let me just throw out one
more thing on the single sales
just as as an option we have a
number of of businesses here who
are going to be really hurt New
Mexico businesses with over a
hundred employees who've
invested fifty million dollars
in our or more in our state
specifically telecommunication
businesses that with this change
it will really affect them there
is a language that would create
an option for those limited
companies to be able to select
either.
The current formula property
payroll and sales for single
sales and I just wonder whether
that I know and gentleman are
here Representative Harper's
aware of this it's been an
amendment that's been proposed
before but that would be away
they would at least soften the
blow of a switch to single sales
which otherwise is a hard shift
in a policy and I just want I
want to throw that piece out as
a possible way to compromise and
and not hit those particular
folks really hard.
That.
So so so chairman and
Senator Wirth I I I've seen that
in the past we've talked about
it
I would say.
I I've talked with that industry
also in the past and and I'm not
sure the impact would be that
great to them.
and I'm I'm I'm you know I'm I'm
a I'm a I'm a tax purists my
heart rate I I want to make sure
that you know as we're changing
this that yeah there were some
people in our state are paying
more and so the letters they're
paying less.
But
also understanding of.
The.
You know I.
Yeah I'd rather not the chairman
but I'm happy to know if we need
this is something that we vote
on I think whatever.
Mr Chairman seems to me that
that.
And I appreciate with looks like
we got the film piece I mean
appreciate chairman Lente
the forty million and the
fifteen is is helpful that gets
that I think we can make the you
know leave the path where it is
I know that's very important
support all of us quite frankly
but I just think if we added
that one amendment and and it's
been drafted we've got the
language that would be a car
about
option and quite frankly and I
would just suggest that what we
do and and I'll give you my
commitment to do this let's get
the real numbers and figure out
if in fact how big a hit this is
and just down the road I thank
you again the pure policy is
always good but the pure policy
also has as impacts on folks in
a lot of New Mexico companies
are going to that are already
here that aren't expanding but
the current lease property
payroll safe they're gonna get a
big windfall by single sales it
just doesn't feel right that
others that are already here
that are playing.
Potentially.
You know get get hit by this and
so I would just throw that out
as a compromise to just get this
done.
Could we put a a.
Like a three year sunset on its
way to the numbers and decide if
we really want to keep this is a
policy.
Mr chair I think and I think
that's something we've been
talking I your sunsets
everywhere else and maybe we do
it five years but just give him
time to play it out but I think
that that would be something
that again would make sense so
we can see if it's really
working and come back and
revisit.
secured.
The five year sunset away
wearing that right.
And just one final thing I want
to throw out the we didn't
discuss on the alcohol I will
tell you
I'm
I'm disappointed I I didn't
really realize I mean this
change that again I didn't vote
for it but it did it basically
brought it back pretty much to
the one cent that was in the
original house proposal is my
understanding now looking at the
numbers.
You know it I didn't vote the
majority so I can move to
reconsider it but certainly
that's something that we out
there but one thing we do we
should talk about is what's the
effective date for the change
are we gonna is gonna be July
first that this change goes into
effect for the alcohol sale.
As early as rating goes in July
first twenty twenty four so
Mister chair I would propose
that we put in July first of
twenty twenty three make it
effective.
If unless there's some reason we
shouldn't do that the tax.
January first twenty twenty four
so Mister chair I propose
January first of twenty twenty
four as a little bit of a
softening there's a lot of folks
that worked really hard on this
issue we're pretty disappointed
with where we are having said
that means we should acknowledge
this is a pretty big moment
first time in thirty years we've
we've raised this tax I look at
this as a first staff not the
end and it's a discussion we
need to keep happening but I
would just suggest we use July
first twenty twenty four
Representative thank you and and
I I would change in the
effective date I I'm hoping this
is an and step mother first but
the the other thing we need to
look at with the alcohol taxes
the if we could is I had some
conversations with the D. W. I.
fund people and what we need to
make sure is that that the way
it's structured they're not
losing money from what they're
currently getting so however for
the percentage needs to be a
leave that to the experts but we
just want to make sure that Fund
the isn't reduced but I will say
and I've talked to them about
this that in the future we need
to have some more count ability
of how the fund is used so I'm
willing to stand right now and
say let's not reduce it but.
With the understanding that
we're going to get a full
accounting of how that money is
being used thank you thank you
in just Mr I think I said July
twenty two of I'm in New York
twenty first and if we all
think.
Okay Mister chair just to
confirm that we do have Mr chair
is just to confirm we do have
the five year sunset funds out
of state creating.
Yes correct thank you.
Yes folks.
Yes the.
Representative personal income
tax.
Really the the I'm going what
I'm change from the house yes.
Fifty four I'm very wind up in a
allow you guys to the summation
I just think it's important to
get director Burciaga to give
the time frame we're four
o'clock in the afternoon and
miss Stokes is needs to get this
committee reports drafted and
how how does what's the process
here.
Chairman members I want to be
clear a couple of things first
before I get to a time frame.
The conference committee report
is very different from your
traditional reports and just you
know what.
Because of the second house
amended and the first house the
house of origin refused to
accept them and and ask to
receive any didn't you're in
this conference committee.
So what the conference committee
report is going to look like is
basically identical H. house as
I mentioned before.
And it's going to say to the
respective of presiding officer
that this has been has been
under consideration report same
with the following
recommendations and then it
would say something along the
lines of the following house
floor amendments.
Be approved and itemize which
ones are approved the following
house floor amendments for
Senate amendments are
disapproved and itemize those in
terms of numbers
it may go through several
different stages like that and
then anything else that needs to
be amended it would just save
the state and that the bill be
further amended as follows so
it's just a little different
from what you're used to but
it's going to outlined what is
being accepted what is being
approved and what is being
disapproved and again both will
be identical both houses.
Because.
Yeah chairman and and Mr
Burciaga thank you for that so
so I so it's not gonna be.
A report that says essentially.
Strike all amendments and this
is now what's happening.
So this is gonna be pretty
complicated to read through
because we're gonna be talking
about.
striking the sentiment and then
Keeping are having these
additions that we've come to
together is that correct.
Chairman.
Representative yes that's
correct you you have three house
floor amendments and you have
one
house Senate tax amendment and I
think a Senate floor amendment
we would have to account for all
of those amendments and that you
know what the what based on what
you're the discussions are
what's approved and what's
disapproved and if there's any.
Subsequent or additional
information that's it to amend
the bill further we would have
to outline that as well what I
expect will happen immediately
after this is that legislative
finance committee staff and
Legislative Council Service that
will sit down make sure that
they're on the same page in
terms of what was understood
based on the three
discussions you've had today R.
and in terms of time frame.
I would ask for a minimum of
four hours to let staff work on
this the only thing that's
required is for the six of you
to be available around that time
frame I hope to give you some
indication where we are in two
or three hours but at the very
least for hours if if we run
into difficulty there's further
discussion will let.
And then if I may chairman a
follow up question so just
knowing that this is much more
complicated than a standard
amendment.
I think for ours is very
reasonable I guess my question
is you know I'd like to once I
have a draft to also have more
staff look through it and I look
through it just to make sure
that we catch everything
possible
and I guess the question is.
If we vote on the
covers committee report.
And we then find that there is
an error is there any way to
correct that before we go to the
floor.
Chairman representative yes that
that would there should be a way
to correct that we will
definitely get up a copy to you
because you're the request as of
this will get you a discussion
draft lack of a better word
before you come in but you do
need to commend reconvene as a
conference committee and take
two votes on the conference
report one.
One for each one for chamber
correct thank thank you
chairman.
SB.
Thank you guys thank you all so
much thank you for the public
for paying attention to us for
the past couple of days we hope
that we've done some good work
here and we do it with all good
