Right so we turned off yeah
good.
One just give us.
Okay are available thank you all
for a.
Join this afternoon.
The two that are covered
committee meeting.
To the two chambers thank you
all very much Representative
will be here.
just kind of lay out what we
have here is a.
Course of the Senate conference
committee three of us have.
And the we all agree that that
would be to reduce the size of
this tax package.
The concern support to all of us
that this package B. O. fiscal
responsible.
This will help of presented
legislation have come back next
year to undo what we're doing
now.
Please understand that this is
just the initial meeting we have
some of the things that the we'd
like to propose no to the house
for your consideration and the
and this hope we were to start a
discussion so I'm gonna go over
a guidance that we've of
identifies and then I'm gonna
turn it over to the Senator
Brandt thanks to comments and
then the Senator Wirth and
earlier will.
Rapid evolution our side of the
G. R. T. side of the R..
When the proposals is a one
eight production the G. R. T..
On the P. I. T. Senator tax
brackets reduced the general
fund impact by a fifty million.
In a motor vehicle excise tax
season distributions over a
longer period.
On the the liquor that all
revenues of we'll go to
treatment supposed to you know
twenty five percent going to the
general fund.
The capital gains restored house
detection of forty percent.
On up to one million of net
capital gain income.
So that protect the US small
business.
A military retirement exemption
make that permanent.
In all the geothermal reduced
from eight million to four
million.
And the last one on here is
a health care practitioner G. R.
T. deduction increased by one
third every two years as opposed
to.
So.
Representative thank you of
assertions over she ate the of
work and and meeting And and got
to work on all this
I saw a couple issues that I
think we we still need to iron
out of these really good
starting point
you know some of the things that
I I really was pushing for was
kind of fixing some of those
capital gains I felt like we're
going too far
so.
Remember to to put that back to
forty percent and then instead
of that starting at three
hundred thousand and go up to a
million I think that really
helps protect our small
businesses when it comes to
capital gains tax in the state
of New Mexico the other one is
really important for the
Republicans at least in Senate
side is that military
retirement.
Exemption becoming for right now
it's sunset it
When we ever heard of that so
let's just get it from in their
it doesn't actually cost us
anything but I think it really
helps us Republicans bill
support this and then the health
care practitioner issue and with
the health care come in and they
you know they get.
We can't.
Pass those costs on to the
patients especially if it's
Medicare Medicaid so the doctors
have to pay that themselves and
so we need to make sure that
exemptions there can't afford to
do that all on here so the
proposal is to face that and.
Starting with one third go to
your spring in the next one
third go to your spring and just
so in the end it would be the
hundred percent but we take a
little bit of time to get
to get there so that's those
kind of things I was.
concerned about and I do think
we need to to work on the side.
Jobs that you know this is the
first step under all Law Center
survive these.
Number years back passed the
bill on open conference
committees and so what's tricky
is we need to have everything
score one of the hard parts of
this is figuring out exactly
what the impact is and I
appreciate that the LFC K. so
really the idea is in no way are
we suggesting this is the end of
the solution the end of any
discussion it really is just
what some ideas on the table and
then really hope that that the
house will respond to those
ideas and once we have the
scoring it will be in a place to
see if we can try to reach a
compromise on this package
I will say that I very much
appreciate center branch and and
Senator Shendo we have.
Agreed to do these items that
are on this list on the Senate
side does that mean I live all
no but I also think there are
some incredibly solid pieces of
tax policy in this legislation
and it's incumbent upon us to
get this across the line and so
this is just the start of a
conversation time is of the
essence I think you all saw
right in the state Senate we had
a two hour late night discussion
on the Senate floor from ten to
midnight and I think the reality
is that we are three hours and
twenty minutes there you go
thank you senator I kind of he
died that so I just think the
reality is we need we need to
get to get this done and I I
what we're certainly open once
we get a sense of what we're
talking about some of the school
standpoint coming back later
tonight and if you all come back
with some ideas and and and we
can see where we are getting
close on the these things the
goal really isn't centers Shendo
said is to kind of bring this
down to a more responsible
number and the three of us
agreed it where we are in it's
just it's too it's too big the
package we came up with and I
think we but I think we.
So that's that's all I have
thank you.
Right throughout the thank you
senator Senator challenge and
though and Senate president
centers were thank you for
calling the meeting of jokingly
we we saw the the meeting
announced on Twitter so.
Here.
Hello the house.
One of the first technology are
are by your vote from house
taxation committee I gather that
a as well as the ranking member
of the Republican Party.
Jason Harper would go and the
process that the house took
regards to how we develop our
tax package and and I think I
mentioned that your committee
yesterday that we are so proud
of the House regards to the
development the transparency the
communication that went into the
development of every single
aspect of our tax package in
well we don't all agree
that it's the perfect package I
think we can agree that this one
that affects the.
Mexico and that was one working
families making sure that we
take care of all of those that
are lower in lower income middle
income making sure that we can
look at that G. R. T. as a way
that if we cannot fully effect
here meeting in the ways that Mr
harbor intended to vigorously
and and and to the end that we
could at least see a way to
dropping that G. R. T. right to
the the point five percent that
we businesses see that affect
people see that impact as well
as making sure that families
being of course source of of our
package seeing that child that
child the tax reduction was is
huge for us making sure that
rural hospital rural health care
rural aspects of these things
are extremely important to the
house and so the the way that it
left the house with full
bipartisan support this is
something that I know that we're
proud of the way that we develop
now meeting knowing that we're
going to come to a conference
committee with you I folks is
something that we also take into
consideration meeting expected
with the with with the all
members of of the house taxation
and revenue committee regardless
of party affiliation making sure
that Mr Harper was part of any
discussion that was gonna happen
here in regards to not just
showing up making sure that he
was here and he was developing
the ideas of the guards to we're
gonna have to come to a
compromise what is that look
like what's important to you
what's important to the public
and party just as much as what's
important to the Democratic
Party as well that's why with
Micaela here and then our by
shown to them so happy and proud
to serve with these two and so
and looking at these things
these are some of the proposals
that we actually talked about it
because.
Seeing your your initial
amendments as well as hearing
the debate on your floor last
night and I think it's a little
more than three and a half
hours.
Your issue list for for most.
It happened but in any event you
know I I think the things that
that we still want to to focus
on within our tax package with
than anything that we come up
with on the house that is one
that it is for New Mexicans it's
for New Mexicans values
Hispanics and families it's for
New Mexico and so that being
said we we to have ideas that
that that we have also discussed
internally in the house again I
want to also recognize the
leadership of the house the
speaker speaker Martinez that
has given the up most respect to
this process making sure that he
understands that it's not to
micromanage but it's his to
support and and give school full
support to of the Republican
caucus member as well as the
democratic caucus members of
this committee to make sure that
we can come up with something
that again holes in place to
Mexico values and so with that
in mind I would like to be able
to ask of our folks it we can
show that of some aspects of
things that we feel are
important based on seeing what
you all did on the Senate side
of the way it came out of your
committee knowing that it passed
on a partisan vote on the Senate
floor yesterday knowing that
there was much discussion about
aspects related to capital gains
related to tax increases let's
go on and on but to also make
sure that we know that we can
find some great insights and
great ideas and that the fact is
that we have involved here that
we have fully vetted out by way
of.
When I think of somebody that is
an expert on taxation in the
legislature I look at this map
here because he can think of
things that you can calculate
the these these these numbers as
head across and down and this
better than he's calculated
some.
But not not not cited if you
calculate.
But to also know that that we
have some amazing expert and
that also includes the staff at
LFC both is in Jennifer I mean
you you guys are rock stars the
fact that you know is here home
grown person from some US crucis
New Mexico state Aggies and
Jennifer you're right along
there with them I mean I would
allow you I look at you guys and
I'm like I'm I'm so proud to
work with you guys and so having
said.
Mr harbor if you can expand a
little bit on on some of these
we thought about that was
important to us Paso thank you
the first thank you for the kind
words I appreciate it's a.
Great job running the committee
and I think that shows that the
bipartisan support the tax
package and I just say to when
you think about.
Of the tax reform package right
your total of seventy.
Seventy five percent of it
you're gonna hate twenty five
percent.
Independent on were you.
Where you sit on the political
spectrum the person you love and
hate will be different.
Right and as the bill came
across the house their supports
and the related like but they're
also supports numerous hours to
report to New Mexico.
And an overall because the
process and how it turned out I
supported you know this the
first tax package of bills
support many years so I think
that says a lot to the process.
I want to thank our percent of
friends for
for for commercial so I think
it's a good idea some
compromises that we can we can
talk about just maybe a couple
other things.
you know when we look at the
true reform that we can do that
with this unprecedented
opportunity.
You know when you look at
actually structural changes that
you can make to the scope that
help grow our economy rates were
not fighting over.
You know problems no that we're
we're we're treating the size of
our pie we have a banquet that
you know so
of course I'm specifically
referring to the single sales
factor apportionment of and the
I will go to I can give you a
two minute description of what
that is but I think I'll just
cut to the chase.
Our current system for corporate
income tax.
Punishes businesses for hiring
in New Mexico and expanding in
New Mexico.
and actually rewards
for expanding Senator Stewart
hiring.
And all the states in the
fifties and sixties adopted this
formula we are using right now.
Of those contracts all states
but states figure this out and
they have since moved to a
single sales factor for.
And what that means is that you
do not punish a business for
extending taken risk Mexico.
And again New Mexico's behind
the eight ball the states that
have adopted this are Alabama
Arkansas California Colorado
Connecticut Delaware Georgia
Illinois Indiana Iowa Kentucky
Louisiana Maine Maryland
Michigan Minnesota Missouri.
New Jersey New York Carolina.
Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island
North Carolina Texas Utah West
Virginia Wisconsin and the
district of Columbia so seventy
six percent of states that.
I move to this approach and I
think it's time for New Mexico
To go that direction too so I I
think that is something that we
can really.
Just take home.
I would say we did some true
reform here that is that's going
to be a benefit to the state
I've often right here what we're
talking about capital gains I've
actually have gotten a lot of
calls the last two days
I wish we got these calls
earlier maybe the capital gains
would look different this call
earlier but I did get a lot of
calls folks very concerned about
You know what's gonna happen
when I my mom and pop business
you know that I've built lots
one two years is sold this is my
last day on how for one Kate why
are you creating me on taxes
when we've got tax deferred
retirement plans
so I'm glad we're talking about
that.
But the million dollar cap.
Hello yep I think I like seeing
the million dollar cap
by my understanding is kind of
your your average mom and pop
small businesses about a million
dollars.
so I I think that's a good
change.
there's
And and how that deduction get
forty percent.
That's a good place.
And it's it's it's odd that you
bring it up in that way because
that's exactly what we talked
about as well is that he thought
that if you're gonna sell your
business in New Mexico we should
find that that luxury to them
and allow them that that that
ability to deduct those things
and so we also noted that and
and I know if we defer to our
our special here in a minute but
we also look at the issues
related to your amendment last
night and recognize that there
are a number of technical fixes
that likely need to happen
because I and many those are
done in short order and so
there's for craft brewers you
know we have some issues related
to that we're gonna fix the caps
as senator twenty nine thirty
related to the the geo thermal
stuff we got to fix it motor
vehicle excise tax distributions
because needed HB to so that's
that's stuff that we need to get
done because
Those are changed and and and
maybe we wouldn't have enough
time to do to check our drafting
but any event presheaf the
single sales factor discussion I
think that I I I I agree and I
support you hundred percent Mr
harbor right to that related to
the to the G. R. G. R. T.
trigger and and and the
extension over that I think
that's something that we want to
get up on as well yeah so maybe
a little technical but right now
in our current statutes
every I think it's February
calculations and if we lose five
percent of our state your two
revenue there's an automatic
increases the G. R. T. by point
two five percent and that
television is made of up until
twenty third in our current
statutes of the Senate amendment
moved it up to twenty forty
five.
And I just.
After this you're gonna be gone
half of us are dead I don't know
I think that's way too far out I
think the the twenty thirty
date is fine
twenty two twenty three date if
the legislature five years from
now disclosed that says Hey she
pushed out I think we should do
that up to them.
In related to to the G. R. T. as
well in regards to revenue out
right so so we we thought that
maybe perhaps the G. R. T. could
be phased in over the next three
years to alleviate concerns
related to to the revenue
outlooks to help.
To help be more responsible
responsible
Representative Harper talked
about that capital gains and and
at the to your point Senator of
rent we're right there with them
and we we understand we heard
the discussion last night the
Senate floor and and we can
relate we can understand that so
There's some things that that
we're also in in your bills
related to alcohol and so it's
nice to know that you took those
and and that the way to the
general fund to put those back
into the all of harms the
mediation fund because that's
obviously the messaging behind
as we want to help the people
that need it the most of those
New Mexicans that are played by
this issue
Related to the
Related to fill it's going to
fail and and and allow
Representative make I'll look at
them not to talk a little bit
about that because when we think
about.
How tax packages impact New
Mexicans we want to impact so
that we love the most of the
people at home so I can't
constructing again chair I thank
you for.
Some of the conversation we
really want to first appreciate
the incredible effort of our
cabinet secretaries economic
development directors our film
offices across the state who
have made New Mexico place to
come
and be in this business and make
us one of the leading states
where people come to make magic
make movies incredible TV shows
built cultural narratives and
and change lives I've always
appreciated that one of the key
elements of the film tax credit
that we've now been celebrating
for decades is that the film
incentives are only paid out
based on money that comes into
our state so often when we talk
about this casually we talk
about how much money's going out
we talk about general fund
impact but if people don't come
here to produce they don't get a
rebate the money only goes out
after the money comes and so I
first want to say that I'm I and
we are certainly supporters of
the film industry and and the
incentives we have in place so
far it's also meant that
especially with chairman Lente
leadership and the bipartisan
transparent process we've been
building through the house tax
committee that has been
reflected in supported in the
house that it matters a lot to
us that we've had opportunity
opportunity to review consider
and debate.
Part of policy
initiatives and changes before
we put them out into New Mexico
so one of the things that we
felt a lot of agreement on is
the rural up left provisions for
those that have been in this
conversation that we've heard
important considerations brought
to our tax committees including
the rest of committee over the
summer and reach which
communities like like the Lana
as explained with that in really
compelling ways from our house
appropriations ranking member
Armstrong
has it been eligible because
like the Lana to date falls
within sixty miles from the edge
of Bernalillo county as this up
with works today it's really
community I serve Los crucis
passing benefits from this
relentless but it works today
for those listening
the measurements of who becomes
eligible for the uplift is from
the county borders and sixty
miles out that connects back to
I don't see a lever rules about
when people get paid per diem
increases to to move issue at a
location further out we want to
appreciate and continue forward
with the working compromise
that's been met in this language
that moves that starting point
on the map to the city center
instead of the end of the county
line we think it really reflects
that better meets the intentions
of this up left to get more of
this industry working outside of
Santa Fe and Albuquerque so we
agree with that and we support
the increasing of the top to ten
percent increasing the uplift
from five percent to ten percent
switch the numbers we have shown
cost about five million
we do have concerns and at this
point don't feel like the house
is ready to support the non
resident film credits including
both of the line and the crew
well yes maybe policy
considerations that we'd like to
step into on the health side we
did not have a single Committee
not economic development not
have.
It's not appropriations that had
the opportunity to hear these
bills presented to have public
comment to have to be and to
certainly take a vote on whether
as the house we feel these would
be appropriate moves again this
maybe something like that we
could consider moving forward
but we want to continue
conversations about the public
policy public policy pieces that
have been vetted including
investments in those that
already exist like the roll up
left Mr chair can also talk
about
a piece of these health this
health care these.
we really appreciated at the
care the Senate took to add
additional G. R. T. deductions
that relate to increasing our
health care workforce and access
to health care for communities
across the state in
conversations we had one of the
ideas that come to us is that we
would potentially
strike what you added on section
thirty seven that was the
counseling and therapy tier two
deduction including because
there could be a loss at local
revenues for the county and
others and because of the way
the the.
The.
All harmless works for food and
medical that potentially
we can have some gaps and
overlaps there that wouldn't be
helpful but our conversation if
we like what we saw in your idea
is if we subsection thirty seven
we could look closer at thirty
six we have the idea of
increasing that two hundred
percent and as we all look
through the definitions of
health care practitioners were
relieved because counselors and
therapists are included in the
definition health care health
care practitioners and so again
we be striking the piece that
was the the DRT section on all
of their seats which you all had
a third of all the receipts but
increasing it to potentially a
hundred percent of their
receipts again only I hope is a
deductible deductibles without
reaching a mass of health care
practitioners under that pretty
expensive deduction definition
so we've got that potentially as
we really appreciate you all
wanted to also make those
increases higher than the
receipts.
Thank you yeah and and I think
finally in this last these
related to the back of the
increases you put on there we
feel much more comfortable
instead of saying those again to
the general fund that we
actually include those of the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund to again to work on the
success cessation programs that
I think again plague of the
Mexican so that being said
gentleman at this point in time
we we we come here obviously to
to work on things by by way of
Twitter in addition to.
But
you know but honestly is that
again we focusing on inclusion
focusing on transparency
focusing on process focusing on
New Mexico New Mexicans
communities everybody in this
real understands that when you
can do things for people that's
why the trust us to be here in
this building to speak on their
behalf and that set Mr chairman
what we're Bridget indication
and if this is a continuation
with the opposite is there all
night you know the house.
We do.
Can I just say a couple things
sure yes it is a good one what I
want to talk about the issue of
the film only being heard on our
site it passed the Senate tax
committee tend to nothing and I
will say that a whole number of
the of the pieces that came from
house we never heard them as you
heard them but they never they
were all tables in your
committee until this bill rolled
out so in fairness both.
Both committees work the same
way we table bills we help them
and then we put things in you
put things in so we have the
same issue you do about the
bills that came over that we
didn't get a chance to hear
we're kind of learning what
those are not discussion is
going to happen so I want to
clarify that also with respect
to Twitter my chief of staff of
the speakers chief of staff of
in contact all afternoon about
moving this forward and we are
under time front so it's just
and I just my take away is that
this is been a very constructive
what we're these are good good
discussions I do have a
disagreement over single sales
we need to state for the record
we have done single sales for
manufacturing and that's to get
folks to common that's a big
drive but to change to single
sales and this is our
Representative Harper impact and
I've had this discussion
sometimes the perfect tax policy
there's other reasons not to do
that for existing companies here
in New Mexico that have property
payroll and no sales sure they'd
like to eliminate singles they'd
like to go to single sales
because they pay no corporate
tax and I just think we need to
think about big corporations
that basically are being given a
massive tax reductions from the
corporate tax that's a
discussion we can have and have
that debate I just wanted to
since we got into a little bit
this just give the other side of
it I appreciate I mean my take
away is that this is step one
and we should come back in a
couple hours once we put our
good economist to work in the
figure out what the numbers are
here and see what we're really
doing and see if we can get
something we're we're on the
same page and of course we've
got to get the governor signed a
bill so that's a piece right now
if this is that one would
definitely of that the ball
rolling so if we come back in a
couple hours like I said we'll
be here all afternoon all the
needs of right work as hard as
you guys were working so it's
just good to work I also chair.
of like dress few things and and
you know the single cells
factors one of the things that I
disagree with my friends through
my loft in more ways than one.
And that was the seal as well
things we just disagree
the the film tax credit I think
I agree with you guys
I didn't like the sixty mile of
the question that was our in our
committee was one of the things
I question because it it just I
don't like the way it's figured
out and I do not like the non
resident
thank it basically.
It gives a huge tax break if we
find a superstar
you know we get Tom Cruise to
come at all I don't really care
to pay.
make lots of money on the film
offers I don't think that's the
yeah yeah sure want that movie
to come in but that's just a
eats up a huge portion of the
way that that was written so
section in there if something
needs to be fast we need to
figure out a couple of those
things and then I'm still not
happy with the the liquor tax
the the increase you guys
brought in.
I did need that support that
right but then we added so much
more to it we literally more
than double the tax rate on
liquor even though.
We were taking half of the
revenue that was brought in from
that and putting in the general
fund we've never given a chance.
The see what that money could do
to help alleviate some of our
alcohol problems in our state
and I think we need to do that
before we look at having this
huge and purpose that we put on
the side so there's a few of
those things that.
That I'm on a roll.
But we we still are trying to
work out between us as far as a
group districts and if I could
just Germans probably just add a
little bit on that just so we
understand.
So the.
The right now the way most
states tax alcohol.
You have a tax on beer you have
a higher tax online and then
your highest taxes on spirits
that's actually help our system
So when you look at so
Both in the house and Senate
versions of this I I think both
of these are probably not right
in the house version would raise
the tax thirty seven percent on
the.
Nine percent on spirits thirty
three percent online which have
those against that general
policy.
And then on the Senate version
the increase the tax on here
hundred thirty percent tax on
spirits seventy percent the tax
on one seventy five percent.
So I guess I would just
recommend that.
to kind of keep that tiered
system that we currently have
right now whatever we decide to
do it should be kind of a a
blanket.
Percentage increase against all
of them so maintaining that that
seem tiered structure and I
think you know we've talked
about actually talk about a time
share brought forward yes the
janitor four you know what a
twenty percent across the board
kind of increases
Governments those are just some
ideas point so I I think it's
infancy we can probably go back
and and and think about a little
more for you guys both of them
that with all due respect to to
the folks that we know that you
think that jobs and.
Relation to to process in
relation to fill you know I I
think obviously we we understand
there's two chambers in this
house we understand that there
are some things that yes in fact
you know part of this bill that
that maybe you've heard that we
did and vice versa right so
we're we're here to work quickly
to do to be amenable with the
each other in order to talk to
you and our behalf of the people
we have so we have a tight time
frame so let's get all right
just a suggestion I think K.
soon as we get info from our our
economists get into both and
then we'll all be communication
I do think we should try to meet
again later tonight if we can
just see where we are I agree
okay.
Thank you all for.
On.
