Members of the committee good
evening so what you have in
front of you and all of you have
the same one is the house
version but the Senate version
will be identical that's
actually being provided some I
understand is the Senate's going
to go back on the floor in the
Senate and the house when I go
back on until the morning
what you have in front of you is
the conference committee report
the proposed conference
committee report
you'll see that the first
Seven items for seven numbers
talk about which items of how
some affirmative sort of be
approved.
Which ones are to be
disapproved.
similarly for house floor
amendment to to be approved and
then those all items of house
floor amendment number three to
be disapproved this basically
just identifies everything that
is but been done in committee
and on the floor what is
approved and disapproved and
then on page two
the.
It says that the bills is
further amended as follows and I
can't begin to explain what is
in the rest of that expect that
either is this will be able to
do that
The you when you get when you
take this to the your respective
floors.
It is a conference committee
like any other committee report
it is subject to debate but it
is not subject to amendment or
substitution basically you can
only taken up or down vote on
this tonight you will just
simply take a vote on from each
house are up or down on this and
up if you agree that will be
turned into a committee report
that'll be produce for the
Senate tonight and for the house
first thing in the morning we'll
be ready.
And with that I think maybe
turnover is a.
Right.
Is it going to Mike.
Mr chair as I think I think you
all know what you did but I'm
happy to remind you that's in
this this substitute here
and you all should have this
sheet hopefully in front of you
if not we'll get it for you
first from the Senate version so
everything I will be talking
about will be in reference to a
past of the Senate first it
increases the deduction from the
sale of New Mexico business to
forty percent of one million.
It.
It does include a three includes
single sales factor
apportionment for the purposes
of corporate income taxes with
an opt out for certain
businesses invested above fifty
million dollars in New Mexico
with the opt out allowance us
sun setting in five years.
the conference committee
eliminates the sunset on
military retirement.
Personal income tax exemptions
it phases in a half a percent G.
R. T. rate reduction over four
years it changes the trigger
timeline to twenty thirty seven
instead of twenty forty five it
changes the liquor excise tax
increases to be a twenty percent
across the board increase that
begins on January first twenty
twenty four.
It redistributes any of the
General Fund liquor excise tax
receipts to the alcohol harms
alleviation Fund and also
provides for a one million
dollar increase for other funds
as well as a cushion and that
again begins on January first
twenty twenty four.
it corrects technical issues for
craft distillers it moves the
tobacco tax increases from the
general fund to the tobacco
settlement permanent fund
it eliminates the tax increases
on the state vaping cartridges
and reverts to the house version
of tobacco increases on cigars
it.
Allows for a one hundred percent
deduction on copays and
deductibles of health care
practitioner receipts it strikes
the counseling and therapy gross
receipts deduction it provides
for an above the line film tax
credit enhancement from the
current five million dollars for
film partners to a total of
fifteen million dollars it also
reduces the aggregate cap to
forty million.
It provides a five year sunset
to enhance benefits for non
resident crew at the adjusting
of the ratios that is sunset at
five years it lowers the total
cap increase of the non film
partners to a fifty million
dollar increase versus the one
hundred million dollar increase
so those are still in ten
million dollars a year
increments through FY twenty
eight
and it retains any changes as
passed by the Senate for the
rural film tax credit uplift it
caps aggregate geo thermal
credits for both pay and sit at
eight million or four million
each and it.
fixes the motor vehicle excise
tax distribution is needed for
hospital to in FY twenty four
and fees is it in FY twenty five
to twenty six.
And with that Mr chair the.
Be in the audience for
questions.
This is the.
If I may just for the audience
and people on the webcast the
both conference committee
reports are posted online.
Thank you Representative.
I just.
One clarification it Mr chair is
it doesn't change our numbers
but there is content that we did
that lead on page forty four.
For its section.
Thanks.
Okay section thirty three.
When we're talking about the
above the line cap for
production previously we just
kept repeating that it was five
million going to fifteen I just
wanted to say out loud the five
million seems to have been
specifically for the services of
performing artists and adding
the ten million here we are also
adding for the services of non
resident performing artists
directors producers
screenwriters and editors so
just feel like that needs to be
said out loud that we works
increasing the number but also
expanding the different rules
that would now be eligible
during the above the line that's
not something that we discussed
allowed so I just want to say
that.
The numbers are the same it's
adding more people.
Appreciate that as we had.
We just had a said it out loud
and it was different and I
understood it so I think we
should just be public and say
what it actually is doing
regions more than the numbers
appreciate that so I mean at
this point time it is in fact
the eleven o'clock eleven thirty
at night I just want to just
quickly thank the Legislative
Council Service Pam Mr Burciaga
thank you thank you thank you
for your hard work is the thank
you thank you thank you for your
hard work I think you guys have
done a great job here's these
getting this all together for us
in a timely fashion so thank you
once again publicly for all the
work that you've done out of
thank them enough so at this
point in time do we just take a
photo here Mr.
Just to happen is each side has
to take a look okay so you you
actually need to sure your that
hello house side sorry
do not side and we need to have
that was understand so at this
point in time I would make a
motion that we approve
house taxation revenues
Committee substitute for House
Bill five forty seven as amended
by the conference committee that
was appointed by the house
speaker Dr report seventy dot
org second by any opposition to
that motion now they're being
done the.
Report has been approved so I'm
sorry Mr co chairs members of
the committee I apologize but
there's an error on the house
versions were sent tax could
amendment number nine is both
approved and disapproved so it
should be approved for fixing it
right now and have it's just
very small very small change
it's correct on the Senate
version but not the house.
The Senate version is correct
I'm gonna leave the original
with you because the three of
you need this need to sign it
we're making copies of the
unsigned version so you'll have
it on the floor that's being
done as we speak.
So there any we we can proceed
with the Senate both I assume
and we're good to go okay.
Chair.
You make a motion that we of.
With.
Except the amendments of from
the conference committee for the
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill five
forty seven as amended.
Second motion for some
commotion.
On favor.
The other.
Hi.
Happy up there you go to the
doctor thank you so do have to
redo our vote you're not going
to be on the no.
We don't have working you're
going with your gut okay it
everybody's good will have
years.
On a few hours and we'll get it
done to the chief clerks I just
give you the original so you can
sign it and take it downstairs.
