So we'll start off with house
bill two thirty nine the
candidates as prison
contribution that we've already
discussed but there were some
amendments in I think we have
a committee substitute.
Oh i'm sorry yeah I forgot roll.
Representative block
representative lower
representative romaria
representative thompson here
madam vice charuvia madame chair
ferrar here.
We have corner so we'll go ahead
and
continue
in it is a committee substitute
that will pass out
for
hospital two thirty nine.
Representative we're starting
very starting
that's okay we're working where
this hearing house bill
two thirty nine with the
committee substitute so that's
what's just before you and if
you'd like to explain your
substitute
we have to have emotion to
manage
medicare i'll move to discuss.
Second.
Moved in second we're up for a
discussion please explain that
thank you madame chairman these
bikes are real touchy today I
guess so madame chairs as you
mentioned a while ago this bill
was in this committee just a few
day day or two was it two days
it's been at the committee
before.
So there was an issue with the
language in the bill that was
addressed by representative of
a metal and the language has
been changed
and representative romato has
proved reb proof read the
language and his agreement to to
go forward with the bill and I
am too
and madame chairman at the wish
of the committee.
I'm sure I just uh well I move a
dupa
mentor.
I'm sorry
i'm overdue pass on
house still two thirty nine in a
due pass on house consumer in
public affairs committee
substitute for household two
thirty nine it's been moved in
seconded by
representative rubio hey are
there any objections.
Okay great
with
unanimous vote
of how many of us are there six
I i'm counting really
six to zero you have a
department on do not pass on
house build two thirty nine in a
due pass on the committee
substitute in consumer in public
affairs committee on house
built to thirty nine
good job thank you madame chair
thank you members of the
committee and thank you
representative of a metal for
working with me on this bill.
Thank you representative
thompson.
As I mentioned a few minutes ago
to six is being rolled to to
saturday and when we hope to
meet briefly
and so next will do how to go
one twenty three prohibit
libraries banning representative
cates.
Thinking made and chair and
members of the committee i'm
here to present house bill one
two three so currently most
public libraries all public
libraries have a process in
place to be able to vet books
whether or not you want to add
books to the library sometimes
books have been checked out for
a while there's a whole process
of removing them and libraries
across the country including our
great state have adopted the
library bill rights to be able
to guide this process the make
individual processes specific to
their public
but they're based on the library
belief rights
we have been this in this
country under attack by a lot of
requests to be in books that
would circumvent the already
established process in plays to
be able to review the validity
of having books in our public
library
and
that is true in the state in new
mexico as well
so I impressing a bill today
there have been several states
that have successfully codified
similar bills new york illinois
california to ensure that if a
public library decides to
circumvent their own process
which is based on the.
National library bill of rights
that they would lose their state
funding if so I like to take
this moment to also enter dues
my co sponsorers represent.
Thank you representative and
missed her
i'm here in support of this bill
as well and want to provide
any availability for questions I
think what is really great about
this bill is that it doesn't
preclude the ability to
challenge library materials it
still allows that in regular
accordance and I think that is
also an important part thank
you.
Thank you manager and think you
committee I I also would like to
bring to the attention of the
committee that another sponsor
is represented at figure out who
may be a trapped in
appropriations right now so I
also want to take this moment to
introduce my expert witness and
i'll have her introduced or
something thank you
my emails value i'm the library
director at santa fe community
college and intellectual freedom
is been part of my career for
about the last twenty years and
i'm happy to answer questions
about the ala bill of rights.
Thank you madame chair we stand
for a questions.
Thank you first we'll go to the
audience is there anyone in
opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone.
K and anyone in support.
Yeah.
Okay
and how many on zoom
no okay so we'll just go
everyone in one minute please
and we'll start on this side of
the front okay.
The committee my name is jack
because i'd like to speak and
support a passport three
excess to the wide raise
perspectives is vital to me and
to all those passion for
learning the stories struggles
and tribes of others regardless
of whether or not
in favor of hospital to ensure
they continue access to the
first literature for the sake of
healthy environment public
discourse.
Members of the committee my name
is cat such as I chair.
We are
the reason that happens on the
community we are characters and
diversity in general book bands
of current and I personally
don't want me my partner or my
beautiful family he raised in
that way based on someone else's
ideology the public libraries
are great place to see
individuals reflected
we are asking that you.
Thank you a next sunday.
Chair
policy
new mexico and they sell you
strongly
believe that access to free
information and the exchange of
ideas is a crucial element for
our democracy for me personally
I grew up in that new mexico and
the library was my to get into
the world the six thousand
people I pursued the career that
I pursued because of books that
I checked out from the library
and it would have been a shame I
would have been limited by
your logical racial sexual
sexual organization that could
have removed box from the from
the collection so we ask you to
support this dog.
Thank you anyone else on this
okay on the side somebody would
like to speak
members of the pretty much
I we have
a fellow
and program mexico
may
ask you to support one thirty
three
story bookman happened by that's
right
we're there together and see my
family
mothers being a race
was not acceptable it there's no
place in our stories about
importance anybody else's if we
must say he can preserve jack
stories just truly show
this new mexico the values
what we end up.
Yeah I am a student that he's on
high school.
What's anything from simple
simple topics
because of this libraries that
are case
don't deserve state funding
communities I might not access
to information and deserve to be
heard including the plus and
people
meant to be a melting part of
those who find joint in the
world of literature and not
social so forty forty future
were all stores at.
Yeah.
Thank you anyone else in the
front
of chair members of the
committee my name is.
Books there are the heart and
education house or young people
like me i'm going to be
welcoming forces
and libraries
that we need to strike
in addition a lot
of those
to the other sources of
information.
I don't want my tax period
no after what others community
right as the young person
I heard you just support.
Thank you
next row.
Thank you
members
you can.
And I worked for the state party
for three years now I want to
promise my support for this bill
it's important to consider the.
Yeah.
The banding of these books takes
away from the right towards an
education about topics such as
our country's history of races
and entire races about
experience general sides about
the queer experience and so much
more
the resources towards education
on such topics is removed the
people altogether it is slow to
raise the reality of.
Alongside being in a research
our democratic progression as a
country if our state can do
anything to ensure
not state funded we are not in
the state against the silencing
of martin with groups for
democratic institution and all
it's work for purpose of
society.
We stand in support this bill.
It's been wonderful to hear how
important intellectual freedom
is
young people what I think the
representative and sponsors were
green this bill we stand ready
to align our administrative code
to administer eligibility for
see funding to eligible
libraries to line with with this
bill and thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
julia calso i'm the library
public library and elderly
outside of santa fe
we support this bill or I
support this bill because it
also it did not only reduces the
ability of people to remove
books in the library but it
provides public library
directors in the governing
bodies with support with tools
for support if outside forces
are trying to remove the diverse
materials that we try to have in
all of our libraries and that's
often one of the issues that
comes up is that there is a
determination not the books but
outside forces want them removed
anyway so we support this book
as giving us a like to stand on
when we are trying to maintain
artifice materials thank you
that's good
matter deborah county here I am
standing before you notice our
registered obvious today but a
small business order of
independent store we stand and
strong support of this bill I
open the store we have a bunch
of birth that are very diverse
and I wanted people of all ages
to be able to pick in shoes
whatever but they want to read
and I think the increase in bank
books and what's happening
across the countries terrifying
but store owner and also his
librarians so I stand in strong
support of this bill there is
one quote i'd like to mention
rate bradberry rich bradberries
for fifty one says their worst
crimes then burning but and
that's not reading them so
everybody read your books and
support this bill thank you
thank you anyone else on that
site like the speak okay this go
to zoom then no nonsense
is there anything else you'd
like to mention before we go to
the committee yes thank you
i'm sorry I I said mister madam
chair i'm sorry i'm new.
Didn't even hear okay
i'm a chair and can me I just
i'd like to say that you know
libraries have been in existence
for thousands of years but
really here in the united states
is where the popular library
began the public library it
doesn't matter who your father
is or how much money you make or
what your level of education is
you have access in the freedom
to books we believe that this is
a non partisan
issue I was was mentioned in
public comment that I don't have
to work on our public libraries
and sand of all county that have
been threatened by hate groups
and are a government body which
is mostly republican or
wonderfully.
Apple to convey that we already
have a process in place and be
able to sign a resolution
protecting the rights of
individuals to be able to freely
eat check out the book that they
want in our public library and
thank you madam chair I rest
requestions.
Are there any questions from the
committee.
Thank you madame chair thank you
represents this the first time
that i'm hearing this bill so
we're going to have to go
through a bit of a detail
because I have questions
I fully support diversity and I
fully support the btq books I
don't that make.
Where we're going to get down to
in this I mean i've read books
at i've even read allen ginsburg
how he was a founder namble of
man boy love so you know what
i'm when I want to get to when
reading this when i'm reading
through this bill is I want to
see
I want to see what your bill
does and what it doesn't do and
if there's exceptions for
certain things so manshare
representative
when I got his bills are right
off the bat on the first page on
nineteen it said adopts and
complies with the american
library social associations
library bill rates that's what
we got here so you're saying
these are the belarates
that you want the libraries in
the mexico to it here to you
thank you manager and think you
representative currently most
are all public libraries have a
process in the place of vetting
their books that is either their
own process that is related and
and it with the library the
national library bill of rates
in mind or it's the library bill
rates themselves
okay some manager so when a
minor stretch so every library
has so every library they just
have their own rules of what
they will have.
I think you mentioned we are
talking about public libraries
thank you mature is it so i'll
public libraries right now as it
is can make their own who makes
that determinations or board or
the head library thank you
madame chair thank you represent
their our libraries and villages
counties cities so I would not
be able to answer that question
specifically about all libraries
but they all have a governing
body with written policies based
on this library bill of rates
okay so madam chair represents a
right now you're saying so i'm
trying to understand adopting
complies with american library
associations library bell right
so you want all low brace to
use this instead of having all
separate ways of dealing with
things manual chair represents
no that's not what I said okay
can you explain what you said
what cause it says right here
the public library should not be
eligible to see you state finds
unless the library adopts these
rules are right there on page
one line seventeen a public
library should not be eligible
for funding unless they adopt
and comply to the american
libraries association library
bill of rates and this is the
library for them to get funding
they have to adopt these
thinking man and chair and think
you represented and there is a
common after that in the comment
after that says including the
requirement that library
materials not be prescribed to
remove because of partisan or
doctor and disapproval or the
authors raise nationality gender
identity sexual orientation or
political religious views there
also is in number two adopts a
written policy prohibiting the
practices of banning books or
other library materials within
the library or library system.
So it's not on one line there
others here that says that they
have the right to create their
own
process and they do and it's
based on this library build
rates okay some manager
representatives trying to do is
not get head because that comma
there means and correct they
have to do this and comma
including the requirement of all
these other things is that
correct it's it's not one of the
other it's both it's all these
things is that correct.
Mancher representative i.
I cannot comment on for women.
The.
Some manager representative
there is a line to the says that
libraries can adopt their own
written policies madam chair
represent is that on the where
on which line madam chair rep.
Manage here representative line
twenty four
okay so manager represents so in
an understanding so
that seems kind of redundant so
we're saying
that they either adopt and
comply with this and.
Require library mateless not to
be removed because a
participants doctoral
disapproval authors raise
nationally generated sex
oritation or political views.
Two
one second
adopter policy prohibiting.
Practice or banning so it
basically says the same thing
except you put on this top one.
It is i'm just trying to
understand the redundancy you
said that and the first one they
can adopt and comply with this
and all these things I think it
would have just been simpler if
you said.
Just that they adopt and if they
want to do this I I guess that's
what was trying to ask her for
clarity so going on to that let
me ask you a question someone
madam chair representative
experts and we say.
Partisan disapproval authors
raise nationality gender
identity sexual origination
political religious views does
that mean for both side to the
eye of there is a book and it
was written and it was.
Anti climate change that that
would be allowed to stay in the
libraries that correct think you
managed here thank you
representative
each librarian and public
library has a process of
reviewing books but absolutely
that would be a book that they
would review to decide whether
or not they're community.
Needs access to it okay so madam
chairman and represent this goes
back to the question is early
maybe your experts can answer is
it the single librarian that's
making that decision or is there
a board of people that make that
decision and who are they
appointed they elected how do
they get there who who are these
people that are making these so
thank you madame chair think he
representative I am i'm sure
that you're the edgewood library
public library has a process in
place so
policy is usually the intent and
then there is an operations a
manual or guidance or procedures
for either the city public
library the village public
library that will tell you what
form to fill out who to call
what committee you're going to
present to or request a book to
be added or removed from a
library system okay some so many
share reps and first fall edge
would go mandared on my district
that's now represented by queens
area I don't have a library in
my district so my question goes
back to i'm trying to understand
so as every library different
maybe one library just says one
person that works a whole
library and other libraries have
like twenty in albuquerque
that's where inter.
Thank you manager thank you
representative.
There is a written policy for
all public libraries because
they use public funding and they
are open to the public so there
are written policies
written policies world
information on how large their
board is I know him in my county
and wanted to count his eyes
there's an entire library board
that and you go to their website
and you fill out a form and then
their library board reviews the
requests okay and that's what I
was trying to get to manage her
representative so effort
so you said there's written
policy so there's a written
policy for all libraries I am
just trying to again get to go
chair representatives
or is it finished yet mentioned
i'm trying to figure out.
So you're saying no there is no
write policy so that is not what
I said madame chair
representative so go if you want
to wait till i'm finished all
the way because I had more to
add to that now less by trying
to thought so mountain rips and
when trying to ask you is let's
take eduar how does edgewood
since I see no longer my
district how did they determine
what books they will or will not
have in the library is it one
person border people I need to
know when trying to figure out
is who is making the decisions
for that library education focus
on there.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative that is
outside the scope of the spell
this bill is saying that the if
there is a library in edgewood
that they must have a written
policy that adopts them national
library bill of rates
or keep manager reps and what
you said here in page one that
adopts a complies with the
american library association
library bill or just has a
written policy so it could just
be if i'm trying i'm trying to
understand your bill so on my
twenty five adopted written
policy prohibiting practice and
banning books so they can do
either or it's an or is that and
so or yeah I see some people not
either heads if you want to ask
your espert when i'm experts
when trying to figure out is
they can either adopt this and
not bandbooks or they can just
assure that they won't band
books but when I am asking you.
Who is making the decision the
reason i'm asking this question
because when it comes to banning
books there's two sides of this
there's one side is over here
there's one side it's over here
i'm trying to make sure that
when it comes to you these
decisions it's not lopsided so
that everybody has some sort of
cease on this but when i'm
getting from us there's really
no regulations they just have to
adopt this and I have no idea
who is making those decisions
because out of fairness and
shouldn't be overnight should be
over here so for trying to meet
in the middle to be fair at
everybody I need to know who's
making those decisions so who is
making the decisions outlets
said the alberta that seems to
be easier for you managers who's
making the decisions in
albuquerque there there's a
library board is that correct.
Manage her representative i'd
like to have my expert witness
talk specifically about the
public library and albert tricky
as much as they can okay or or
any area that your certain
venture to any area familiar
with them just trying to figure
out how so I can know how to
vote on this bill
madame chair representative I
must speak on behalf of the way
libraries in general work I
can't speak specifically to what
albuquerque does
libraries have written
collection development policies
and most of those written
collection development policies
include the library bill of
rights they referred to the
library bill of rights within
the collection development
policies and the policies will
outline what will be collected
and the policies are built based
on what the community is how who
is in the community the state
library requires that public
libraries in new mexico do an
assessment of their community so
libraries and their boards are
familiar with what their
community is made up of as
they're writing their collection
development policy.
The state library also requires
that as part of being a public
library they submit a collection
development policy to the two
the state library
and
and so it is held by the state
library and as part of the
process of libraries currently
receiving state of funds the
collection development policy
will explain how librarians
review books what methodology
they use
words may become involved in
that process but most often that
decision and process is left up
to professional librarians okay
thank you so much for him chair
and expert that's what I was
trying to get out I was trying
to figure out how this process
works and i'm also trying to
work my fear is with everything
is there's a lot of jewish
hatred right now and I don't
want it to be lopited that we're
not going to put anything out
because we think these these
books should not be out there
trying to figure if this is
going to be fair or how this is
playing out some madam chairman
representative so
with your arm holder.
I feel that's questions on this
one so i'm sure representatives
so
we can do either or we can adopt
this and promise that to ban
i'm gonna go down here to the on
page two line fifteen band fan
beans the act of removing or
prohibiting the additional
materials from public library
sector okay.
So we're seeing them for banned
that means if that library were
to remove a book.
They're no longer a bellboard
for funding.
Okay let me go back mentioned to
ask important question how
I look through some of the books
that people have problems with I
don't care if it's I don't care
about the gender people that are
and what they're doing that does
not bother me one bit what
bothers me though as there were
some very ex lesser staff on how
to have sacks in detail.
Those kind of books in this bell
writes.
Is there anything in the library
that says if you're five you you
can't check out this book
because it's extremely graphic
as their age requirements on any
books or is it just a free fraud
that's what I need to know.
Madame her representative the
bill does not restrict if an
individual has the right to
challenge an individual husband
right to challenge a library
material in accordance to the
libraries method which can be at
times filling out a forum and it
may.
Sent some understanding cause
there was something in here I
forget where it was I thought it
was in here.
The.
Okay so let me ask about this
challenge don't matter if so
challenge reading tempt to
remove a restrict material so is
that a challenge from the public
or who is challenging on this
for them.
Okay sorry he just made a leap
over there.
What is this mean to challenge
means of attempt to remove
restrict materials in a public
library and think you made him
chair and think you
representative every library is
stated by my expert witness has
policy procedures that will lay
out in details as a citizen
process in which you can
challenge a book
okay as I mentioned to challenge
to keep it or get rid of it
either one of those you have to
say at the people can't hear
yes spanish areas representative
there are ways you can request
books as as of my expert witness
indicated that libraries tend to
reflect the community there
round I know that I used to go
to a little library in north
carolina there were a lot of
books on pirates there
and so libraries tend to reflect
their community great thank you
madame chairman representative I
was checked out a bunch of books
on horses because that was my
favorite singing the world and I
would hate their band but
but here comes a big question on
whether i'm going to support or
not support your bill if let's
say somebody wrote a bill about
i'm the picker gross topic sorry
what if they wrote a bill about
beastiality you guys thought
that was okay.
And I don't want.
My ten year old children read
that can is there going to be a
ban on who can check those books
out or is it just anybody can
check them out thank you manager
and thank you representative you
you in your questioning you said
if you think and and I am not
decided it's public it's not a
catholin library it's a it's a
public library so there is a
process in I know that in the
sanital county we have a very
clear process for individuals
under the age of eighteen who
are checking out books and
there's a whole process of
gaining library card with
principle print permission and
things like that okay and thank
you ma'am so I met you in the
you all you over there some
mountain representative and for
your experts.
Are do.
Our libraries monitoring.
Very graphic.
I'm in a customer totally great
I mean this is
are they monitoring very graphic
books to children under eighteen
or that can they go in they get
the card could they go in and
get something that's extremely
graphic that I would not think
is appropriate for a child that
age are they gonna say no you
can't get that book are they I
guess the peter are rating.
Madam chair representative this
bill relates to the removal or
restriction of the materials
themselves and not to the
process of checking out the book
okay manager represents i'm
gonna take that as a no so
that's going to mean i'm going
to both know on this baron has
why I don't want to marginalize
our children that are in the
community or of any color I was
race and a biracial family I
don't want that but what I don't
want and this is where you've
guys lose me all the time is
common sets I don't want a young
child getting a very graphic
book about how to perform
valatio on somebody I don't
think it's appropriate I have
the right to feel that that's
not appropriate if somebody was
eighteen and want to get it
that's fine if that's what the
you know sixty whatever age that
is appropriate what I don't want
is to have a bunch of angry
parents who are angry that I
passed a bill that it's a free
for all if you had something in
here that you said age
appropriate I might be on board
but it has nothing to do because
I was raised in a sharpest
foundation my grandparents came
over here from mexico my greater
grandfather's black and i'm
sorry that I have to go ahead to
this great detail so they don't
get called racist in the paper
which has happened to him and
it's super insulting for
somebody who is not as white as
I look so my point being.
I am all four have all the books
you want above.
Two young man who found love two
I was raced by less mister young
women who farm lived that's
great but I don't need those
details for young children and
that's.
So that is my reason for voting
now and I yield my time thank
you
thank you represent block
thank you madame chairman thank
you presenters for it coming
after a fund floor such as that
we just have proceeded madame
chairman representatives I i'm
i'll be pretty quick you know me
I try to be quick but managed
here
representative we might only be
here for an hour to just getting
manager but my my first question
I had similar concerns regarding
the section a or i'm sorry
section one a regarding that's
on page one regarding this and
or approach rate madame to
representative we have an
approach that allows folks to
comply with american library
association looks like we lost
them a library association's
library bill of rights and other
provisions right that say we
cannot be
discriminating against sexual
orientation gender identity
nationality race madame chair
representative representatives
i'm wondering cause we just
updated the human rights act.
Last year in new mexico so
madame chairman represented i'm
wondering does doesn't that
mechanism to protect these
classes in current law so i'm
just wondering is this
duplicative of current
legislation madam to represent
them thank you madame chair
think you represent it we don't
believe so that the human rights
actors for people in the where
this is for books and we this is
not a procedure operations
manual it is
making clear that when you write
your that you follow your
procedure and and operations
manual
okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative but I
believe the folks who would be
checking out these books
they would they would also they
would fall under the human
rights act the people that are
bringing the books from the
library and checking them out so
I mean madam chair
representative is it currently
illegal to not check out a book
to someone based on race gender
gender identity nationality
political views or sexual
orientation.
Incumbent and chair thank you
representative i'm
not funny in the question as and
I think there's a double
negative there and so I want to
make sure I understand that the
question again to I am happy to
repeat it so
no double negative madam chair
i'm asking.
Now now I I lost my question
manager asking is does current
law protect folks to be able to
check out a book regardless of
sexual orientation sexual
identity gender a national
origin political views or
religious use.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative yes
okay thank you madam chair thank
you representative and I
appreciate that because
my my concerns kind of stem from
what representative lord is
talking about the content of the
books that are in libraries and
i'm i'm mainly talking about
children right madam to
represent it and I see on the or
right it starts with the air
with the the a.
An one and then under the two it
says or adopts a written policy
prohibiting practices the
banning books etc etc but it
says pursuant to rules
promulgated by the state
librarian so madame chairman
representative I looked at the
state librarians website and
they have a handy guide to the
law and under the law that cited
on the state labor ins website
under thirty dash thirty seven
dash two
it says it's unlawful for a
person to knowingly sell deliver
distribute display or sale or or
provide two a minor or knowingly
to possess with intent to sell
deliver display
any picture of photograph of
drawing scops from motion
picture film or similar visual
representation of a person or a
portion of a human body or
massochistic abuse and which is
harmful the miners is there's
any booklet pamphlet magazine
printed matter however produced
or sound recording which
contains any matter and
numerated in section a of the
section or explicit details
verbal descriptions are
narrative accounts of sexual
excitement sexual kind of durset
satellite masochistic abuse and
which taken as the hole is
harmful to minors some madam to
represent if I see the current
statute it protects miners from
being displayed.
Or sold or delivered any kind of
sexual or violent content let's
just say madame to represent it
so manimater representative i'm
wondering does current law then
protect from libraries putting
this sexual content is violent
kind of content in libraries for
children to read.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative of the
library is for the public which
is all agents so for library for
public libraries to comply with
this law they have a policies
and procedures that protect
miners from such literature
okay thank you madame chair
thank you represent it because I
know actually in current current
libraries in the state new
mexico there are books that
include.
Very graphic sexual details and
madame tear representative I
know that actually made
headlines in the news in places
like albuquerque rear rancho and
I I believe less cruces might
have folks talking about it so
madame to represent if this law
already is on the books to
protect miners I want to make it
crystal clear that it would then
be okay for the state to not
banner book from a library but
prohibit that book from the
children's section for checkout
from by children would that be a
reasonable request and ability
of a library to do under this
new provision in your bill madam
to represent it
I think you manage here and
representative
the bill itself is to ensure
that libraries follow their
policy and procedure so
i'm not clear on that particular
question I will say a day
I have
been witnessed to the concerns
and santa bar county in the city
of rear rancho none of the books
were in the children's section
and that the city rearrangement
has clear processes of how
children get library cards they
require parent and that parents
know what books that the miners
are taking out and there are
none of those books that were
requested that were located in
at children's or even at a
lesson sections okay thank you
madame chair and think you
representative and so my I mean
I appreciate that and I I know
that there are many many diverse
books that were talking about a
majority of the books we all
think are important to read you
know even though I violently
hate hitler we could keep mine
comp on the shelves rate madam
to represent it even though I
hate the guy he's a jerk and he
killed all these people.
His book still can can be on the
library shelves no one is
advocating to ban books rate
manager what we're saying madam
to represent it is I don't think
that children should have access
to whatsoever to these harmful
violent sexual content in
libraries that state law already
should cover so many
representative what is what is
to prohibit a minor from
wandering around a library and
seeing a book such as a a book
that has sexual content.
How what what is to prohibit
that child from just reading the
library book in the library not
checking it out but reading it
in the library manager with your
with your new bill.
Manager representatives so in
your scenario this child is in
the library without their
parents or
many adults provision so when I
was growing up manager
representative after score I got
out of school and the the
library was just down the street
from where my school was so
after school I walked to the
library checked at a book waited
at the library for my mum to
pick me up no I was not
supervised madame to represent
it so i'm wondering during that
time that the child is in the
library and they go into less
you say any section of of the
library and they find this
sexual content i'm wondering in
the in the legislation what is
to protect and a firm the
current state law that prohibits
children from being
affected or to see the sexual
content in the library manager
thank you madame chairman thank
you representative I I don't
know what the current laws are
that is protecting that child I
will see that that is not the
spill this bill is to ensure
that the public has access to
bills based on the national
library association bill of
rights
thank you madame chair and thank
you representative but in your
builds and or
in your bill it says you could
be in complaints with this
library bill of rights or you
could promulgate your own rules
at the library that complain
with state law and state rules
from the state librarian so many
representative in both cases
they both have to follow the law
rate animator representative.
Yes many chair representatives
okay thank manager and thank you
representative and I think
that's why we have this nice and
wide people being concerned
about children being exposed to
these kinds of graphic books
because madam to representative
I I looked at the american
library associations book.
Heard that thirteen most balance
most challenged or band books
and these are mainly targeting
kids but their sexually explicit
materials that are targeting
kids some of these titles
include
and this is from an nbc the
article fleamer
and this is a graphic novel
about a boy who goes to summer
camp and it includes very
graphic details about that meant
I am too represented this is
regarding literature and they
gave us information from the
american library association so
is it not property sight the
very things that they're giving
us madam to represent it
there is
kind of like good diversion from
what the bill is saying we can't
really go into al.
But if we could just keep the
discussion on the bill
okay thank you madam sure think
you represent and I appreciate
that but I do want to be clear
that there are their titles that
are there written by people that
do indeed talk about these
graphics sexual
instances and so madame chairman
representative I want to make
sure they were protecting our
children per the current statute
that the librarian has on their
website which is thirty dash.
Thirty seven days
two and his current statute so
madame chairman representative
if someone says I don't like
this book because it's targeting
it to kids it is against thirty
dash thirty seven dash two are
they then going to be
branded a book banning fascist
that's kind of what i'm
wondering madam to represent it
because i'm looking for a middle
ground here I don't want to be
banning books but I do want to
be protecting children from
being targeted and groomed by
these books that are indeed
targeting children so madam
chairman representative i'm
wondering.
Are we going to insure with this
new legislation that people who
have concerns with sexual
content specifically targeted
children their concerns can
indeed be heard and be remedied
through the current statue
manager represented thank you
madame chair and thank you
representative we already have
those processing in place for
concern citizens that you need
to follow their local public
libraries processes where they
can a document their concerns
and they will have them refuse
and they have opened hearings
for them so they if they follow
that process they will get their
concerns met.
But this bill doesn't talk about
that process this bill is to
ensure access to books okay
thank you manager thank you
representative and I I agree
with that I think access to
books is a good thing right III
actually read fair and high for
fifty one when I was in high
school and I wrote a book report
on it and think other than
burned my library books and I
was in high school right madam
to represent it and so I think
it's important to keep
culturally relevant books in in
libraries I agree with that but
I want to make sure that we have
the community input manager
representative just a few just
hours ago we were talking about
local control and the need for
local control.
How will this square with local
control with libraries that may
maybe in areas of the state
where they don't want to be
putting their kids subject to
this kind of violent graphics
sexual content madam to
represent it how this how are
they sir work with local control
is kind of what i'm wondering
manager
so thank you madame chair think
you representative so this bill
is not addressing that we
already have policies in places
that public libraries that it is
addressing with this bill will
do is insure that if you have a
concern citizen that would like
to have a book reviewed and
considered for removal they must
follow that process they cannot
use his alternative methods to
get the book removed that's what
this book bill is about it but
they can follow the process
that's in place
and and it's a pretty thorough
and process
thank you madame chairman
representative so so the current
process right let's just say I
file a complaint with that my
local library and I say I don't
like a book that is in the
children's section that's
targeted to kids it's against
the law madame to representative
in the interim time between my
complaint and ipping responded
to would that book be taken off
the shelves temporarily as we
are looking into the matter
madam cherry representative
manager representative that is
not what this bill was about and
you would have to ask your local
library what their processes are
for that review
thank you madame chair and
representative so because i'm
reading your bill here and it
states and page two
you can't take a book out on the
basis of the partisan doctrinal
disapproval approval nationality
gender identity sexual
orientation or political or
religious views some madam
chairman represented some of the
the books that I was citing
previously I won't name them or
whatever so I don't get gave it
down or whatever.
Madam chair representative the
books that I was referring to
let you say some of them
may regard a political view that
someone disagrees with right
madam sir representative it may
be something that they deem
violent and and against.
The state law right madam to
represent it so if someone files
that complaint about that
political book
how are we to have an
independent process to ensure
that there's fairness and that
both sides are listening to
madam to represent it
representative I think you're
going off track with the process
again that is already been
explained it's up to the
different processes
that have been adopted by.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative and I I
appreciate that and I understand
that there's already processes
in place but this requires new
processes
because an a
if I don't go with or number two
one on page one I go with a
number one says I must adopt and
comply with the american
association of libraries of race
including a requirement and then
I must promotate
new doctor not disapproval
of or approval of the of the
material the sun a one so many
representative i'm just
wondering do they have to tweak
the current process that they
have with this bill
thank you madame chair think you
representatives this current
bill does not change the
processes currently public
libraries all have adopted
processes of a review and
librarians are
wonderfully educated and and and
and in an follow these processes
what this bill does is ensure
that if public libraries do not
follow the process.
That they war
lose their state funding.
Thank you madame chair and
representative so currently.
If I was a little let's just say
I was a library locally
somewhere and I had books that
were against state lies and
state rules.
Wouldn't I already been
ineligible for state funds if I
was not in complaints with the
law madam to represent it thank
you madame chair think you
represent it not sure what state
laws what books would be against
state laws okay manager
representative let's just go to
my my previous example at sexual
content that's targeted the kids
in children's sections of
libraries that goes directly
against thirty dash twenty seven
distance one.
I believe.
Or thirty dash thirty seven dash
two
if i'm blatantly violating the
state while it's already there
madam chair represented by
putting these sexually explicit
books in the in the library
wouldn't I already be an
eligible for further state funds
if I was already breaking the
light as a public library madam
chair representative thank you
manager thank you representative
libraries open to the public of
all ages
thank you manager thank you
representative I agree with you
but what I what i'm saying i'm
trying to get the answer here in
a children's section i'm not
talking about any library of any
age i'm saying is there let's
just say there is a book in the
children's section that has
graphic **** manager
representative if that book is
in the library wouldn't I
already be breaking the state
law and if so will my funding be
in jeopardy because I am not in
compliance with the law manner
to represent some madam chair
representative this is a
hypothetical and let me make
this clear this is the question
that has been asked to meet if a
public library has pornographic
books in a children's section
the representatives asking me
whether or not they will lose
their state funding because they
broke an estate law
that's not what this bill was
about
but I do think there's probably
a process that that can be
remedied
okay thank you madam chair and
think you represent because i'm
brain that up because your bill
says that it shall not be
eligible to receive state funds
unless they comply with this but
if this
is so I I mean I agree we
shouldn't be banning books right
but.
You put a new provision here
that says you can't get funds if
you don't comply with extra y
i'm wondering and I know I
already asked it but.
I you know if there's state laws
that are broken i'm pretty sure
your funding would be in
jeopardy and that's just a
concern that I have regarding
this legislation because we're
putting apples to oranges here
regarding what is what is.
Allowed under this arbitrary in
my opinion standard with this
new set of rules and then what
is not allowed in current state
law so my concern is I want to
protect right I want to protect
children to ensure that they are
not.
Subjected to nine age
appropriate sexual content or
sexual continent on madam chair
representative I don't think we
should be putting any kind of
sexual content anywhere where
children exist in my opinion
madame chairman representative
and I don't believe that's a
book banning I believe that's
merely doing the states
responsibility to follow thirty
dash thirty seven dash two to
protect the children and our
communities from being groomed
and targeted by this this
violent content because manager
representative read something
about this at the public library
and then goes in googles it lord
knows where that could lead or
what what things that could lead
to that child being taken
advantage of or if they ask
questions to to someone in the
community and lord knows what
that would happen madame to
represent it so might my big
concerns are regarding that I
want to protect local control I
want to protect children I do
not want to band books I want to
prohibit this state from using
state funds to purchase
pornograph pornographic and
graphic content that is not
suitable for children under the
current state statutes now I go
to the library all the time I
have my almogoria library card I
love our library you know and
they've really good stuff there
and I know or or library manager
and all the staff there and I
know that they they want the
best for its children right but
I think it's important to
protect and affirm the current
state statutes that ensure that
children are protected that
there is no graphic pornographic
violent content for kids to
absorb in public spaces with
public dollars and so that's
just one reason many reasons why
I just I cannot support this
legislation thank you madame
chairman chair
i'd like to move a do pass on
the house
managed to table a second okay
tabling motion supersedes we
will take a vote on the
motion to table
representative yes the table.
Representative north yesterday
table representative ramiro no
representative thomson no madam
vice chair rubio not a table
madam chair for noticable
k on a vote of
24 being no to table your motion
does not withstand so we will go
back to the
original motion for do pass.
Representative block no
representative lord no with the
explanation representative
remarrial yes
it resenative thomson yes madam
buys cherubia yes madam vice
chair ferrari yes
so only boat of four to two you
have a do pass
your bill house bill one twenty
three and representative lord to
explain her book thank you
madame chair what I don't like
about this bills that it says
libraries shall not band books
no matter how sexually graphic
or have sensitive topics like
beastiality or peta feeling that
is not fair to community set
don't want them if the majority
people there don't want them
what you're saying is too bad
you have to carry these books
and tough and I don't think
that's fair to do the places
like edgewood or other
communities that don't want them
so absolutely not I will not
support this bill because kids
can walk around to get access to
stuff that's not appropriate not
saying it's not appropriate I
don't you want to read that kind
of grow step but
it should not be allowed work
children can have access thank
you.
Next we'll hear house bill one
eighty three
negligent use of deadly weapons
and.
Thank you
good evening and thank you very
much madame chair members of the
committee
I am here this evening are to
present a house bill one eighty
three for your consideration it
is an act to increase the
penalty for negligent use of a
deadly weapon to a misdemeanor
for if first offence and a
forced degree felony for a
second or subsequent offence at
this evening I have my
expert witness
who will be assisting.
Who will be assisting me this
evening and I would like to ask
him to introduce themselves
between chair.
Matter chair members of the
committee my name is mark baker
and the attorney and about
turkey with the firm paper
handset mullins and baker.
Thank you madame chair and we
are ready for questions and to
help to move this along this
evening I would like to ask if
the questions that come up this
evening I would be
if it would be acceptable for
mister because to respond to
those directly just to help you.
Um
some time
thank you very much did you want
to introduce the bill a little
bit more or wait for questions.
We are ready for questions ma'am
madam picture thank you will go
to the audience those who are
in.
Opposition to this bill.
Okay go ahead.
Yeah.
Opposition to this bell.
Raising healthiest
particularly when crime as in
this case it's definition not
intentional what intentional
intentional threats are at
present.
That's a separate sense that can
be charged in this case where
what you believe up to triple
the penalty and that's
what you many times that we
don't believe as the evidence
does not show raising penalties
as the church private and this
is just the approach that we
would.
Thank you anyone else.
Then we'll go to the audience
those in support.
Thank you members in the
committee to speak and endorse
this bill on half of myself in
the opportunity please
department.
Just introduced myself in just
an art of the commander of the
investigative service division
for pd which overseas our
violence in a mentioned program
and our gun violence teams and
as part of a holistic approach
on to address going balance in
the city I think this bill is a
common sense approach to address
a very serious incident can
happen negligent use of a daily
weapon whether that's through
alcohol that other means of the
recipe for disaster for
individuals and throughout
learning from that then it makes
sense to increase the penalty so
we can kind of remove that going
from that situation and create a
safe environment for the commun.
Thank you.
Is there any.
So will go to the committee
okay
we'll go the representative lord
flip first
thank you manager thank you.
I'm preparing for senate to
start showing up so make sure.
So I have some questions on this
So currently right now if you
accidentally discharge your
firearm.
So we're looking at.
With let me just ask you
question his required on this
because I know a lot of
questions so on page one online
twenty discharging a farm into
any building or vehicle or so to
knowingly and danger a person or
the person's property what what
do you mean like if they're in
their house and they're cleaning
their gun and they accidentally
do a neg a discharge in the home
is that where you're saying or
what do you mean on the person's
property
so for negligence it would have
to be unreasonably and that
would be the first hurdle you'd
have to clear as you'd have to
show that it was an unreasonable
use and then if it was in the
firehour fired off in a home and
it was or building and the house
would count
then this would apply
okay ma'am chair represent I can
understand if you're an
apartment and you did that and
it went through a wall or
something that could be
dangerous I get that and you
harm somebody get that but what
i'm seeing is if I live on a
five account lot and I
somebody's walking there door by
and they hear the fire and go
off and it was accident dental I
was clean in my glock somehow I
would never do that have the meg
and the farm in the same room
so if they accidentally did this
that falls under
negligence for this correct.
If it was unreasonable yes so
there you have to prove that in
the court but yes
and that's already existing lot
is just increases it from a
petty misdemeanor to a fall
mister meaner with no mandatory
minimum or anything like that
and madam chair said the only
reason ask about because to make
the decision I have to first
define what we're talking about.
Okay so.
So online twenty three I thought
because I did a whole bunch of
study on this and again i'm just
trying to figure what you mean
by negligence this is so there
seem renters and experts are
saying that negligence is if
you're impaired that's cause I
thought that was a completely
different thing that you could
get arrested by law enforcement
officer if you were under the
influence of anything if you
were impaired I thought that was
it that falls under negligence I
think he's not in his head so if
you wanted to agree with
disagreed that you have to say
something cause I was asking
people they were not even people
got like five knots and.
Madam chair representative lord
yes
okay I just really quick on that
off topic meant your
representative that should be in
some are completely different to
me that is intent like I argued
that with marijuana you can not
smoke pot and carry a firearm I
wish this and maybe we can work
on that nexus moving this into a
different category because
that's not negligence you're
getting high and you know it.
Sounds like a song
good memchair representative so.
So I guess we're getting tripped
up here I guess I haven't read
enough about negligence i've
read a lot about impaired
but negligence to me in another
state and i'd hold was you are
it was an accident like we just
had that incident horrific
internet where she dropped her
purse.
And that
doubt to me is negligence
and so again i'm trying to wrap
my head around how to vote with
this because of how this is
going
what's really **** me up on this
bill
is negligence as I meant my
house i'm.
Cleaning my gun I have.
Magazine is loaded and a clean
my glock and accident pulled the
trigger and to me that's
negligence when we start getting
into this it this
this was a home of the round
this is somebody's getting high
they know what they have a fire
this is endangering the safety
other people you know it in or
doing it
can you give me an example one
this one like how to use a farm
or other delay weapon in a
negligent met like you're waving
it around with that being now
you're just a moron
sometimes more on a negligent
madam chair being of learn
sometimes more on a negligence
for the same thing and I think
that example would qualify and
it would argue in that
mentioners and there are some
people that are just really
stupid i've actually had people
try to show me their farm that
just spot and point the barrel
at me and I dock and move in
like what and the hell you do it
I can see that there's ammo in
the pipe and they're still
pointing at me and i've had to
severely discipline them because
that's how you could harm
somebody that I get that's kind
of now you get new different
room and negligence.
Which
would i'm gonna offer manager
represent some sort of amendment
to wear because when i'm looking
at.
You know we know you should know
that you can't fire farm within
a hundred and fifty years of
dwalling or building then you're
just being stupid you're waving
the gun around that's been
stupid which you can sitter.
An amendment.
And I mean there's seriously one
or is a part.
I don't know how to word this
but something that takes out
people that accidentally make a
mistake because all these are
intentional or just being a
complete idiot or and then I
have this one we are telling me
that if I am cleaning my gun and
they do that to me is like so
accidental it can happen
especially recleaning multiple
firms but you've been hunting
you doing a lot of stuff you may
have like five or six guns out
there cleaning I get it it's
negligence but it's not the kind
of negligence that intention.
Madam chair representative lord
I understand what you're saying
and my response would be that
the discharging of into any
building or vehicle I don't
think it's clear that it applies
to the round accidentally going
off within a home arm setting at
a side even traffic citations
are considered criminal
violations under new mexico law
and if you had somebody who
accidentally fired their gun
while cleaning it first of all
you'd have to get past it and
find an officer who would charge
that secondly you'd have to get
to a judge with convict on it
and find that it was
unreasonable and then third you
would have to get to you whether
there would be any meaningful
penalty that would actually
exceed what you would get for a
traffic sitation so a dangerous
lane change could be a tree
falling in the woods there may
not be another vehicle over
there sometimes you accidentally
cut someone off and cause an
accident those are different
things that the system deals
with but it allows for great
asians here the only consistent
thread being anyone who was
unreasonable and reckless in
using firearms as violating the
responsibility that comes with
gun ownership and endangering
people and and property around
them and the consequences moving
it from a petty mister meaner to
a mister meaner is a very
incremental change and if the
other piece of this is if you're
dealing with repeat offenders
who can't figure out to not be
foolish with their guns at some
point there need to be
consequences because someone's
going to get her
so I get agree with that because
I been a gun on her myself i'm
trying to wrap my head around
how this bill is going to affect
our gun owners across
new mexico so let me go back to
on page one I think on page one.
So we're changing the use of
dealt out case a negligent use
of a deadly weapon to
from a missed tue mister meaner.
For a first advance
and then a fourth degree fell in
in the second or suburbs
subsequent offense.
Madame chair representative lord
yes from a petty misdemeanor to
afford this to mean her first
offence to a fourth degree fell
any for a second offence.
I mean i've never not gone would
I have never had that happen.
So I wouldn't even that would
still be my first offence but.
I get nervous on and I see we're
going with that people who are
doing dumb things with firearms
there should be an incremental
punishment that I green
so can you tell me mature
represents so.
So one more time on this I guess
this is on action on page
eighteen are sorry pate one
eighteen.
Whoever commits dangerous of
delling weapon is guilty so it's
going from explain to me the
difference between a petty
mister meaner and a mystery
meaner how much more time server
how bigger all those fines
madam chair representative lord
all it does increase the
discretion of the judge from
zero to six months for a petty
misdemeanor to zero to a year
with the zero still being in
play for a scenario like you're
talking about a very minor issue
that if you take a more
dangerous issue where somebody's
fired a weapon and there were a
house full of kids free when I
was a prosecutor I had a case
where someone fired a weapon
into a home with ten kids inside
out that a judge could look at
as much more serious and that's
that's this gives them the room
to deal with in that spectrum of
different things that could fall
with within the statue.
Mancher and represent your
killing me with this because I
understand we're saying like I
said you're in your apartment
and you're cleaning your gun.
And you fire the weapon interest
about you do something sell with
regions I can see this.
I just get worried where I get
worried is not gone what again
I am cleaning my glock in my
house I live in two wakers and
there's nobody round us and i'm
within all the distances from
other houses where amount.
I just get tripped o.
Accident dents that are purely
accidents versus being a
complete moron with the fire arm
so i'm still going to struggle
with this because I get it
that's the judge's discretion
and there are cases if you're so
stupid i'm sorry calling out
gunners that are stupid but
there are some people are stupid
luckily small percentage like I
present a numerous times only
ninety nine ninety nine point
nine nine nine eight five
percent of us don't do anything
wrong with their fires and
that's based on stats.
And by data collection so now
i'm wondering that's a zero zero
zero one four think percent ends
up doing bad things so i'm gonna
struggle with this all but more
but
I don't know manned up by gross.
I don't know yet I haven't
gotten there
I just see this big division of
I accidentally did it versus you
did something horribly stupid
that you should have known
better between those two things
in a month struggle over.
Thank you representative block
thank you madame chairman think
you representative little and I
think you expert or presenters I
should say that's easier and am
too representative so my my
questions can use them from the
same van of representative lord
but I do want to know in this
current statute we're not
amending the kind of weapon
right just as deadly weapon so
madam to represent with this
include like I don't know
a dagger or
a boey naf something like that
would it include all of those
kinds of things that can indeed
become deadly weapons manager
representative
chair represented a block the
definition of deadly weapon
would include more than a
firearm the subsections are
specific to fire arms.
Got it thank you madame chairman
thank you representative I see
that here so madame chairman
represented my my question is
then let's just say someone
doesn't use a firearm list just
say they like stabbed
a bunch of people while they
were also included in the
section
carrying.
How far are carrying something
that's like narcoticker and
intoxicant so madam to represent
with this only be relating to
folks who carry a firearm and do
those things or could it be
somebody who has like a dagger
or like miss said he is just
like running around stabbing
people madam chair
representative
madame chair representative
block if someone's staving
someone I would hope we weren't
looking at mister meaner
statutes at all and they would
be then guilty of a violent
felony i'm sort of the statue
would not come in to play that
circumstance got it the
commander think you represent so
this would only be in effect if
someone didn't like actually hit
someone with a bullet or stab
somebody would just be
endangering the the environment
manager representative that's
pretty much it
madame chair representative
block yes and I believe that
part this was presented to us by
the city as a um as a priority
bell is indicated by apd's
support and from my perspective
we're looking at what reasonable
steps can be taken to deal with
that violence in alberta key
ends in the state and this was
an incremental step um to to
deal with that to deal with us
representative large putting
people who are doing stupid
things with guns thank you
madame chair thank you
representative and I I think
it's good to go after folks who
are stupid with anything that's
deadly weapon and I agree with
either so madam chair
representative and wondering
here we're talking I think she
talked a little bit about what a
petty versus a misdemeanor is
but I see that we've added first
offence is a misdemeanor and
then the next defence would be a
fourth degree felony so
manimature representative could
you just go out go over with
this the statute says regarding
sentencing for a misdemeanor
versus a fourth degree felony
manager.
Madame chair represented block a
defendant convicted of a fourth
agree felony in new mexico
generally faces a statutory
maximum penalty of eighteen
months and a five thousand
dollars fine if my memory
certainly correctly.
Okay thank you madame chair
think representative so then
this from the current statute
this would increase it from I
believe you said six months for
a petty to then maximum for
eighteen months if it's a second
offence so this person would
already have served a
misdemeanor so probably about a
year or less if they had a first
offence and then madame to
represent a second offence would
be in additional eighteen months
potentially manimater
representative.
Madam chair representative block
yes you'd have two separate
incidents to drive the second
one
to be honest in my experience
most people charged with the
misdemeanor serve zero time or
very limited time
if you get to in a more greatest
scenarios I was mentioning you
could serve up to a year and
then for a second or subsequent
offence or a second offence
you'd face a matter statutory
maximum of eighteen months the
reality again being that
those charged with a fourth to
refel any rarely serve
any serious time or any time at
all often probationar
diversioner are the first course
of action.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thinking representative and and
I appreciate the answer I find
that to be kind of scary that if
you do this there is not really.
According to your testimony
there is not much punitive
action so madam to a
representative I I kind of find
that to be scary so it's good
that we're increasing it but
even though this is a mister
meter you said that most
misdemeanors don't serve time so
madam chair representative how
would this then deter these most
violent criminals if it's only a
misdemeanor for the first
defence madam chair
representative
madame chairman represented a
block and I should be clear i'm
not speaking off of like stats I
haven't studied but i'm just
speaking from my experience with
mister charges
but the deter in effect would be
imposing appropriate punishment
on people who have done the most
agreed just things that fault
within this statute and so the
judge and has the discretion to
impose meaningful consequences
in the case that warns it rather
than being capped at six months
and again dealing with the
second her subsequent offence
you have the consequences of
becoming a felon and
and if you unreasonably are
stupidly as we've been talking
about it used your guns twice
and then caught twice doing that
I don't think that that's an
overly significant consequence
for someone to face in the in
this climate where lots of
people are being her with gun
violence okay thank you madame
chairman and think you
representative and I appreciate
the clearly on what what that
would mean and and I take your
experience to heart they
definitely know you've done it
before so you've seen it and you
know what's happening so madame
chairman representative I i'm
just now staring at the fire
here and i'm on page three.
And I believe I don't know who
gave this I think it's probably
corrections but they said uh.
It's gonna cost their department
some potential
increased cars I think a minimum
two representative and underpaid
the first page of the fire it
says for twenty five at least
twenty six thousand dollars
madam chair representative so
are we are we assuming that the
statute would be used sparingly
with these numbers because it
seems a little low manager
representative could you just
open on that if you've spoken
with corrections what they're
saying about potential increase
of costs if this goes into
effect matter and share
representative block I have not
spoken to corrections I assume
that that's reflective of my
prior testimony regarding um
stats on incarceration for
mister meaners.
All right thank you madame
chairman think you
representative.
And yeah that's just interesting
say I see the same kind of urban
and other bills like it says
significant issues research
shows that certainty have been
cut is the more powerful
deterrent to crime than severity
of punishment and although
wasn't policies designated to
deter crime focus mainly on
increasing severity of pushing
spent this as little to a deter
criminals because most.
No little about sanctions so
madame to represent it right
just find that interesting that
there is put in here because I
i've seen other bills in this
the very committee die
immediately because we're
increasing penalties for violent
offenders but then this is the
out this is like the the ability
to say well I don't want to be I
don't want to be punishing
quotes and be punitive so I just
I just find that interesting you
know and it's interesting that
the desert does this have a
message manager representative
this is a message from the
governor.
Okay thank you manager that's
very interesting and there's not
an appropriation on the bill is
that
correct memter
yes matter sorry yes manager
representative that is correct
but it was article yes okay
thank you manager yeah I know
this is microphones kind of
started less so they keep us
awake right skinning late so
that's all I had managed here I
appreciate the time and and
thank you both for your
information thank you.
Madame turred like to move
table.
Okay will take roll call
representative.
Oh i'm sorry representative
on tabling motion yes
notable
representative lord.
Um
no to table
representative ram yes to table
and i'd like to explain my vote
representative thompson same as
romero
madam vice chair rubio yesterday
table madam chair for yesterday
table
so I boat of four to two
your bill has been house bill
one eighty three husband table
and representative mirror.
Thank you madame chair I just
want to appreciate the city of
albuquerque's arms situation in
which
there the gun violence situation
not just in in the city but
across the state is certainly
alarming I think is a value from
our community when we see
increase and penalties as the
only level of with which we
tried to redress you know the
different crime levels
especially when we're looking at
negligence um it's just we just
want to be in line with how it
is that we can ensure that what
we're doing with this isn't just
an increase in penalties were
trying to address the root
causes of crime and we've done
this numerous times across
numerous statutes and I just
would like to work with you know
any community to sort of raise
the bar on how it is that we can
be smarter on on what how we're
going to address these things so
appreciate the time and the um
hope we can work a little bit
differently than.
Thompson think you managed here
and I would say did o to what my
colleague said
and in the we have we have heard
so many bills and that
let's increase the penalty if it
was working we would know it
it's not working we have to come
up with some other and they know
it's a big answer but behavioral
health is a big part of it in
treatment in all that stuff and
so I it's not that i'm against
the
attempt it's that I don't think
this is the right way to go
about thank you.
Thank you.
Okay next
we have house build two eighty
two.
Registration and federal law
bill.
Go ahead.
Man of chairman
out many chair members of the
committee
thank you for working so late to
hear our bill it's eight house
bill two eighty two and with me
are two experts at evans
and i'm sorry he made a cheque
as richest met
as why we were whispering before
are you the right one
and and this is
a really interesting situation
another elizabeth thompson
is our other.
I know others with two
spin a long day as so we
is this
is a blasting i'm trying not to
blast but i'm also trying to
speak allowed enough so we're
here on house bill two eighty
two and
it relates to.
And end of the day not very
light topic of sex offender
registration and this bill
amanda and acts sections of the
sex of under registration and
notification act to comply with
federal law and federal law is.
Ah it's quite sorna is the
with the alphabets.
First letter there's a word for
that too I can't remember that
right now yes been a long day
and
part of the reason that his bill
has been wrap forward is that
new mexico is not in compliance
with federal law on the
registration of six offenders
and as a result will your
penalized about a hundred
thousand dollars year and over
the last ten years we bost
something an excess of a million
dollars are in federal funds
that would otherwise have been
coming to us i'm going to leave
it to our the experts to explain
the
details of the law and
briefly and then will stand for
questions.
Check ok just making sure it's
like that screeching sound
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for hearing
us on this on this bill
I will
first just introduce myself my
name is matthew charges i'm the
chief legal council for the
department of public safety
and i've been working on this
with the the department of
justice's sorner office for.
Almost a year.
Good folks over there and and
we've done a lot of good work in
the last six months trying to
put this together and and make
sure that we have a shot and
make a new mexico compliance
with the adam walsh act.
So just a couple of highlights
for you all on this bill first
of all it.
It will indeed stam the the
tired of a hundred thousand
dollars that we lose every year
by not being in compliance with
title one of the animals act so
in twenty eleven the use
department of justice determined
that new mexico's not compliance
with the most act and
consequently for for the past
thirteen years new mexico is
annual annually received a ten
percent reduction in federal
funds from the act
from specifically from the
edward burn memorial justice
assistance grant so cumilatively
that has resulted in new mexico
losing one point two million
dollars
from not being in complaints
without a mall shacked.
Erm the the your department of
justice has indicated that if we
bring these changes that we have
put in in house will to two
eighty two if we can get these
done that we have a really good
shot
they can't say for sure because
they have to do another another
review of new mexico's
compliance where they say we
have a really good shot of being
compliant with animals act.
So just a couple of other
highlights HB two eighty two
would increase community safety
it is not punitive it does not
increase criminal penalties
associated with sex offences.
It is sex of any registration is
not a criminal penalty at all it
is a civil remedial regulatory
non punitive law.
Um it doesn't also does not
violate new mexico or the
federal constitution's exposed
factor clauses that is to say
anything that's retroactive in
this bill would not violate
constitutional law and
my direct the committee's
attention to state versus drug
tennis two thousand four and mca
zero three two for that point of
law.
The really critical things that
this bill does in terms of
community safety one it new
mexico currently does not
require
sex offender registration for
the following offences.
Patronizing child sex abuse
victims.
Promoting child sex abuse
accepting earnings of a child's
exam of child's ex trafficking
voyarism of a minor.
Human trafficking so it closes
first it corrects that in new
mexico law by adding those those
offenses to our soreness
statute.
And that's one of the critical
points that we were not
compliance in the department of
justice is twenty twenty review
of new maxical.
They'd also close as the so
called jeffrey obstained
loophole by adding the above
offences that I just listed to
sections.
Three jay of the bill thirteen
through nineteen.
An insection seven a it makes it
such that if an offender is
convicted of these offences or
required to register as a
lifetime sex offender as a
result of an outer state
conviction.
That the offender must register
into mexico so the bottom line
of that is that if they are a
lifetime registering offender
they moved to new mexico they
were automatically have to
register into mexico for th.
That really summarizes most of
it at the this is going to
require a little bit more
resources from department of
public safety to affect your way
this bill.
But
we see as a benefit it improves
community safety.
And if we can succeed and make a
new mexico complaint without a
malsa act.
Will begin receiving those funds
that we've been foregoing for
the last thirteen years and we
hope that the bill uh will pay
for itself in that regard so any
additional resources that
department of holiday safety
incurs or requires rather to to
make this
to make these changes into
increase increase the
the monitoring of six of others
in new mexico
will come from from the money
that were for going every year.
So.
Just a quick note on that before
i.
Yield the floor so to speak
hundred thousand dollars a year
we've been losing since twenty
twelve but it's increasing every
year and so in twenty twenty one
it was a hundred and fourteen
thousand dollars.
And twenty twenty two it was a
hundred and nineteen thousand
dollars and last year it was a
hundred and almost a hundred and
twenty eight thousand dollars so
there's an upward trend of these
of his grant money that were
we're losing every year by by
not being compliant.
Ah.
I think that summarizes.
Most of the changes are happy to
set stand for any questions
thank you manager.
The.
Thank you first will go to the
audience is there anyone in
opposition.
Oh you could stand where they
have microphones ever yeah.
And i'm worrying a couple of
hours both as a staff attorney
and also someone who has.
And someone who works with
people who have caused actual
violence as young people
and have searched very problems
is only to navigate after their
release long six hundred rolling
registry.
Could not be.
More certain approached.
If people who cause actual.
I'm also.
Prospects.
Disrupt people's lives and even
if the registration.
The.
Good evening madam chair I
apologize I am in opposition I
didn't hear if this is a right
time to make my comment.
Go ahead
thank you matter members of the
committee regularly charges on
behalf of the law
we appreciate the sponsors
committed to public cd
two we do stand in opposition
our concerns with our winner the
registration or juvenile as well
as someone will be issues that
would be created by all of the
different reporting requirements
agencies and so we ask you to
take a hard look at this bill
and oppose thinking matter and
members.
Thank you.
Did you want to close with any.
Representative lock think
manager i'm overdue
pass a second.
Okay yes we didn't get far
nephew go head a representative
think you mount here think you
representative I just on balance
i'm trying to
it I know we've seen different
laws in the past about the
registry
and you know
the way I this has been framed
as essentially getting out in
mind with federal law.
Do we go beyond federal law in
the spell to increase penalties
or
I guess when it comes to
violations and concerned that
when we're looking at the amount
of funding that we're getting in
grant funding that we're also
making it more challenging for
folks to
be in compliance with that
increase in grant funding so how
does that balance I guess i'm
just concerned with
you know what what with the
shortfall is currently
potentially running this program
but also how it is that you know
word essentially doing more to
do that so just a can you
explain that
yes thank you manager
representative merrill.
The short answer is that this is
not a punitive amendment to new
mexico sort of statute doesn't
increase penalties on sex
offenders.
And let them let me rewind the
question was does it go beyond
the adam wall shacked entitle
one of that act which is the
federal sort of statute and the
answer is it does not it really
just brings us right in line
with
federal statute and.
You know it's for example it in
there you know just to go to the
to the juvenile.
The question about registering
for juveniles.
Um.
The.
I'm reading from.
If that's where missileness and
his committee i'm i'm reading
from what the department
adjusted just the sent me that
as their sorn a guidance that
for for lay people and policy
makers and it says that sorner
does not require jurisdictions
to treat their juvenile sex
offenders the same as adult
registrance and all respects.
Jurisdictions have the
discretion to exempt juveniles
from their public sex offender
website.
Just sictions can also establish
different procedures for
juveniles that recognize the
unique needs of driven off
enters and so it.
This is not going to require
juveniles to be on a sex of on
our website and it does not
increase.
Our penalties aren't sexual
finers at all.
And in in terms of the the money
question madame chairman
represented
to me it's it's a wind when so
it's going to increase resource
needs for the department of
public safety and
but we're going to get this
grant money and if we become
fully compliant with sorner
because there's substantial
compliance which is kind of like
it's good enough and will free
up that grant money that ten
percent reduction of feral funds
and if we we become if they find
after doing a subsequent review
of new mexico that we become
fully compliant it will they
will release an additional three
to five percent of fines are
on top of that so the the the
funding we expect will exceed
the additional resource in needs
of increasing surveillance of
saxophoners thank you thank you
madame chair
I it looks like you're headed to
due to sharing extra this
committee
promote this and I just wanted
to flag that some of the
technical issues in the bills as
well regarding even the
definition which is inclusive of
two different definitions
that those that the flags that
had been raised about the
technical challenges there have
you
made any attempts to sort of
remedy that since there are few
conflicts I can point them out
but they're flagged in the fire
but just curious if you are
planning to fix this
madam share representative
depends on the on the particular
issue that I was raised we we
did address some of these
with the sponsor as well.
Madame chair representative I
think it's on the tier one in
tier two sex offences they are
inclusive of the same statue and
it's not clear within the tier
to start you
that it's not also inclusive of
so think inclusive of tier one
and but can you be charged for
both.
That's that I think that's.
Manager represent you have a
page sorry page a
in the definitions of tier one
and two or two if you look at
lines
eight nine we're looking at
subsection
a of section thirty dash succeed
dash three and going down to
tier two sex offense lines
eighteen and nineteen
also lists the same start you as
the definition of tier two
so you're defining both tier one
and two two with the same.
I'm sure if I could give this to
the other expert.
Madame chairman representative I
actually looked at this several
times because that was bugging
me to uhm
subsection as in tier one
because subsection a has
different are
elements than the rest of the
section so if you you can
actually read those two together
even though it appears on its
face that there's a conflict
subsection as different elements
and then the remainder of the s.
Now if I think we're a minimal
to possibly further clarifying
that but it's not actually a
conflict if you.
Think you matter thank you I
just on the overlap I think
clarity that it's not also
inclusive and that if they're
not deplicated.
When we get to the technicality
and then there's just some other
technical issues that were
flagged in the far
that we can wrestle with the
text door analysis I think on
substance thank you for
clarifying um
that we're trying to get in
the same sort of formulaic
patterns as what are federal
governments doing I appreciate
that and
you know making sure we have the
resources to do that as well so
with that manage.
I just am concerned about
juvenile's having to register
and then to keep up and and the
public defender
mentioned that there is
significant enough changes to
present expensentially greater
challenges and enforcement and
ensuring knowing cupboard or
violations that
this would.
Make it so that the registration
violations by changing them also
often and the requirements so
many times over the years that
it would be hard to
the complex process to identify
which version of the statute
applies so.
That is and is that something
that's in.
The.
Requirements or
is this something else that.
Is above the policies.
Man i'm sure thank you for the
question
broadbrush strokes the the
sorenet there are more shacked
in the entitled once the sorner
statute federal stature in state
statutes
they are complex we believe that
this the amendments to this bill
will resolve a lot of the the
complexities by
adopting importing the tearing
system of offenders from the
federal statute
so.
Hopefully that answers part of
your question
the issue with juveniles is a
the changes that we make to the
sort of statute are
significant but they're not
they're not sweeping there also.
I can I can kind of summarise
them if the
manager if you liken for the
committee.
To get to become a sex offender
like have to register as a
juvenile you have to have
committed a very serious sex
offence and so that's that's one
thing that we should really keep
in mind and and just the origins
of the out of maltracked
the animal shacked and sorna the
federal the federal statutes
originated from a series of very
grizzly
rapes and murders of children in
the eighties and nineties and
and over time
you know the the the statutes
have changed but they have sight
to improve an address very
serious problems and in our
communities with sex offenders
and so I don't think that we
should see the development of
these statutes as problematic we
should see them as a beneficial
to our communities and improving
community safety from sex
creditors and so I just wanted
to put that out there that the
overall are development of these
status have been a good thing
and we we believe that hb twenty
two will actually bring
it will actually bring some
bit simplify things a little bit
and it'll it'll help.
Are our law enforcement partners
and and the armed public safety
and are sheriff's.
Effectuate the the the purpose
of of the bill thank you
and also
representative and.
To your name again mister.
I'm sorry math mister.
So for someone who is a
prostitute or has a prostitution
related offense which becomes a
sex offence
when a special finding of fact
is made on its unclear as to
whether it is the judge or jury
to make that kind of finding can
you explain that.
Thank you madame travel that's a
good question I believe that it
would be a finding in the
adjudication of that case either
by a judge or by a jury
depending on depending on the
circumstances of the trial.
I'm sorry would you repeat that
that's alright
madam sure you would it would be
if finding a fact by the judge
or a jury in the judiciation of
that trial just depending on on
the circumstances of that.
This.
Define.
I am sure if I could add to that
I think
if it's a jury trial the jury
will make their finding a fact
if you say judge trial then the
judge will make the finding of
fact okay I hope that clarifies
it yes thank you
okay that's.
Do we have a motion
oh i'm sorry we did and do pass
okay which.
Yeah.
Representative block yes and i'd
like to briefly explain my
representative lord yes with the
explanation representative of a
mirror yes
representative thompson.
The.
Made invoice to your rubbie no
matter here ferrari no.
Okay
you have a do pass
on house build two eighty two on
a vote of three to two and
representative block to explain
your boat thank you madame
chairman and thank you offer for
the presentation you know I I
read the bill III read on my
bills and marked this from back
to front and I just find it to
be a very common sense piece of
legislation too to pretty much.
Allow new mexico to be a safer
place for children and that's
really why I think this is an
important piece of legislation I
think you represent matthews for
bringing this forward thanks
manager.
Go ahead representatives thank
you mentioner or
i'm sorry we're also tired of
this point in there still
fifteen more days
I will say was not already
thirty days
day is already
so thank you so much I I bought
it yes to support your bill I
have not found a peter fills I
think everybody has no mouth.
To close the geoffrey abstention
loophole you p.
It's unfortunate
I read the story of the girl
that he raped and i'm sure there
was more than that that came
forward and it's just horrific
th.
You would not have had to been
in this registry because that so
thank you representative again
supporting another good
democrat.
Um seeing further bills
you desponder to say thank you
very much
appreciate it thank you
