I'm good morning everybody so.
We're going to start with the
reason why we're here.
Normally would be I wanted to
discuss some kind of base line
for the committee I think that
these will help us function in a
way it is certainty to those
that are going to be
in front of us and also helps
the committee for the time and
also to give our members at the
time please certain as to how
we're going to keep our bills
using through our committee so
just want to go through these
really quickly are you each
received a copy of these we're
trying to figure out how we can
put them on the website for our
community and from their launch
right into them so what what I
think would be best for us to
keep on schedule is we're gonna
get each bill thirty minutes the
thirty minute will be divided as
such two and a half minutes for
the presenter of the bill and
then two and a half members for
each member of the committee
this is not going to include
public testimony if we end up
reaching the thirty minute limit
for the bill we can by two
thirds majority of the committee
vote to continue on hearing that
bill I think this is going to
get keep us advancing forward
make sure that we're not
spending too much time on bills
that don't necessarily need that
much time and I think that is a
fair way of representing each
committee members ability to
give committee on the bill
without stretching out so
starting on that first rule is
anybody have any comments.
Yes Sir.
Chair I think anything that
hasn't appropriations or will
fall in the house bill three.
Deserves whatever time it takes
okay if we want to reach that
conclusion of the two thirds
vote of the committee and chair
members members with you I think
it should be as easy an easy
decision and not way the but I
also knew committee as well for
any response to Representative
favors.
Enter this is kind of on that
topic this is regarding the
amendments that might be
attached to build.
It says the must be submitted to
us twenty four hours in advance
of the committee meeting yes
ma'am how much time is because I
like to see that at least the
night before if so if there is
an amendment.
And it's not what I'm asking is
how long does it take for that
amenity to be transmitted to the
committee members for our review
that's a great question Haley
question.
Well if I can get it twenty four
hours before the committee
meeting that I can get it to you
at a minimum of twelve hours
before a committee meeting which
should be I think some of the
work out of the city more to
last time because this is also a
few that the sickly I think the
reason for that role as is
majorly though because I I have
experience getting presentations
or documents or house amendment.
An hour before the committee the
meeting starts and that's not
reasonable for in this so if if
it works for you are you willing
to do twenty four hours to me
and I'll send it to you as soon
as possible but no later than
twelve hours in advance.
Madam chair for a simple
amendment see that is working
really well if it's really
complex or maybe a committee
substitute and one more time
would be nice because I our
analysts would like to look at
it as well yeah we're I agree
Representative and for for those
more steps into the management's
we were obviously gonna have a
preference we're gonna hold fast
to that twenty four hour rule
and and and twenty four hours
rest needs we turn it around
exactly when we get it when the
when it's delivered to the
committee secretary that for
next move issue sensitivity
analysts to make sure that all
that we have the opportunity to
to analyzed to the best of our
ability I do want to mention
that this is only for those
amendments that are more
substantive we have an amendment
that's just one or two I think
that less material equipment we
can get that accomplished during
the committee meeting so that's
that's one changes I do want to
make in that first smaller.
Then that we can get those done
with the committee hearing so
and fax your point
Representative Pettigrew
anything having to do it house
bill three I don't I don't think
that these rules will give
relief
the here to that because we're
gonna this is gonna be for bills
are probably outside of house
bill three I have nothing to do
part of transportation's budget
a lot of the appropriations
bills if we are here that we are
here than hearing of are going
to be sent on to appropriations
anyways and if there is money in
the budget for the advance if
not they will not be
appropriations so I think we
also need to kind of trust the
process and that way this is
more towards the the bills that
we're hearing for of substantive
qualifications and and madam
chair I appreciate.
The clarification there I just.
When will we say trust the
process we need to understand
the protrusion we look at the
appropriation of the billing.
And so trusting the process
would include making sure that
the language.
Language is correct and so given
thirty minutes to the language
on something the social.
The that has value it's gonna go
to appropriations.
To me.
You may not.
And so.
When applying that to.
In my opinion the twenty four
hour rule is a twenty four hour
notice if if the analysis of
what should be heard.
And I get that yes we move
things through we get to the end
of the session and we're trying
to push things through but it's
not our fault that it didn't get
guitar Committee in time to get
through the process.
Giving Graeser to somebody
that's not putting the effort in
the beginning make sure the bill
got here in time for we had good
qualified debate and discussion
this is our issue.
I think that's a valid point
Representative one thing I do
want to fly for you is that we
are in a.
Recently we have been
experiencing
Getting analysis bill analyses
and even fiscal impact reports.
Barely hours sometimes minutes
before we hear the bell I agree
with you that's not our issue
that's not our fault.
Same time our committee has to
do our work so we kind of have
to management that to the best
of our ability I have great
faith in LFC and the analysts
that are going to get this
straightened out and just at the
beginning of the session is
always going to be cases they
get better but are there process
I think you start to see it
sooner and sooner I that what I
kinda discussed with the the
Annalise's if we have a bill
that clearly has the fiscal
impact that all members can
agree on will have fiscal impact
and if we don't have a fiscal
impact report for that self
we're not well here it we're not
going to take action on.
We're we're simply not sell for
those bills that you are going
to have an indeterminate fiscal
impact I think that we can be of
a little less stringent on them
but again I'm gonna you know mic
turned to the committee for that
we're going to have discussions
about this some of these are
committee discussions some of
these leaders you know decisions
ultimately for the chair to be
made but I am very interested in
getting the input on the
committee making sure that given
the information that we're
supposed to consider these bills
we feel we have all everything
that we need to make good
decisions so that's one of the
reasons for the for this role
madam chair this admissions
Committee and but it has been
and over half of the other
committees that I are
And the analysis is already an
hour beforehand.
Is actually receive what I would
just.
And those are still going to
work.
I.
This.
And so
once again.
I get we have are working in the
if the people the process.
And the provided the
information in order to it I
don't want to get chair to a
point where
we go back several years ago
work closely
process here in those bills.
One thing that's weighing Mexico
government forms I don't think
that's fair to our constituents
people that are listening and.
The people that don't have the
access reason why they're still
out there right now this is all
ours all agency analysis all
members need to be posted on the
on on the website because we do
need to be a transparent
government and for not being
transparent we should be pushing
the work.
Is an important yes it's
important but there's a reason
why people pre file bills.
For this reason why there's an
opportunity for food agencies
the.
Yes right now we have I wanted
education clearly has a
requirement inside still.
The Attorney General is going to
be responsible for that that
that for this new agency
analysis from the attorney
general's and so Photoshop.
Representative Harper you have.
Yeah yes thank you madam chair
and.
I guess my.
I I have some concerns with one
three and four on this
And I think just guessing
correct me if I'm wrong guessing
probably risk office was during
our hearing last time we had a
presenter that was pretty
verbose and response to
questions for very long and so I
can kind of see why others maybe
it is for this
but eight years I've been on
this committee we've never had
problems with.
You know people trying to just
talk about the death rate of
controversial here yes the port
questions.
And typically towards the end of
the session is not have
insurance because we finished
off our work
regional stock Committee and we
don't get a billion bills and.
And I think three bills on an
agenda is usually about right
I've.
Thank you for a bill that is
simple two and a half minutes is
a great intro a lot of my bills
take ten minutes to explain it
first and that helps the
committee never understand it
well so they don't have a bunch
of questions right and
And usually allows chair of the
ways and means committee
usually each member took about
ten minutes of questions because
it takes about a minute ask your
question about a minute after
response back so this would mean
that really every member just
ask one more question.
So I would just I guess I would
say.
No number two is a house rule
obviously we can change that but
I would I would say let's a
let's see how the first couple
committee hearings go on bills
and if there is a problem we can
combat.
And see if we want to really
want this policy the committee
to.
I appreciate the fact of
Representative Romero.
You madam chair from so yeah I
think as far as a twenty four
hour rule offices to house rules
on some fires by that we can do
and you all and your staff right
up front to to get the
information out there if there
amendments things like that some
of the things that aren't
necessarily in our control are
the way agencies are putting in
their information Representative
Senator mentioned in education
yesterday we did have a bill
that was up and it didn't have
the wealth it was perceived that
the Attorney General had not
however they have waited we
brought that up in committee it
has in was disseminated to
everybody of all the analyst and
we can take action on the bill
we actually rolled in Europe
actually there are
but I think we can do as a body
and in this committee we can get
the process through enough what
is in our power by the house
rules by the end of the set up I
chair to get our bills through
get them vetted in a timely
manner because we all have sixty
days to get the work done in
this session we have four
sessions that start ten thirty
eleven o'clock that we also need
to attend to and I think this is
inefficient good way of doing it
with some mechanisms for the
committee to also consider
amending if need be just time
need to be fixed today extended
the chair has made available to
be able to do that so I think
this is more than to to go by
and if those time
Extra time is needed there are
ways to to work on thank you
very much Representative
delivers thank you madam chair
so disorder clear thirty minutes
is include the bill presentation
plus discussion boards of the
bill presentation and then
discussion.
I think this the bill
presentation and discussion by
members it does not yes.
I would like to see an exclusive
the bill presentation thirty
four.
That's a smart I'm sorry say
that again it's good
presentation and then thirty
minutes for the discussion you
should thank you that's great
discussion anything else.
Okay thank you thank you for
this into this is next meeting
come back in the amendments it
is I do want to say it is really
important to me that we do have
a structure here so we can
continue to run this committee
and really efficient way I've
been on some committees where
efficiency with name of the game
Madam chair Lundstrom those that
very well.
But at the same time of the
committees where we can only
wish that I think it's at some
time wait we're wasting the time
of the public in in ourselves so
I really want to make sure that
we have at least some framework
that we could hear to make sure
that the run very efficiently
because we not only here till
policy but we also in charge of
house bill three we're gonna be
hearing section I projects here
soon and so I it's important to
know we have a framework and I
am very confident that we will
be able to come together as a
committee together process that
we all really like and we all
feel good about so thank you
very much on that you'll to our
our first.
Bill.
Right.
House bill seventy.
Representative Garcia and the
on.
We're gonna roll house bill
seventy eight that's me Mr chair
is really quickly.
Experts here there is.
I wondered madam chair off to
like for.
Thank you very much the
semester.
House bill seventy eight what it
does is it just the first few
tax distribution that to the
aviation department as majority
of their funding right now it is
a two hundred fifty thousand
dollars a month distribution
we're asking for it to go out
thousand dollars a month we have
one very important amendments
are shouldn't pass up the
committee.
This.
Mr chair of discussing the
amendment it looks like we left
off the word monthly
accidentally when you're talking
about the.
Constitution that first tax
division so it says just five to
five hundred thousand dollars
here is a five hundred thousand
dollars.
Not is the.
Yes.
About give direction to the
equipment.
One of the things we have a full
bill discusses his plan and went
into this might actually this is
people out from the invasion
apartments going to discuss a
little bit about why this
increase in G. R. C. is
necessary.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the this is a bill introduced
because right now the aviation
division received three million
dollars a year which is two
hundred fifty hours in the
request to as Representative
Hochman piece.
I also includes a fifty million
dollars a year.
I.
The original amount of that Lucy
L..
That.
Since two thousand and nine
actors fourteen years ago.
Change in that which.
Funds the aviation division.
A few years so what is happened.
Is.
Thank.
Session commission has been in
the entire time.
Thanks for.
Which is our of the dollars
decreased by five percent.
Funding the the second thing
that needs to be.
In a recent as you can imagine
in the past fourteen years with
no increase.
the aviation division is unable
to keep up with that demand
property that we've actually
done it for years well.
Prioritize very careful.
Things off.
More than one time project
budget.
Attention the.
Other matter that I wanted to
discuss that even though we are
pandemic.
The funded transportation.
He there funding has nothing to
do with the hours of total
funding is completely separate
separate statutory structure
this beauty and our core
funding.
This
asking six the full annual
funding in the past five years
have been six point one million
it is not enough if we're
spending this uptick in spending
that we needed to.
Six point.
This came behind for instance
have been.
That feeling of the
prioritization that we
absolutely.
Funding to do so that is
that is those are the basic
arguments and the basic reasons
why three million dollar
increase would be very very
helpful.
It is.
Well after four
minutes I think it's really
essential in order to allow the
division to do its job our job
is to
to instruction help the of which
around the state is is you know
fifty two safety problems we.
Basically of the job of
maintaining all of the airports
are.
We forty nine PM of course take
care of all of the sections of
international discussions on
immigration they're so large
the.
The deal with their own
government the.
Of the forty fourth of the
responsible.
So for those three those are the
reasons that exist regarding the
request for this the.
Kind of I'm a administer chair
this this legislation would also
remove the sunset clause
associated with this type of
funding to the aviation division
as well so another important
aspect to keep in mind.
with that.
Committee on spurs.
Thank you for I.
That for those that favor last.
We need coverage from the
audience.
In favor Mr chair thank you
Secretary department
transportation they can I'm sure
for Karen this for us you have
the agency we appreciate your
consideration as I was
explaining this funding
essentially goes up to support.
service throughout the state of
New Mexico appreciate your
considerations.
All.
Mr chair I just want to add.
Bill where the sunset removal
that particular revenue fund is
about twenty percent of our.
Anybody in opposition.
Seeing no one opposition the
question from committee
Representative are.
Thank you chairman and madam
chair
So this is a a couple quick
questions it looks like the F.
A. R. page to list all of the
revenue streams that.
To vacation I noticed notice
here
Senator portion of the gasoline
tax that goes to the aviation
Fund.
Jet fuel G. R. T. have licensing
fees and G. R. T. here I guess
the reason I bring this up is
one of the one of the parties in
this half hour.
He is coming that they don't
like to your mark.
portions of revenue streams to
particular funds.
But we're already doing right
the the gasoline tax goes to
about five different places and
this is one of them the jet fuel
goes here your craft licenses
stores here
registration car registration
goes to the department
transportation right we we do.
Earmark funds so I started
coming from just wanted to make
that point the question I have
Mister chair madam chair.
These funds our our leverage for
federal funds matching can you
help me understand how how these
are.
is although this makes up to
percent of budget receive a good
portion of federal funding as
well is that correct.
It is yes the the federal
funding comes from Italy the.
And that those are all of those
funds and.
Very very helpful for us
the funding increases the
ability creation.
Help you with what happens
within the within the division
is a certain project is come out
comes up it's it's a four
million.
The and the way it is a project
which which
some of the money I'll get to
that is that some of these
projects are if a.
The.
Manages ninety percent.
We automatically is.
match the list of all the ways
something purple percent
sentence.
Financial situation as the
sponsors of the State Council
could match the other to help us
out with some of some of the
time we put it all that's
already taken into account even
including those funds still
short and mentioned that as we
have Mister Mr
more in here that need to be
able to details of this so so
faster chair and chair that
that's not necessary I think the
point I'm trying to make is I
think it's wise of us to
increase the amount of
distribution because if it's an
FHA fund project.
Every dollar putting as much
money nine other dollars that's
correct yeah we talk about.
We should be investing more
Medicaid because we get a three
for three or four to one match
right and this is a nine to one
match so so I think.
I think this is wise of us to
increase distribution.
The last coming of age is you
know in in the tax committee we
make it a policy to add sunsets
to
Tax breaks right and the reason
is we want to have that
industries that that group that
is benefiting from a tax break
to come and show us.
That is actually what.
The benefits of that lost
revenue to the state is
resulting jobs for creation of
an industry and actually
additional economic activity and
revenue right that's that's the
purpose of a sunset.
I actually disagree with having
a subset here because that's not
the purpose the purpose here.
Is to provide a revenue stream
to our aviation funds so they
can make sure that our aviation
infrastructure is maintained and
at that meeting the needs of of
dentistry in our state so I
reduction.
I don't know why this originally
had a sense that five years ago
when it came before us House
removed the sunset and I think
the Senate put it back on and
the.
I think that just shows that the
house understands has called.
So thank you Mr.
Questions about our.
Thank you Mr vice chair madam
chair.
So I I agree with the intent of
the bill I think we have a
higher level of funding for
aviation State I do have a
couple of so so I thought I'd
just bring those to.
And just so Mister vice chair
madam chair.
I will look at the bill titled
the.
If
there's a word in there I think
doesn't need to be there and
it's online thirteen I think we
could.
Probably eliminate the word
another is is increasing another
distribution of the gross
receipts tax to the state
generation but I don't think
that means anything to anybody
in the bill title of this act as
possible
we're looking at from section
seven dash one or six point
seven of the code.
And so so substance there for a
couple of subsections do and
once coming out of gas tax one
revenue stream one out of the
sale of basically jet fuel and
then
Let's see do is about
C..
It also said speech to wind six
strikes the date range there
which is good because it means
this will be in perpetuity now.
So there the distribution is
A certain percentage of net
receipts to traditional full to
the gross receipts tax
distributable to the general
fund event ID is a distribution
partner receipts attributable
so it they're kind of they're
kind of the same but but the the
word another make should go
hunting for something else and I
don't think that sector so it's
kind of a minor little point it
is kind of from my attention and
I really appreciate Mr vice
chair madam chair the cleaning
up of the language in section D.
regarding the subsets one two
three and
Right getting rid of dates that
are long past and just making it
really simple and saying it
would be five hundred thousand
dollars and I would recommend
that the monthly so that makes
perfect sense to me to
and then finally for Mister vice
chair Madam chair.
I yes my
away to get the fiscal impact
reports for the bill last night
before she left for the day and
it was not available.
And I have one house Republican
bill analysis that no other
analysis available and always
like to give.
So I can read that thank you Mr
Mr.
Thank you representative of.
The fact.
Thank you Mr chair I'm here to
talk about fourteen years ago
and have just one of for their
supported projects are you just
talked about in the state.
Some kind of general description
orders and specific since the
curve should.
Tell you that they can realize
some of the stories.
Madam that was the speech was.
But the idea is to demand has
been growing over the past
fourteen years is just.
And the specific that I can give
you the calculation of the.
Stand here which is six point
three million seating six four
one.
Behind this is being careful two
hundred thousand dollars a year
you're talking about.
Forty nine zero point I don't
know that we have a study to try
to each individual airport and
all of us to their the
information.
Your available space that would
be a task tax numbers wrong
number showing that we're going
full.
It makes sense because of the
frustration every region
increase.
Most why don't.
I think chairman so.
With the fault the increase.
Would be built a new costs that
are at play that'll buttonhole
happens it would have passed to
HSD would receive funding from
the.
from the legislature
statute that we have the one
thing I want to mention
is that the the registration so.
Los it's been at a loss for you.
Four of them left the other one
we keep we're supporting Arnold
but the amount of money that
that is actually coming in his
past two those
Twenty nine.
Of the words will tell us that
is here and we see a full case.
And then we see we have the
funds in the I.
The stock.
Approve it or disapprove that
and then.
The time of course there is a
need for projects sign off I do
the monthly fee to that spot.
Budget festivities
administrative costs that.
The.
That we have are a lot less
they're just a fraction of.
I think you are are a five or
six hundred thousand dollars to
run the agency for a small this
vision we have right now
seven actually eight.
One one.
Government.
Last month.
Government but yes but no.
Your bill's we just to
prioritize funds we don't have
enough money so I can.
Hi this is who I am the Russian
get rules all that this.
Last question sure sure is there
been any safety issues to date
assuming that without the New
Hampshire every.
That potentially could be a
situation but I'm basically said
safety issues for the public.
The the only one that I can
think of right now says Gallup
one.
The New
I
would not.
If you community college.
The way this bill is.
And and we have the controls
right we we have had a problem
with that.
So so that that's the only one
it wasn't a major thing the
other things we've been able to
to fix up and.
Continue that for the time being
of the actual accidents and
things to the public for the
ship docks of airports yes to
that question is no.
You can close closer.
This that would be my general
answer.
Mr Stewart and I would us he may
have one in the the ages of all
this we just might have some
more examples of that thank you
one moment thank thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative from
thank you Mr chairman I move the
do passes mended soccer.
We have offers from top second.
Okay little.
Any opposition.
See no opposition you invest all
of the seventy is amended thank
you Mr.
Prof.
Madam chair what about the other
yes Representative Garcia.
The.
Was it your intention that Raul
brought forth recalled that.
Representative I think I I liked
Representative pro let's just
kind of take it as it goes today
and see if we can suggestions at
the next meeting.
Okay health with.
Your.
Right I thought that was going
to start at nine so is this.
The committee on the this is
the.
But thank you madam chair
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Will a seventy.
Make some appropriation of three
hundred thousand dollars.
To the department of
transportation for expenditure
in fiscal year twenty twenty
four to develop and implement a
quote unquote ritornello stuff
on red traffic safety education
program in collaboration with
the public education because.
And
Chair
this concept that is kind of
long the.
The in the interest of mine
of for many years going back to
the elementary school days a lot
of kids back in the eighties and
and I thought it be appropriate
to kind of bring this for
considering some of the.
Realities that we're
experiencing with the traffic
safety and public safety issues
are in our communities
throughout the state.
And madam chair.
we have a generation in our
state.
That is is
Deviant.
And
It is a generation of kind of
deficient and the former US.
That have a propensity madam
chair to just as soon through a
red light.
To use the access on a regular
roads.
And it is through those school
crossings upwards of twenty five
thirty five miles of over the
fifty mile per hour speed limit.
And the and it's getting it
madam chair and it seems to be
getting worse with with every
passing day.
And in that spirit is all I
bring.
This legislation for one aspect.
Madam chair.
Another aspect is that we're
experiencing.
Workforce shortages within our
law enforcement agencies.
And usually madam chair.
The first U. S..
To cut back.
Is a traffic patrol in.
Mainly because that's kind of at
the lower end of the totem pole
in terms of prioritization.
Naturally enough calls for
homicides violent crime domestic
violence there is not.
And but normally.
Are you the one the units I.
And the first time to go when
you're there for shortages or
cuts in revenues chair.
You know and I grew up.
With motorcycle cops all over
the place.
You know focusing on madam chair
on those traffic violations.
Either kind of hidden around.
In certain areas of the
neighborhood or kind of
physician a red and I you know
and almost you know they were
real efficient real affection.
And we don't have we don't see
that presence on.
To the same degree that we did
in the past years.
And
that's another element in terms
of bringing this legislation
for.
Another element in bringing this
late legislation for.
Is.
Similar educational initiatives.
That have them if it's the
effective.
And efficient.
In terms of the theme.
And then we give you an example.
With my kids.
In the nineteen eighties.
nineteen eighty six to be exact
but in the nineteen eighties.
Right after we pass the seatbelt
law.
I had two kids in the elementary
the two smaller ones one second
grader and the other was a
fourth grader at the school
elementary.
And the state transportation
department collaboration with
the department of that.
Created.
They educational initiative
statewide.
That basically the thing was.
Buckle up.
So what the department
transportation and in
collaboration Department of
that.
They have this outreach to the
elementary schools.
And what it was it was a mock up
of a half of a vehicle.
Stairwell dashboard a little bit
of the of the what.
Then you have the the front seat
and then you had of seat belts.
So then the teachers would take
the kids as part of the
educational program there was
also kind of Madam chair of a
curriculum to go with that.
and
but one aspect of that the
curriculum was the the locales
would go in.
Well go up.
And then the engine what kind
of.
The little mock up within the
engine with kinder Revenue.
You know so the message was you
buckle up before you start the
engine.
While going the whole chair.
In a here's this young parent.
For wanting to take his kids to
school are ready to take this
gets to school first thing I
would do.
Was.
Start the engine
here loans well after this
initiative.
My he thought.
When I would start the engine
but in here he'd go rectus
during well.
The state drive.
Of the lock and you won't
believe how effective that was
our kids became the role models
for our for us.
In terms of that policy making
that policy a very effective and
public safety policy that our
kids female role models in in
getting us to that point of
following the law well not.
And you know madam chair I'm
Judy I'm a retired teacher a
doctor fifteen years Spanish
language arts there are mainly
in the south valley schools.
And
And I can attest to the fact
madam chair that we have very
sophisticated children.
That in some cases.
Are more socially mature and
their parents.
For some reason or another fall
into a dysfunctional.
There aren't on drugs they're
into prime in all their main
concern they're on drugs and
chair is to.
Therefore the fix.
The children come last.
So this is kind of generation.
Of parents
I have no major.
When it comes to issues of
social responsibility a lot of
times.
And the kids who for the most
part in this scenario being
raised by their grandparents.
Develop the skills the social
maturity skills a very young age
kindergarten first grade I know
for a fact.
The visit us on with the numbers
of state second.
And
Madam chair that wasn't the only
educational programs affect the.
We had right around the same
time.
Madam chair.
We have this.
Don't drink and drive campaign.
Again.
DOT department of ed thank you
statewide initiative but they
also have a curriculum for
elementary school.
And what it meant that I recall.
There was a curriculum in terms
of getting the information out
to the candles what.
There was also demonstration.
These vehicles front stop lack
of.
A little more can.
The screen showing what happens
when people drink and drive.
You know and then the card the
generals that the curriculum and
the messaging in terms of.
Before people on this chart and
make it.
Because the guy down the hidden.
Was dropped on their Buck.
You know and zoom through that
red light or just whatever that
was another very effective it
education program.
And that's what we're trying to
do madam chair with this
initiative of.
Break on me I'll stop on red.
You know because.
This generation of the finance
in demand motorists.
Is.
Gas line yellow and.
You know the only way you stop
on red is if you get in a crash.
Because this demand mentality
was somehow Motors.
As a propensity to not update.
You know that traffic light.
And if we can change driver
behavior.
By getting heroes.
Our young daughter right next to
us.
And that read that yellow light
goes on.
And mom.
As the.
Going to gas up you're gonna
have a little money up telling
mom mom.
Right on yellow.
Stop on red.
We've seen we've seen chair of
the act that has been.
With the.
A program.
And Dr program.
And the Madam chair I have with
me.
our our our secretary.
For patients.
Ricky Serna but he's just not.
Our secretary of the department
transportation.
He's one of the most top notch
governmental administrators in
this country.
This proved proven that.
Is what he did two of the the M.
D. for he was there and two of
the work force of the shins
Department when he was there and
the worst your time.
In the work in the history of
workforce solutions the COVID
era.
Madam like to turn it over to.
Senator not.
I also.
Of.
Assuring the the benefits of
this initiative and.
And the links to some of the
ones.
Possibility.
Madam.
Thank you Secretary raising your
marks.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative members of the
committee we work with
Representative of course on on
developing an estimated budget
for what it would cost to work
alongside PDD to take on this
initiative the concepts of the
buckle street don't drive of
course are you related part of
what we've done with driver
safety if you do there are some
national models for this
campaign across the country that
other states have taken on to
achieve similar reductions in
crashes involving running yellow
lights running red lights some
of the some of the measures that
municipalities are taking is an
increase in the use of speech
patterns and increasing the use
of red light cameras to minimize
this kind of behavior but
unfortunate is one of the major
components to train changing
driver behavior an education is
another critical walked and this
funding you would utilize along
with some other of programs at
the public education department
to the insert the message into
the minds of especially young
drivers right drivers or young
adults who are soon to be
drivers and the idea of course
is that they would help to shape
those changes in behavior some
of the calls and of course
educate them as they become
license themselves so
we're we're obviously supportive
of this effort and to my if you
have any questions for Mister
for Franklin Garcia is of course
what we're already doing in the
area of cyber safety education
programs with support that we
have the expertise in the
background to implement this cat
thank you very much.
Senator ready to go to the
audience
this guy in support of this
bill.
Is anybody in opposition of this
bill.
The committee first number I
have is Representative Harper
thank you madam chair gentleman
is good to see you Secretary.
A quick question I I think all
of us on this committee agree
that this is you know the issue
and would be a good program.
I do know the department already
has a large budget receive
billboards radio ads all the
time if for some reason this
doesn't make it into the house
bill two as a line item is this
something that the department
could work with and and and
there existing
budget chair ideal to.
secretaries are not answer that
Ortiz of madam chair and
spinners Committee
Representative Harper Franklin
Garcia with Mexico few people
division of our traffic safety
division does fall under article
division.
And they're the ones that that
section handles are in the W. I
campaigns are vocal of course
the happenings well tell you as
we get a lot of general fund for
alcohol related programs the
jury that is where we put our
emphasis strides there's just
areas is gaps that I think we
will necessarily have always the
the proper funding to to address
all the other areas so this
would definitely benefit
Legislative opportunity not just
for maybe a small campaign but
with two hundred cooperation.
Okay thank you Mr chairman John
I appreciate that so I'll just
finish by saying on.
You all remember that that to
some of the nineties walk like
an Egyptian.
There was a New Mexico there is
a parity of that song called
drive like in New Mexico.
And what alliances you know why
turns yellow start to
accelerate.
And so I like I very much like
this note that the brake on so
thank you madam chair.
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair.
Well Representative Garcia I I
was a little bit leaning towards
voting against this bill before
I got into the committee room
this morning but I I really
appreciate your explanations I
was actually kind of a little
girl he was in third grade when
I left campaign started in my
home state of Washington and it
was very influential we we did
F. chair
have a new mentality about you
see thousand I believe if memory
serves the first production car
of the US to have state seat
belts is the ability.
And it was also the first car
that had districts so that came
in around the time of the early
sixties which is the period I'm
referring to so madam chair I I
know these campaigns can be
successful with the question I
have madam chair and perhaps for
secretary Schardin is what are
we teaching our driver at the
losses right now about red light
yellow light green light needs
I've always considered it
a caution light because that's
how I was taught but if you have
suggestions is telling you to
break and I'm just wondering if
we're consistent with what we're
teaching students are taking
driver's ed classes are those
who are adults taking the
drivers at yes can chair
associate director great
question
I mean so the mobile department
also oversees right the
licensing of the Representative
courses and there's essentially
one of two ways you can take so
we'll almost certainly
essentially I find the parking
for the public school system to
teach those classes this
semester long course for
students and then there are the
the private courses that can
that chart and so this is a a
state statute and require block
to stop on red and slow down on
yellow and so we've using it is
part of the curriculum in the
driver's ed courses right but
part of that is building the
culture for the adults who are
already licensed who will go
back for a refresher course on
on you know that the laws
associated with driving and so
giving students and
Representative is this a
subgroup of the drivers on the
road using this to leverage
young minds to change behaviors
of drivers are already licensed.
Is going to be that piece that
we just can't get out of the
driver and recall.
So madam chair and
representative Mr Garcia and
secretary Garcia so we are a
little bit inconsistent them in
what of basically requiring for
the passing of the if it's
quick question item yes and
then.
I I just see this is potentially
being a little bit of a problem
and I think a manager is the
caution light and kind of
calling for some driver judgment
as to our.
Try to make it through or not
and not all traffic signals are
consistent in terms of the time
between the yellow and red I've
I've seen that everywhere I've
been actually so might be my one
concern managers that I I I I
kind of like we're headed with
this but I'm just concerned it
may actually create more of a
problem with drivers have
already been on the road while.
So that's that's.
We're coming from that and then
madam chair
question
do you have measuring the
success of this campaign that
you can think of share you madam
chair members of the committee
so the moral Department is
responsible for tracking the
crash data across the state and
so we can actually identify
probably the the areas where
this would be most needed I need
for colocation and perhaps even
by streets and intersections and
so we could target based on
where we implemented in terms of
school district participation
whether or not we see a
reduction in questions related
to signal or signal related
actions I see and then finally
just a comment Lujan
Representative Garcia so this
might actually be a really good
bumper sticker.
especially those who are going
to follow this rule regarding L.
stuff on read please give people
notice thank you madam chair.
Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair.
Was pulling up some information
alters.
An effort to to to hold to the
rules I'm gonna make some
statements with respect to those
I feel like we as a legislative
body funded so many different
things already
and we can we can tie the the
language in the discussion into
those.
We have to drive the process off
obviously and
While this is now
Wait the only set and and
through the Representative that
we're going through now we don't
teach that anymore because the
PLO.
they pushed hard enough.
They do but the other side is I
think we have the opportunity to
trade that to to teach staff to
our younger generation through
the fence and driving different
things happen within our SO
Peavey our traffic.
I think we have the options out
there so that reason is.
The.
Representative question
president thank you madam chair.
Representative said the
secretary you know all.
More of a COVID thing else in
all my collide was for your
recovery.
You know and I saw a lot of
people died over.
You know this this
administration would you know
three hundred thousand dollars a
small price to pay for some of
his life.
And we.
The more education without the
people Senator who are in the
state do you know the the the hi
we fish we I have over forty
years you see people dying
receive kids die somebody ran a
red light you know those are big
issue for me a new US probably
support this piece of
legislation.
For that reason you don't see
that enough to madam chair hi we
used for that many years I spent
a lot of things have been for
some of the state.
With that.
The.
And usually what happens there
madam chair not the one that
runs it the dis did.
The one that will fall develop
this to concern Madam and I
think we can.
What we want and vice chair I
don't think you can make a
speaking motion and then move it
to pass so we're going to keep
it the speaking motion and other
members of the.
and the unexpected have
Representative Lundstrom
Representative.
Yield makes motion value.
This is this thank you madam
chair for first of COVID couple
questions.
It's it's it's a sad state of
affairs in my estimation when.
Realities everybody that takes a
test drive in New Mexico has to
understand what the laws are.
RT motor vehicles and when
you're supposed to stop you'll
move forward that's that's
already.
And.
The secretary.
The program that you have now is
part of your department he
describes some that that you did
briefly volunteer together sure
madam chair all you for six
months so the compact the
campaigns right in front from
later educational programs
around that are keeping New
Mexico beautiful the ending of
your program of the longstanding
programs the buckle up program
we have a program specific for
you distracted drivers among TV
structures across the state.
And so the the programs are kind
of dictated by the funding
streams the federal highway
USDOT will say these are the
focus areas and that's for
weekly services and then we'll
report back to them on how we're
passionate the pedestrian safety
is of the program so what we do
is essentially develop the
campaigns around the focus areas
and then establish the metrics
so we can measure and report
back to them how effective we've
been in reducing crashes related
to all non alcohol distracted
drivers things like.
That's perfect so that would be
my next question.
What are the measurements you
receive this morning.
You have this kind of general
descriptor that you measure
for this session.
I'm not sure.
For sure and all you Mr Garcia
can talk about specific the the
the metrics of the measures were
captured in our cost.
Madam chair of the committee.
With our traffic safety
divisions of the questions we're
asking if there's a crash on
route our engineers might go out
and say their problems of rules
there Kerr.
Striped if there's not an issue
with the role they say there's
something wrong driver drove the
speeding was the driving too
aggressively and so the traffic
safety division have the eight
year old components of that try
to address that but beyond that
you know we we have our driver
education program that oversee
all drivers cations schools and
instructors in the state we have
our country safe
citation our State University of
programs we are due to the
actual program mandated we also
offer internal program will see
that you are practising Division
the duty the metric that
measures we do have an entity
survey that we do a survey every
year every point on people's
recognition of our different
campaigns within recognized or
any to the eye campaign or our
buffalo campaign so that's
conducted every year that's
report back out we have measures
that we do like Siegel surveys
that were required to report to
the our our federal partners
Mexico has a ninety percent CBOE
right but we have to do is to
self service.
and that is what we are.
Updated the committee I was
fatalities right across the
tallies we can break down all
the craps data on the leading
cause of crashes
we have made huge strides in our
reduction due to the IP tallies
right now all of those numbers
of gone down however some of the
things that of the
representative Garcia mentioned
that other aggressive driving
behaviors of gone up so we see
non alcohol fatalities increase
speed related fatalities
aggressive driving distracted
manager or morally or direction
we're still not seeing the
correlation.
Clearly there's cater when
there's practice.
I'm not understanding how the
promotion campaign that you have
then correlates to a positive
outcome
those activities those project
activities
madam chair members committee
and Representative I can tell
you once example down south our
districts to area there's a lot
of issues with crashes we
developed a specific campaign
for the district to area of the
southeast part of the state and
and we have billboards with
messages via collaboration with
the on the issues that were
going on alright with law
enforcement so we target certain
areas at specific crash issue so
we had a target that messes with
our partnership with our with
our arms of education so we see
some decline the state I I think
our program or promotion is
working I think.
Representative that's
essentially a.
Or or.
Support Representative chair
representative that that's
essentially it's a combination
of things and we take for
example we had a conversation
this is Alice state or think it
was a couple a couple weeks ago
or a month or so ago right about
the speeding traffic comes in
and so the initial thought is
what can they do to you from
infrastructure investment right
you start talking about from the
street slashing lights you know.
Other measures that we can take
essentially shape driver
behavior without actually having
to address from an education
standpoint when we realize that
we go out to accord  or we
realize that there are no issues
with signaling right with access
with other infrastructure
measures that we can put on the
road and you realize the issues
for behavior and that's what the
education component comes in and
I mean I think you
Representative Pettigrew is
point I have two drivers in the
last year two children will
become licensure right from our
change behavior perspective
right as they're driving with me
I'm because of the creasing
aware of that happens that I
have is a driver that I don't
want for them to pick up okay
and so as a doll to already
license outside education
programs like representative we
realize that we have an impact
on how the folks with us are
going to behave when we're not
together and so be as a parent
would to do the licensed drivers
is becoming aware that just five
miles over the speed limit is a
happy right running yellow
lights is a habits you know
other measures that I will walk
for them rates when they're all
in the car by themselves so this
campaign leverages that
importers that support pressure
if you want to call it from use
from our children should
appreciate drug behavioral
results Representative church
there appears to me that a much
of the what we're hearing is
more on the dole actually
responsible parents typically
don't have as many problems
responsible parents it's the
secretary that you're
responsible for our.
So this proposed.
This funding would be funders
and will develop program is that
correct Madam chair
representative will be with this
funding we would have the
resources to specifically target
use within school districts
along this message so you don't
have anything quite fleshed out
yes that's correct you're asking
for money First what would
prohibit I'm sorry sure you and
I do not think.
What.
From.
Through our more fleshed out
program and I say that only
because.
I get that this is a feel good
thing I get this I get that we
want to do good bye make doing
our best to get the word out
there that people should.
Right gonna yellow stop on red
even though most of these folks
focus yes.
And so that's my concern with
this is fund us and they will
call.
Thank you madam chair thank you
at this.
I'm.
Make a couple of have a couple
of myself for the so what
currently is the law surrounding
L. like a law that says you must
right Anjana the state of New
Mexico.
I accept that madam chair and
theirs Committee we did look up
all the way which definitely
break on yells at campaign
that's been use nationally
I believe discussion drivers
that there's potentially
the intersection of the some of
the language that I haven't seen
specific language on what lies
on the get a life and so that's
something that we would
incorporate whether it's you
know whatever language we work
with walk in on requirements are
but I think there is a language
that will allow for you to clear
next intersection at E. L. Y.
Madam is the most clear the
intersection before the dollar
thank you very much
Representative and and secretary
and and Mr Franco I need my
concern of this bill is I'm not
quite sure your messaging
actually taxable law.
And there are for instance I
back when I was a little girl I
wanted to be the end of the
project and a lot of advanced
driving classes when I was
younger and what they teach you
for best defensive driving is if
you are in an intersection need
to clear section you have
salaries for the ally Ross
you're gonna break you're gonna
costs an accident behind.
So I am very concerned that this
language surrounding this
campaign is going to be giving
people the wrong idea
and so the last question I have
for you is what please remind me
again what the funding situation
is is their front is our money
in this for hospitals to is it
with the PED budget is it with
the D. O. T. budget you don't
know what what exactly is this.
Of the status madam chairs at
the of this of procreation is
not yet the house bill two.
We're working towards that goal
and I think the secretary
mentioned this scenario with the
their budget
in terms of basically initiative
with the pandemic
misappropriation.
Thank you very much
Representative.
General for the last second.
Okay.
Present from.
I am going to vote no and I'll
explain.
If I may Representative.
She.
Representative at yes.
Representative delivers I'm
going to no no like to explain
more.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative just to the.
Sarah Representative Lundstrom
yes.
Representative.
Of.
Representative.
No.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative this yes.
On the purpose of the six yes
two three don't you have.
And
in the Pacific.
Thank you Representative Brown
thank you madam chair
Representative I was kind of
teetering on the fence on this
bill and I just concerned that
if what's in laws not consistent
with what we're teaching in a
public education campaign that
we may be actually creates more
problems and if this does not
get appropriation
in the in the next committee if
it's not bill to the house bill
two I do believe that the
department thinks it wants to
pursue this is if you can do so
without appropriation but
just concerned possible confused
thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair are
appreciate good intent.
What you're trying to do I will
always have a problem with us
for funding for there is not
something that is flashed on
program I want to be able to
confident that what you're going
to do with the money actually.
Also I like the numbers on.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes we're gonna have a
presentation
New Mexico steam locomotive for
us three.
We are you have fifteen minutes
and madam chair
After the COVID side of the
state or the.
The store goals.
At one meeting it is twenty nine
point six rating
Siemens.
The for twenty one years.
And this is what's left
of the presentation went over to
get.
But this is to inform the public
about.
Actually eight point
Alright this is Representative
both Krewson said.
Of course he is
Area they're not in there media
is.
So.
This is John Roberts president
station and that password is
easy operating group chief
operating officer and he comes
in.
When the fire engine he's
actually of Haitian with the and
it people into so.
Hold on with their presentation
and to go this is my son he got
involved in this.
That's what I'm hearing thank
you for having distributed.
Madam chair members of the thank
you.
I believe we should all have a
presentation for the U. S.
The talk through that to some
degree.
So we are the owners maintainers
and operators of the former
Santa Fe steam locomotive the
twenty nine twenty six
We're here to provide some
information and some education
for the those of you who may not
know about us or about some of
the features and facilities down
and help.
going to the first slide we can
easily some pictures we this is
called Sliq then and now so the
top row is historic.
Our store photographs of the
eight probably from the forties
or fifties operators problem
from the seventies that's our
locomotive in the middle
sometime probably around the
fifties down the bottom of the
the same areas but these are for
a photograph of the Albuquerque
railyards what was known as the
Santa Fe repair shops now.
Really are.
And that is the section of what
they look like now including our
state.
you'll notice this because it is
fully restored and operational.
Something point out about the
really are because we're talking
about this.
State of the large building this
is the scene the two
the photographs that is three
acres under one.
Industrial age cathedral as we
like to call is a magnificent
structure it is enormous J.
worked on forty or so
locomotives among back in the
day.
Restoring overall Senator.
totally up areas in the twenty
seven acres and there's about
three hundred thousand square
feet under roof in the the
machine jobs
and Justice the trivia I was
modeled after of course factory
today so.
Of.
I'm
slide our pass so.
Local or twenty nine twenty six
built in nineteen forty four.
Senator L. right donated to the
city drive P. and ninety six
after approximately ten years
running.
Mainline operations reckoned
proximally and miles.
This designed for high speed
passenger service between
Rockland city Los Angeles.
So at the time back in the late
nineties it's survival was
threatened by the.
Redoing the big I interchange
them see the opportunity to get
rid of it and the organization
got together to go to the city I
personally don't there back in
nineteen ninety nine sort of
work.
and twenty sixteen seven months
later.
The created the Mexico steam
locomotive.
As and the restoration to for
over twenty years and about two
hundred fifty thousand volunteer
hours in those volunteers came
from all walks of life we have a
couple of X..
Tired of people but not steam
locomotive we had stopped to
help farmers five hundred
welders social workers it across
the board is really just
whoever.
Not necessarily love that the
locomotive I was just interested
in the locomotive say the.
If we move on to the historical
significance.
Then if you'd like to speak
those beliefs
Madam chair for thank you for
time.
I don't need to tell you guys
that southwest.
Is it
is everybody in this room is
here because we love Mexico and
working that way.
The Santa Fe railway.
I came to Albuquerque and easing
the.
Challenges across in this land
and they were able to do it in
style increase that is the
standard of excellence that is
still used today in the rail
industry.
We have been working with larger
out and Tim Keller.
What the city and we would like
our our long term goals are to
turn the radio into a tourist
destination that will.
Give an example of the premier's
Santa Fe faster trains in the
experience that Santa Fe at.
They did this by state of the
art locomotives like twenty and
twenty six and the
Representative their
personalities like to reference
that we're able to.
To.
Keep everything running so that
we didn't have to worry about
how harsh is outside.
Chair LESC committee to all of
that yeah.
Part of the significance of the
of the railyards the Santa Fe
repair shops is the impact it
had on the frozen food the south
Broadway neighborhood and the
City of Albuquerque in the state
of New Mexico low it was vital
for some of the things that
happened in the state that the
railroad brought in.
Going on with the historic
significance that the next page
there funding view it as a
photograph and the significance
of that photograph as as a
touched on the importance of the
railyards to the districts in
the state of that photograph it
is difficult to see a portion of
our locomotive in the foreground
in in the repair shops in day.
So the proof that you know we're
here.
A.
Mexico provided reasons to.
It's.
Those manta it's gone.
We're working for the city to
make some of programs down at
the railyard we're trying to
give ourselves a new home from
our restoration site on eighteen
thirty three the street right
now.
We would like to wear your our
vision in the this or trying to.
Bush to the city is to make it a
historic multi multi purpose
reduce area
museum a food mall a children's
area education center out side
displays place etcetera
something to stimulate drill
tourism in central Mexico to
complement some rail tourism.
In the state.
to provide a tourist destination
Hey I want to come out for you
to go to the railyards to do
seem a motor to do that using
those sort of things.
Senator.
we also we also want to use the
locomotive to read the federal
public relation to.
I listen to.
The proposal is now.
We do something very similar the
store is in working order done
in Los Angeles with operation
lifesaver and rail rail.
Right across the state real
estate in general we have well
stable look move up we're not in
the store.
Bring in local school kids to
get a presentation and.
Like Representative Garcia is
that.
When his granddaughter told him
to put the seatbelt on before
you start the car when kids get
about a steam engine they
remember what they were talking
class they have.
This is a public relations to.
If you want to get eighteen
twenty five thousand people
somehow we can fire the
signature novelistic about
someone you all of you over get
a crowd.
And.
It's New Mexico state hope we
own it we started.
But even the legislature
recognize that is a
representative for New Mexico
for past present real.
Officials and preservation.
We on so one of the reasons
you're right is
Which you know of what it is
that we're looking for right we
have a capital outlay requests
provided help other requests
this year
we're looking for money used to
help us restore some of those
structures and features down the
really are specifically the
turntable which is a piece of
equipment that we need or
appropriations and tracks
leading into and out of it and
then some other secure
structures and stuff so we can
keep it down.
One of the primary things for is
of permission from in India T.
to real runners to work with us
to to be a partner with us to
help us to the promotional
activities
as a special trip as a special
correct right.
I think it's important to we
inform the committee that this
is actually the first time in
twenty two years we've ever come
to the legislature for any form
of the systems.
most of the money and and
equipment and parts of gone into
the locomotive have either been
through funds at the private we
raised or have been donated from
other organizations for from our
own man's Act.
It is.
Lastly is personal some long
term goals of the dust on Google
already right working the city
to help redevelop the really
are.
The male operate that we made to
water for baths so that we may
do educational cooperative ends
those sorts of things
Maybe look into our looking to
other the store relinquishment
restoration activities.
The members we have very much
enjoyed working in the storms of
motor.
Many other opportunities out
there to do that.
And eventually of the the our
ultimate goal is to run tourist
excursions in the state of New
Mexico to take passengers on a
trade a steam locomotive to give
them an experience of some form
would be dinner train station.
But those the source thing
proving at four.
And Germans Committee that's all
I have to figure of you very
much we do have one question to
the committee and gentleman
thank you very much I I did have
a question I you have attached
share your capital outlay excuse
me a request for over million
dollars the fiscal agent B. as
Albuquerque.
my question is how much of those
local governments putting into
this how much is the about the
Caribbean County putting into
this in light of the fact that
this is a major tourism for
office to community.
So right now all of we are
getting some cooperative effort
from them not very funds we are
just starting this process with
the city just like we are with
this legislature so that we can
develop those relationships and
those opportunities a lot of the
things that are happening right
now in the mix to steam
locomotive and railroad
Historical Society funds.
To get some of these initial
things done so to answer your
question right now not very
funds madam chair and that's
what I suspected particularly
when a project like this would
be eligible for lodgers tax from
both of those governments it
would also be eligible for via
this application grant funds we
have got we have receive some
funds from being yes.
Madam chair I just think that
those local governments need to
step up but I think this is a
great projects they need to help
step up on some of this and
certainly the state can to but I
don't think the state out of
Kerry all the way thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative next
Representative Romero great
thank you madam chair thank you
all for The presentation thank
you madam chair for allowing for
The presentation today I would
school in Germany and they have
a whole
Culture of people that work on
locomotives my host father was
one that we would go out and
Saxon the lawsuit and the clerk
on the locomotives there and
they have tracks set up there on
Sundays once a month I think it
was they would bring you and by
the community as well children
which in order to see some of
the historical locomotives that
we were working on mostly my job
was reserve for checking off of
the old locomotives
It was a fiber you would see
people from all over Germany be
able to come you would have
residents and dressed in your
dress and all of the largest
here city but I would you have
people in the Czech Republic you
have people from Poland be able
to come in
take a tour of the thank you all
made a great point in the
southwest with its rich history
and locomotives trains in order
to start building this
infrastructure to really start
connecting these networks and
bringing people because I have
seen it it continues to work in
Germany our father still does
Disentis this on today and I
think it suits a pre worthwhile
venture and part of the
railyards seats within the
district that I represent some.
Thank you for this issue there's
also the wheels on the.
That has some of the old
transportation.
means as well to show off and
thank you so right right program
thank you if I may that
gentleman just committee just a
follow on that we'll see if
we're working with the wheels we
know how important they are how
long they've been around the
influences we've just had on
this is saving the railyards and
saying that history and so we
are working with our along those
lines also
We do bring in a lot of people
locally nationally
internationally to our
restoration site come in and
take a look at our locomotive
give a detail to.
So they understand what we're
doing Mr locomotor the history
of the locomotive in the state.
That we do very quick to do.
So it all just come and do it on
their own time yeah well in two
years thank you for the next
Representative restricting thank
you madam chair actual solution
really are back in the middle
nineteen nineties or late
nineteen nineties when the
Rovers initially when the for
sale it was actually for Silva
wrote the and at that time I was
the director of parks recreation
from Bernalillo county and I I
information much of what's
happening now is the real
heroes.
At that time or find out what
the cost what they were selling
this property for and they were
asking six million dollars which
is our.
And I restart the gentleman was
uptick Kansas and he said
alright I think you the level
four million dollars.
Well I'm trying to convince my
boss at the time to come Madam
get the county manager I'm not
in the system restart to the
county commissioner of the area
I'm not convinced some.
And so eventually it was
purchased by are you that
person.
That person later I think to
Representative Lundstrom is
question a little bit that
person and then turned around
and sold it to the City of
Albuquerque so the City of
Albuquerque has a significant
investment the City of
Albuquerque purchased it from a
private owner one nine four four
six million dollars around
twenty million dollars so that's
Mr by the city Senator staff.
In addition to that.
So much of the meeting this this
happened there has been also a
testament city I cannot speak to
the county I don't know what the
best at all but I know that the
city has a heavy investment so
like to remind you that when you
talk about this project madam
chair that industry that
investors okay while I
appreciate volunteerism which is
essential for this succeed at
the same time government has
stepped up and this is
relatively a modest amount at
least in my estimation to the
potential economic development
that this will bring not only to
the City of Albuquerque but in
the state because this is a
state asset this is a state
treasurer it just happens to be
located in Albuquerque.
So you have this represents
support thank you much very much
next we have Representative
question in thank you madam
chair of the presentation.
Of your presentation you said
earlier that eventually one of
have for riding the train.
Is your concern date is that a
conflict with the gross profit
rural rural to jump is that
gonna be taking full one that it
but in the other because you
know that we need to survive.
On the rules.
And for us to do another rule of
C. core of all data collected at
that's a great great question.
Vice chair and representative
actually it will complement.
Covers all day you have people
already or flying into
Albuquerque to drive to shop.
Three half hours right.
If you're able to speak.
A lot of times they have to get
your day early because of the
way the flights were beginning.
Having us in Albuquerque we give
them something else to do they
might spend one more night.
More of the rooms more more
meals just it just kind of
compliments the to the to a
how many jobs it makes a more of
a destination to get Albuquerque
to go do the trying stuff you
want to do.
You also have a variety of
private car owners so people who
own their own rail cars who
their their whole saying is to
hook up to a steam train on on
the standard gauge railroad and
have it pulled from point a to
point B..
Chair and I understand that but
that just
do you know what I'm looking at.
Those stop here and do what they
need to do so just say well you
know we want to just committee
worried that just my concern
concern is also Representative
Lundstrom said the city and
county have tested both.
Right the to to get all of the
three.
Rest assured we're talking to
them just like we're talking.
Thank you Mr and Representative
package thank you madam chair
and thank you for the
presentation
Our family has a long history of
Santa Fe were so
Of the the amendment of.
With respect madam chair to unit
twenty nine twenty six what your
primary fuel source it runs on
recycled motor oil currently.
It used to run from C. which is
basically our.
we no longer run on that because
well actually it's rather
expensive so we can run on any
any flammable fuel it really
doesn't care what it runs on
which is to be a little more
fired and we friendly and take
some of that motor oil that
comes out of everybody's car and
use it instead of.
You know.
Buying regular diesel fuel.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that Sir my question
with respect to that is in lieu
of having people pay that
to deliver whatever having to
pay to have that disposed of our
young picking that up and using
those as a fuel sources at how
your are you getting that from
the location makes it directly
right that we've we've fire used
motor oil from the oil and town
and they are the ones that
collect that recycling oil from
the locations in the city.
The.
Don't we don't have a direct our
nation program that would be
impractical.
Madam chair just a as a follow
up I find it interesting that
missile would have to to pay to
have the disposable and they can
give it to you and that may not
have to pay that we wish and so
maybe there's some some you for
that Madam chair presentation
thank you perhaps you to make an
introduction Representative.
Thank you very much for the
informative presentation person
Senator Representative.
Here Representative thank you
for this the.
If you have any questions about
this is one of.
Following through loans.
If you
will so don't be afraid to ask.
Thank you very much thank you
to our first
to last and not least house bill
one forty one and that way to
remind members we need to be in
for some time between ten thirty
and eleven so
For
a movie for.
This is exactly what we need
rural.
We got thirty.
Good morning members of the
local.
Sarah before use house bill one
forty one it is.
I played bill.
The concerns of police survivors
also the cops.
Are the survivors of.
Our police departments are.
And they would like to have a
license plate
To.
There are two their memories of
their loved ones died in
service.
Community or to the state.
And it is this would be a
nationally recognized logo there
one station has flashed.
Life that have that memory is on
Mexico license plate that they
did send.
Reuters.
Their their license.
Requests for the number of other
for.
That's the essence of the bill.
Thank you for that reason
traduction.
As anybody here in the audience.
These reserves.
Is there anybody I am supposed
to the.
And with that we go to the
committee the first question I
have Representative Harper thank
you madam chair for survivors
welcomed.
Having been on this for eight
years we always your license
plate bills.
And I'll just say
I have personally committed.
Couple years I mean years ago
that we had too many license
plates in New Mexico there is no
way I would support another
license plate bill
Representative general Dennis
Roch great idea would have a
license plate with like New
Mexico emblem and the number and
like a sticker and you can just
buy whatever step you want to
put on there I thought that was
a brilliant idea.
But to a couple years ago there
was a little girl in my district
who was
a celebrity in our own country
school in our neighborhood she
had cancer.
And a childhood cancer and when
she would go out of state more
treatments she saw lots of
license plates there you know
family support for you know
price for families with kids
with cancer she came back and
she said her family along for
for New Mexico to New I have
Representative so I will.
And I remember senator Morris on
the floor her family came in is
recreating the bill is like well
I promise to never fall for
other devices.
For this one.
But we made a couple changes
port changes to how devices
plate bills in that legislation.
And that's the thing about this
one and the great costs I want
to support but I think we need
to adopt those two important
changes.
that's your thoughts on this so
the first in
FY are you know we have the
standard license plate fee and
then I believe you're asking for
us to ten dollars on top of that
it's one time.
That doesn't even cover the
initial costs making the plates
so we have ours asking for one.
What we did in the childhood
cancer plate was we did an
annual.
Fee of like thirty five or forty
five dollars I can't remember.
And portion of that went to
prefer the plate the rest went
to fund to support those
families who are experiencing
childhood cancer.
And was an annual fee so that.
You know if your score this
plate you know you should be
able to make a little donations
that because every.
So I do my first recommendation.
the second is and they've got
some language you can hear the
FY are.
We have a lot of states out
there that are just not very
used.
That's what the language of as
we're gonna set a baseline the
first two years of the plates
will we'll see we'll see how it
goes and so at least one year
average for those first two
years baseline.
If the annual rules or issuances
fall B. fifty percent at
baseline and now here's the
plate is automatically removed
just like at a bill to repeal.
So I would just I love to hear
thoughts on to to changes.
Chair and representative.
Hi this year the report says.
First.
Our.
Money was with the former
representative we love who was
also one.
Work of the special awards I I
wonder how he would feel about
this since he was in the line of
duty that
I think we all wrestle with that
and hi.
I have no
Idea how the people who brought
this to Representative Ezzell
myself would feel about those
changes personally I agree with
you if it's not being effect
plate is not supported there.
Why should we keep expanding.
For sure we continue to go under
costs are I would hope that this
this place would your time never
be needed but I don't think
that's going to.
I know the families brought this
forward
feel very strongly that there
are a number of families who
would like to have such a place
and I think that would be of a
sufficient number to have right
a decent place.
Of the suspected continues to
grow.
She
is one we want to see.
Who is this you can get that all
discuss it with Representative
was sure that we get that thank.
Yeah that manager.
I.
Yeah I think so I have.
My number two son Steve his best
friend is twenty these many
years Daniel Mears.
It was the son of Fred
helicopter crash right so I I
think thirty many people
including me and my wife has the
childhood cancer played.
When I'm done with the
Legislature provided this.
And and I think I'd be very
happy to share that language
lots of folks like need to be
happy to donate fifty Bucks a
year to a fund that helps those
families.
I'd be grateful if you consider
that language.
Madam chair my question would be
here do you want to amended in
this committee new wants to try
to determine between our
appropriations acts next off of
each what's
Yes.
Is.
You guys are fine.
