Representative Abita here
representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative girl.
Representative Henry.
represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Represent small
Vice.
McQueen.
Now I represents
you, Chairman, members of the
committee, we're here to present
Senate Bill 21, which takes some
really important steps to make
New Mexico, uh, give New Mexico
control over our own water
resources.
First, it creates a new state
law to lay the groundwork for
the environment department to
implement the Federal Clean
Water Act in New Mexico.
Secondly, the bill amends the
state's Water Quality Act to
protect New Mexico, New Mexico's
waters that are no longer
protected by the Federal Clean
Water Act, or the Superfund Law.
Third, it sets up a program to
hold polluters accountable and
clean up neglected and
contaminated sites.
Before I talk about uh the
details of this bill. I want to
spend a moment uh talking about
how this bill was developed and
some changes we've made along
the way, um, for the last 3
years, we've supported New
Mexico Environment Department to
really start on this path uh
toward building a surface water
permitting program and primacy,
um, on, on, on this issue, we
have given them appropriations
for the last 3 years and the
last one was a sizable
appropriation to start standing
up this program.
In the last year of the New
Mexico Environment Department
took on a uh extensive
stakeholder process with more
than 50 people, uh,
participating to have
conversations about a surface
water permitting program. In the
Senate and Senator Wirth will
talk a little bit more about,
about this after I finish, um,
this bill was referred to 3
different committees to really
dig into the details of how to
make this program work for the
state.
So we'll talk about that in a
moment. I want to go back to the
framework of the bill. Uh first,
I want to address the surface
water, uh, provisions. We are
one of only 3 states in the
entire country, um, that does
not have its own surface water
permitting program, we rely on
the federal government to decide
who should be allowed to
discharge into our surface
waters.
The Federal Clean Water Act
protects surface waters by
requiring a permit for
discharges of pollution into
what are known as waters of the
United States, uh, the EPA
establishes and enforces
standards through permits under
what we call the national
pollution discharge elimination
system, or NITES, um.
So the EPA is the lead agency,
the 47 other states have applied
for primacy, um, so they
regulate their own surface water
program in the state and this
bill sets up New Mexico to do
just that. Um, we've again
supported NMED to make this
happen through very
appropriations. Uh, so this bill
is the next logical step and
requires that the water quality
control commission set up rules
to implement the clean water,
Clean Water Act program, and
then NMET will.
apply uh to the EPA for
authorization.
The second part of this bill
addresses the Supreme Court
second decision, uh, in 20 2023,
which essentially uh deregulated
95% of our surface waterways in
the state, um, through its
reinterpretation of the Clean
Water Act.
That's been devastating for our
intermittent streams, ephemeral
streams and waterways arroyos.
So this bill, um, fills that gap
by amending the Water Quality
Act that will then, will, will
require permits for surface
water discharge.
Into those waters that are no
longer covered, and they have
been covered for 50 years, so
we're amending the uh the Water
Quality Act to ensure that they
continue to be protected as they
have been for 50 years. Um, we
address dredge and fill
materials, uh, we included
provisions on mitigation and
anti-degradation.
Uh, the third part of this bill
is really focused on uh
groundwater and uh and clean up,
uh, the bill provides authority
to hold polluters responsible
for pollution, that threatens
groundwater but doesn't rise to
the level of um federal
protection and federal cleanup.
So we established rulemaking
authority, clarifying cleanup
and financial liability for
environmental contamination.
This, um, this aligns New Mexico
law with federal, uh, with the
federal super fund.
liability provisions and
protections. Um, this will also
provides a mechanism for
cleaning up the hundreds of
contaminated, uh, threatened
groundwater sites in New Mexico.
This comes from dry cleaning
from uranium mining POs,
chromium, petroleum products,
um, and lots of other things for
many of these sites, the
polluter is no longer here, and
the local community is
essentially held responsible and
left to deal with the risk.
to their groundwater resources.
Um, so these neglected and
contaminated sites don't qualify
for federal cleanup with this
bill allows that to happen. We
establish a fund to clean up
these contaminated sites. Right
now there's $50 million in in
house bill too as it's making
its way through the Senate to
start cleaning up the sites.
I'll wrap up what this bill does
now. We establish a state
surface water permitting program
will continue to protect the
arroyos and rivers and waterways
that have been that have been
protected for the last 50 years.
Will protect our groundwater
resources and we'll start to
clean up the contaminated sites.
Mr. Charo like for the senator
to
Explain a little bit more about
how this um bill ended up being
where it is.
I thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, members. Um, so let me
start with a little more detail
about the surface water advisory
panel, uh, this is a group that
enemyD convened in the fall.
They met 6 times. It consisted
of 4950 participants from a
broad array of stakeholders,
including industry, oil and gas,
mining, construction,
agriculture, asa is conservation
districts, dairies,
environmental groups, tribal
governments, local governments,
uh water delivery folks,
irrigation districts, flood
control, state and federal
agencies, Los Alamos was
involved watershed.
and wetland restoration
professionals again as the
representative mentioned, the
funding for this, the, the stand
up of this program has happened
over the last 3 years, and so
before bringing a bill like
this, uh, the convening of that
group uh was an important part
of the process. That's what led
to what started as two bills,
uh, originally it was Senate
Bill 21, uh, which dealt with
the primacy issue under the
Federal Clean Water Act.
and then Senate Bill 22 was the
sacket fix plus the groundwater
portion, um, the bill is as
Representative Ortez mentioned,
was uh referred to 3 committees,
uh, I know there was some noise
about that being an interesting
development given that I make
the referrals in the Senate, but
in this particular case, this
bill needed to go to the 3
committees. It needed to go
through conservation.
needed to go through judiciary
and it needs to go through
finance, and I just want to talk
a little bit about how we dealt
with issues in each of those
committees as it progressed. Uh,
the big issue in conservation,
uh, there were 21 was there was
a private right of action in
this bill that I think was the
number one issue that created
the most concern, um, and also
there was discussion about the
way the bill was drafted in
terms of how it's going to be
funded. It initially was a
draft.
expected to be funded by fees
and the way it was worded it
would be only fees, um, and so
those two issues kind of came
out of Senate conservation. We
went to the Senate Judiciary and
made the decision to remove the
private right of action. And I
think that decision definitely
addressed a lot of issues,
didn't certainly solve all the
opposition, but that was a big
one. the other thing we did was
line up the farm and
ranch exemptions. One of the
things that is important about
how we've done this bill. We've
really tried to carry over the
federal language, uh, that's
been interpreted for the last
50+ years, uh, and so part of
that was making sure the
exemptions used exactly the same
words. Those are what people
have lived with for 50 and
groups have lived with for 50
years and so there was some
tweaking and getting those to
parallel, that also I think
again lowered the temperature a
little bit on this.
know, um, and then in judiciary
we made the decision to put the
bills together. It really made
sense to have the two surface
bills, um, under, under one
umbrella and so the sub went in
for both bills, uh, in the
finance committee, uh, the big
discussion did focus about how
this was going to be paid. Uh,
there's a couple of different
options and I'm sure we'll have
some questions about that this
morning, uh, and states have
done this differently. Uh, one
option is to pay for.
through fees, I believe it's
about 7 to $8 million a year to
uplift this program, uh, that
would be different than the
current federal part of the
federal clean Water Act, which
is, there are no fees. Another
option is to pay for this using
general fund, and that's
something that some states have
decided we're going to do the
primacy and continue just like
the federal government did,
which would mean no additional
fees. And the third option would
be to do a hybrid of fees plus.
General Fund. Uh, we had a lot
of discussion about that in the
Senate Finance Committee. I
think that issue will be
something that will be worked on
in the interim moving forward,
these programs don't really get
lifted until 2027, 2028, so we
have some time to look at that
issue. Uh, they're also is a
fund, uh, for the groundwater
cleanup, and I really appreciate
Chair Small and Vice Chair
Dixon, there's funding in House
Bill 2, which ties into that,
uh.
So that was an important piece.
And then one thing that Senator
Munoz, uh, really was adamant
about is that the penalties
collected or violations go into
the general fund, not into any
new fund at the Environment
department. And so we left
Senate Finance, um, there were
continuing negotiations going on
between enemy D and the mining
association and so when this
bill came,
onto the Senate floor, uh, I
made an amendment that addressed
Senator Munoz's desire to have
those penalties go into the
general fund. Uh, then there
were 3 additional amendments
that were worked on with the
mining association and enemy D,
uh, which Senator Scherer put on
in the on the Senate floor which
were friendly amendments in the
last 24 hours, there was a whole
bunch of work that that went on
and things that, again, I
I don't want to represent in any
way that that the mining
association.
is in love with these bills or
supports these bills, but I
think that again there was a
desire to
Try and line up definitions to
try and minimize some of the
rulemaking uncertainty and those
happen in the Senate floor
amendments. So that's really
what brings the bill to where it
is today. There's a lot of work
that has gone into this and
certainly appreciates um, you
know, the Environment department
and all the advocates who had a
stake in this and we're happy to
answer some questions.
Mr. Chair, we have two experts
with us today, Shelley Lemon and
Jonas Armstrong from Mexico
Environment Department.
Would you like them to speak or
or they just here for questions
Mr. Chair, they'll probably
speak a lot later. OK.
Fair enough.
Um, so we'll go to the audience
before we go to the committee,
um, first off, just by a show of
hands, uh, who is here in
support this bill.
Who is here in opposition.
To this film. OK, so we got a
lot of hands on, on, uh, both
sides. Uh, we're gonna do, uh,
it's a matter of practice to do
3 in the room, uh, in, uh, on
each side and two on online and
each side will start with
opposition. If you'd like to
speak in opposition, please step
forward to the mic. We'll take
the 1st 3.
You'll have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman
members of the committee. I'm
Howard Hutchinson. I am
Representing the coalition of
Arizona and Mexico counties and
the San Francisco soil and
Modern conservation District.
I served on the water quality
control commission for 20 plus
years.
We discussed taking on state
control of the pollution
discharge permitting many times.
The concern was having enough
personnel and funding to carry
out the permitting and the
enforcement.
While the private right of
action has been removed.
The new section 9 on pages 52
and 53 on liability creates
standing under subsection B for
broad actions.
This is particularly true for
subsection B 3 and 4.
I'm glad I'm not on the
commission anymore because this
rulemaking is going to take
years.
I would say that just the
rulemakings that have been
added.
With the language is going to
take the commission, probably 2
or 3 years to complete that
process.
A fair county governments.
Another subdivisions.
Of government will become
targets of suits under the
exemptions.
Under liability.
Now I
I'm hoping that also the Court
of Appeals is going to get
additional funding because I can
see extended litigation going
forward to the court.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Chairman members. My name is
Matt Thompson with the New
Mexico Mining Association. I
wanted, wanted to start off by,
uh, agreeing with Leader Worth,
um, the leader and the
department have been incredible
to work with this process we've
made great strides in getting
this bill to reflect what is
currently in federal law. There
is, there are a few more uh
technical things we'd like to
see cleaned up, but, um, the
bill is uh is at least workable
now through the, uh, through the
last few weeks, and we
appreciate the, the
collaboration with the
leader and with the department,
we still stand respectfully
opposed until we can see just a
few more technical items cleaned
up and amended. Thank you very
much.
a chairman and members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the San
Juan Water Commission,
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico and the New Mexico
farm and Livestock Bureau. Uh,
we do to, uh, in the comments
from Matt. I appreciate the, the
majority leaders and the
departments, uh, work throughout
the process of this legislature,
getting it to a much better
place. We still do have concerns
around the definition of the
waters of the states, uh, and
its impact and then specifically
on the construction side,
depending on
on how this is funded since we
do not have to pay the fees
currently on the federal level,
we are concerned and we know
it's been a concern of the
legislature over the interim
about the cost of construction
in New Mexico and cost
escalation. We do believe that
that's gonna, the pill would
continue to increase the cost of
construction, and I know that's
concerned specifically on public
projects for this legislative
body, uh, and then we do expect
because of the new structure,
uh, potential delays in those
projects as well. So we just
wanted to bring those concerns.
Thank you.
Think you will take 2 online,
uh, first up we have Terry Cole,
in opposition.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the Committee, I'm
Terry Cole, president and CEO of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
First, let me also echo the
compliments others have sent uh
majority leader worse way.
He has done a wonderful job, um,
improving this bill and finding
a better balance around it. Uh,
we do, however, still oppose the
bill this morning. It's just a
very big leap in our mind to
admittedly take over federal
regulation. Um, they're likely
will be a result in missteps and
mistakes.
We're also concerned about the
rulemaking process itself
important rulemaking and
enforcement is still ahead, and
about 50 employees are going to
have to be hired, we're told,
uh, in order to deal with that
rulemaking, uh, in this bill.
Um, and the quality of workforce
matters. It's gonna be hard to
find those employees, we think,
and they will be charged, as I
said, with important rulemakings
and enforcement.
We're questioning also why this
couldn't be put in an interim
study to look at alternatives
for enforcement that could be
easier to implement and less
costly because of these
concerns, we urge you to vote.
Thank you so much.
Uh, thank you. We'll take one
more online if anyone would like
to speak in opposition, please
raise your hand.
OK, I'm not seeing any, so we're
gonna come back to the room for
support.
We'll take 3 people in the room.
Good morning, Mister Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington. I'm a
longtime registered lobbyist for
the Pueblo of Laguna.
On the Pablo of Laguna.
Water is life.
And the surface waters of the
pueblo.
Run through their lands, the Rio
Machino.
The Rio Piwati and the Rio San
Jose have been providing life.
And sustainability to the people
of Laguna for hundreds and
hundreds of years. It's worth
noting that right now the
environmental Protection Agency
ensures that these surface
waters.
are held to tribal quality water
standards. What Senate Bill 21
does is that it's going to
ensure that these tribal water
quality standards are preserved
and that if anyone applies for a
permit application.
That affects these waters that
flow through laguna lands that
those water qualities are going
to be held to the same standards
that they are now. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor from the Pueblo of
Tasuki.
Welcome to the ancestral
homelands ofuqui Pueblo.
Um, on this bill.
At the very onset, we're the
ones that started to talk about
the surface flow.
The water quality that the tribe
has, and I'm happy to report
that those are in there now, and
therefore, we stand in full
support and we look forward to a
favorable decision. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Vidal
Gonzalez and I work for the New
Mexico Psyche Association as the
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist, and
I'm here to speak in support of
Senate Bill 21. Senate Bill 21
is critical for protecting New
Mexico's waters, seass, farms,
economy, and our culture. We
wish to highlight this
legislation is needed to have a
New Mexico-based process for
protecting clean water in both
rivers and in Aseass while
upholding the needs of
agriculture so that it can
continue to prosper into the
future.
We need to pass legislation that
protects our waters, traditions
and customs, and it is what
makes New Mexico the line of
enchantment. I want to thank the
New Mexico Environment
Department and sponsors the
bill.
I would also like to thank the
legislature for securing funding
for surface water permitting
development over multiple
sessions, particularly in 2024,
and a special thanks to Chairman
Small.
Vice Chair Dixon for their
leadership in House
Appropriations and finance last
session in this session to fund
our water priorities. Thank you
for your time, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you. We're gonna take 2
online. First up is Anna Hansen.
Good morning,
Mr. Chair and committee members.
Uh, my name is Anna Hansen. I am
the registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo Auake, and EPA currently
requires that upstream permits
meet Paaki tribal water
standards. FB21 insurances that
we don't lose this provision
when the state takes over the
program. I am also the chair of
the coalition of Sustainable
Communities of New Mexico, a
nonprofit.
that represents close to 50% of
the population through our
elected officials from Taos.
To Las Cruces, Santa Fe County
and Santa Fe, uh, Berna Leo and
Albuquerque. We believe this is
one of the most important bills
this session. Please give this a
due pass. Thank you, Senator
Worth and Representative Ortiz
for their work on this important
bill and uh thank you committee
members for your time.
Thank you. Next up we have
Francisco Guevara.
Francisco, you're muted on your
end.
My name is Francisco Guevara. I
am owner operator of Los Rios
River Runners, New Mexico's
oldest, most experienced rafting
company. I'm also president of
the New Mexico River Outfitter
Association. The economic
backbone of New Mexico is tied
directly to our water. Outdoor
recreation businesses like my
river guiding company,
agriculture, and our drinking
water supply, all rely
On healthy, clean waterways.
Our natural resources are vital
economic assets, but they are
also fragile.
With no state permitting program
on rivers and streams are open
to pollution from industrial
runoff, sewage, and chemicals,
endangering everything from
local businesses to our homes.
Senate Bill 21 will establish a
permitting program for the many
waterways that are no longer
federally protected.
Please pass this important piece
of legislation to protect
businesses and families like
mine.
OK, thank you very much. Uh
thank you for all those who
participating. I apologize to
those we didn't get to, uh,
Senator Wirth, would you like to
add anything before we go to the
committee? I think we're ready
questions from the committee.
Members of the committee.
Representative Henry, uh,
Murphy, sorry.
That's OK. Henry's a pretty good
looking guy too, so.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
experts. Good morning. Um, just
have a few questions. Um, I'm
gonna break them out into sort
of the general impact. I'm gonna
ask you to take me from um what
I would know as the waters of
the US down to the dry aurorass
of the oil fields of southeast
Mexico.
Um, I wanna talk about the
permits, the specific and the
general, how you see that
working, um, like, I have some
concerns on impact on energy
projects, whether they be
renewable or oil and gas, and
then going into the rulemaking.
So, um, general impact, um,
What I have known traditionally
as the waters of the US were
originally sort of defined as
navigable and that I think
expanded to currently, current
flow. But could you tell me how
this will work.
Where will the federal line
stop? Where will the state
lines?
start, um, and what that might
mean in, in some of this high
desert country. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair
and representative, let me give
you the kind of big picture, uh,
and then yield to experts for
that specific technical. So,
Again, what
The, the Federal Clean Water Act
portions of this bill are trying
to do is essentially status quo
what existed from 1972 when the
Federal Clean Water Act was
adopted until 2023 when the US
Supreme Court and the Sackett
decision narrow dramatically the
scope of the clean Water Act. So
you're right, uh, there's been a
big change, but during all those
50 years, everyone in New Mexico
was working under the assumption
that both the free flowing
streams and ephemeral rivers and
wetlands were all protected, and
in fact, many of the permits for
those ephemeral streams are
sitting in place right now. So
again, the, the goal of this is
to, in effect, go back to where
we were in 2023 before the US
Supreme Court made its decision.
I'll just read. I've got the,
the court case here. Let me just
read the highlights about kind
of the
The definition that that the
Supreme Court adopted in 2023,
which led to about 95% of our
water no longer being covered.
Uh, they determined that the
clean Water Act's use of waters
refers only to geographic
features that are described in
ordinary parlance as streams,
oceans, rivers, and lakes and to
adjacent wetlands that are
indistinguishable from those
bodies of water due to a
continuous surface connection.
So that is what dramatically
narrowed the federal Clean Water
Act, and currently about 5% of
New Mexico's rivers meet that
definition. That is very
different though than how it was
interpreted for the previous 50
years.
Uh, and so really as an overlay,
what we're trying to do with
this. And again, this is a you
and I are going to disagree
about whether we should do that
or not, but what I'm trying to
do and what this bill and
environment department wants to
do is just continue the
regulatory scheme that existed
for those 50 years when everyone
got used to
You know, what the rules were
and how it worked and you'll
hear a lot about the language
that we put in this bill
mirroring the federal language
to do that. So that's a general
overview of what, what the
federal portion of the bill
does.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for that explanation. So, in a
layman's way of thinking, if, if
I'm standing in the ecus I'm in
federal waters. If I'm following
a little stream that's perhaps
coming off of a spring, that's
probably federal waters. If I
walk out some distance and
mostly is wetlands and has water
in it, probably most of the
time, that would be federal, but
at some point,
And I'm seeing someone shaking
their head no, so I'll stop
there. Help me. So, Mr. Chair
and, and representative, let me
give you the example that exists
right in the district I
represent, and this really came
true to me. We have a situation
where bishop's Lodge and
Albert's resorts, uh, wanted to
discharge into the Tasuki Creek,
which is a free flowing creek, a
quote unquote federal water, uh,
EPA currently.
New Mexico is one of 3 states
that don't exert primacy, so the
determinations of what that was
gonna look like were happening
out of the Dallas office of the
EPA.
Uh, again, this bill's going to
move that to New Mexico, but
that's an example of a
free-flowing creek and
interesting downstream, and you
heard from Tasuki Pueblo, uh,
the Tasuki Pueblo has asserted
primacy and they pueblos and
tribes can assert privacy.
They're ahead of the stadium in
New Mexico.
And so that particular
application ended up getting
stopped because
What, what didn't happen is that
bishop's Lodge didn't consult
with Tasuki Creek.
And so EPA was involved in that
piece of it. So that's an
example of a free-flowing stream
uh that's covered under the
federal, which I'm using your
terminology right here in Santa
Fe though is the Santa Fe River.
Which currently is not covered.
Uh, it's part of the 95%. It
does not run year round. It's
connected to two reservoirs, uh,
most importantly, the city of
Santa Fe is discharging from its
wastewater treatment plant,
which needs a lot of help.
Into the Santa Fe River and
they've actually been fined
because that's not
In compliance. So, again, that
is an example of waters that no
longer have federal protection,
but it gives you a feel for how
important it is that we pay
attention to what's happening
there when you've got municipal
wastewater discharging into some
of these non-federal waters.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank
you, that helps a lot because
then what you're really focusing
on, if I understand it, you are
truly focusing on either
industrial or or municipality
discharge and what I've been
trying to sort of wrap my head
around this, is this bill really
addressing water or is it
addressing waterways, and it, it
sounds like in some ways it's
perhaps addressing both and um
I'll move off of this because I
think it, and once I start to
ask some specific questions that
it might help me understand the
impact. I want to go to the
permits though.
understand where you see site
specific permits being required.
What's the difference between,
I, I saw site specific, but I,
I'm that terminology may be
wrong, specific versus general
as, as the general categories if
you will.
So, this is where I'm gonna
yield to Miss Lemon for the
technical expertise on the types
of permits.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
individual permits are used for
more complex or complicated
discharges, um, site specific,
uh,
Either a site specific, um,
water quality standard that
needs to be met or different
types of pollutants that are
being discharged from that are
different from other facilities,
so it's, it's more of an
individualized approach because
that discharge is unique.
Whereas the general permits
cover a range of discharges that
discharge similar types of
contaminants, um,
For example, there is a
construction general permit for
discharges of stormwater off of
construction sites. Those are
expected to carry contaminants
that are similar because the
construction activities are all
very similar. We have a, a
general permit for stormwater
off of industrial sites, um,
that general permit is broken
down into different sectors of
industry and so different
sectors.
have to do different things, um,
and make sure that they're
complying with different
standards, but the general
permit covers those stormwater
discharges. So it's more of a
broad category of discharges
that um covers those types of
facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator and uh Miss Lemon. Um,
the next thing I'd like to talk
about is in is um
The infrastructure, potential
impact on energy infrastructure
projects and um I've got a
number of questions and, and one
of them is are a number of
examples, um, when the oil and
gas industry files for uh to
drill a well, for example, we
either go through the OCD or BLM
BLM, um.
In, in many cases is, is the
most active land in the, in the
southeast part of the state perm
where I come from.
And so, if I file that and let's
just assume I'm on.
I'm on federal lands, both
surface and minerals.
And I filed an
application permit to drill uh
for a well. Will this bill
require me to get any other
permit other than, than the ones
on uh my company's traditionally
used to.
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
there are discharges to surface
water, typically what's
happening right now through the
EPA, it's a stormwater discharge
from those oil and gas. It's
like what I was talking about
those industries and it's a
stormwater discharge general
permit, so, um, that would be
covered by a general permit, um,
and it would not be um an
individualized permit unless you
were treating water and
discharging it to the Pecos
River or something like that,
then it would require a
discharge permit to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh Ms.
Lemon, I, um, this is helping me
from the standpoint of sort of
distinguishing between the
discharges and, and, and the
canals and waterways themselves.
So, and digging a little bit
deeper into that example. Let,
let's say, let's assume there is
no discharge because we
typically wouldn't, we wouldn't
have a discharge, but, um, if
water simply during a rain event
was to run off of that well pad
and go into what is, is a dry
aurora or or um something that
that
Never flows except when there's
rain. Would, would I be required
a permit for a situation like
that.
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
would probably depend on um
The waterway.
So we would be evaluating how
close that waterway is to other
waters if that, um, if that
those contaminants have a risk
of.
Being mobilized to waterways,
um, it's, it's hard to say
without knowing where that
ephemeral is located in the
context of the broader
watershed, um, but likely if
you're near um other waterways
and the ephemeral stream flows
more frequently than um
Once every 5 years, uh, it, it
would likely be considered a
permitted activity and you would
need that general permit that I
was talking about. Those general
permits require best management
practices to prevent things from
flowing off site, so that's,
that's what we're trying to get
at is making sure that those
contaminants are staying on site
and not flowing into the stream
or trying to reduce that impact.
And Mister, can I just add that
I think.
Going back to the idea of trying
to keep the status quo.
The rules are going to be the
same rules that existed.
For oil and gas from 1972 to
2023.
And so those permits, in fact,
many of those permits still are
in place.
Uh, and so really, this isn't an
attempt to to go beyond what
folks are used to. It's really
to just have a continuation, but
I want to be really clear, it's
different than the status quo
because after Sacket, there's
really no, no protection, what
we're doing here is basically
going back to what everyone was
used to for those 51 years.
Mr. Chairman Senator, and Ms.
Lemon, thank you for that. I,
uh, you know, I don't know that
the industry has, has changed
its practices at all because of
Sackett, um, you know, to me,
and so I welcome that
explanation, Mr. Chairman,
Senator. Um, OK, so under the
well pad scenario, we don't
really know. Uh, it could,
depending upon circumstances,
but, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, it sounds like that a
lot of that will probably be
addressed in the rulemaking
process, um, I would presume.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator, um, I
want to give you another
example, um, and this is, um,
the pipeline example.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, um, as you know, the
industry is, is uh very
aggressively trying to capture
every bit of methane that we
can. I think the recent numbers
that we've heard in this
committee are somewhere around
99% now and we're 18 to 24
months ahead of schedule, and
we're proud of that as an
industry. Um, but one of those
things is, is that as we
continue to develop our
resources here, we, we continue
to run into takeaway capacity
and, and pipelines are a
critical part of that, Mr.
Chairman, and
And all the associated uh
compressor stations and so
forth. So if, if, um, if an
operator
If an operator has a pipeline
that they want to build, and
they have to cross a series of
what have traditionally been
thought of as dry roar as a
washing or however you want.
What happens in that
circumstance, Mister Chairman
and Senator, with respect, is,
are we now talking about a
general permit or, or something
else, do you think?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives.
It, we review pipeline projects
in my bureau to make sure that
they're protecting surface water
resources and surface water
qualities, so that's already
happening, so I would imagine we
would continue the same practice
of reviewing those projects,
making sure that, you know,
water quality is protected from
them, that standpoint if a
general permit is required, we
make that comment and in in our
um review of that project and
they are required.
to get a general permit. So, um,
it, it's happening now, uh, it's
something that we do regularly,
so I imagine it would continue
to be the same.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Mr. Lemon, um,
Regarding those pipeline
projects that that you
traditionally review. Are those
limited to intrastate,
interstate.
Uh gathering or there or is
there a threshold at which
point, um,
You sort of determined you are.
rules have determined that you
need to review, uh, that
project.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
review them because they are
typically federal projects and
that triggers review from us,
um, so it would be a little bit
a little bit different because
now the state would be
administering the program, we
would um be reviewing that
project under state authorities
instead of the federal program.
So, um,
I don't know if I'm quite
answering your question. Can you
repeat it, or?
I, I guess there's a, there's
different uh types of pipelines
that I'm thinking about, sort of
the major, the large pipelines
that might take whatever product
they do across state lines,
perhaps into Texas and down to
the processing facilities and in
Corpus and Houston. Those, I
would think would clearly be um
large federal projects that are
being reviewed by somebody.
There's perhaps then in-state
projects where um they're larger
than what I would think is field
gathering lines, but they're
taking.
large volumes of crude oil or
natural gas, um, to an existing
interstate line, for example.
And so my, and then there are
the sort of the field gathering,
um,
Um, pipelines.
Um, that if they're within a
unit or they're laid on, they're
within an existing lease
typically, uh, those are
relatively small diameter and
additions for for gathering
within the field. So I'm trying
to, trying to figure out at what
point does your agency kind of
stepped in?
Mr. Chair Representative, that
will come into the actual
permit.
Requirements. And so I think
what you're talking about is
what's what's that threshold for
permit required permit not
required. We haven't determined
that yet, right? So that will
come in with the rulemaking with
the permit, um, issuance and,
you know, from what you're
talking about.
It's making me think of other
general permits that are called
regional general permits that
are used for larger projects
with the same type of um
Activities that are occurring or
discharges and those regional
general permit permits cover the
activity over five-year period
and so um as you move.
Through the watersheds or down
the pipeline or up the pipeline,
whichever direction you're
going, you're still covered and
you're still doing the same
things to protect water quality,
so, um, I can't give you an
answer on what those thresholds
are because um I don't know yet,
but we will be talking about
that in rule making and in the
permit issuance process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
and Miss Loman, I'm gonna wrap
up here fairly quickly. I want
to talk about the, the
rulemaking and, and the permit
process, um, Senator, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator goes, um, you
talked about the three types of
funding mechanisms, 100% fees,
100% general fund or some sort
of hybrid between the two.
And um it's been my short
experience uh in this body, um,
that, uh, folks are very
reluctant to go to the general
fund uh for these types of
things. And so therefore
probably eliminates two of
those. And could you talk about
sort of the fees that um you've
seen in other states, what, uh,
these might look like, um, at
given the various categories.
Representative, let me first
give you kind of my take because
I appreciate that I am not a fan
of, of fees and using fees to
stand up programs, and I
actually as this bill has
journeyed along, um, becoming
more convinced that this is the
type of program that is of such
an importance to the state that
we should try and continue with
status quo, which means the
general fund would need to come
up with 7 or $8 million. I think
that's a number that we could
probably get to, which
would ease a huge amount of the
concerns that are out there and
quite frankly, it would be
status quo.
Again, I keep going to status
quo. Status quo is no fees and
the federal government has done
that. So this is going to be a
discussion and it's very good to
have the the chair and vice
chair of the House side here to
hear this and think it through,
um, and again, there are states
that do it that way, and I'm
going to let Miss Lemon kind of
walk through the different
options. Initially, as the bill
was drafted, it kind of had
mandatory language that it would
be funded through.
Through fees, that was amended,
uh, in part of the journey to
give us the flexibility to make
that decision, but it's going to
be a policy decision that we all
make. Actually, uh, we had an
interesting debate. Do you all,
we've all spent a lot of time on
the fish and game reform bill,
um, I was one of the senators
that voted against the fee
increase a couple of years ago
and Senator Brantley and I both
presented that bill on the floor
of the Senate. She liked parts
of the bill. Uh, she loved the
fee increases. I didn't like the
fee increases. I would probably
have voted against.
That is a standalone, because
again, I think we're broadening
the mission of of game and fish,
and so I do think that it
shouldn't just be on the backs
of sportsmen. Now that's a
different issue, but there's a
parallel. So I just wanted to
give you my thinking on this as
it goes through and this is
going to be a discussion for us
to have throughout the interim
and then to make that
determination, but let me yield
to um Miss Miss Lemon and Mr.
Armstrong to give you just a
feel for what other states have
done and how they've done it.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so we've done
some research on this,
obviously, um, and
All states with.
Federal primacy over the Nipy's
program have fees except for two
states. So most states
incorporate fees into their
program at some level, um, not
all of them are 100% fee based,
but most of them, 45 states have
some sort of fees incorporated
into their programs. Um,
regionally, about 60% of program
costs are covered by fees.
That's like states
found us in the southwestern
part of the United States, um,
and nationally about 45% of
program costs are covered by the
fees. So if you look nationally,
you know, it's almost a
fifty-fifty split, um, with,
with that said, looking at fees
general permit fees are
typically in the hundreds of
dollars to maybe 1000 or $1500
for an MS4 permit, which is
urban stormwater, um,
Areas. So it's a little bit more
complicated for those MS4
general permits for individual
permits for like a wastewater
treatment plant, um, again, it
depends on how much you're
discharging, what type of um
What type of effluent you're
treating and the chemicals that
are found in there, but for a
wastewater treatment plant,
small, the smallest in our
state, it would probably be
2000 to 3000 range, looking at
other states, um, we would have
application fees and a permit
fee um for the 5-year permit
term, um, for larger facilities,
wastewater treatment plants like
Albuquerque, it would be
significantly more, probably
100,000, maybe 75,000, um, you
know, depending on what that
balance is between
appropriations, you know,
general.
fund versus fees. If it was 100%
fee based, I would imagine it
would be probably uh application
fee, you know, in that $100,000
range, um, if we get general
fund, that's obviously gonna go
down, right? Um, the annual fee
would probably be a little bit
less. Um, but overall, those
fees, if you split it out by the
population in Albuquerque that
served, it ends up being like 3
to 5 cents.
Um per month or those
individuals for those
households, um.
When we're talking about
industry, um, individual
permits, again, you're looking
at how complicated they are, um,
the most complicated that we
have is Los Alamos National Lab,
um, that would probably again be
in the 100,000 $150,000 range,
um, and then you have the
smaller individual mining
operations, um, probably in the
tens of thousands, you know,
looking at other comparable.
Um, state programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, Ms. Lemon, um, just
about finished, um.
The, I'll just make a comment on
the fees is, is that, is that,
you know, um, this state needs a
lot of infrastructure and the
cost of construction um has gone
up, you know, dramatically, and
so, uh, Mr. Chairman Senator,
Ms. Lemon, I would just pay
particular attention to that
because we need these, um, these
infrastructure projects, um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um, I
wanna, uh, thank you for the
outreach that you've done uh to
my industry and the other
industries, I know that you have
taken a lot of effort.
to make this bill better, and
from what I understand, I
haven't been deeply involved in
it, but Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I think it sounds like
it is a whole lot better. Um, I
like your word status quo, and
um and it sounds like that
you're trying to achieve that.
both in law and an impact and,
and hopefully in fees, so, um,
I'll say that, um, during the
rulemaking process and, and I'll
end with this, and I don't mean
to end on a negative note, but
it's, it's, it's a cautionary
note, and that is, is that, you
know, so often my industry sends
experts into the rulemaking
process and I can think of the
methane rule, and the penalties
rule, the general construction
permit rule, and we feel like
that the, the environment is
you're welcome.
The calm, we'll listen to you
and Mr. Chairman and Senator,
not directed to you, but with
all due respect.
But we really don't care what
you have to say, and we're not
going to incorporate
incorporate, uh, your technical
or or business aspects into the
rulemaking process, and so many
times, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
um, I wonder why we even show
up. And so all I would say with
this is, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator that you continue the
process of a very broad
stakeholder process, one that,
that incorporates, um, you know,
all of the industry concerns and
you address those as best you
can.
Um, I'm gonna, uh, respectfully
withhold my support at this time
until I see some of these other
areas that are cleaned up, but
um I really appreciate the
dialogue and the explanation,
and I think I have a better
understanding of this, Mr.
Chairman and and Senator. Thank
you very much. Thank you,
Representative Murphy. Uh, next
we have Representative Senator
Cortez and Representative Henry.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
Senator, and experts. I know
this is a really robust bill, so
I want to make sure that I
understand all of the
implications and my questions
are always fairly easier than
Representative Murphy, so don't
be alarmed. Um, Mr. Chair,
Senator and experts, a lot of
these infrastructure projects
are serviced out of hobbs where
I live, so how does this impact
jobs?
Uh
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Cortez, I would just say that,
you know, echoing what Senator
has highlighted that our goal
has been to maintain what was
the status quo prior to Sackett,
um.
In industry in New Mexico was
familiar with all that, all of
that regulatory scope complied
with it for decades, um,
And, you know,
Had a
Uh
Labor market able to support it
in those times. I don't expect
this bill to have much of an
impact on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
expert, um, let's go into some
of the clarifying language just
so that I understand. I saw that
a speech 21 requires permits for
discharges to surface waters,
right? But I didn't quite see
where it defined the surface
waters. Can you define that?
Mr. er Representative, the bill
includes the existing statutory
definition of water, uh, in
The definition section.
On
Page 13.
Again, that's existing law. It's
underlined because uh council
service in their drafting
standards re-alphabetized all
the definitions, but it is an
existing definition and statute.
The definition of waters of the
state is an existing definition
in our water quality rules. So
that, that definition already
exists. We can provide you that
citation, if you'd like, uh, but
the bill doesn't define what
those waters are. OK. So, Mr.
Chair, Senator
spurt, do the surface waters
include man-made channels like
irrigation ditches and aseas.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would just point out that the
exemptions that we've included
in the bill mirror the Federal
Clean Water Act exemptions,
which include uh return flows
from agriculture and uh right
now, we don't require permitting
of a diges, uh, and that would
continue to be the case under
this bill. Oh, OK, but what
about the stormwater drainage
channels or the borrow ditches
along roads.
Or other manmade water drainage
channels, Mr. Chair, senator,
and expert.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
can read you the definition that
we have for surface waters of
the state. It means all surface
waters situated wholly or partly
within or bordering upon the
state, including lakes, rivers,
streams, including intermittent
and ephemeral streams, mud
flats, sand flat, wetlands,
sloughs, prairie potholes, wet
meadows, ply lakes, reservoirs,
and natural ponds. It also means
tributaries of such waters.
Including adjacent wetlands, any
man-made bodies of waters that
were originally created in a
surface water of the state or
resulted in an impoundment of a
surface water of the state and
any waters of the United States
as defined under the Clean Water
Act. It does not include private
waters that do not combine with
other surface or sub-surface
water or any water under tribal
regulatory jurisdiction,
pursuant to Section 518 of the
Clean Water Act.
Um, waste treatment systems,
including treatment ponds or
lagoons designed and actively
used to meet requirements of the
Clean Water Act.
Other than cooling ponds, um,
are not surface waters of the
state unless they are originally
created in a surface water of
this state or resulted in the
impoundment. So the clarifying
language there is if that
channel was
In a surface water of the state,
and now it's, um, engineered
because we decided to use the
contour of the land.
That helps. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator, um, and Mr. Chair,
senator and experts. Um, I saw
that there are some exemptions
for agricultural, uh, practices,
but it also seemed vague in the
language to me, so what's
considered normal farming.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, that's a very good question.
That language is taken directly
from the Clean Water Act, so in
the spirit of maintaining that
status quo, we're using the
language from the Clean Water
Act in this bill, um, as our
exemptions, so whatever is
currently exempted under the
Clean Water Act will be
continued to be exempt under
this statute.
And Mr. Chair, can I just add
that.
As you might imagine in the
Senate Judiciary Committee, we
spent a lot of time looking at
this language, because again,
it's not language that
We're super comfortable with,
and I think had it just been a
new bill in language like this
was being proposed, we would
have rewritten the whole bill in
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
but what was super important and
the thing that was stressed by
the advocates, leave the
language like it is. There's 50
years' worth of case law and
federal regulations that have
determined exactly how this all
works, and this just goes back
to what I was saying with
Representative Murphy. It's
trying to maintain the same
regulatory.
scheme that existed before. And
that's the critical part of
this, and so,
Actually, the way the bill was
introduced, there was some
Just a few little tweaks to the
exemptions for agriculture. We
took those out in judiciary to
line it up using these words,
which is the normal farming, and
again, as, as Miss Lemon said,
there's
50 years' worth of regulatory
and case load on case law
interpretation about what those
mean, so it's gonna be exactly
what everyone's been used to,
and that's just going to
continue onward. But I, I,
there's no question it jumps out
at you, it jumps out at me, uh,
cause it's different language
than we're used to seeing in New
Mexico statues. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Senator, and experts. You
guys are doing a great job
explaining this very robust
bill. Um, I have several more
questions and then I'll wrap it
up. Mr. Chair, Senator,
Experts, so are the agricultural
producers protected when there's
like possible contaminants from
Chile or mesquite treatment or
the salt cedar treatment.
So, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, let me give you,
uh, Senator Cervantes his
example, uh, because his farm,
Cervante's farm, uh, had to pay
a large
penalty under the EPA
interpretation of this act
because they were washing chili,
and there were some pesticide on
that chili that ended up.
Going down into a and I assume
it was the Rio Grande free
flowing stream, and so under the
federal law, um,
That was not OK, and that was a
violation, and they, he, he
brought that up as an example of
an a, a perfect example of the,
the current situation now, and
so it would be, it would just
carry over and be the same type
of analysis. What does the
permit look like? What happens,
you know, what are the specific
factors that would be considered
to determine whether or not
there was a violation.
OK
I didn't know if you were gonna
add to that. OK. And Mr. Chair,
senator, and experts, thank you
for that explanation. So, going
a little bit further. So if
you're irrigating and you have
cattle in the same field is the
fecal contamination from
livestock livestock then exempt
as it washes into the water
stream. I know that's
More detail, but.
I'm curious. Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, so there are
two types of contamination. One
is point source contamination,
which comes from a discrete
source. So this
Um, program that we're trying to
stand up is for point source
discharges from a pipe, um, that
is discharging to a stream. It's
coming from an identifiable
source, um, you know, location
and.
There's also nonpoint source
pollution, which is what you're
talking about. You know, the
cattle are roaming, um, there's
fecal contamination and then
storm water hits the ground,
runs off the landscape into the
stream. That's a nonpoint source
pollution that is dealt with
differently. It's a voluntary
program under the Clean Water
Act in in our state programs,
and we work with stakeholders to
um
Improve their best management
practices to reduce that
contamination from entering our
streams and rivers for restoring
the river and stream, um, when
it becomes impaired. So it's a
little bit different and I know
it's nuanced, so, um, that's
what we're trying to do here.
That's a great response. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Senator, and
expert. So, and you may have
already answered this, but what
waters are actually water and
important to protect.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, I
would contend that all of our
wives in New Mexico are critical
to protect.
And unfortunately, after the
sack decision about 95% of the
water is no longer subject to
the protection that existed for
50 years. So what this bill's
trying to do again is to.
have New Mexico take over, uh,
why should we have Texans in
Dallas doing our water for free
flowing streams. That doesn't
make sense to me. So we're gonna
take over that piece and then
also fill in the regulatory gap,
so that all of our waters grow
free flowing and ephemeral
streams like the examples I use
with with Reside Murphy. Santa
Fe River, even though it doesn't
run year round, it needs
protection, especially when you
think about our, our dis
our wastewater plant is
discharging right below that is
the, the village of La Cienega,
um, and again, that water is
flowing right through the
village there, there.
Domestic wells, uh, PAS, all
those kinds of issues. So it
just is something that I would
contend we should have
protection for.
Our free-flowing and ephemeral
waters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
and expert. I do have one more
question and then I'll wrap it
up. Uh, what percentage of
waters are actually areas that
rarely, if ever, have flowing
water or water at all.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, the the number or the
percentage of ephemeral streams
which flow only in response to
storms, um, is around 88% of our
stream miles. Um, so it's, it's
a large portion of our state is
considered ephemeral, um, we
have a little bit, you know,
more that are intermittent, so
they flow seasonally and a very
few less than 4% flow.
All year round, well, mostly all
year round, you know, they still
dry up occasionally, but, um,
they're considered perennial.
Thank you. Thank you for that
explanation, Mr. Chair, Senator,
and experts. That concludes my
question.
Thank you Cortez. Next is
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator and experts. I just
have a couple.
questions, mainly living in the
municipality questions, um,
earlier y'all had mentioned that
that some discharge, I think you
said Santa Fe even had some uh
violations and or fines. So
what, how does this change?
Like, like, can you help me
understand like I understand our
teach and I'm gonna talk about
that in a second. But what do
most cities, what kind of
permits do they have to have
now? And what is the change in
this? And if they're already
being fined, who's doing those
fines, and how does this change?
So Mr. Chair and representative,
um, currently it depends on if
you're discharging to a surface
water and that surface water is
considered protected under the
Clean Water Act, then you would
get a permit issued by EPA and
Dallas, Texas, um, we, you know,
the question came up from um
representative that asked about.
You know which waters we should
protect we already protecting
all of our surface waters. We
have water quality standards for
our surface waters. We have
designated uses for our surface
waters. So if you're discharging
a pollutant to a surface water
without a permit, either EPA if
it's a water of the US can
enforce or the state can enforce
as, um, you know, because we
have those water quality
standards that need to be
upheld. It's not a
process by any means because.
We want to be proactive and
prevent the pollution from
entering the stream in the first
place, rather than reactive and
um trying to clean up the
pollution once it's occurred, so
that's, that's the difference, I
believe, um, being more
proactive and making sure that
our waters are protected when
there are discharges into those
waters.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
expert. I still am not clear
what's gonna change. So right
now, if the EPA issues a permit
to the discharge, which in, in
our, it's Region 6, which I
don't know if that's
everybody's, I'm assuming it is,
uh.
So if, if we're already getting
a permit.
From EPA.
And there's water quality
issues, and they get fined,
what's gonna change under this
bill, Mr. Chairman
Representative Henry.
If you have an existing federal
permit.
That federal permit upon renewal
will transfer over to state
administration if we succeed in
our primacy application, uh, and
like 47 other states exercise
our authority to uh implement
the Federal Clean Water Act in
New Mexico. I, I would say that
there are a number of
municipalities also that have
groundwater discharge permits
for their wastewater plants,
that's status quo under this.
This does not change our
groundwater permitting
requirements. Um, I would also
point out that there is
the uh
Federal resource conservation.
Long rira, um,
A provision that says that law
does not apply if you have a
Clean Water Act permit. Um,
without a clean water from then
in Artesia, you would have to
consider and comply with the
much more burdensome
process for hazardous wastes,
then you would under a surface
water permit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman or
senator and, and experts. Um,
So if it's the waters of the US,
so Pecus, Rio Grande, things
like that that are regulated by
the federal government.
If that's who we just because
that's who our teacher
discharges into his, his the
pagus. Am I going to have to get
two permits because how would,
how would
Is it, it doesn't feel normal
that the state is gonna trump
the, the federal regulations.
Well I guess we could make a
more stringent but not less, but
if for status quo, what would be
the difference? So Mister Chair
and and Representative.
Um, states and tribal
governments have the option of
asserting privacy. I think only
New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
and New Mexico have not done
that. So really,
For your situation, it's going
to be instead of having
Regulators out of the District 6
office in Dallas as the lead,
it's just gonna be the
regulators are gonna be here in
New Mexico, and the, the permit
is gonna carry over, so it's the
same permit and I'll go back to
the example that I have in my
district with one bishop's Lodge
wanted to discharge into Tasuki
Creek.
A lot of people were surprised
that it was EPA that had the
lead on that out of Dallas, not.
The New Mexico folks here in New
Mexico, so it would just change
the agencies but not change the
permit. So it's not gonna be a
second permit. It's just gonna
carry over and be implemented
now here in the environment
department instead of an EPA
Region 6 in Dallas. And Mr.
Chairman, Representative, I
would just point out that with
the Senate floor amendments that
we made an agreement with
industry representatives. We
included some language that
pretty clearly states double
permitting won't be.
uh, an issue.
say that what permit double
permitting, so the the
duplicative permitting that you
were concerned about, we've
addressed that with those four
amendments.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator, and, and experts, um.
So I guess I'm still a little
Maybe I'm just slow on this, but
If, if Santa Fe is discharging
right now to the the Santa Fe
River.
Is that what you said? OK. If
they're discharging to that and
obviously there were issues
there.
The EPA did address them and
they were fines, so what's the
If they're doing that already,
what are y'all gonna do
different other than it's gonna
be in this state and not.
Not doubtless. So just let me be
clear and stand up in situation,
it's not in Dallas, because
those are no the Santa Fe River
is no longer. Oh, it is in
Dallas, so it's still considered
a.
Part of that connection, so I'm
wrong on that, so let me yield
to the experts here to get that
right, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative.
There were long standing
violations with the city of
Santa Fe's wastewater treatment
plant. We in looking out for New
Mexico's water quality, notified
EPA regulators in Dallas of that
situation for, I think a year
and a half, and they did not
act. So what we did at the
environment department was
looked towards our existing
authority, which is a
reactionary authority in state
law where we can issue
penalties, uh, for
exceedances of our water quality
standards. We can't yet require
a permit in state law, but if
you're violating our established
water quality standards, we
can't find you for it. That's
how we have worked to, uh, on
the violations of the city of
Santa Fe.
Um,
I, I would point out that, you
know, so that that's a twofold
issue in terms of
regulators in Dallas not being
reactive to an ongoing
environmental and public health
concern in New Mexico and uh
what we could do if we had some
more authority to be proactive
in that public health
protection.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
and expert, so you were
proactive though, right? Once
you discovered they weren't
going to do anything y'all did
then.
You have the authority to do the
fines today.
Mr. Chairman representative, we
have the authority to find if
there is a violation. We don't
have the authority to require a
permit, uh, for a facility
required that it
Uh, implement the proper
technology and practices to
ensure that there is not a
violation.
So we can only react to the
violation. We can't work with a
permitive entity to prevent one.
Mister chair an expert wouldn't
behoove them if there's a
violation to fix the violation.
I mean, I would think it will be
in our t-shirt
OK.
On a couple of other quick
questions I'm gonna have on the
city level, again, ourte might
be unique. I don't think we are,
um, but right now we get a class
2 to be discharged for watering.
So a lot of the parks, um, but
one of those parts happens to be
eagle draw.
Eagle draw is, I'm assuming
gonna be one of the
Arteries, what did you call it?
ephemeral. Thank you. Uh, that
would, it's about 2 miles from
the Tacus, but it will
eventually end up in the eas.
How is this legislation going to
affect that?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, that uh class 2
permit that you mentioned is a
groundwater permit, so not
impacted by what's in the bill,
Um, other than that language
from the Senate floor amendment
that says
If you have, if you have a
permit in existence either under
a state program or a federal
program, you're not gonna need
to have a second permit, uh,
unless there is a threat to
public health that isn't covered
by that existing permit.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator and expert. So our teams
would still be able to get that
exact same permit, just like we
are, and water the draw even
though that draw is going to
eventually end up in the Peas.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
that's correct. Um,
We would evaluate also um those
duplicative exemptions are
exemptions from duplicative
permitting.
are in existence if um the water
quality standards are met. So if
there is a surface water
contaminant that we need to add
to that discharge permit, but it
would still be issued under the
Groundwater Quality Bureau, and
it may have an additional
requirement to make sure that
that surface water quality is
protected.
It, it's a little bit nuanced, I
understand, but, um, it's to
protect both groundwater and
surface water. Right now it's
just protecting groundwater.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
experts. So the, the thing that
I worry about, uh, mainly
because we've heard it.
I've heard the word POs more
than I've ever heard in my life
during this session, so I have
learned quite a bit and I do
fully acknowledge POS. I, I'm,
I'm, I, I make light of it, but
it feels like it would be easier
to listen things POS is not in
instead of what it is and
unfortunately, so I do know that
that a lot of this stuff that
goes down the drain that ends up
in the city.
Has contains POs, right? Makeup,
a lot of those types of, of
applications.
So with, with what you just
said, one of my worries is, is
if, if folks are washing their
faces or whatever and the POS is
going down the drain. I know
there's been a lot of discussion
on the wastewater treatment
side, I don't know what that,
how that would impact the cities
because I think it would be a
major cost.
Um, no matter which direction
this legislation goes, but if
we're worried about that, and
then I'm gonna use a water reuse
program.
How do I know that there's no
POS in that water reuse program.
I, I mean, you just said that
there could be a change in the
way we look at that, uh, that
would be a pretty big hit to all
the cities.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
completely agree with you. Um,
currently right now, what's
happening is um we EPA is
requiring monitoring to figure
out if, if there's a problem,
um, or they're requiring
monitoring at suspected
locations where there's, you
know, suspected PAS
contamination. Um, it's not only
a surface water issue, it's also
a groundwater, I mean,
groundwater quality ureau has.
Much more, uh, many more issues
with it right now then, um, we
do at the surface water side, so
it is a concern, um, we are
looking to monitor um to figure
out if it's a problem before we
Make really crazy requirements
for anything. If it, if it's not
a problem, then
You know, we don't need to
address it. If it is a problem,
how are we going to fix it? And
we understand it's
It's pretty ubiquitous at this
point, um, where you sample, you
will probably find it, um, but
then at what level uh are safe
levels which EPA um is issuing
guidance, um, they issued
guidance last year on
Uh, aquatic life, um, protection
levels. Uh, it's really
stringent. There are other
states we're looking at because
Michigan has a really good PAS
program. Um, there are some
other states that are working,
um, to, to mitigate PFAST, so
it's something we're working on.
It is complicated and we
understand your concern. Um, so,
you know, hopefully we can come
to a solution together.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative now an expert, uh
with that, if, if the state is
in control of now wastewater
discharge for cities.
And y'all decide, I think Maine,
Michigan have been pretty
aggressive, as you said. I also
think they have, I can't
remember, it's over 2000.
Um
man.
escape me this morning, uh,
excuses, uh,
exemptions
excuses could be too, um, but
exemptions already and so if
they're exempting it, I guess I
worry a little bit about it, if,
if the state was to get that,
how are we going to impact, even
though we say status quo and,
and I believe you for that. But
that's at what point do we not
want to be status quo anymore
and want to take that next step
regardless of the federal level.
is ready for that or not.
So Monsieur and I would say
though, the Santa Fe example is
a good one.
Because again, under current
status quo.
The state was forced to step in
long after this problem was
happening and we've got a plant
that needs to be rebuilt. It's a
mess. And they're trying to kind
of jerry rigged. I'm gonna, I'm
not gonna hide from it, but it,
it's, they're doing a, a
yeoman's effort to keep a very
old plant going and it's
discharging and unfortunately,
again, it's at the point where
the state did have under the
status quo, had to step in. I
think the difference is gonna be
having the state.
In a position to be proactive on
the front end.
would mean that it would come to
the city and say, you've got to
fix this plant so that it
doesn't do the discharge.
And you've got to go get Senator
Worth and the other Santa Fe
folks to come over and find the
money to help build this new
plant, which is what we all
want. We don't want to be in a
situation where we're where
we're reacting. And so I really
do think, and I, and I hear what
you're saying and, and trying to
game this out and exactly what's
going to happen. I just truly
believe in our situation, it
would have been much better to
be having this discussion.
A few years ago.
On the front end versus having a
discussion when now we have a $2
million fine.
And we're trying to work with
the environment department to.
And I continue to make those
changes and hopefully we can get
them to, you know, not impose
that fine which will hit our
folks really hard in local
government, so that was my
response.
Thank you, Mister Chairman.
Thank you for that response.
The, the only other question and
now I'm veering a little bit off
of city, but
It, it's more towards farmland,
uh, and, and city to some
extent, but how does this bill
protect existing and future
water right owners and their
property rights from uh takings
associated with water quality.
Compliance actions.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
this, uh, statute does not take
away any rights and water
rights. So it's, it's stated
explicitly in there, um, it's
not taking away any water rights
that anybody has in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative and expert. So
the city's water rights, there's
nothing that can ever happen if
I'm a farmer or rancher, my
nothing can ever touch my water
rights through this bill.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
that's correct.
Thank you.
Thank you for your answer. I
appreciate your time.
Thank you, representative.
Uh, we're gonna go next to
Representative Dixon and then
represent Montoya.
Orson Dixon, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I, uh,
I think I have 4 questions, not
uh connected by any theme
necessarily, so uh they may
appear random, um, and hopefully
do not require lengthy technical
explanations, um, first off, I
want to say, Mr. Chair, and uh
sponsors how much I appreciate
uh your work to have New Mexico
have primacy. Um, I think that
that is very important, um,
particularly, um, in some of
these areas.
areas where New Mexico has
unique
Uh, facets and communities and
You know,
I don't think that um the EPA is
necessarily the best to oversee
some things when we can meet
their requirements, um, but
then, um, add to um some of the
rules and regulations based on
our specific needs. Um, so I
just wanted to start with that.
Um, Mr. Chair sponsors, uh, can
you briefly talk about what the
role of the public and
stakeholders will be in the
rulemaking process.
So Mr. Chair and Representative.
Rulemaking is a public process,
so, um, anyone can participate
in that rulemaking, um, they are
encouraged to uh to participate
in the rulemaking, um, the
department meets with
stakeholders, um, I'm
anticipating a large stakeholder
engagement prior to the
rulemaking for this particular
rulemaking because we want to
get it as close to right as we
can before we go to rulemaking.
Um, but all, all our rulemakings
are under um the water quality
control commission, and they
have established regulations for
rulemaking that have different
participation requirements and
under the Clean Water Act, we
also are beholden to specific
public participation
requirements.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Ms. Lemon for that. Um,
that actually leads to sort of
the next question, um, which is,
there was discussion from um
some of the um public members
who spoke up today about
concerns that not all of the
definitions or um technicalities
have been addressed. And so is
there a way to ensure that um
those are addressed or fixed in
the rulemaking process. How will
that work?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Dixon, we've talked with
industry representatives who we,
I think it's the same ones who
who brought those concerns to
you, um,
while things could be cleaned up
in the bill, we don't think
that's necessary at this point,
and we were in uh agreement with
them that we'd have a very open
and engaged process for the
rulemaking to address those
things directly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, thank
you, Mr. Armstrong for that. I,
um, I appreciate that. I do
think that my colleague, um, to
my right, um, brought up some,
some, uh, points about um
stakeholder engagement and
actually incorporating feedback,
um, that I do think moving
forward, we should really work
to make sure that we are
listening and implementing and
not um just listening for the
sake of listening.
So I, I appreciate that. And can
I just add, Mr. Chair and
Representative that I think
One of the things that's
happened in the journey of this
bill is that there really has
been a dialogue that's open.
We're gonna be in a unique
position because we're all going
to get to make the funding
decision about this. And so I
think we are going to have the
opportunity to make absolutely
sure that the representations
you are hearing, which I have
also heard from both sides a
willingness to do that kind of
pre.
Free rulemaking stakeholder
process, that that's actually
happening. And so again, we're
in a position, position to be
able to do that. I, I couldn't
agree with you more. That's,
that'll be the success of this
is if we can continue this kind
of collaborative process and if
I may, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Dixon, I, I would
point out that, you know, this
bill.
Does put in statute a number of
things that we heard from
stakeholders through our public
engagement process last year.
I'd point you to page 21 of the
bill, uh, the, the amendments in
context version of the bill.
And at the bottom of that page,
there's existing subsection uh Q
which is changing to R.
That language is a very broad
provision that currently reads
that the water quality Control
Commission may adopt regulations
to be administered by the
Department of Environment for
surface water discharges.
That is it?
That's currently in statute.
That's the grant of authority
that you all have provided to
the Water Quality Control
commission. It's incredibly
broad. What we do with this
statue, with this bill in front
of you today is provide
guardrails and legislative
direction to the water quality
Control commission, including
what exactly we're regulating in
terms of surface water
discharges, uh, what exemptions
apply, what, uh
will be available in terms of
general permitting requirements,
um.
You know, without this bill,
water quality control commission
could elect to not allow any
general permits, which would be
You know, unworkable. And so
there are a lot of things that
through this bill that you all
are doing to provide
Certainty, uh, and we got to
this place through that rigorous
stakeholder involvement that we
plan to carry forward.
Uh,
thank you, uh, for that, um,
information, Mr. Chair and, uh,
sponsors that actually, you
know, provides a nice segue to
my third question. Apparently
they are connected. Um,
regarding the maze versus
shells, um, in the bill. Um, uh.
Is there an overarching
philosophy that went into this
bill for determining when
You would use a May versus when
you used a shell.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Dickson, I don't believe so.
Thank you, Mr. Terry. Thank you.
I was just curious you brought
up Q, the subsection Q, uh,
where previously had said May,
and now it says shall adopt
rules. Um, so I was just curious
if there was um a thinking
behind
flexibility versus
Where you really wanted it to be
prescriptive. I, I would say in
this case, Mr. Chairman
Representative Dixon, that we
have a changed circumstance post
sacket.
Right? This statute existed
before Sackett and said, well
water clock water quality
control commission, you may, uh,
adopt these rules. There's
urgency now posts I get to fill
in those gaps that didn't exist
before.
Thank you, Mr. Terry. Thank you,
Mr. Armstrong. Um, last
question, um, the definition of
tribal water quality standards
that came up um in public
comment as well, and that's
something I'm still a little
unfamiliar with. Um, could you
just walk me back through the
distinction and, and how that
plays in.
to this.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Dixon.
As, uh, it was an issue that was
brought by both supporters and
opponents earlier today.
We have in the bill a provision
that like the Clean Water Act,
Requires us as a permitting
agency to not issue a permit if
it's going to be uh or result in
the violation of a downstream
water quality standard,
including other states or a
tribal nations.
We've included that language in
our state program provisions,
um, to be respectful of.
Those water quality standards
and tribal sovereignty.
Thank you, Mr. Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Those are my
questions. Thank you,
Representative Dixon ranking
member Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Representative, um,
Uh, Representative Dixon
mentioned that her question
probably weren't going to be
leaked. Um, I never would never
try to link my questions. I
gotta try and keep you guys
guessing.
Um, I think it's, uh, as a
matter of fact, if they are
leaked, I try and separate them
by several questions, so, um,
Mr. Chair, uh, and, uh, Senator
Representative.
Um, is there a possibility of
the federal government denying
primacy?
Mr. Chair and Representative if
if EPA has an issue with the
state's application, we will
work to correct what
deficiencies there are, so that
they can approve the program,
um, I have not heard of EPA
denying any state and once it is
approved, they can rescind it
and so far no state programs
have been rescinded, um, so it,
it is an issue, um, that they
may.
Want something different and we
will have to correct that, but
um, we've been working with EPA.
They've seen.
these various versions of the
statute, um, we've been working
with them for a long time on
this, so um.
We're not anticipating any
problems. I can, um, Mr. Chair,
and Senator, I, I wouldn't think
so if, if we're only one of 3
states, uh, so, uh, majority,
vast majority. I, I'm just
wondering based on um Mr. Chair,
that
Obviously, decisions we make,
uh, would be, uh, dealing with
waterways and going to other
states, so, um, I would imagine
there's a minimum standard that
we have to hit.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yes, we cannot be any less
stringent than the federal law.
The Federal Clean Water Act.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
And this probably would go to
your experts, um,
Um, Miss Lemon or Mr. Armstrong,
um,
Why, what was the, what was the
reasoning behind the sacket.
Decision, I mean we, we have
the, we have the second
decision, but what, what, what
was the reasoning that the
Supreme Court justices used to
uh eliminate.
The, the non year round
waterways.
Mr. Chairman, uh, NMED general
counsel Zach Ogas is here this
morning. We'd like him to
address this question.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, my name is Zach Ogas. I'm
the general counsel at NMED, uh,
and to give you a little bit of
background on the second
decision, you know, really the,
the issue in that case was the
scope of, you know, what was a
water of the United States, uh,
you know, they're, they're, you
know, going back to the Clean
Water Act and the language in
the Clean Water Act, you know,
it, you know, leaves the
interpretation, or at least the
definition of the waters of the
United States.
states as navigable, um,
continuously flowing. I don't
have the exact definition in
front of me here, but, um, you
know, long story short,
navigable, continuously flowing
bodies of water, think of the
Mississippi River, Columbia
River, Missouri River.
And uh, you know.
And, and that goes back to the
mid 1970s Clean Water Act, over
time, you, you start to see that
the EPA was taking, uh, you
know, in attempting to uh
implement that somewhat broad
language, uh, in a way that
would protect all of those
waters, uh, and so, as I said,
over time, you start to see
navigable wires being protected
as intended, uh, but you also
start to see, you know,
tributaries of uh navigable
waters also being protected
because uh things that get into
those tributaries.
actually do flow into those
bigger bodies of water, uh, that
we rely on for a, drink water,
things of that nature, um.
And as I said, as the EPA was
trying to implement the intent
of the Clean Water Act, the, the
scope was
toward making sure that the
tributaries and those larger
bottled water are protected. So,
you know, as time continued to
go on multiple Supreme Court
cases, uh, you know, had been,
you know, multiple supreme
courts had opportunities to to
rule on what the scope of waters
of the United States were, uh,
we start
see some confusion, uh,
essentially as to what the the
scope, what the boundary of what
a water in the United States
was. So going back to 2006, you
had a a Supreme Court decision
called Rapanos versus the US,
um, you know, where we were
hoping to get some clarity, we
ended up with 4 justices in
favor of a broader
interpretation for justices in
favor of a more strict
interpretation in one justice
kind of right there in the
middle.
Uh, you know, so, you know,
continued uncertainty since 2006
as to what the scope of the
water of the United States was,
so, you know, long story short,
we get to sack it, um, and, you
know, at issue in that case was
an EPA rulemaking, again, you
know, defining what that scope,
what that limit of the waters of
the United States were, uh, sack
it then took the opportunity to
decide what was the authority of
the EPA.
regulate waters of the United
States, uh, and the end result
was a very narrow opinion that
covered only again, navigable
waters, uh, large continuously
flowing bodies of water and
those those tributaries and
wetlands that share a surface
water connection. OK.
OK, so thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman. So, so that was more
of a question of what authority.
The federal government really
have over
Non-navigable waterways, and it
just so happened to impact EPA.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct. OK.
OK, so, uh, thank you. So
following my theme of having no
theme,
um, Mr. Chair, uh, this is just
kind of more of a general
question.
What qualifies as a discharge.
Um, that, that would be
managed.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Montoya, I believe Ms. Levin's
looking for the definition.
In, in the bill. OK, because the
reason I'm, I'm, I'm wondering
this is obviously there, there's
ground disturbance that takes
place.
Uh, in construction, you know,
in every
Community across the state,
there's gonna be construction,
is that considered once there's
construction and it rains, is
that, is that considered a
discharge?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Montoya, the runoff for from
that site would be considered
discharge and would be subject
to a construction general permit
requirement.
OK, so thank you, Mr. Chair,
and and uh Senator.
Mr. Armstrong. So,
Just uh doing dirt work and
flattening ground.
And then it were to rain, seems
like it's the same ground that
the rain was.
falling on in the first place,
just to, just to disturb the
ground, you have to get a
permit, Mr. Chair and
Representative, there are
thresholds in the construction
general permit for stormwater
discharges, the amount of land
that you're disturbing has to be
over a certain acreage, um, so
there are qualifiers, um, under
the federal program for that.
Permit requirement.
OK, so I, I guess the reason
I'm, I'm, I'm questioning since
we're talking EPA or
Uh, contaminants, let's say.
I'm I'm just wondering if
there's not anything introduced.
How is that that considered?
discharge
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
sentiment is considered a
contaminant. It can smother the
stream bottom which has um.
Bugs that fish depend on. It has
fish eggs that are at the
bottom. It creates problems with
breathing for gills, it will
scratch the gills of fish, so it
is considered a contaminant when
it's in excessive amounts. No
one's saying that it's not
naturally occurring, um, it's
similar to nutrients where
nutrients are naturally
occurring, but excess it becomes
problematic for the aquatic
environment, so, um, it is.
Sediment is considered a
contaminant.
So thank you for that, um, Mr.
Chair, um, uh, Miss Lemon.
Um, so during fire season.
And we have to go in with uh
bulldozer sometimes and
Try and mitigate whether or not
we're trying to create a fire
line or something like that,
that, that seems like major
ground disturbance. there have
to be some sort of a permit for
that. It seems like that's kind
of time sensitive.
Mr. Charon representative, so
if, if they're doing work within
the stream. Yes, they will
eventually need a permit. That
is usually is issued as an
emergency permit and so it's
issued after the fact. It's a,
it's a public emergency. We have
to take action now and then we
um follow up later to make sure
everything was in line and once
the emergency has been
addressed, then we make sure
that the cleanup.
following what it needs to, what
needs to happen to protect water
quality and public health.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, um,
Senator, um,
Representative
Um, so after the fact, there's
been
fire and then now we're, we have
flooding issues.
Similarly, you have to go in and
disturb the ground.
Maybe to try and
Uh, we try and eliminate.
Some of the flooding or the
Consequences of that.
Um, once again, this is, uh, I
would imagine the same exemption
that you just discussed, maybe
after the fact.
Mr. Charon Representative, yes,
typically after a fire we're
trying to put up structures.
So when the floods happen, it's
mitigating that flood energy and
reducing the flood impacts, um,
but.
Similar situations when we have
natural disasters, um, when we
have wildfires or flooding
events. It's, it's after the
fact permitting and then we try
to um put in structures that
will help the next
The next event that comes along.
OK.
Um, once again, changing topics
again.
Um
In the, in the bill, uh
exemptions for some uh
agricultural practices are in
there, but it's, it's really
vague.
Um, what will
Rulemaking help make that a
little more clear. I think that
the, the what the language is in
there is.
What is
normal
Farming, uh, that is not very
clear.
So let me just start, Mr. Chair
and Representative. This is the
language that's been in the
federal law.
And it's been interpreted over
50 years with case law, with
statutory interpretation.
And we talked uh representative
Santa Cortez had the same
question, and it was one of the
issues that certainly triggered
a lot of interesting discussion
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee, because you're right,
when you look at that as, as I
look at it as a, you know, a
lawyer looking at that language,
I'm like, wow, that's could be
all over the place. This is the
language that the industry here
in New Mexico want it. They
wanted it to track exactly
what's in the federal statute,
because it's all been
interpreted and everyone has
worked with it versus
The dangerous thing is if we
start to tweak those exceptions,
and we had a little bit of that
when this was introduced. We
pulled it all back and tracked
the Federal. OK, thank you. So,
uh, Mr. Chair of Senator, so, so
that goes back to the status quo
or established understanding.
Exactly. OK.
Um, one of the questions, uh,
That that was brought up to me
was uh
When you're dealing with EPA and
before uh the stents, you know,
before the second ruling, um,
really weren't concerned about.
And
necessarily.
Having
Uh, folks just go onto your
property because they could, um,
But now it'd be a little closer
to home, a statewide agency, any
concerns that uh folks have
private property that uh
there'll be more access to
regulators just to go on their
property because they in Arroyo
goes to the property.
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
you have a discharge permit, um,
there, there likely will be a
compliance inspector who comes
to the property to make sure
that that that you're
discharging in accordance to
that discharge permit. Um, if
you do not have a discharge
permit, and there is a complaint
that we receive um.
Somebody complains about
something being discharged into
the arroyo and we want to
investigate. We need your
permission to go onto your
property, or we need a court
order um to go onto your
property.
OK.
That's correct.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator.
Um
I, I
A lot has been talked about the
funding versus fees. I, I agree.
With the fact that we need to do
that through funding, in part
because this is gonna be a brand
new program.
And for us to have any real
oversight as a legislative body
uh, the ability to
the department accountable with
funding, whereas if it's all
internal, it's all fees.
I, I think we lose a lot of our
ability to
To hold accountable.
Uh, so I, I'm, I'm concerned,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Probably, uh, on, on the same
lines.
And maybe I'll just turn this
into a question. Um,
How do we have this is something
new to us in general. Do we have
the expertise or will we be able
to get the expertise to manage
this, how, how available it is
it to hire people who have this
type of knowledge to manage
this.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Montoya.
Good question, question we've
heard a number of times
throughout, through this process
and, and I've got a couple of
points to make in response to
it. One,
the environment department's
ability to be a competitive
employer in terms of salary and
benefits has improved
dramatically in the last year
and a half. What has changed
since then is that last year in
the 2024 legislative session,
you all appropriated $6.2
million in general fund and a
few million dollars in our fee
funds to support.
what we call appropriate
placement across the agency.
Thank you to you all and
specifically to the chair and
vice chair, um,
That funding supported our
ability to pay employees based
on their education and
experience in line with what the
state personnel office says they
are worth within their
classification.
Um
Since then, our vacancy rate has
dropped dramatically, uh, from
about 20% at the end of last
fiscal year to
Just this morning, I got a
report that said we have 621
filled positions. That's a 2.8%
funded vacancy rate, incredibly
low. So with the leadership
within the department to fight
for those resources for staff
with the leadership from the
legislature to support those
resources for staff. We've shown
that we can be a very desirable
place to work for 12, to the
specific expertise that people
have, uh, we think there are
lots of New Mexicans who are
very interested in
Protecting New Mexico's waters.
We know that you all think
that's a priority too. We see
the legislative conversations
going on about workforce
development in that field.
Um
The other thing I would say is
that we have a lot of really
good folks with federal
experience, uh, that might be
looking for work soon and the
state is targeting those people
through rapid hire events and
the Environment department is
very glad and eager to
participate in those, so that
that's how I'd speak to that.
Thank you. Thank you. um, yeah,
maybe we have we have job
placement program in New Mexico.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, uh, and, and
And Senator, so uh Mr.
Armstrong. So, but we would be
looking to folks that have have
done this work before.
I mean, we wouldn't just be, it
would be a job training program.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Montoya.
It will be a gradual build up
this program. We will have lots
of entry level folks looking to
come in, uh, our higher ed
institutions at uh New Mexico
State,
uh, sorry, it was you, you and
M, Highlands tech all have water
resources programs, uh,
educating New Mexicans, uh,
every year, and we are
a happy uh employer for those
people to look to. Um,
But yes, there are people who
have some immediate experience,
um, we've heard that some of our
colleagues in Region 6 have
already been downsized or let go
or accepted early retirement
offers, um, so we do know
there's that expertise
available. What Miss Lemon has
said and previously this in
previous committees though about
a buildup is that.
Yes, 50 people in the long run
is what we need to add, um, but
it's probably gonna be over a 3
to 5 year period to get there.
So thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, and, and, and Senator
Representative.
When we are gonna stand on this
program up.
Is there going to be a time of
duplication? Is there gonna be a
time of overlap or is there
gonna be a solid
Deadline and we go away from
federal involvement and then we
are running an entire program on
our own.
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
when we submit our application
to EPA, we will enter into an
agreement with EPA, which
defines that um.
That takeover of the federal
program, it will be a phased
program implementation, so we
will work probably over 3 to 5
years to to take over different
components of the Nipy program,
so we're looking at retreatment,
municipal wastewater treatment
plants, storm water, industrial
sites, so like there's different
components that we would be
taking over over that time
frame. It's not OK, all of a
sudden.
We're taking over everything.
OK, that, that is a concern that
I had, so, um,
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, and
I'm closing in at the end, end
of my questions here. Um, since
we are doing, uh, something that
Is managing to some degree the
federal waterways, are there any
federal dollars?
Available to help pay for some
of this. I mean, we're we're,
we're literally taking over a
bit of the responsibility of the
federal government here.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
will not receive additional
funding from the federal
government. We currently do
receive Clean Water Act grants
from the federal government as
state assistance grants.
That pays for a lot of our
surface water programs, not just
permitting. Currently we assist
EPA and the Army Corps with
their programs. So we have some
funding. It's around, I mean
between the federal grant and
some of our state dollars, it's
around 900,000 a year right now
that we're spending to help EPA.
Um, so we will not receive
additional funding from the EPA
but we will have those grants
that um we will continue to use.
OK. Last question, uh, Mr.
Chair. Um,
What do we think this is going
to cost? I mean, if we're, if we
are going to take this fully on
as a budgetary item. What, what
do we think it's going to cost?
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
our estimations like I've said
before and we've said in other
committees are around 50
additional FTE, so 60 FTE total,
um, and that equates to around
$8 million per year.
OK. Um, Mr. Chair, uh, uh, send
representatives, um,
Uh, I'm very concerned about the
rulemaking process. I I believe
that's been mentioned.
At least 3 times.
OK. Um,
I am concerned because I have
seen in the past, uh, that those
who are regulated sometimes
don't have the same seat at the
table.
That
People who want
entities to be regulated have.
I, I think it's very been very
disproportionate in the past.
Um, uh, for that reason, I'm,
I'm gonna withhold my support
today. I don't think you need it
to pass this along, um, more as
a
Just a statement.
Which is, uh, people who are
being regulated need to have a
need to have a voice.
And, um, and I think that is
something that goes well beyond
this today, um, I, I think uh
there
The cities, uh, municipalities,
uh, counties that have this is
really gonna affect them more,
uh, since they have the water
treatment plants, they're,
they're discharging directly.
Um, but those who, who are gonna
have, uh, let's say, uh,
A much lesser effect, but.
We'll have to comply, um, a
farmer's, ranchers in
particular.
Um
I just want to make sure that
that that
Just to state once again that
they have uh
a fair opportunity to be heard
and for their concerns to be
addressed. So with that, Mr.
Chair, that's, that's all I
have. Great. Thank you, San
Montoya. Thank you, Leor. Thank
you, Cha Ortez, uh, great
questions. We'll go back to you
for any closing comments and
we'll go to Representative
Garcia for the motion.
OK. Tim Garcia.
Mr. Charon move Duin's
recommendation on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 21.
OK, uh, it's been moved by Reson
Garcia, sign in by Russeurrola,
and also Representative Dixon.
Can we please take the role?
Representative Abeta? Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representativerola? Yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Represented small.
younger.
Your
OK, uh, by 5 to 4 vote, there's
that do pass on somejuary
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 21 and 22. Thank you all.
Thanks everybody for being here
your members.
OK, uh, members, I've texted uh
whip Padilla
we're seeing, let's give it just
a minute or two on Senate
Memorial Senate drug Memorial
one is amended. And I guess uh
Secretary Kennedy, are you here
for that?
No.
Um
OK
let's see.
OK, um,
Thank you.
Um,
senator, uh, let's go ahead.
We're gonna proceed in
subcommittee. We can go ahead
and get started with the
presentation. Uh, we can't take
a boat until we have a quorum,
but go ahead and, or no, excuse
me, sorry, Murphy is here. Uh,
please go ahead, uh, senator,
thank you, chair, and thank you,
uh, members of the committee. I,
I've been working very closely
with the energy, minerals and
Natural Resources Department.
And the economic development
department to take a look at
what can we do um about the um,
I would call it the messiness of
our forests right now.
Essentially, we need to clean
them up, but we also believe
that uh that's gonna help us in
a couple of ways. One is, um,
you know, take some of this, you
know, off the ground so that it
improves water quality, water
runoff, uh, watershedding, and
then also um uh reducing the
risk for all of these massive
wildfires that we've had here in
the state of New Mexico and
we're gonna probably continue to
have couple that with a and
economy and economic benefits by
doing this. We had an economy on
this and economic program on
this some years ago, and somehow
that's gotten away from us. So
essentially what we're doing is
instead of just jumping to
conclusions and making all
these, you know, profound
statements and here's how we
have to do it. I thought, let's
bring everybody together,
Ener economic development, all
the other interested parties and
and let's get a plan together
and then we'll come forward with
some legislation down the road.
Why would we want to do this is
again, economic development,
environmental, the environmental
benefits that I spoke of in.
ecosystem health, reducing
wildfire risk, improving water
quality and environmental
sustainability, resource
optimization, community
engagement, and then alignment
with our state priorities to, to
ensure that we're taking care of
that kind of stuff. So that's
essentially what this does. It's
a joint memorial, it sailed
through the Senate and we're
hoping that we'll get your
support here in the house.
Great. Thank you very much,
Senator. Uh, is there anybody
who wishes to make public
comment on please raise your
hand, 3 in the room, 2 online.
our usual. Is there anybody in
opposition?
Kate was just go to support
then, can I just say one last
thing? I'm sorry. The state
forester fully on board. She
just doesn't have to be
available right now to be here,
so thank you. Great, thanks.
Uh, good morning, Chairman,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the Public Service
Company in New Mexico.
And we believe um Senate Joint
Memorial one.
With the forest restoration, the
potential for economic
development and what we believe,
you know, from a P&M standpoint
is the vegetation management can
really help out with not only
the economy, but, you know what,
but also thinning out the forest
and preventing wildfires because
we, we've seen way too many
wildfires and even at PNM we're
really looking at ways how we
can um mitigate and prevent
wildfires, so we really look at
this as a as a
positive, so we support Senator,
Senator, Senate Joint Memorial
One. Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members. Camila Romero
with the New Mexico State Land
Office, the land Office supports
this memorial, increasing the
use of wind products would
directly impact and pace the
scale for forest restoration and
fuel reductions on state trust
land. Additionally, it has the
potential to generate revenue
for the beneficiaries of the
state land Office. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gillian Joyce,
representing Rocky Mountain
Farmers Union and our family
farmer and rancher members
across New Mexico. We strongly
support Senate Joint Memorial
One. We advocate for sustainable
forest management practices that
effectively, effectively reduce
wildfire risk, improve watershed
health and strengthen rural
communities and economies. This
memorial aligns perfectly with
these priorities by encouraging
collaborative approaches to
forest restoration that benefit
both.
environment and our rural
communities. Senate Joint
Memorial One could help protect
critical water sources that our
farmers and ranchers depend
upon, while simultaneously
creating economic opportunities
in forestry and wood product
industries for rural
communities. We urge you to
support Senate Joint Memorial
One to build a more resilient
New Mexico that protects both
our natural resources and our
agricultural communities for
generations to come. Thank you
for your consideration.
Great. Thank you.
OK, now we're gonna go online.
Uh, is there anybody online
who's in opposition?
Seeing no one, is there anybody
online who's in support.
seeing no one to the committee.
Any questions from the
committee?
Um
I don't see any, uh, we'll go to
a vote briefly, uh, Senator
appreciate some of the
amendments that were made, uh,
focusing on sustainability and
other pieces Senator, it's my, I
think we all acknowledge that
fire restoration, fire is a sort
of intrinsic part of our forest.
So it's not your goal to
eliminate fire on the forest,
correct?
Uh, no, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that excellent question. It's to
help better manage it, of
course, we didn't set the.
That was a song, wasn't it back
in the 80s did not start that
but at the end of the day, we
need to do everything we can on
the ground here in New Mexico to
make sure that it works for our
people here and I don't think it
can be lost also that this can
be a great economic benefit for
very rural parts of New Mexico
creating really good high paying
jobs for this kind of economy.
Uh, thank you. OK, uh thank you
for that and also just noting
it the, as the 4th most
biodiverse state, sort of that
biodiversity is also a key uh
economic and also cultural and
other benefits for the state. So
it seems that your memorial
works to balance that, as you
said, by bringing folks
together.
Garcia, uh, Mr. Chair, I move to
pass recommendation on Senate
Joint Memorial One.
OK.
There, OK, the 2nd, there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none, um.
Uh, I think we're good. Yeah.
Great. And we'll show McQueen
will show you support as voting
in favor of Senator Memorial One
this.
Oh, there we go. OK, uh, thank
you all very much. Thank you,
