State land office leases and
this will apply to the best oil
production tracks so the the
least terms are actually set out
in statute there's a range of
royalties that can charge this
w.
Thought that the range that
range is currently eighteen
point seventy five.
What what what's the bottom of
the
so the range is currently
eighteen point seventy five
percent the twenty percent this
increase the upper range to
twenty five percent this would
make us comparable to other
states
notably texas in what private
parties hurt
for
leases again over talking about
the the premium tracks the
effect of this bill with
increase revenue to langrip from
the phone after a few years
of about fifty million.
Impact over the life of the
lease in the oil gas leases stay
in effect as long as they're in
production so we have leases in
effect from the fifties where
the royalty rate was twelve and
a half percent of the average
effective rate for the state.
For me in basic
it doesn't make sense to charge
less.
As I said it's a cap not a
specific re
or floor only of course effects
future leases were not by the
fine.
The.
If wouldn't support royalty rate
of twenty five percent.
Building is built into the
statue.
And finally I just say th.
To maximise revenue from see
trust
in what we're doing here is
working with
the c land office neighboring
the state land office to carry
out their mission which is
reasoning.
The beneficiary.
This
realized life of th.
Mexico just a couple quick
points on this bill we just
stand in the respect of
opposition certainly appreciate
the stately of office yeah.
In this case I paid up those
builds it's a step too far in
just a couple points
most states are average
there was reach average between
sixteen.
Extra
percent
and yes that the texas has
twenty five percent but I just
want to stress it's not an
apples comparison
the new extra tax research
institute do the study recently
that that shows that the new
mexico operators actually eight
percent of overall taxes.
We feel this is just another
tack on top of that
people that
they do have small
more money that goes into
loyalties does her smaller
operators proportion so for that
reason we just stand it was.
All right gonna go online if you
could.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair mister
chairman legislators i'm john
krenshaw and president of the
new mexico well live federation
of the state told us in larger
sports and contributions
organization in new mexico the
federation strongly supports
house bill forty eight these
well and glass gas royalties for
last updated more than fifty
years ago when I was young
actually and this increase to a
maximum allowable rate of twenty
five percent his decades overdue
the radios corporable too and
it's competitive with those of
the other top petroleum
producing states are most
notably texas further the bulk
of these revenues are going to
dedicated and these will be good
new revenues are dedicated to
financial benefit financially
benefiting one of new mexico's
most pressing needs to support a
public education with that way
due to move though to eight ford
with the due pass vote thank you
very much
we were
we are doing opposition.
We have any but.
Remember the committee to pretty
well
accidental controlling other
policy.
Oh.
Good afternoon madame chair and
members of the committee can you
look five women with the real
granded chapter of this year
club standing here and strong
support of HB forty eight to
increase oil and gas.
Pleasing rates and new mexico
state plans haven't been
increased since the nineteen
sixties they increased to twenty
five percent realty rates on new
leases is on part with texas and
colorado
gas extracted from state lands
belongs to the people of new
mexico out to industry it's a
publicly held resource extracted
off public lands
in this case for private profit
but also for the beneficiaries
of the state land office and
that office and those beneficia.
Industry will claim that they'll
leave new mexico if they have to
pay but the only factors that
indicate where extraction will
occur is on the quality of the
oil the ease of access to it and
the price on the global.
Members of the committee on
charles speaking now
earth works to urge your support
for this bill
it's really a pretty simple
building of the issue raise the
money rates or not
and I think it makes very simple
fair simple issue afternoons to
smell as stated so much more el
public resources.
Public resource I just add that
the statement about taxes over
all comprehensively being more
in the excellent other states
clearly this if that is true
than it's evidence that the
rates and collective tax rates
really have very little impact
on the industry.
Because the industry is booming
consistently every month or at
least every few weeks there's
another new story another
assets by bigger company and
more investment in new mexico or
history so the industry is doing
just fine the way things are is
this is such a small marginal
rate for the industry but.
Thank you committee my name is
energy director with
conservation voters in mexico
and I just go the point th.
Thank you very much.
All right online research.
The.
Good afternoon representative so
my name's gluten wickle i'm an
environmentalist and an
electrical engineer specialising
in energy systems
I want to first speak to the
conservatives in the room I know
that conservatives believe in
free markets and are against
welfare
for decades the state land
office has been required to
ignore the free market and
participate in a welfare system
as the welfare system that
benefits the oil thousand.
Despite offices mandate to
maximize revenue the current law
requires them to grant oil
leases out of price that is well
below market rates the state is
leaving money on the table
even the new twenty five percent
royalty rate proposed in age
forty eight is below the market
rate that's the market rate to
charge on private land.
Usually I advocate to reduce
green house gas emissions
however this bill is not going
to impact emissions in a
meaningful way it won't reduce
the number of new wealth in new
mexico the spell is about
increasing revenue for the state
as everyone knows well in gas is
a boom in bus industry oil and
gas bus caused pain for the
legislature and for the people
of new mexico while
oil budget bus in the past might
seem minor compared to the big
bus that's coming over the next
ten to twenty years there I
would revenue provided from this
bill is important to allow new
mexico to build its rainy date
pass reserves so that we can
weather the big bust that's
coming in the next couple
docates
please pass age be forty eight
thank you for listening.
Yes good afternoon everyone
thank you chair of committee and
a sponsor and thank you for all
your work I am joined brown and
francis consister in the
executive director of new mexico
interferent power and light and
we are in support of a the state
land office getting a gas realty
rate increase it's been way too
long since this was done and it
really is for the common good
and that includes our children
and our school system it's also
a call to industry on our part
for ethical accountability and
fairness
yet I heard many people speaking
this morning many of those of
you on the committee about
concerns for children and so
this is something that we can do
for the children and for the
future of this state and allow
the state land office which has
the legal mandate to earn money
for education to do their job in
the name of the citizens and the
people here in new mexico so
thank you for supporting this
and for all of your work.
Yeah.
Thank good afternoon madame can
members of the committee my name
is page night and I am the best
policy doctor mexico with the
church of their stand in the
great bill forty eight
increasing the realty great per
newly says that they try plans
that escalate and
environmentally responsible and
would ensure that the language
permit fund generates as much
revenue as possible for
beneficiary their children and
school your increase transfers
and investment we think the
spanishers and the statement
office where this important bell
and we urge the part thank you.
Thank you
better by share and members of
the committee my name is tom
soleman I am representing three
fifteen new mexico and the six
thousand members but we have
throughout the state
I speak in false support of this
village before to increase the
future oil and gas realities for
years now new mexico has had a
big discount signed hanging on
the oil and gas that we sell and
while I look forward to winding
down all fossil fuel extraction
by
which the claimant crisis
demands it is just crazy in the
meantime to sell these public
assets to the oil and gas
industry at less than market
value the choice represented by
this bill it's simple should we
give excess profits from selling
our oil resources to the oil gas
industry or should it go to new
mexico schools
clear and it is to the schools I
urge the committee to vote to
pass this bill thank you.
Yes good afternoon chair
committee members my name is at
the inner crease to do blue i'm
an energy and environmental
engineer which means I look for
solutions to the problems we
humans have brought upon
ourselves especially toxic air
pollution in the current climate
crisis a retired navy commander
I raised my hand to support our
constitution and i'm a christian
all tell me to protect lives and
people need clean air in order
to live and thrive faster fuel
emissions account for ninety
percent of air pollution do you
want us to continue to breathe
toxic air that's what it comes
down to and of this bill doesn't
outright fix that it begins
reparations reparations that are
long overdue HB forty eight
points out the abuse of
financial advantage the oil and
gas industry has utilised to
keep our state government and
people's behold into their
product and industry despite
their own scientists warning a
future climate problems it's
about time to increase that
royalty rate reparations to the
state in the world need to begin
and I am in full support of this
bill thank you.
Good after a new madam coach
here and members of the
committee my name is jean
logsten and I represent the
league of women voters of new
mexico we stand in support of HB
forty the oil and gas future
royalty rate bill and here is
the reason why the league
believes that a fair tax must be
adequate to finance the
essentials of government the
state legislature should insure
that the land commissioner has
decided port needed to maximise
revenues and minimise
administrative costs while
protecting the environment and
preserving the long term value
of the land thank you very much.
The.
And
members of the of the community
but he was just
making as an individual
also
daughter
but we alemation
such consolidate school district
where I feel I know
forty eight will help many
students across.
The mexico especially
where we're all the time about
the the different
of the teachers
are you asking for full support
for house bill forty eight back
very much item.
Yes this is june persons madame
chair and honorable committee
members new mexico his last
billions of dollars in lost
revenue is over the past forty
years because our new mexico
legislator has not increased the
fair market rates for oil and
gas leases on new mexico's
public land there is so much
need for economic development in
new mexico that can be supported
by the new mexico government if
these lost revenues are captured
from oil and gas leases in new
mexico by simply raising the
fair market rate for oil and gas
leases on public lands to be
comparable with our neighboring
states of colorado and texas our
new mexico legislature has a
responsibility to help grow new
mexico's economy to left the
standard of living for all the
mexicans by acting
responsibility with you ditchery
fudiciarily in charging
comparable market rates for only
gas recess these are monies that
should be charged and made
available in the state budget as
oil and gas extracted from
public plans are meant benefit
the public good please vote for
HB forty eight oil and get out
of future royalty rates thank
you.
Uh was opposition it would just
need um
it was never states have a lower
role to rate and first fall the
correct rate in the mexico is in
fact lower.
All right.
Yeah.
Really quick in this area.
Some detective questions office
and that we're al.
Resources and confident they can
attorney questi.
Madame chair representative
that's correct so this is one
unique area where.
Thank you.
Last week.
Yeah.
Right.
I'm sorry.
I just.
You know I love.
Yeah.
A quarter.
You know.
A couple.
How how do you plan to
determine.
Share representative for small
as a new attorney that seems
short coming when it comes to
mathematics.
Appreciate that so
there's actually a point system
I were the state land office to
determine how to rates that
would be set the first kind of
question you ask is it in an
area to some which is
essentially an area that is
traditionally
exam.
They look at
what we're you know if they're
outside of the
restrictions on you might have a
friend here leaves and have
really low because it's in
explore what we're talking about
here is so development leases
and the point system that you
don't look the response volume
recovery rating bonus rating
exploration so every month we
have an engineers
or leasing folks in the
tracks that we're going to put
up for auction
comparable ones and say okay
well these are going for this
rate and there comes there's a
ranking system and if it was
into the category that we're
talking about today which is.
Mentioned
some five percent twenty
percent.
Okay.
We were
in.
What.
When representa.
And and.
Yeah.
Production.
Presented that is correct most
of our premiums.
At least uhm
you know I wouldn't know that
they they do come back to us
sometimes.
My production
uh they they come back to the
land office if they're not
producing for example just.
Where we had one track three
hundred.
Uhm it's a great course.
In the future this legislation
has passed put up for um.
The fiscal report in the
financial analysis from the
state land office
isn't talking are existing just
talking about the in that then
the title that um marginal
increase on this premium tracks
and keeping a mind then it takes
a couple of years for this track
screens production once a new
paying at that higher rate.
And then there's this tracks
could be in protection.
Significant impact over time I
would also note that that the
road tea payments go into the
laboratory permanent time in the
way from the phone
presumably additional funds so
there's a multiplyer effect on
the royalties or receive put in
like five invested and then
distributions from the labor
currently to the beneficiary so
that the network fit
over time it's quite sixteen.
There's been.
Representative I don't
guys you know they they do have
significant companies.
Regardless of statements
is twenty five percent in the
promotion producing.
And I think they
have about five thousand.
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Some of these.
Madame chairman representative
they do have a different type of
system but I think at its core.
It's what you charge
the market when there is.
Online
energy
that you know private party sell
leases.
Suggest that it is a hundred
percent apples for apples in
their areas.
Business
and texas
particularly with response to
the n.
It's not a purely open.
Where.
Exactly number with in this
context because it was you know
raised earlier as well.
What is it public resource that
we own a hundred percent of it
and work telling companies you
develop you seventy five percent
of this legislation just.
You know i'm not next but.
Thank you
thank you.
All of that.
Made representative it was
actually in the left ser there
is a summary by state tax rates
are in it less new mexico and
effective rate of weight
in texas.
Yeah.
Apologize it
on new mexico royalties and
state finances dated june twenty
eighth uh twenty two.
Thank you commission.
Federal.
Yeah.
Business.
More.
Representative I think that
there there is an interaction
there in some regards
the the federal government
recently increased their royalty
rate actually.
So they have updated there
and and you know there is a cost
of doing business you know
working with their ads a lot of
their leases are caught up in
negation you've got need you've
got slower turn around time for
permits so you know kind of
similar to your other question
about texas in new mexico there
are different
uhm.
Thank you
vision.
Yeah.
These these lands are.
Yeah.
Would have.
How do you.
I think it's absolutely correct
that there is likely that you
will see a decrease.
Eventually.
Well.
Twenty five percent.
Just
worse you know we were not able
to see precision with that
losses.
But you know decades going to
the way grant permit fund to be
an invested by.
You get much more
concerned about will they not be
developed that absolutely is a
possibility
to we're talking about.
So um
company but most likely.
The.
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Uh that does.
Uh see in the mexico earns money
from production of these lands
and they're not in production
then that least gets cancelled
and comes back to this so that's
them terrible and I I was just
that's not something we.
If this is in production least
these
medicare.
So
what I understand and I not sure
So
which you also.
I have seventies we haven't
increased the royalty rates.
So
I guess.
Mentioned regular definitely.
This discovery is the
realization of what the research
the period.
Oh.
So with this proposal
forty eight.
Represent we can find.
Five percent
increase
it's arguably twenty five
percent of the currently
increased but because what you
the maximum rates are not
necessarily with the rate that
the range with increase through
eighteen point seventy five to
twenty
from eighteen point seven five
so still that lower rate.
Yeah.
Okay.
In our I guess not.
Cost of inflation over.
Yeah.
So.
Yeah.
So.
We.
Size.
Madame chairman representative.
Considering.
In terms of the formula.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Um.
Yeah.
This was tremendous and was
released it would be a new.
If they are.
Um.
Uh
existing leases because it
wasn't in production and it was
released it would be creeping so
don't necessarily have the
potentially the same unless you
could be
if they weren't in protection
maybe you know there's a reason
for that maybe they're not going
to be the
winner three it's a new
document.
It seems like.
Yeah.
We do.
Sure the specific circumstances
you're referring to you know at
least this expire on their own
are not producing but they do h.
I don't
situation referring to.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We have
required.
Where lisas were issued you
know.
But the land office is trying to
do things differently than we
have in the past
concern.
Rich way.
Yeah.
You know whether they are
bonding.
The.
You know be to general.
You know.
An operator has a bond with l c
d that that's great but if we
need a well in the honestly
trust.
The contract.
You know we have to only work in
the framework that we have
authority and that's you know
our relationship with with the
last sea.
If there is.
You can get the heart of the
problem is
you know we have contracts with
less but maybe have been ten.
Great.
Go to the process of making sure
like we know who all those
interests are
you know
so I think this is there's
particular case you concerned
about happy to try to work
through with you and better
understand.
There is a population
with.
The.
Just representative.
The.
Not being the check
but let me limit that this is
her contract
provision.
The transit contract aren't
the most coming peace would be a
residential right or maybe corsa
real property but yeah you know
he don't pay your rent young
eighteen your insurance field
maintain the property
all these things are grounds for
terminating
so their legal contracts they're
enforceable
in the operator is concerned
about.
The lease has been under
somehow germany they have
recourse.
So I am aware
of.
I guess.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
I understand any.
Yeah.
So you have a leases returns.
Chairman representative so we're
talking about before production
has occurred um you know they.
I told during that time and he
had five years to produce and
once they start producing that.
We are.
Due to diligence you know we
reviewed eight hundred we talk
about eight hundred of our
leases
and only about twenty four of
them were cancelled the delta.
So are a total give.
Make money for the school kids
we're not trying.
Okay.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Stops producing we're not
cancelling it just.
Yeah.
Only twenty four so we we work
with companies who want to try.
Yeah those.
Only twenty four.
Is the
seven thousand uses.
You go through every single
determined weather.
History most of.
Yeah.
I think you said.
Very different there is a bigger
significant.
Have to.
Representative
because we have a contract.
Thank you for that.
And.
Mexico.
It's developed operations there
such less.
The.
The.
This.
Yeah.
Don't see how you.
Yeah.
Your.
I I was told we don't have the
front I mean that maybe there's
some additional.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Management and representative
i'm you know
there's this overlap in practice
but the reality is you know
we're separate agencies we have
separate statutes I think the
stronger point.
Insurer
to clean up to the extent that a
crisis.
Deposit so
you need to.
The.
That we're doing
Yeah.
Wouldn't want to characterize
there's no impact because the
stronger more bonding that they
have and if they are actually
pulling those which is an
important aspect and utilizing
those proceeds to the extent
that that results in a work on
state.
That's a positive thing and that
would help.
Yeah.
The.
Representative you're talking
about what the overall rate
would be in this dructure of
what our policy.
We would you know take into
account what assurances are on
the side but but ultimately you
know we need to have.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Madame chairman representative
uh we are.
You know that's what kind of led
initially to us doing a review
of our.
Everything and we realize that
was
also needed to review what.
Thank you manager just imposing
i'd like to observe there's
there's been good discussion or
discussion is about things not
in this bill right so other
practices operations of the same
office
for this is going for it
charging a comparable market
rate in earning money for the
same skill I think you're a
permanent phone in the
beneficiary
thank you matcher.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
The.
Representative yes
thompson.
The motion carries.
Thank you.
