Representative Hernandez.
Representative Bachman B. Hill.
Representative Jones.
Representative Romero.
Uh, chair de la Cruz.
Present we have Quorum.
Good morning, everyone.
This morning we're gonna start
off with HB 97 insurance against
unemployment. Thank you proceed.
Yes, OK, this morning I am a
motorist. I have a whole lot of
information for a Senate bill
didn't get these analyses from
tax and Revublic Safety from
DPS. So, for starters,
We all know that liability
insurance is required in the
state of Mexico at minimum
coverage of 2550, and we all
know what liability insurance
does. Liability insurance
protects another driver should
you be in an accident, they're
dam.
a package deal when, and that
covers you.
If you get in an accident with
someone who does not have
insurance, and it sounds that
it's actually quite complex. So
come on this journey with me.
Huh, so I'm going to call
underinsured, uninsured motorist
for the purposes of this
presentation.
So, UM Insurance provides
coverage in 3 unexpected ways,
apart first.
First, most people don't know
that liability insurance that
you're required to have can
exclude things like road rage,
other deliberate acts by a
driver.
And this is actually why I
brought this bill because that
particular experience is
personal to me.
When my partner, who was the
passenger in the seat that I was
driving got shot through our car
door. I would not have covered
that, if that's the only view in
coverage. And that incident was
covered, but that act of the
under the shooter driver's
liability policy.
Meaning that can exclude in
instances like that from your
coverage.
Second, UM coverage also follows
you, and that means if you're
crossing the street and an
uninsured driver runs you over,
you're still covered even though
you aren't in a car. And third,
if you're in someone else's car
and they don't have UM coverage.
And that car is hit by an
uninsured driver, your UM covers
you.
So this bill would require that
drivers in New Mexico have UM
and so all of those scenarios
would be covered.
So it's really important to know
that this bill does 4 things.
First, it requires that anyone
who purchase purchases
underinsured, uninsured motorist
coverage gets the underinsured
coverage they pay for.
So what does that mean?
Well, the second half of UM, as
I mentioned, was underinsured
coverage. So if you're hit by a
driver who does have insurance,
but your medical bills or lost
wages are more than the limits
of the driver's policy, you have
additional coverage for the
remaining damages under your UM
coverage. And this doesn't mean
that you get double recovery.
Double recovery is when you
recover 2 times for the same
bills and the same damages. And
underinsurance coverage just
means that if you have $50,000
in
bills and the driver who hit you
only had $25,000 in liability
insurance, your policy would
cover the balance. If you only
had a 100 like 10,000 or any
amount less than $25,000 in
damages. You don't need to make
a claim against the underinsured
coverage.
So right now
If you purchase 25,000 $50,000
of underinsured coverage.
You actually get not, you don't
get any underinsured coverage at
all. And here's why.
So right now, when you buy
underinsured coverage, it is
offset by the amount of the
other driver's liability policy.
So in other words, my
underinsured coverage is
canceled out by the amount of
the other driver's liability
insurance. So if the other
driver has insurance, it will
always at least be 2550 because
that is what's required by the
state, and that's the lowest
amount that can be sold in New
Mexico.
So the second thing that this
bill does is it prevents
taxpayers from picking up the
cost of medical care needed as a
result of uninsured drivers. So
I'm gonna have a whole lot of
numbers thrown at you. Please
stay with me and you'll feel
free to ask me questions as we
go.
So in 2023,
There were 419 fatal motor motor
vehicle crashes in New Mexico.
13,150 crashes with non-fatal
injuries and 29,000,200 property
damage only crashes. So that
means if we add the 400 and
13,000 together, that means that
in the year 20 that there were
13,569 cases of car accidents in
New Mexico that ended in a
fatality or injury.
And according to the OSI,
The uninsured driver rate in New
Mexico is 24.9%.
So based on these values, we can
estimate that approximately
3,398 of those fatal or injury
crashes were caused by uninsured
drivers in 2023 or involved in
uninsured driver.
So, and also according to a
statement by the governor very
recently on February 27th.
She said that 40% of New
Mexicans are on Medicaid, and
that's according to the Los
Alamos Daily Post. So therefore,
the likely number of people on
Medicaid injured by uninsured
drivers in 2023 was 13,051.
And according to the National
Highway Safety Traffic
Administration, the average cost
of medical treatment for being
injured in a car accident injury
is $15,000 and we know that
those numbers can skyrocket, um,
depending on how injury, how
severe the injuries are.
So only using the average cost
that 15,000. The likely cost to
Medicaid in New Mexico in 2023
resulting from car crashes by
uninsured drivers was
$20,272,086 that had to be
covered by the taxpayers.
So keep that in mind.
Third
This bill would prevent hidden
charges by requiring that
coverage be sold by the vehicle.
So a lot of insurance companies
have been found liable for
selling UM coverage per policy,
but then charging the
policyholder per vehicle. So in
other words, insurers have been
charging more for unstacked.
UM coverage than they should be.
And this gets really complicated
really quickly and that's why I
brought my expert who I'll have
introduced himself in a bit
here.
So he can answer more questions
about that. And lastly,
The 4th thing this bill does is
it reduces or eliminates
litigation over consumer
rejections. So right now, the
law permits consumers to reject
UM coverage if they don't want
it, but that gets very
complicated.
Insurers have had to pay out
tens of millions of dollars in
cases in which the court found
that consumers rejected UM
coverage because they were
misled or improperly advised to
reject that new insurance.
So I'm almost done, but the very
last thing I need to tell you is
what this bill does not do.
It does not limit the business
of an insurer.
It does not tell the insurers
what they can or should charge.
Insurers are not required to
provide coverage without
charging a reasonable fee for
it.
And insurers will, which we
anticipate will lead to lower
overall costs for consumers, but
this bill explicitly does not
attempt to regulate or limit how
insurers set their premiums. And
with that, Mr. Chair, I will let
my um expert witness introduce
himself now.
Thank you.
I'm Jeff Romero, uh.
Local attorney, native New
Mexican. I've been litigating
insurance issues since I was
licensed in 1991. I've been
analyzing these issues since
1989 when I was in law school. I
was intern to house counsel for
State Farm for 2 sessions.
And so I, my job there was to
digest everything that came to
the legislature and through the
courts. And so I've been very
involved in deep analysis of
these issues, but after being
licensed, I've been litigating
these issues and this bill.
Seeks to fix perceived problems
of misrepresentation to
consumers and overcharging of
consumers, billing them for
coverage that they're not
getting.
The issue that was identified as
one of stacking first of all,
uh, this bill requires a per
vehicle selection.
So insurers can't hide a per
policy premium and bill on every
vehicle and then get a stacking
rejection. That's happened over
the course of 30 years when
insurers wanted to build premium
on every vehicle and get
stacking rejections. The court
said, no, that's repugnant
conduct. You can't build for
something and then not provide
it.
Over the course of time, the
insurers tried to shift and hide
the premium.
On their declarations page and
say hey, we're only charging one
premium. It's included for all
other vehicles. But when you get
into the analysis into their
underwriting, the extra premium
charges are there.
And they then shift again to try
and hide it in a different way,
and we end up in years, in fact,
decades of litigation.
The tens of millions of dollars
in
Litigation payouts come as a
result of this conduct, these
practices affect all New
Mexicans. One of the areas in
which I practice is class action
work because all New Mexicans, I
can't represent everyone
individually.
So I do bring class actions to
make right what was wrong.
This bill seeks to correct that
by making the insurers offered
the coverage on each vehicle.
And they will get what they pay
for. They will get
Stacked UM coverage, what they
pay for, they're already being
charged on each vehicle, but not
getting the full coverage. The
other part that takes care of
consumers is that everyone, most
people when they hear the, the
term underinsured motors
coverage.
They think, well, an
underinsured motorist is one who
has insurance but not enough to
pay all of the damages they
caused to me.
The way that our statute is
currently worded, it doesn't
work that way because of the
definition of underinsured
motorists in our statute. The
offset.
At the representative referred
to is applied. So if, for
example, you have $25,000 in
underinsured motors coverage,
you never get that because it's
offset by whatever the other
driver has in insurance
coverage.
If you have 100,000 underinsured
motors coverage, you never get
that because whatever the other
driver has in liability coverage
reduces your coverage.
So by changing the definition,
That offset won't be available
anymore and consumers will get
what they expect. The amount of
coverage that it's stated on
their declarations page that
they're paying for now, but is
subject to an offset. They pay
for it. They just don't get the
full amount. Uh, so that's what
this bill does in terms of the
competitive rates, uh, the way
that insurance, uninsured motors
coverage is priced now is
tries to manipulate the choices
of the insured. Insurance
companies dislike uninsured
motors coverage and they hate
stacking because they're
insuring against the unknown,
they're insuring against the
drive-by shooter, the drunk
driver, they don't like it. So
they don't really want to sell
that kind of coverage and they
don't want to sell it at higher
limits. What they like to sell,
Allstate is a prime example of
this. There's a case pending in
the Supreme Court is minimum
limits, non-stack coverage. Why
do they like to sell that?
Cause they bill on every car and
there's a 75% likelihood that
that coverage will be wiped out
when the client, the insured is
hit by uninsured motorist. So
it's almost free premium. The
strong likelihood is that never
gets touched. Everything else
they don't like, so what do they
do? They price it to encourage
rejection.
So the current pricing on
uninsured motors coverage is
what we call rejection pricing.
They're manipulating or
motivating insured to reject it.
And how do you get somebody to
not buy something, price it too
high. They price that high, they
price the minimum limits low,
that's what gets picked and it's
a really good bet for the
insurers.
By changing the definition, not
allowing the offset and
mandating UM coverage on the
policies, the pricing becomes
competitive. Everybody who
drives has to buy insurance.
There's a market and an insurer
for almost everybody, 25% of the
people either can't afford or
choose not to buy insurance.
But they'll have to buy it. And
the insurers will have to
compete.
Because if they are going to
sell a policy, they have to
compete with the rest of the
market. They can't engage in
rejection pricing.
I'm happy to answer any
questions that you would like.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. With that,
we stand for questions.
And if you wish to speak. OK.
Hi, I'm Damon Hudson. I'm a
trial lawyer here in Santa Fe,
representing primarily injured
people, specifically often in
car accidents, uh, being a
traveler is important because it
ensures justice to people when
they are injured. The, the
simple thing I really like about
this bill is that frequently
clients come to me, they pay for
insurance. I'm diligent. I've
been paying for 20 years, and
they get hit by somebody,
Grandma's parked at a stoplight.
She gets hit in the in the back.
And what happens, she doesn't
have any uninsured underinsured
motor. She has no protection, no
coverage. At the end of the day,
this allows people to get
coverage and compensation for
their uh for their injuries that
they have been paying for. So
I'd hope you'd vote in favor.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, just as a brief
reminder, if you speak or when
you
button to speak, make sure you
turn it off when you're done.
Everyone, please. Is there
anyone online in favor of this
bill?
No, Mister Jimmy.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition to the to speak,
please line up behind the
presenters.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association,
and we stand in opposition to
the bill, uh, APCIA is concerned
about affordability, and that's
our concern about this bill.
What this bill does is it takes
away a consumer's choice to
either pay for uninsured
motorist or to reject it. It
helps them control how much
they're paying for insurance.
This bill would force everyone
to pay for that insurance, that
will in turn
cause
folks to have to pay more for
insurance. We all know that
uninsured motorists are an issue
in New Mexico. The numbers are
really high. We believe that
this proposal has the real
potential to make that problem
worse, to make it more expensive
for folks to buy auto insurance.
They will no longer be able to
control how much they're paying
for insurance, and understand
that uninsured motorist coverage
in New Mexico is a large, large
portion of the auto premium that
people are paying, and, you
know, average numbers for auto
insurance with
One of our members is about $300
a year. If you add those numbers
up, you're gonna, you have a
real potential to make the
situation worse. There's lots of
concern by our members based on
this proposal. Please vote no.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ann Conway, and I
represent State Farm Insurance,
and we also stand in opposed to
this bill for the reasons that
Mr. Moore has described. I want
to make a couple of points. We
did also for State Farm run the
numbers on this bill, and it
would be approximately a 38%
increase for our policyholders.
Also, I note in the FIR that the
superintendent of insurance has
indicated
that this would cause premium
increases.
Currently, we all are able to
reject or accept uninsured
motorists coverage and probably
all of us uh uh accepted. Um,
it's important coverage, but to
mandate it and cause the
increase in premiums could
increase the number of uninsured
motorists, and quickly on this
um issue of offset.
If I get in an accident with Mr.
Moore, and he has 25,000
liability insurance, my damages
are 100,000. I have 100,000 in
his liability will pay the 25
and you will pay the 75. So
it's.
Thank you. Do we have anyone?
No, Mister Chairman,
Thank you. Questions from the uh
Peter Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and thank you for your
presentation. Um, I have a
couple of questions.
Um
So basically we're, this bill
would mandate.
To raise that everyone purchase
the uninsured motorist.
Insurance at a certain amount.
Is that correct?
that a minimum amount of, you'd
be required to carry that the
same way.
Thank you for that. And um,
I, I heard a bill last night and
commerce actually.
Where we, we talked about this
uninsured motorist.
Uninsured mortars is the
problem.
It's not the people that have
insurance, that's the problem.
It's the uninsured motorists
that are the problem. So,
mandating people that are
already buying insurance.
The increase of 38% we heard in
the audience.
Um
Do you think that's fair, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Leader, um, I'm
not sure which part of that to
address first, cause I was also
in, um, that bill, this bill is
somewhat different because we
are numbers what statistics they
can or cannot use to um assess
risk of a client, um, I also
agree with you that uninsured
motorists are the problem, which
is why I think, um, I agree that
uninsured motorists.
will cover you. It's about
uninsured motorists does nothing
to protect the interests or
assets of the uninsured driver
who hits you. They get nothing.
Through your uninsured motorist.
They are not made whole at any
point. I also have, um, some
significance by 43.
1%, um, those numbers are based
on that disincentivizing pricing
that you have uninsured
motorists. Uninsured motorists
is the most expensive insurance
coverage out there.
For insurance carriers. It is
the best return on investment
for the consumer. And if they
have to start competing with
other insurance carriers to
offer consumers the best price.
They really don't want that,
which is why they're here in
force.
Chair Representative Armstrong.
The 38% that you just heard is
somewhat State Farm State Farm
itself already engages one of
the practices that were
Promoting in this bill that's
the per vehicle selection. They
already do that.
And the 38% increase would not
be an increase to people who are
already purchasing uninsured
motors coverage. There would be
an added charge to people who
have rejected it, but the 38% is
based on them not having any
premium now. And the rejection
type pricing where they're
incentivizing people to reject.
Important too in this bill is it
gives a tiered option for
insured to purchase the level of
coverage that they want. They
don't have to buy uninsured.
coverage equal to their
liability limits. They can
reject all the way down to the
minimum limit is 25, 50. And
then they'll have something when
they buy it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for those answers, um,
you know, I'm, I am, um.
I'm, I'm about consumer
protections, but I'm also about.
Consumer choice.
Me having
Being able to make the choice if
I want to carry that insurance
or not. Um, I think it comes
down to, like I said before,
this is the uninsured motorist
problem. It's not an insured
motorist problem.
And I really feel like
Um
The insurance issues that we
have across the state.
Whether it's liability, whether
it's medical malpractice,
whether it's um.
Uninsured motorists, medical
malpractice, car insurance, uh,
uh.
Any kind of insurance.
We, I want to be able to make
that choice for myself. What
kind of insurance am I going to
carry and what do I need? No
matter what happens.
An uninsured being hit.
By an uninsured motorist is the
uninsured motorist's fault.
But I'm still gonna pay.
I'm still gonna pay.
The insured, the ones that are
insured are still gonna pay.
And, uh, quite frankly,
I don't normally say this, but
I'm gonna say it today.
Have attorneys sitting with you
at the table.
Who will actually benefit. I
have a problem with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
done.
Mr. Chairman, I would like a, a
chance to respond to that, if I
may, yeah. Uninsured motorists
are absolutely the price of New
Mexico drivers be left high and
dry is a significant problem. I
would also say that full
coverage in, but most
importantly, um, or Mr. Chair
and Leader Armstrong, I'm really
glad that you mentioned like,
because I, if you really like
him to instance, not make if
this bill goes through.
representative
Uh, I appreciate that concern
Representative Armstrong. I
Truly have been litigating my
entire career to put myself out
of business.
I bring class actions to bring
relief back to all New Mexicans
because I cannot represent them
all and this particular bill.
is likely to clarify the
problems that we've experienced
that result in these class
actions. It's a ridiculous
statement to some to say I'm
trying to litigate myself out of
work, but I've been trying to
litigate myself out of this work
for 30 years because I wanted it
to be right for New Mexicans.
The class action work.
It generates money, it generates
income for me and dozens of
lawyers. This bill takes that
away if the insurance companies
can will do it right. And I, I
want that. It's an altruistic
goal for me.
To do this right for New
Mexicans so they get what they
pay for. I'm looking to sunset
my career in this litigation. So
New Mexicans are taken care of
just so that this panels where
what my motivations are.
Thank you, Representative Doe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, so,
I'm, I'm wondering if.
It, I'm thinking about like
mortgage companies, mortgage
companies, they deduct the
insurance and your taxes, it's,
it's rolled into your payment
and when, when folks have a a
loan on their automobile's
looked at at the the carrier of
the loan.
Uh, address, you know, like, as
long as you have a, a, a loan on
your car.
Why not roll in the insurance
into the payment.
Like there is there a way to
hold the, the person purchasing
the vehicle who's refusing to be
insured, hold them responsible.
Instead of putting the burden on
the folks who are already.
Doing what the law requires.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Finance companies already re
require insurance, so they don't
go beyond.
don't need it and if it might
influence
Sailability of the loan, they
don't want it. All they want to
make sure of is their loan for
that car is covered.
In terms of making the wrongdoer
pay.
Uninsured motors coverage is a
good opportunity for this
reason. There's something called
subrogation.
So when an insurance company
pays for that wrongdoer.
They can then sue the wrongdoer
and take payments over time.
The person has a medical bill,
the person who's out lost wages,
they can't afford payments. They
can sue the tortfeasor by
getting $50 or $100 a month
doesn't help them immediately.
But the insurance company can,
and they do collect that money
back from the wrongdoer. So in,
in this vehicle, the incentive
to bring the suits actually
makes the wrongdoer accountable
in the long run.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. Thank you
for that explanation, um, but,
but I mean.
I
We can mandate that the coverage
be sufficient at that, at that
point for the, for the person,
I, I mean, if the uninsured
motor, if the uninsured
motorist.
Has adequate insurance.
That resolves this issue, does
it not? And we would, as the
lawmaker and as the people who
are determining what the rules
would be, why wouldn't we just
set that as an adequate
expectation
at the lending.
Thank you representative uh.
I imagine it could be done at
that point. Uh, the lender just
has no incentive to make that
offer. If it's required at the
point of lending, that will
provide uninsured motorist
coverage, but only on financed
vehicles, not on vehicles that
are already owned.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I,
I do understand that that would
be the, the, the, the.
the gap.
But we could just be.
instead of putting it on the,
the citizen who is following the
law.
Chairs representative. It would
still fall back. He would be
born just in a different manner
and then create the gap that you
discuss. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And then I, I would
like to go a little bit more
into detail on the, you were,
you were saying that you
wouldn't be able to do different
policies on different vehicles.
So, and I understand you
correctly, so we've got like a
four wheeler that my husband
used for huntering, hunting,
that is a vehicle you would
require me to carry uninsured
motors, uh, when he uses it to
hunt in the hea.
Um
Did I understand that correctly?
Chair representative. No, the,
the mandatory financial
responsibility Act.
Mr. OK. So, Mr. Speaker, and a
representative. So would that
apply, so it wouldn't apply to a
dirt bike.
Chair and representative unless
it's a dirt bike that is
licensed to be operated on a
highway as well. So, uh, so
misrepresentative.
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
my husband's dirt bike that we
haul on a trailer.
To the mountains to ride.
And, and we're not encountering
other vehicles generally.
He would then have to carry an
insured motorist insurance on
the trailer and the dirt bike.
Chair and Representative, know,
the dirt bike if it's designed
for off-road use, not for use on
a public highway and it's not
licensed with a plate.
If, if it's excluded from the
vehicles that are operated on a
highway, then it wouldn't be
required. The trailer is a
different issue and I apologize.
It's insured when it's attached
to a vehicle. OK.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I mean, Mr.
Chair, so, so.
If I, we've got a really
That we take to the lake.
So
That's gonna have to have
uninsured motorist insurance on
it.
Um, so
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Um
It's, it's interesting to me
that.
I think the most ironic comment
in this is that.
You're choosing for me what is
best for me when I would like to
continue to make those choices
for myself.
And that you're choosing for me
what is best for me when I have
a different feeling about
different vehicles that I own.
Why all vehicles instead of why
can't the consumer continue to
choose which ones? I mean, the
vehicle that I put 40,000 miles
a year on the highway.
I, we have an insured motor.
Motor vehicle insurance on it.
But the one that we take to the
mountains, you know, we put.
200 miles a year on it. We
don't.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
You are already required to
carry liability insurance on
every adding you uninsured motor
Jeep's notoriously windowless
vehicles, so, and also protects
the taxpayer 3 taxpayers.
Like paid out 220 in Medicaid
care. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative. The
difference is is that when I go
to the mountains, population
density is probably one person
per square mile, maybe.
Maybe, and when we're at the
lake.
You're not moving more than, I
mean, I don't know the last time
that, I mean, people might drive
their their vehicle, their jeep
might sink in the roof in the
lake.
But I I I don't see collisions.
inside the state parks. I mean,
we're going very, very slow and.
It, it just that that part does
not make sense to me. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, I think I need to chew on it
just.
So when I purchase a and then I
go down to motor vehicle
division to get the license.
you.
So
You know, just kind as you get
to the point, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I think that's
Maybe we need to have a way
insurance stays in effect.
That's the thing.
And um
Then we catalyst for the
problems so um I also Mr. Chair,
I.
I don't want a man. I mean,
we've just done so much of that.
If we look at the number that
was stayed at 38% increase in.
the cost of a 38% increase for
policyholders.
I just wantsibility someone who
effect as long as the person. I
do, I do share some of the
concerns already said, I
understand that, but I don't.
Yeah, I, I do have an charitable
metal.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. Um.
So
I mean we've talked a lot about
choice and
Um, but I want to go to what I
think is important from the
Department of Public Safety. And
I was wondering where we rank in
terms of uninsured motorists in
the state.
Thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um.
We are one of the highest at
believer #2 in the country for
uninsured motorists.
And Mr. Chairman and, and
Representative, um, when
somebody is the victim of an
accident, um, and the
responsible party doesn't have
insurance, financially, what
does that mean for the victim?
Financially Chairman Romero,
that means insurance.
If they damaged nothing.
Past what they.
And, and Mr. Chairman and
Representative, um, if somebody
is to get into
A horrible accident. There's um
ambulance called all sorts of
services, um,
You're saying that the victim,
um,
Uh, is going to bear the cost of
that. Um who else might bear the
cost of ambulance services,
medical services that would be
provided if
The, the responsible party is
uninsured.
Yes, Mr. Chair and Chairman
Romero, those nario, and I
didn't even give you all the
numbers in the initial
presentation, so the average,
the average inpatient
hospitalization is $57,000 and
if this were to happen in a
remote area, an air flight bill
is $50,000. So, um, cases
involving serious injuries like
fractures, traumatic brain
injuries, those costs can exceed
$100,000 and it's not covered if
an uninsured driver, if the
person who's the victim is on.
Medicare, medical costs get put
off given the fact that one in.
could be that, that expensive.
That's fair.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I think that's
one of the things that's being
left out that you're making very
clear in the Department of
Public Safety is also making
very clear in their analysis of
the bill, is that all of the
costs associated with uninsured
isn't directly like me on the as
the consumer, but it could come
indirectly to cost to the state,
um, in terms of all the care
that might be associated legal
proceedings that are associated
with um
Um, uninsured motorists, so
there might be a cost on the
individual. However, there's
also indirect costs on us as
people living in the state, um,
having to absorb the costs of
other people not having
uninsured um coverage. I think
the other thing too is that, you
know, I'm a car enthusiast, and
I have a an old car and big
steel box and um I would
appreciate that others that
don't have the sort of impact
control and the safety features.
that we have in modern cars, um,
also, even though I travel in
it, um, uh, sporadically that if
I were to get into an accident
that it doesn't have those safe
safety features of modern cars,
which are dangerous for me as
well as others on the road, even
though I drive it sporadically,
so having this sort of coverage,
um, um, I think it's, it's super
important no matter the the how
much the vehicle gets utilized,
so um.
I appreciate you bringing this
forward and I look forward to
supporting it. Thank you, Mr.
Last but not least.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I believe,
uh, uh, Representative Barrego.
have a real strong voice so you
don't have to lean in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
Representative, thank you for
bringing this forward. I too
also appreciate this
legislation.
Very much needed.
Especially in, in, in my
community.
First off, Mr. Chairman,
Representative.
A real life scenario.
I too am a victim of of this
incident.
Um
But it's not a person.
It was a a wildlife animal.
When I had liability insurance.
Um
driving, driving through the
mountains.
I, I hit, and uh uh an animal
and
Uh, a deer, and I was left.
You know, with
The cost, my insurance company.
You know, couldn't help me.
No one could help me.
You know, I was, I was left out
of pocket to pay for everything,
including I'm medical bills.
And so what would this
Scenario
Mr. Chairman, Representative
with this legislation help help
me in or anybody in my community
in this scenario.
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for that question. I have,
Mr. Romero.
Mr. Chair Representative,
unfortunately, the answer is no,
uninsured motors coverage
protects against the dangers of
uninsured motorists.
Wildlife, they're not operating
a motor vehicle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, another scenario, Mr.
Chairman, I, I, um, had gone
back to the Northern Navajo, uh,
where.
100,000 people
Attend this event.
And luckily for me, I, I was in
a rental car.
Uh, when I came back home.
And I got T-boned.
The driver of this vehicle.
Uh, did not have insurance, uh.
He had a different license
plate.
When Navajo police
Sergeant told me that they
actually can't do nothing
because Navajo law has not.
Does not require anybody to have
insurance.
And and it's, it's, it's really,
uh, uh, you know,
The wild west out, out, um, uh,
you know, especially in my
community, it's so many people.
Just, you know, I, I, I really
don't understand, Mr. Chairman,
uh, it's it's just a factor that
that.
I, I feel, um.
The peace of mind.
Well, um, I, I see here
chairman, uh, and, and again,
luckily for me, it it was a
rental car and we didn't have to
go through as much.
Um
Much, uh,
Financial risk.
And, and Mr. Chairman, uh,
I'm just uh.
Trying to understand, you know,
The data that we that we're
getting about.
Um
The uninsured motorists in the
state of New Mexico.
Uh, also, I, I feel, Mr.
Chairman, that, that, that
number is missing, especially
like in in tribal communities
where, you know, there are, you
know.
gaps there and, and, and, um,
and
I would like to get more
information.
On how, you know,
We could, we could better
Uh, protect more, more people,
especially the high medical
costs, uh, I, I have heard.
Mr. Chairman, um, uh, accidents
of
Of, of, of people having to
Um, pay, pay for that, you know,
and it, it is a reality because,
um,
And
And um
Trying to trying to also, Mr.
Chairman, see how
Um
Has, has this been done in any
other state, Mr. Chairman
Representative?
Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Romero.
He represented Mr. Chair
Representative, my understanding
at last counts is that there are
22 state 3 jurisdictions that
have mandate.
Thank you, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, good morning.
Um, really interesting scenario
here, um, and
You know, I'm somewhat torn
between this.
And I have to, I mean, when I go
back and I read our committee
analysis report where it says
that we are 4th.
Highest rate of uninsured
motorists in the nation, and
then if you read further down.
It says um.
Based on recent filings, filing
data, the OSI estimates
additional cost of coverage
would result in a 16% increase
for full coverage policyholder,
and 43% rate increase for policy
holders with only minimum
required coverages.
OSI is concerned that increased
rates to the UMUIM requirements
may lead to driver's foregoing
insurance coverage altogether.
Therefore, exasperating
uninsured motorists problem in
New Mexico.
And so that does concern me, uh,
especially since there's no one
here from OSI, um, to discuss
this.
But
You know
If this is implemented, they're
basically saying that insurance
rates will increase.
And
You know, I, I, I believe that
it would have been a good idea
to have them here.
To substantiate what they're
saying here, and, and that does
concern me.
Um, OK, there is someone in the
back. Could you?
we can't do that.
OK, let me go on then. Let me go
on and um.
Talk a little bit more about
what some of my concerns are
with regard to that, Mister
Chair and Representative in
2023, New Mexico's poverty rate
was 17.8%, uh, which is the 3rd
highest in the United States,
and then it goes on to talk
about children under 18, which
we know there's a lot of drivers
that are under 18, 13.7%, uh,
I'm sorry, 25.3% of children
under 18 lived in.
poverty and then 13.7% or 65 or
older, and the reason that I
raised that issue, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative is because we
are also headed in a direction
where we're seeing those numbers
are increasing for poverty rate,
and, you know, people are.
And, and this concerns me
greatly. People are concerned
about whether they're gonna pay
their insurance or where they're
gonna buy a dozen eggs. I mean,
literally.
And with the tariffs going into
effect today, um, by the way,
um, you know, we're gonna see a
lot more people.
In this poverty rate, I, I
believe.
And that, and that concerns me
because now we're talking about
requiring and mandating.
Insurance coverage for uninsured
motorists.
What do I mean, you know, people
are concerned about whether
they're gonna buy their
medication or whether they're
gonna, I mean, I, do you wanna
comment on that?
Representative and Mr. Chair,
Mr.
Chair Representative a person
cannot pay.
The insurance or cannot pay for
insurance when they have an
accident, we pay for, so we're
paying out of pocket when they
don't pay, um.
I believe somebody gestured that
OSI is in the room. We did have
a conversation with OSI before
we brought this bill forward and
OSI was supportive of that bill,
um, and so their numbers don't
necessarily reflect that to
offer public comment. So Mr.
Chair, if you are amenable to
give OSI an opportunity to
comment and to have, um,
we will hold this bill till
Thursday. Thank you. Thank you,
members of the committee.
We are now moving on to.
HB 475 Transportation Trust
Mr. Chair, members of the
introduction of uh his.
Um, yeah, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. Um, I'm Clinton
Turner. I'm your uh economist
for council service and as any
member of the council service
needs to um know that um we're
not in favor or in opposition of
any legislation before you.
We're only here for any
technical assistance that we can
be of an assistance.
Thank you very much. So it's
Groundhog Day today. Um, I have
brought a transportation trust
fund row. Uh, we're back again.
Transportation Trust Fund in New
Mexico.
And, um, that fund started, I
think it was 20.
But as we all have heard many
dollars and how they got from
such a relatively feeder avenues
for funds to get in, uh,
proceeds. So, uh, the, um, and
I'll go with the money in the
trust fund it be limited to 5%
rolling average, and I think
provide that those funds be used
as match it also to capture the
electric vehicle sales, which
are projected to small, um,
capture, um, so, and then we
have, um,
Uh, for capital outlays in their
accounts. If they're not general
fund and rather than do that, I
Not yet reverted, but um you'll
Um, there are a couple of
advantages.
Having a trust fund would um
provide for long uh income.
It would it would also diversify
the revenue streams.
About in the ballpark for where
we'd want to start. And so, um,
with that, um. Thank you,
ranking member. Do we have any,
if so, if you would wish to
speak, please line up behind the
presenters.
Uh, sergeant at Arms, uh, do me
a favor and not, don't put it
too close to their mouth.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, good morning. Mike
Sandoval, registered lobbyist
for the Associate Contractors of
New Mexico think Representative
Brown for bringing this forward.
I think this committee more than
any other knows the importance
of establishing some type of
reoccurring revenue for the
Department of Transportation.
You've been very lucky over the
last 6 years that we've had
non-reoccurring revenues support
the department, and we see how
far that has gone and now is the
right time to invest in some not
into some reoccurring funding.
So thank you, we support the
bill.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee,
Franklin Garcia with asphalt
Pavement Association, and uh we
stand in support of this
legislation as an opportunity to
develop a consistent revenue
stream for long-term
maintenance.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Ricky
Serna, Secretary of the
Department of Transportation.
I'm gonna thank the several
sponsors who really methodically
put this bill together and just
point to a few things. Of
course, we're supportive of any
strategic investments that
address the gap between our
current infrastructure needs and
our infrastructure funding.
But 2, like, um, Representative
Brown mentioned the strategy to
feed the bill with tax revenue
insures growth in the corpus,
and this is really big and
differentiates the bill from
other attempts that
fundamentally would add a bucket
of money and hope for really
good interest earnings over
time. 3 is it's meaningful
because the bill focuses on
federal match, right, which
makes the sum of those
distributions meaningful, for
example, if
In one year it would distribute
$15 million on a 20% match grant
that could support a $75 million
project, and that's key just to
underscore the value of match
funds last year, the legislature
and governor approved a 75
million match fund that got
eaten up entirely and so we're
hopeful that that'll happen
again, but it's difficult for
DOT to leverage a fund like that
because we can gobble it up
very, very quickly. And so for
those reasons, it's, it's a
smart way to keep the corpus
intact, feeding it with tax
distributions is.
to ensure that there's healthy
return, so I want to thank the
sponsors for really in
methodically about the bill, we
support it.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online in favor of the bill?
No, Mister Chairman.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the bill in the room, raise your
hand.
Is there anyone in opposition
online?
No, Mister Chairman,
Thank you members, any
questions?
Representing Borego
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you Representative, um.
I, I don't know all your titles,
but I know you've done a lot of
things, um.
So one of the questions I have
is how you measure the
electrical.
Um
Portion of the GRT into the
fund. I think it's a fascinating
idea, Mr. Chair, and, and, and
representative, I just wonder
how those measurements are taken
and what the formula is, and I
don't know if you have that or
not yet.
Thank you, Representative
Barrego. Mr. today.
There's a
There
There's, this is kind of new
territory in a way, but in some
ways it's it does actually do
some of these types of things
already.
And so, um, I just asked
representative Brego and um
Chairman De la Cruz members, um,
the
The easiest thing to point to
might be uh distribution,
transportation secretary might
be familiar with. We've had um a
distribution um for many years
in section 71 6.7, um to the
state road fund based on the
amount of um jet fuel sold.
So, um, there's no gasoline tax
or diesel tax directly on that,
it's subject to grocer seeds tax
just like electricity is. And
for some of the same reasons,
um, we've taken a little um
calculated piece of that um uh
sale, we've created a
distribution by it and we've
given it to the road fund. It
will be uncertain, but it's
based on taxpayer reporting.
And uh thank you, um.
Representative, Mr. Chair, and,
and your witness. I think it's
um a really fascinating idea, I
think that it's, it's something
that definitely needs to be
gauged.
Depending on sales, um, because,
you know, there's only, I mean,
there's a small percentage that
are driving electric vehicles,
but every day we see more and
more of those. And so I think um
would that be up to
transportation or MBD to monitor
who would, who would do that.
Mr. Chairman, sales or who would
monitor
Um, probably in the in this
instance, it would probably be
the number of electric vehicles
that are driving on our roads.
I would think.
Representative, so I, I, I think
we do have probably 1% of
vehicles and close to 4%. So I
know those, and then, of course,
tax and rev.
Mr. Chairman, um, and
Representative Brego, just to
clarify in this one, as it's
currently drafted, it's uh a
small percent of total statewide
taxable uh electricity sales. So
we have some estimates about how
much of total electricity cars,
but this specific distribution
will be calculated.
As determined each oxation
revenue department,
um, to the, the jet fuel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Representative and your
witness, um, I think that as
revenues decline, especially for
oil and gas, this is a really
important point because, you
know, our.
Our funds are definitely gonna
reduce or DOT, and I think that
it's really important that, you
know, I love that you guys took
the time to really think this
through and.
You know, how we're gonna
replace those funds. I, I think
it's a, it's really fascinating
so thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you
Uh, Representative and
co-sponsor lunch from.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
want to thank the sponsor
wholeheartedly. This has been
something that she's worked on
for many, many years and.
I've been in and out on this,
but I do believe in it
wholeheartedly. I like the idea
of a transportation trust fund
more than getting into debt.
Um, and I don't want this bill
to be another fun fact.
During this legislative session
that, oh, gosh, we did it, but
the budget's already gone and so
there's no way to capitalize it.
I wanted to ask if I can, Mr.
Chairman, a couple of questions
that
May need the help of uh the
cabinet secretary.
On this,
but would you mind stepping up?
I, my, my first question is in
terms of capitalization.
Um, seems to me that we have
lots of different options for
this.
So I'd like to ask Mr. Chairman
and our cabinet secretary, is it
possible?
the bond issue go through that a
portion of that bond issue
funding the used to capitalize
the initial um.
Initial appropriation, and we do
that?
Even though it's not on the
step, it's not a federal, um.
Not a federal identified project
under SIP.
But what my question to you is,
is since we're gonna be bringing
in money.
From the bond issue to cover
projects, you're gonna have
money from another other
sources.
That would be freed up.
Since we'll be using bond, uh,
money for projects. Is it
possible, Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
Secretary, that we could find.
Inside existing funds, a way to
capitalize this.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
it's an interesting question
just to make sure I understand
that essentially we would, we
would serve uh or the state road
fund perhaps would serve as the
initial capital investment for
the fund.
And so just my recollection of
State Road Fund use.
State Road fun use is, I think
across the board allowable for
um maintenance and construction
of state roads.
And so if we could somehow
connect the dots legally between
its distribution to a fund and
ultimately it's used for public
roads.
Then perhaps it would be uh
permissible use.
Um
However, it would be limiting in
its use because the state road
fund typically is used for
maintenance activities and to
match federal apportionment or
federal grants.
Taking it out of the state road
fund to put into this fund would
fundamentally limit it to
construction because federal
grant awards, um, and all
federal match is used
predominantly for construction
projects and the nature of this
fund would limit it just for, so
it would minimize its use for
maintenance. So let me ask you
then, uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary, if we changed the
effective date out a year.
Because if you're bonding bill
goes through, it kicks in
immediately. If we change the
effective date to July 12026.
And we restructured how the
financing is done with this,
because I think there's other
things that we could do to get
get this capitalized, but
initially, if we restructured
that.
And we would stripped the
appropriation.
To get this out of the house and
get it on the Senate side, as
again, again, Mister Chairman, I
don't want this to be another
fun fact, thank you for this,
and then nothing ever happens.
Because this is in my opinion,
one of the most important pieces
of legislation, and there's ways
to structure this, but we
obviously have to have the
cooperation of Senate Finance
with this, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
what generally happens with
these bills is the entire
appropriation piece is struck.
It's out of the house, goes over
to the Senate Finance, and at
that time that amendment would
be put forth.
An amendment at that time could
be things like.
And the department may not agree
with this, but removing all of
Section 11 in the General
Appropriations Act and put into
this to capitalize it.
For one year. I don't know what
you had in there, about 170
million in there.
Um, but that's an example of the
kind of things that can happen,
uh, if we strip the
appropriation.
And um,
changed the effective date and
then were able to actually move
this bill, so Senate Finance can
work on it. I mean, we, we
missed our deadline here on the
house side because the budget's
already gone.
But I, I would like to uh ask
about some creative um.
Financing options from the
secretary to at least get it.
To begin getting it capitalized.
With non-reoccurring funding.
Do you have any other ideas?
Cause I mean, I've got some
things like I'd like to, I'd
like to move all the gross
receipts, tax collected on
highway construction projects
into this to capitalize it.
That that would take some doing,
but I mean, it makes sense. Why
aren't we reinvesting, um, those
grocery receipts back into this
program versus it just going
into the general fund.
Mr. Chair Representative, we,
we've explored a number of
possibilities, um, that would
include.
Reallocation of
Taxes from the general fund to
the state road fund. The, the
downside to getting those
measures approved is the impact
on recurring expenditures that
those taxes otherwise fund.
So, for example, the bill that
we've supported to increase
motor vehicle excise tax
distributions from the general
fund to the State Road fund.
I think is favorable in
principle but difficult in
practice because the $160
million that we're hoping to
redirect has a direct impact on
recurring spending. And so
that's difficult. And so to
answer your question,
indirectly, and I apologize that
it's indirect is there's one,
there's one of two options or
both. One is you move
distributions from the recurring
general fund to the state road
fund, which is tricky, or 2 is.
you you increase.
The amount of revenue generated
by those fees and taxes, right?
And that fundamentally is.
Increasing road user fees,
whether that be increasing fuel
tax registration fees, etc.
And so it's either move them
from one to pay for the other.
And that's difficult because
programs are impacted, or 2 is
you increase the amount of
revenue.
That those distributions produce
and that materializes by way of
fear or tax increases. And so
the third alternative, which is
the bill is proposing is one
time appropriation,
non-recurring into the fund. And
as you've suggested, that could
come by way of reallocating
already allocated non-recurring
general fund, like in Section 11
to this fund for the purposes of
its capital. It's, it's, you
know, prince.
capital investment.
And Mr. Chairman, I think it's
It's our past time that we get
this up and running, even if it
has a smaller capitalization
amount for year one.
I, I just think it needs to get
set up. It needs to be something
that we.
And even if it is at a much
smaller amount, but I, I assume
the 400,000.
Of non-reoccurring general fund
was selected because that's
close to the amount that we used
with early childhood, but at the
end of the day.
Once it's set up, once the
structures in place, once it's
capitalized and it's easy to
come in here a couple of years
later or the next year and say
now we want to do these other
things.
I think um the weight of the
bill, I I think it's a good bill
and, and I like the way it's
laid out, but Mister Chairman,
what's going to happen is when
this gets uh in front of Senate
Finance or tax, they're gonna
say, wait a minute here that,
you know, we've already done a
bond issue and that's generally
the kind of thing that happens.
But I'd like to find a way to
capitalize this so we can move
this out of appropriations, get
it on the house floor, get it
over to Senate Finance.
I mean, I've got some other
ideas of where we could get the
money.
That would make some not very
happy, but I, I have some ideas
of where that could happen.
But it, it, you know, it's, uh,
do we want that do we want that
lift at this point in the
session, I think so, but that's
just me talking, of course, the
main sponsor represented Brown,
uh, you know, you'd have me at,
you'd have my help on it.
But it's something that you, you
know, you'd have to make that
decision, I just don't want this
to be another fun fact.
Or gee, we should have done
because I've seen this bill at
least for 10 years in a row, Mr.
Chairman.
Let's talk about finding a
little further in just a minute.
If I might, Representative
Brown.
How many times have we passed
Thank you, I, I agree with the
notion. I think it's long
overdue, but.
Are we talking Representative
Brown, lunch drum, do we need to
roll the bill, work on some
language and amendment, come
back.
Or do we just vote on it right
now?
Chairman, I think what we could
do is um.
The, the, um, tax package has
not been done yet. The chairman
of tax has asked that all tax
package be to him by Wednesday.
Um
There's a possibility.
I mean, you'd have to talk to
the speaker in the tax chairman
about that.
Is inside of that package, is
there an opportunity for us to
get some, some money to
capitalize this, even if it's
100 million.
You know, just to get something
in here to get the ball rolling.
Um, I think we should pass it
out of this committee and then
when it gets into appropriate.
But I would, I would ask that
you and and I'm happy to go too,
but we, we need to ask the tax
chair if there's any room in the
tax package for capitalization
of this, and if not, then we've
got an uphill battle on the
other side.
Thank you
Uh, I, I think that's a good
course to follow if you're OK
with that, Brown, we'll go ahead
and vote on the bill now and.
And uh and then amended as a
necessary you move forward.
OK, we have a due pass from
Representative Lustrom and
seconded by Representative
Morego. Let's take the roll.
Mm
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Borigo.
Yes.
Representative
Representative Dow,
Representative Hernandez.
Yes, and
Yes, I like to explain my vote.
Yeah
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Representative
Dela Cha Dela Cruz. Yes.
We have a past bill, uh, well,
you got some work to do.
Thank you. We have uh explain
the vote that was chairman, uh
appreciate this bill coming
forward, and I understand the
historical work that's been done
on this, uh, Mr. Chairman, it's
just, uh, when, uh, SB 3 SB 2
went through. Um, it was
mentioned that they were gonna
take the general capital outlay,
um.
They're gonna do the same thing
with, with that, with, with the
reversion, and Mr. Chairman, I,
I just want to state for the
record, you know, uh, Navajo
Nation, we sit on a lot of
capital outlay version money,
and it is something that I'm
trying to find a fix with. I'm
trying to work with my
leadership. I'm trying to work
with my local government. I'm
making sure that we could.
Uh, prevent the reversion from
happening and um I know it does
happen, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, and, and, and
if, if there's any way we could
We could look at making this
worth.
Taken back home, Mr. Chairman
Representative, maybe I'm, I'm
just thinking, could we, instead
of putting this into the
transportation fund. Could we
put this into a district fund.
For each of the 6 districts
rather than
Into the pot, which gets
disappeared because Mr.
Chairman, I want my roads fixed.
Thank you, that's a discussion
for another day, represented,
but thank you. Well, perhaps you
can visit online with, with the
secretary.
Moving on to, thank you. Moving
on to HB 480.
480 is the suicide prevention
license plate Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you committee.
House Bill 480, excuse me.
Is a bill, um,
We're trying to create a suicide
prevention, uh, special
registration license plate for
New Mexico. The proceeds
supporting suicide prevention
efforts. Um, the, uh, financial
support for the suicide
prevention, the portion of that
goes, the rest of it goes
directly to behavioral health
services, potentially expanding
resources in the state of New
Mexico, Mr. Chairman, and um the
initial fee is $35 in addition
to regular vehicle registration
fees and the renewal fee would
be $30 each year.
To retain and renew the plate
revenue from the additional fees
collected shall be distributed
as follows 12 for the initial
fee retained by the MBD for
manufacturing and insurance for
the plate 23 for the initial fee
for the entire renewal fee
appropriated to the behavioral
health services, uh, Service
division in, uh, the healthcare
authority. With that, I stand
for questions. And actually, Mr.
Chairman, um, a friend of mine
brought me this plate, and I
thought.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in favor?
Is there anyone online in favor?
No, Mister Chairman.
opposition?
In the audience.
No, Mister Chairman.
Members
Representative Romero.
He was terminal movie to pass.
We have a due pass from
Represent Romero, a 2nd from
Representative Lindstrom. Let's
take the roll, please.
I apologize, ranking member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I.
I appreciate
Suicide prevention and people
will see the word suicide before
the deeper but that might.
So I just. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, and, uh, ranking
member, um, maybe we could do.
Prevention of suicide, um, in
the design of the sticker or the
plate or whatever it becomes to
be, but.
Representative Armstrong, yes.
Representative Brego? Yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative Doe.
Representative Hernandez? Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hills.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Chair de la Cruz, yes.
pass.
Thank you.
See no further business, we are
adjourned.
