OK
Roll calls closed. we.
Have a quorum
Well, the gentle lady from
Bernard Leo Representative
Garrett, lead us in today's
invocation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, please
join me.
Heavenly Father, greater of
heaven and earth center of love,
truth, beauty and goodness, we
ask you to be part of our
Efforts today, we pray that we
can have the spiritual,
emotional, mental and physical
stamina to do the work for the
sake of our fellow New Mexicans.
We pray that we can cultivate.
Authentic relationships among
ourselves so that even when we
deeply disagree on a policy or a
law that we can still respect
the goodness and the heart each
of us brings here to do good for
the people of New Mexico as this
8th to the last day begins, we
really pray for a good floor
session committees and that the
work throughout these final 8
days can be meaningful.
Successful and benefit each and
every member of our state. Thank
you. Amen.
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee
Rosen Brown with the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan,
Representative Johnson with the
pledge to the New Mexico flag.
I
Play ball gentle lady from Santa
Fe. Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Happy last.
We obsession.
By this time next week, you will
probably be on the road.
Get the heck out of town except
for the generator from Santa Fe.
Because she lives down the road.
from McKinley will be getting a
speeding ticket.
She'll probably be an I-40 by
this time next week.
Announcements.
Or miscellaneous business.
lady from San Miguel and Torres
Representative Gonzalez.
Mr. Speaker and members in the
chamber, I would just like to
make an announcement that our
Roberts and Cardinals are 3
state champs as of 1 minute ago.
say Michael's Horseman, 58 to 46
have on my carnal earrings
today. So goernels and but my
West Las Vegas girls took 2nd in
mypeckless girls also took 2.
Congratulations, West Las Vegas
Robertson and Pecos.
And to Saint Michael's good try.
Gentlemen from
Curry quay, Colfax, Harding, San
Miguel, and Union Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And along that line, I would
like to announce that the
mosquero Roy Lady Blues
completed a perfect season by
winning the state championship
just this morning.
Undefeated, he said.
Undefeated
Wow, very cool. Congratulations
to Mosquero.
Gentle lady from Berle
Presentative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning, everyone. I want to
share some incredibly happy news
to my family, uh, that's come to
my family we have a new grant. I
have a new grandson.
We
This new baby grandson is the
son of my nephew.
And he is the first little boy
who's been born into our family,
the others have all been
granddaughters, so he gets to
carry the name Tenorio forward
into another generation. He was
born this morning at 9:23 924
and his name is William Gael
Tenorio.
And he came into this world at
7.5 pounds and 20 3/4 inches
tall.
Congratulations. Thank you so
much.
Gentle lady to sing.
Happy birthday to you
to you.
Rod, show him this webcast.
It is archive forever.
So don't do anything
embarrassing on the floor
because it is gonna live
forever.
General lady from McKinley,
Representative Lunstrom. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I'd also like
to give a big shout out to the
Gallup girls last night and I
also wanted to let the body know
that when the camera was panning
that game. There was one state
rep that was there just cheering
and cheering and cheering, and
that was representative Martha
Garcia. I saw her on camera.
So we want to we want to
congratulate the Gallup girls.
Thank you.
Congratulations to the Gallup
girls basketball team. Is that
what you were excused the other
day?
Playing hooky, OK.
I agree. I wish I would have
been there too.
But I had to be here.
With all due respect. Gentlemen
from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, Badi, I want to rise
today, uh and uh sort of update
all of us on the budget process,
Mr. Speaker, uh, body think uh
Senate Finance might have had
their 3rd, perhaps 4th public
meeting, uh, on the budget, Mr.
Speaker, I, I would contrast
that with the work that HAFC
does, which is public from the
very first day, Mr. Speaker,
body, I also want to share that,
uh, there is good communication
as there's been through the
interim, uh,
with uh various staff and the
leadership of the committee. So,
uh, I think in one step, in one
sense, Mr. Speaker, embody, you
know, we continue to see some
good progress. On the other
hand, Mr. Speaker Badi, I think
it is, uh, and I wish some press
were watching, perhaps they're
not tuning in yet, but the deep
and stark contrast between the
public work that this body does
when it comes to the state
budget and to be the 4th public
meeting, maybe even the.
adopting drafting instructions,
which is essentially sort of,
that's the precursor to riding
the budget. There's been a lot
of good feedback. I know a lot
of members have worked very hard
even in, uh, as it's gone over
to the Senate, so I don't rise
to sort of, uh, necessarily, Mr.
Speaker body, point out
deficiencies in a product, which
I think is still continuing to
progress, but I do, Mr. Speaker
and body think that uh our
colleagues, uh, really everybody
in the building in the
State, uh, should look to our
process the way we approach
things and uh hopefully emulate
that over time. And Mr. Speaker
body, as we seek to do that, if
we fall short, you know, we want
to hold ourselves to that same
standard as well. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Thank members
take note, gentle lady from
Berlio thank you Mr. Speaker.
Um
You got it, Borego, um, I just
wanted to give a shout out to
our lobos, um, 7269 Boise last
night just, you know, really
appreciate where our logos are
and uh we missed it by 3, but
hey, you know, we got there so
uh big shout out to our lobos,
woof woof.
Big shout out to the Lobos.
Everyone's a lobo.
Oh, that was pretty weak, but
I'll take that. They did lose,
so there you go. They lost 100
bucks.
Can I borrow 100 bucks anyone
per diem? Did it come in today,
gentle lady from Berna Lee
Representative Garrett. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. The body saw
the wonderful volcano Vista boys
basketball team here on the
floor a couple of weeks ago they
played for the 58 championship
tonight at 8 in the pit against
a team from Representative Liz
Thompson's district, Sandia High
School, we know who's gonna win,
but you know what it's gonna be
a great game. Thank you. OK, I,
I suggest a friendly
wager or maybe on friendly
wager, are there bills in each
other's committees that we can
wager on this basketball game.
No, Mr. Speaker, maybe a really.
dinner.
At a reasonable time. good
dinner, OK.
And, and just for the benefit of
the body, um, generally from
Berlio who is the coach of
Volcano Vista?
Greg Brown
and who was the coach for the
Sandia Matadors, young lady from
Bernilo.
Danny Brown, who was my son with
autism's teacher in middle
school and high school both
Browns are brothers and their
dad was a coach was a coach
incredible Albuquerque
basketball family for the 5A.
Basketball championship tonight.
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Mr.
Speaker, I just wanted to give
an update on um a federal
update, um.
Some of the, the
Ending of some of our
departments of government, the
Department of uh government
efficiency efforts to identify
billions of waste, fraud and
abuse in the.
The Federal government,
according to a fact sheet
provided by the White House, the
president has eliminated the
following entities, the federal
uh mediation in
Cancellation service, the US
agency for Global Media, the
Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars, the
Institute and Museum and Library
Services, the US Interagency
Council on Homelessness.
The Community Development
Financial Institute institutions
fund the minority Business
Development Agency and the US
Arctic Research Commission, uh,
ABC News, Kelsey Walsh reported
today, Mr. Speaker, thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady members
take note any other
announcements or miscellaneous
business.
lady from Ber Les representative
Royal Caballero. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I rise on a point of
personal privilege your point,
gentle lady. Thank you Mr.
Speaker.
I hope I can get through this
without um.
Without tearing up.
But um I wish to stand.
And honors a life.
Of congressman Raul Grijalva.
From Arizona.
He was our social justice
champion.
I had the honor.
And privilege
Of marching with him.
Since the 1970s.
In the fight
For farm worker.
Labor
Environmental justice.
And immigrant rights.
We, we're very strong allies.
As public servants later in
life.
We both served.
In the League of United Latin
American Citizens.
And we both served in the
national caucus of Hispanic
Legislators.
Not to mention.
I having the privilege of
hosting him.
On many occasions to both Texas
and New Mexico.
In these fights.
As we marched and rallied.
For many years.
We in our Chicano.
Hispano and Latino communities.
Have lost the kindest.
Most sincere.
And caring.
Hermano and La Lucha.
He never
Congressman Grijalva never
forgot his roots.
Never forgot his community.
Never shied away from standing
up and being the voice.
For the underserved, the
underprivileged, the
disenfranchised.
In the US House of
Representatives.
His voice.
His strong stances.
We'll never be forgotten.
Mr. Speaker.
vivarijalva.
Pree
folks, round of applause for the
late Congressman Raul Grijalva
from Arizona.
Now that I think about it, he
may have been the first
politician my daughter met, um,
a long time ago. He just
happened to be in town,
wonderful men, big loss for.
Our country
Any other announcements?
Young lady from Santa Fe,
another note, I wanted to um
recognize one of our own here,
um, Mr. Lucas Robbins, um, and I
just wanted to
To recognize um all the uh the
um
Colleges that want to um have
him as their student there you
see Davis, who really wanna um
with honors in college in
regions scholarship have
announced that they his
acceptance, do you see San Diego
you of Virginia, American
University special program and
scholarship and the University
of Georgia scholarship and we're
waiting on Georgetown, Mr.
Speaker. So I just want to
recognize Lucas here who's been
with us for, for several years.
in all his accomplishments and
work and um and to say wishing
him the best and say well
deserved, sir. Thank you, thank
you Lucas, we're so proud of
you.
He's right to be recognized.
Good.
Lucas, how come you're not
wearing a tie? Come on.
Very proud of you. Good work.
And we look forward to to you
going to college and then coming
back.
It's sitting right here.
Just don't memorize the lines
Isaac I see him wrong all the
time because nobody calls me out
on him.
Members take note.
Any other announcements.
Right, I do have a generic bill.
That's a, that's miscellaneous
business.
How's Bill 600, generic bill.
The.231 number, loosen up 0.31.
980.2.
This is House Bill
600.3.231980.2.
Remove it from house rules and
order of Business Committee and
refer it to House Judiciary
Committee Again, House Bill
600.231.
980.2 sponsored by
Representative Dixon and
Representative Small.
Seeing objection that is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports.
See an objection. It is so
ordered clerk.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to him has
been referred House Bill 493 has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill 493 do pass. Respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report for Osville
493, but a favorable committee
report for House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 493. All those in
favor signified by say no.
Or the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Bill 576 has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Houseville 576. All
those in favor of say I.
Of the supposed nay, the Abbott
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report for Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 23. All those in
favor of 25A9.
I was supposed name.
The ASA can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee team has
been referred Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 115.
Has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption
favorable report for Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 115. All those in
favorinevabainna.
I suppose.
The eyes have it community
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 280
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker,
adoption for Senate Bill 280.
All those in favor, sitting up
but say no.
All the supposed name.
I have a committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 159 as
amended, has had it under
consideration, reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
Chen.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of favor
committee report for House Bill
159 as amended. All those in
favor by say I.
All the supposed name, the IAAV
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 348 as amended has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
348 as amended. All those in
favor of eba and I.
All the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 369 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Alvie 369. All those
in favor signified by saying no.
All the supposed name, the I
have committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 426 has had it
under consideration in reports
in with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for Houseville 426. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All the supposed name.
The IS have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 443 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass.
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are on adoption of favorable
committee report for House Bill
443. All those in favor saying I
would say a.
All the supposed nay.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 461 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair. Move adoption.
We're adoption report for House
Bill 461 as amended. All those
in favor by say I.
All those opposed name.
Yeah, it's habit committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee team has been referred
to Senate Bill 17 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We're in adoption of favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
17 as amended. All those in
favor signified by CNI.
All those Bosney
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 124 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair.
Speaker, adoption report for
Senate Bill 124 as amended. All
those in favor say no.
All the supposed name
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to has been referred
House Bill 586 has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 586 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
Hoville 586 but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house 586. All those in
favor of 5 would say no.
Well Beau's name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 36 as amended has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption committee report for
Senate Bill 36 as amended. All
those in favor of C5 but say a.
Of the supposed name
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 39 as amended, has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We are an adoption of favor
committee report for Senate Bill
39 as amended, all those in
favor of seeing if I would say
aye.
All the supposed name, the I
have a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
to Senate Bill 57 has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
report for Senate Bill 57. All
those in favor, I say no.
I suppose name.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted. For this last one, I
wonder if we should involve
members of the gallery.
That would be kind of funny.
It's not controversial.
Mr. Speaker, OK.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
to Senate Bill 252 as amended,
has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption
report for Senate Bill 252 as
amended. All those in favor say
aye.
All the supposed nay.
The IA committee report adopted.
No voting from the gallery. I
was just kidding.
I saw you shit.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to that next order of business
messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engrossed copy of House
Joint Resolution 2 as amended,
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and return same
herewith. Respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson, a chief
clerk.
I mean,
message will be entered.
You can take note too.
And take note, it's important.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of House
Taxation and Revenue Committee
substitute for House government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 47 with emergency clause
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and returned same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate Bill 5
as amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Mohan, Senate chief clerk.
General leader from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now.
I move we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Your leader from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, now being 11:59 a.m. I
move we adjourn until 12:01 p.m.
will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session.
So no objection, it is ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended if the records show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved, subject to
revision and approval of the
rules in order of Business
Committee.
It is so ordered.
Happy legislative day 16, but
calendar day 52.
52
That's good news. You guys can
clap for that 52 days.
That's my garry here.
Give that man a raise
Any other announcements or
Gen lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation.
Here's the gentleman from Riva
Sandoval in San Juan.
Representative Lente ready on
item number 54 on the regular
calendar.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, would you
please get me to that point that
all action necessary for placing
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for housing
of 14 on final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate, amendment, or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon members. Uh, it's
an honor to present the 2025
House version of the text
omnibus bill this afternoon. Why
not so quite omnibus. The
committee substitute to House
Bill 14 includes two bills that
are house taxation and revenue
Committee, uh, tabled this past
legislative session for
consideration to this package
that you see in front of you
today.
One of them is titled House Bill
548, which is the oil and gas
equalization Tax Act, which was
sponsored by Chairman Small, the
gentleman from Dona Ana Chairman
Small. The other one is House
Bill 14 earned income tax
credit, which was sponsored by
myself and the speaker.
And with that, Mr. Speaker,
Seeing the board light up the
way that it is, I will continue
with the discussion this
afternoon.
Guys, you guys are awake today.
Love it.
So, so there are a number of
ways to, to, to look at this tax
omnibus bill.
There's one way to look at it.
In regards to the immense
Benefit that New Mexicans will
see will receive with the
extinguishment of their taxation
liability.
A large population of New
Mexico.
We'll be able to keep much more,
much more of their hard earned
money.
In their pockets and in this
time of federal turmoil.
And global uncertainty for food.
eggs as we get the daily update
on egg prices rent.
Utilities and basic necessities.
It's gonna be extremely
important to see this type of
benefit.
Applied for many of our New
Mexicans, those especially that
are making minimum wage upwards
of about families that are
making $70,000 per year.
The second way that some may
want to create the narrative.
Or may I say in some cases
hijacking narrative would be
that this bill is about.
Having sympathy on oil and gas.
Creating the narrative that
The revenue
That we are attracting from this
industry, the increase that we
will be making from this
industry will have dire
constraints and create turmoil
in the state to which we will
see a destruction of our
economy.
Of the places that we call home
and the people that we know that
are our friends and our
constituents.
In our discussion today, it's my
hope to alleviate those fears
and speak some rationale to this
matter.
As it relates to House Bill 548.
I wanna first recognize and
thank Chairman Small, the
gentleman from Dona Anna.
For bringing this piece of
legislation to our committee.
Recognizing that it likely was
not a popular piece of
legislation for one individual
to bring to any committee.
But the fact of the matter is
that when he found a
discrepancy.
He worked towards correcting
that discrepancy.
He communicated effectively.
He listened effectively.
Not only do we just members of
the House taxation and Revenue
Committee on both sides of the
aisle.
But to also those that are
advocates in regards to oil and
gas.
While he keeps his eye
constantly on the price of oil
per barrel.
Daily, sometimes hourly as I
watch him on his cell phone
watching.
The WTI, the West Texas
Intermediate.
Watching the price of barrel and
I know it was made mention that
that price of barrel, since
we've been in these chambers
over the past 7 weeks has
dropped. That's a reality.
That when we started this
legislative session, that price
of barrel that price per barrel
was at around the mid 70s.
To the day the last price I saw
on the WTI index was at about
$67 per barrel.
So it's gone down. Thank you for
the tortillas.
So it's gone down.
But in going down, he recognized
and had the discussions not just
with me but with industry again
and with our economists at the
legislative finance committee to
try to make adjustments to what
once was a large revenue
generator in House Bill 548 to
now much condensed in the way we
see it today.
So what once was in a revenue
generator of upwards between
$400 million per year to $450
million per year. It is quite
condensed at this point where
oil itself.
would raise about $130 million
per year.
$100 million raised by oil.
But yet cuts.
To help alleviate the stress on
natural gas.
Which we will, we will lighten
their responsibility upwards of
about 11 $11.4 million.
Nonetheless
This price per barrel drop that
we saw over the past course of
the last 7 weeks was something
that our amazing economists at
the Legislative Finance
Committee forecasted in their
forecasts. It's something that
they saw that would be uh
substantial enough based on the,
uh, new federal administration
and the way that the economy
was, was growing or lack thereof
that they had already accounted
for to make sure that we had the
safeguards in place in our
budget.
And in our processes in regards
to how this state functions.
financially.
So when we talk about
The narrative of, well, let's
not impact oil and gas, pour oil
and gas.
I'm quick to note that.
As soon as House Bill 548 was
tabled in in our committee
literally the next day on social
media in print and on
television.
The gentleman's bill was
blasted.
For saying that it's gonna be an
impact to New Mexico.
And or New Mexicans.
That the energy price.
Energy prices or price at the
pump would be impacted in a way
where they would be detrimental
to all New Mexicans and New
Mexico communities.
But I would say something to all
of this in the body to consider.
Consider that the price.
Per barrel of oil is not
something that
This minuscule
raising of revenue to the tune
of $130 million has any effect
on.
We're talking about global
markets.
We're talking about tariffs that
are being waged by the federal
government today we're talking
about the mass portations that
are taking place today on those
oil and gas fields all across
our nation.
That's what's creating the
instability and price at the
pump considerations that may,
that many talk about.
Furthermore, we talk about.
The extraction of this natural
resource.
Most of these natural resources,
while extracted in New Mexico
are exported out of New Mexico
to then further be processed.
So when we talk about energy and
price at the pump.
That's quite the false
narrative.
And it's really creating a lot
of fear unnecessarily.
Furthermore, when we talk about
employment to oil and gas and if
we do this $130 million increase
or taxation to oil and gas.
We will see a devastating effect
to those employees of oil and
gas. We will see a dip in
employment.
I remind this body that in just
2024, New Mexico saw a 1%
increase.
In employees of oil and gas.
A 1% increase. Times are good
for oil and gas right now in New
Mexico has been still is.
And it continues to still want
to be a good time in New Mexico.
And I would make mention once
again that when we talk about
those mass deportations that
those are the people that we are
seeing a declining population
of.
That's the result again of this
federal administration and not
because we want to raise $130
million from this industry.
Further, I had asked the
question of these jobs are these
job losses of those that are
working in the oil fields? Are
these the men and the women that
are producing this oil, uh.
Uh, uh, incomes in these states
are these the individuals that
are on the oil fields busting
their backs every single day.
Or might this be the might this
be the individuals.
That
Are the accountants, the
attorneys, the staff people.
That once used to work for the
local economy, the local oil and
gas operator that wants are
bought out by the multinational
conglomerates then are
unnecessarily unneeded.
At that point in time because
guess what those multinational
conglomerates have their own in
staff attorneys in-house
accountants.
etc. etc.
So I would consider that when we
talk about matters of.
declining employee pool.
Finally I wanna talk about
something that was raised in
committee as well.
Here we go with just another
tax.
And New Mexicans or here we go
with just another tax on New
Mexico or here we go with just
another attack on oil and gas.
How dare you Democrats do it
again to the the the industry
that seemingly pays 40%.
Of our general fund for the
initiatives that we have in this
state. How dare you?
I would say, how dare we
because.
Under the administration where
the Democrats have been in the
majority for so long this
industry has thrived.
This industry has thrived, so I
would, I would beg to differ
that we are trying to kill the
industry that is helping New
Mexicans.
Rather
I would say that
This is a continuation of our
support for an industry that we
see as a partner.
They recognize that we're
partners.
And that I would say that when
we talk about a surplus, the
fact that we have.
billions of dollars.
In House Bill 2.
This bill in itself.
It's not a continuation to want
to debate House Bill 2.
This is not house Bill 2.
House Bill 2 left this chamber
weeks ago.
I don't even know where it's at
now, but it, it's, it's
somewhere it's here in this
building, but it's, but we
haven't seen it in a couple of
weeks.
The House passed this budget
weeks ago seeing 6% growth in
the recurring budget in
alignment to maintain
sustainability.
And budget growth.
Leaving 31% reserves continuing
to put dollars into accounts,
trust funds, other mechanisms to
create sustainability.
Lessening our dependence on the
volatile oil and gas markets.
So when we talk about why not
take it from the reserves, why
not take it from the budget that
we just passed out, that's not
this discussion. This discussion
is about how we can utilize and
utilize tax policy to create
initiatives and benefits for New
Mexicans that all of our New
Mexicans or most of those
anyways that work.
will benefit from
Furthermore, Mr. Mr. Speaker and
body.
When we talk about oil and gas
in New Mexico.
Again with the narrative that I
hope we can escape that wow, how
dare we consider touching oil
and gas. How dare we consider
trying to tax again oil and gas.
I would use a pinata analogy.
That we heard in our committee
house taxation and revenue
Committee.
The gentleman from Eddie Chavez
and Otero.
Made the analogy of what we keep
hitting this pinata and
Pretty soon this pinata is gonna
stop giving us candy.
His analogy as I understood it
was towards that of oil and gas.
If we keep hitting the oil and
gas industry, it's gonna stop
providing us the treats.
I see it a little bit
differently.
I see the pinata being the
natural resources of this state
of New Mexico.
If we continue to beat down the
natural resources of this state
of New Mexico by which all of us
are owners of.
There's going to be a day.
That it stops giving us those
treats.
Or the analogy being today that
oil.
So I think it's really important
that we begin to think about.
How we begin to stand up.
Say it's actually OK to
negotiate a fair deal on behalf
of the state it's actually OK to
say that we're partners with oil
and gas. It's actually OK to
recognize the oil and gas, it
does in fact give about a 40%
boost to this, to this uh budget
for the state of New Mexico.
But it's only because this
natural resource.
For the state of New Mexico is
something that I would use an
analogy towards as well.
That the Permian Basin.
For oil and gas.
Is what the San Juan River.
is to trout fishermen and women.
We have the best of the best in
New Mexico.
We have the best by far.
That's why when fishermen and
women travel from all across the
world just to hop in that river
in the northwest part of the
state, they do so because they
they know it's the best.
When those businesses come from
around the world saying we want
to dip our straw on that premium
basin.
In the southeast part of our
state it's because they know we
have the best.
So when we consider this, we
need to make sure that we are
getting our fair shake. We are
getting our fair shake from this
industry that has come.
This industry that we are
partnered with for better or for
worse.
That because, not because of
political pressures.
But because of that pinata
analogy.
There's going to be a time when
we won't have anything else to
extract.
And when we have nothing else to
extract.
And what are we're gonna move
towards.
That's another debate that we'll
have another day related to
natural to to to renewable
resources that's not today.
So why wouldn't we?
Why shouldn't we?
As New Mexicans, as New Mexico.
With the trust responsibility to
those New Mexicans in this body.
Be able to.
Negotiate the best possible
deal.
That we could have on oil and
gas.
Is it not just fair?
Is it not just just but it is
the right thing to do.
And related to being fair.
I would also make mention that
related to being fair based on
legislative finance committee.
Information
That in 2019.
The oil and gas profits.
Net profits from oil and gas
were about $2 billion.
Fast forward to 2024, it's
estimated that
Oil and gas net profits.
We're upwards of 400% to a new
number of about $10 billion.
These are net profits, ladies
and gentlemen. These are not
taxes paid to New Mexico. These
are not gross profits. These are
net profits.
So when we talk about.
$130 million to raise for the
benefit that's a part of this
tax package.
It's the right thing to do. It's
good tax policy.
Related to good tax policy
though.
You have to make also mention in
regards to.
Good tax policy means that when
we can export.
Our tax liability to pay for
in-state benefits, that's good
tax policy.
That's excellent tax policy.
And furthermore, consider this
that when 99%.
Based on the state land
commissioner's estimates that
were produced just yesterday
that when 99%
Of this increase.
Will be paid by the top 20.
Largest oil and gas companies in
New Mexico.
That are primarily multinational
conglomerates that typically
take the profits elsewhere, but
we can utilize that benefit for
New Mexicans.
That's a great deal.
That if we can use this money
generated in a way to extinguish
the tax liability from those
making
Minimum wage
To those families that are
making upwards of $70,000 per
year so that they can keep more
money in their pockets for eggs,
for groceries, for rent, for
utilities.
That's a good deal.
Maybe not for the oil and gas
industry. Maybe they're gonna
have to reduce the 130 from the
$10 billion in profits.
But the point being is that for
New Mexico and New Mexicans,
that's the right move to make.
That's the prudent move to make.
That's a big deal.
Let's talk a little bit more
about this big deal.
And as I switch gears a little
bit, I wanna give reference in a
little bit of context to the tax
structure here in this state.
That when we talk about this tax
structure since 2018.
New Mexico has led the United
States in creating one of the
most progressive tax structures
in all of the country.
And I'm proud of the of my
predecessors that have led the
way.
Chairwoman Chandler, she was
here, uh, Speaker Martinez, if
he was here.
I give him a lot of credit
because they led the charge they
recognize and they understood
the assignment.
But I would also make mention
that in addition to that
progressive tax structure that
we enjoy today here in the
state.
Comparing that to having the
some of the lowest.
tax property rates in the United
States here in New Mexico.
partnered with
The expansion of what we've done
with low income credits
partnered with then the
expansion and the creation of
new child tax credits and
dependent deductions.
Furthermore, work done with the
reduced GRT or gross, uh, the,
the GRT rates that were cut 25%
over the past two recent years.
Furthermore, expanded exemptions
for Social Security income that
helped those in the upper middle
class categories.
And then finally rounding it
out.
Would be last year's new tax
brackets that we passed in this
very legislature that meant.
All New Mexicans saw a tax
break.
All New Mexicans saw their
personal income tax rate dropped
and the liability dropped.
This year, let's do one more
better.
Let's extinguish that tax, that
state tax liability for those
that are making minimum wage all
the way to get to those that are
families, uh, that are making
upwards of $70,000. Let's make
that happen.
That means that those people
that work in this building that
clean up after every single one
of you each day.
We'll be able to keep just a
little bit more in their
pockets.
That means that all those people
in your communities.
That helped cook your food that
help clean your places that that
that makes certain amounts of
dollars. Think of that. We all
have them in our communities.
In some cases we are those
members of those communities,
our families are some of those
members in our communities.
But I say this.
With all respect that we can't
afford.
By having fear
Of an industry to not allow this
to happen.
So when I talk about House Bill
14 shifting gears to the actual
benefit.
I want to make mention that.
House Bill 14 continues the work
of what was once the Reagan era.
Benefit
Expanding on the success of
President Reagan era program
called the Federal Earned Income
Tax Credit.
That today, New Mexico still has
in place.
That the program itself has been
successful.
That the program itself has
claimed to be that has about
200+.
Tax filers
Most recently in 2023.
But it has been successful in
reducing poverty.
Promoting employment, expanding
economic opportunities
increasing childhood educational
opportunities increasing
earnings.
And research has shown.
Research has shown ladies and
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, that 80%
of this money.
Of the earned income tax credit.
80% of this money spent in this
program.
Stays in New Mexico's economy.
And more than doubles its
effect.
Meaning that if we create this
opportunity with the 70+ million
dollar investment or injection
into expanding these working
family tax credits.
That we will see the benefit
upwards of about $140 million
plus boost to New Mexico's
economy.
That means a boost to your small
towns to your mid-size towns to
your large cities.
Of upwards of about $140
million.
Of boosting your economy and
again in this time of
uncertainty of federal turmoil
we need every little bit of help
that we can have.
And this is it
This is how you do it.
So House Bill 14 as it's
presented today, has 3 main
parts.
One
It increases the federal match
from what once was 25% to 34%.
Meaning that everyone who
certainly who who currently
participates in the program
we'll see a boost in their
benefits.
Furthermore,
It ensures that an additional.
101,000 more New Mexicans.
We'll be able to be eligible to
receive this type of benefit.
Meaning that
It doesn't reward those that
don't want to work.
Rather, it gets those that have
been on the bench fearing that
they will work for the fear of
having to pay taxes, they will
keep every single dollar in
their pocket.
Third and final at the couples
New Mexico from the federal
program for the benefit of New
Mexico where.
The two kind gentlemen behind me
and I forgot to introduce them,
but we have Brendan from the LFC
and Izzy or cheap Izzy, as he's
also known from the LSC here to
help me out this afternoon, but
these two fine gentlemen will
also.
Ensure that when we invest this
way.
that they will study the
effects.
Of how this is improving New
Mexico's economy and the
strength in our of our
workforce.
And what that means is that.
We get people off the bench.
We get workers back to work.
We get workers back to making,
wanting to make a good wage.
In short
This legislation will ensure
many that work in this very
building will receive the
benefits.
Minimum wage workers in your
districts.
We'll be will no longer be
liable.
For state income tax, families
in your districts will no longer
be liable. Many of them anyway.
For state income tax.
Single filers, those that are
working maybe part time or on
minimum wage again in your
district.
Will not be liable for state
income tax, completely
extinguished.
Again, those making.
Minimum wage.
And families upwards that are
making $70,000 per year we'll
see their state tax liability
completely extinguished.
Utilizing and exporting a tax
liability to out of state
multinational corporations.
That's a good deal.
This, again, easing the stress
of this economy.
That this the easing the stress.
That we live under today is
extremely important for all of
us.
Making sure our citizens and
those that live in our small
towns in our cities will have
more money in their pockets,
making sure that every single
dollar that they earn stays in
their pockets, helping them with
the skyrocketing prices again of
groceries, rents, utilities,
etc.
Further insulating our citizens
from the uncertainties at this
new.
Federal administration finds its
feet.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, and
with that body.
I would stand for questions.
Thank you gentlemen, uh, before
we begin debate there's been a
request for the gentlemen to
remove their jackets that
there's no objection, so.
The gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We'll,
uh, the chair.
Give up a little bit of his
time.
Mr. Speaker, I, I give up my
time as much as you want of it
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Uh, Mr. Chair, I'd
like you to know that after
talking with uh
Um, oil and gas folks in New
Mexico and in Texas, there has
not been one mass deportation
from any oil and gas company,
period.
I'd like that to be known
because that is a reality.
Mr. Speaker, yesterday this uh
legislator passed out of
committee two bills that will
increase the taxes on oil and
gas companies $200 million. I
don't care what industry it
might be, but when you do that,
that is a significant tax that's
going to be passed on and people
are going to pay that as you
mentioned, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Chair, the price of
oil is, is significantly dropped
and uh the uh
Chief Izzy there talked a little
bit about that in committee
yesterday, and a couple of
questions I'd like to ask, uh,
you on that is, um, does she I
he think it's gonna continue to
drop.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, their
forecast appears to be steady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, and yesterday we also heard
in committee that um,
The state of New Mexico has, uh,
put this into their radar and
said, OK, at this point in time,
January, February, March, uh,
oil is going to drop and we're
going to see a um a decrease in
our revenue, so Mr. Chair, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Chair, can you
address that a little bit, um,
um, the analysts foresaw this.
Can you tell us what they
foresaw and when it's going to
end.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, at
this point in time, when, when
the LFC forecasted this this
type of dip in oil and gas. They
expected to
Prices to drop.
At the beginning of the year and
continue into next year.
Before slowly climbing back out.
And then plateauing and, and,
and stabilizing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So they forecasted to
continue to drop until next
year.
At this point in time, LFC sees
that we're in 2025 that we can
see, well we'll see the steady.
Stabilization at this point in
time, but that it'll slowly
climb out.
By next year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So you're saying a
steady decline or we're now
where we're gonna be and we
don't, shouldn't expect any more
losses from the drop in oil.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
crystal ball is about as good as
yours, but what they're seeing
is that the price per barrel of
oil would probably maintain
about $68 at this point in time
and for the year and for the uh
near future.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Can you tell me what,
uh,
Uh, what the price of oil has to
be to uh make uh oil company
whole and then they can start
making money after they hit that
mark.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what they're telling me that
there's a lot of variables
involved, but that, that price
per barrel break even point can
be anywhere between about $30 a
barrel, $50 a barrel, and
upwards.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we've got an oil man that's
sitting right next to me and I
just asked him the question, and
it was 65. So what happens, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, when oil
hit $65 a barrel.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
happens to who when the price of
oil hits $65 a barrel.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
happens to oil companies when
the price of oil hits $65 a
barrel.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
goes back to the answer I gave
you previously is that there's a
bunch of variables and all
companies are different so some
see their break even point at
about 35, some at 55, and if
you're, if the gentleman, your
neighbor to your left of you
says 65, then, then, then
perhaps it's 65.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, at at
67, there's already being rigs
laid down right now, so it's 65,
they're all going to be laid
down. Would you think that that
might be something that this
body ought to be concerned with.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Not knowing.
Who the gentle and, and maybe
we'll get there when he, when he
speaks, but not knowing who the
gentleman to your left and your
neighbor works for if he's
small, if he's large, but again
the variable, the variable,
there's so many to think about
in terms of if he's a a smaller
producer he's one of these
multinational conglomerates.
It's hard to say.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and Chair
and so I agree with that. I'll
let him address those issues
with you.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, um,
To raise taxes and stay in the
same breath we have the capacity
to lower taxes for another group
is like saying I'm gonna take a
blanket and I'm gonna cut the,
cut the top 12 inches off and
I'm gonna sew it on the bottom
of the blanket and tell and say
my blanket is longer.
That is just not, it doesn't
make any sense and it's not good
tax policy.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
I'm gonna go on and I'm, I'm
gonna address a couple things on
the uh federal EI EITC and, and,
and work back into New Mexico,
the, the, uh, the bill itself,
um,
I'm sure anybody in this body,
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chair, could
uh Google and find out the
problems with the feds program
is do you anticipate any of that
program with our or any of those
problems with our program.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
same as the feds. I mean,
whatever they might be seeing
and and being impacted by, we'd
likely see the same thing here
in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, the most recent
analysis of analysis of the EITC
concluded that the 43% of the
payment payments that were made
were erroneous and filled with
with fraud, abuse and waste.
So I guess then if we implement
this.
If we pass this bill and
implement the law, then we're
going to see 43% of fraud,
abuse, and waste. Would that be
a a statement?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know if that's a correct
statement. I mean, I, I, I, I
think it's unfortunate that you
wouldn't rely that if the TRD of
the state would be the
department implementing this
program would have the same
faults as a federal program that
I don't think that's fair to our
State departments and I don't
think that it's fair that we
would think that our program or
program that we're standing up
in its infancy is set up to
fail.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I did not refer to
our own department at all. I
referred to individuals that are
filing their taxes.
So then would you agree that we
can probably gonna follow the
same thing as as the Fed program
with people filing their taxes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
understand where you're coming
from, but the main problem in
many cases is compliance.
As it relates to to the federal
program some people are
mistakenly overclaiming so that
there's, there's very little
intentional fraud that's being
associated to this program
today, but in this case we have
$5 million that's an HB 2 for in
fact the taxation and revenue
department to begin to
administer this program once it
becomes a state program itself.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, in the, uh from
the years 2006, uh,
And forward several years, um,
half of the federal EITC uh
claims were from income
misreporting from people who
fraudulently claimed.
So my question and I think to
this bodies um should be
questioning the same thing as
how is New Mexico going to stop
the waste, fraud and abuse by
individuals that are reporting.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
again, I, I, I'm not here to
make claims on a program that we
haven't even adopted yet, but
the fact of the matter is is
that I have every full
anticipation and faith in our
departments here in the state of
New Mexico that we've stood up
and these programs that we are
standing up that they would be
able to be compliant and create
the best standards so that the
Mexicans.
will be able to produce
themselves and, and create the
benefits for themselves that are
fair and balanced and are true.
And that I would, I would, I
would hate to even think that
the Mexicans would want to.
Provide fraudulent type of
information.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen do.
Mm
Can you, um,
Uh, let me, let me figure out a
different way to say this, Mr.
Speaker and Mr. Chairman, um, is
it your belief that everybody in
the state of Mexico the files
taxes is honest.
Mr. Speaker, in the, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
say all New Mexicans they're
honest.
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman, I
assume that the, the FBI agent
behind me might have a different
story on that.
So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Chairman, um, let's, let's
talk briefly for a minute about
this program that we're, we're
trying to implement here.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, as a
body we have implemented laws
made laws, and people that are
low income in the state.
Get some incredible benefits.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we've
worked hard to make sure that
those individuals receive some
type of benefits.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So this benefit, if I
make $65,000 a year. Um, how
much money am I gonna be able to
get back on this program?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
please clarify, are you a single
fileer? Do you have a family?
How many kids do you have? I am
a single, let's say I'm married
and I have uh for the sake of
this argument, um, 17 kids.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, let's
just say 2 kids.
two kids, uh, Mr. Speaker, 2
kids are 17.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, 2
kids. I mean, I would have had
17, but I, I'm not sure my wife
wanted to stay with me if I
asked her that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
the benefit would it be extended
to you as a, um, married person
with 2 kids, $800.
$800. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
Can you tell me if you think
that or Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, do you know how much
people that are making $40,000 a
year with the same thing, um,
married, filing jointly with two
kids get from the state of New
Mexico for benefits.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
currently it's about $1500 per
year.
1500 per year, so then let's
take it another step, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, with
Fed, with the Fed dollars
included as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
thinking about it, it may be
about an additional 2500 $23 to
$2500 per year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I'm gonna refer to
the now um Senator Larry Scott.
At one time on this floor, he,
uh, uh, had a, had a uh couple
of thoughts on that, and at one
point in time, he said, with
everything that this state
offers and that everything that
the feds offer, there's $140,000
that people can access rent.
Food, utilities, everything
that's allowed.
Would you agree that maybe
case.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that,
that may be a little bit high,
but it's probably close to that
figure.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Then why in the world would I
want to go to work for $70,000
and lose out on $140,000.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
mean.
This is a matter of, of, of, I
guess personal preference,
right? I mean, this is why Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, when we
were talking about the next tax
incentive that that our body may
be able to entertain. We talked
a lot about maybe liquor, right,
the low income tax credit that
we've offered in the state and
we, we recognize that if we
wanted to expand on that.
All we're doing is creating
cliff effects where people don't
want to go to work for fear of
losing those benefits, right?
And so when we talk about New
Mexicans not wanting to go back
to work because they're fearful
of losing these benefits. This
is quite the opposite. I think
this impacts those people that
have
Have the, the ethics to want to
go to work, right? that that
that that that realize that they
have a family of 12 or 3
children to feed that they have
to go to work that they have to
do certain things to make sure
that they can provide an
opportunity for themselves and
their family and or set uh set
the standard for that family, so
I, I think, you know, to say
that.
They're fearful of going to work
for losing their benefits isn't
really a a fair statement. I
think it, it really is in some
cases insulting to the Mexicans
thinking that they don't wanna
work.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't mean to be offensive to
anybody, but when we're talking
about a $1500 benefit as opposed
to 100, let's take it down to
$120,000 worth of benefits
that's offered to the folks. I
just don't think we're going to
move the needle very much.
That's my statement, um, I mean
no offense to anybody, and I
hope people do want to get off
and and uh benefits and uh and
go to work uh for this.
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chairman.
Um, uh, and as I've mentioned in
uh in committee we had the
capacity to do this, um.
We could have given this earned
income credit without raising
taxes at all. And with, and
since we're intent on raising
taxes, um, let's include a tax
that doesn't harm any New Mexico
businesses.
Mr. Speaker, I have a substitute
bill that I would like to
Bring forth
And I would like a roll call
vote.
You've got a roll call.
Let's get it down here. We'll
get it explained.
Gentlemen from San Juan, will
you kindly read the 231 number,
please. Yes sir, Mr. Speaker,
it's 231-985.1.
I've got a 0.3.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, 0.3.
We'll get this passed out and
we'll get it posted online and
Gentlemen, I believe the
substitute has been passed out
and it is posted online, the
gentleman to explain the house
floor substitute.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, this
bill is relating to taxation
enacting the renewable energy
production Tax Act to impose an
excise tax on electricity
generated from renewable energy
resources that leaves the state
and goes into Arizona and
California.
Let another state pay our taxes.
Every mayor in the in the state
of New Mexico likes that.
Gentlemen, from
Yeah he was 100% of lente is
this a friendly floor
substitute.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, while
in
Intriguing, it is not.
A friendly floor substitute and
I have a couple of questions.
Go ahead.
Gentlemen from San Juan in
regards to your amendment.
What would you imagine that this
renewable industry would raise
if we taxed it today.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Let me ask my expert.
Mr. Kevin Powers.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
the experts say it's about $75
million a year.
Mr. Speaker, total.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
for $75 million per year would
be what would be.
Raised from this tax or is, what
are they making per year then at
this point?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's 75 million a year.
Now, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what does renewable energy.
Make per year net profit.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
actually don't know that, um,
but I thought my friend from
Donana would be excited about
using those lines to generate
some wealth for New Mexico.
So Mr. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, do you know or do you
not know what the net profit
from renewable energy is today
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no,
sir, I do not.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
From from San Juan.
Considering then regarding
The tax omnibus bills is
presented now and then your
amendment regarding your
amendment, do you, would you
think then that you would put
these renewable energy
industries out of business.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't think I would.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, but.
I, I think that's a yes or no
question.
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman,
that's a past due tax. Those
folks in Arizona and California
pay that tax.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
then in regards to.
How much today then have rural
communities benefited from
current renewable energy
projects.
In the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, I
don't know the answer to that
question.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
if, if, if we can say then
Alone, Sunsia project has, has
brought in to local communities
about $20 billion then to that
community.
Would that be fair, a fair
statement?
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, uh,
yes, those, those numbers are
big numbers and, and I think
Chair Small mentioned those.
OK, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I have no further
questions, and I'll sit here
and, and wait and listen to the
debate. Thank you, sir.
Right, it is an unfriendly floor
substitute. There is debate. The
gentleman from Donana,
Representative Small.
Speaker, my friend from San Juan
y you?
Yes, Mr. Mr. Speaker, gladly.
uh, great, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, sort of looking
at the substitute, I want to ask
a few questions around the bill
you're attempting to substitute
and, and that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think will
illustrate a few places that
don't quite fit from my
perspective, uh, respectfully on
the substitute, if that's all
right, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
agree that, um, the severance
taxes are the base.
for, uh, much of the tax system
for oil, gas, other minerals
that are, that are here in the
state of New Mexico?
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, yes.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. I, I too,
uh, and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we'll have a chance to talk
about those in a little bit more
detail. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
my understanding of a severance
tax is really that it's because
there's a mineral, uh, that is
there in the state, uh, that's
sort of seen to be collectively
owned by the citizens of that
state, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and so when that's severed, when
that's brought up or taken out,
uh, uh, then
that's, that's where the value,
uh, becomes and so the tax rate
is on that value. Would you
agree, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, yes,
great. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's my
understanding too. And so is
this, does the wind, uh, or the
son, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
does that originate in the state
of New Mexico? Is that held
solely by the state?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I'm not aware of any fences or
walls that are put up so I, it
might come from Arizona. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think it, right,
it, it doesn't sort it, it's not
held in the state in generally,
uh, uh, underneath the surface
of the state, which Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think if we go
through most of the other sort
of minerals in this case,
hydrocarbons, oil, natural gas,
all of those.
are underneath the surface of
the state. Those are not going
anywhere unless Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, they're taken
out. And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's the, it seems to me like
a pretty core difference between
the uh limited, uh, natural
resources under the, the Earth's
crust and in this case
underneath New Mexico's surface,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
unlimited, uh, sun and wind that
is above.
I guess, Mr. Speaker, would you
agree, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman,
um, I, I think I would, but what
I'm, what I'm trying to do
really is to, to say I'm, I'm
for all things. I'm for coal.
I'm for oil and gas. I'm for
wind, I'm for solar, um, and so
I'm just saying if we're gonna
lose oil and gas, let's start
looking at a way that we can tax
those that are out of state that
are getting the benefit from
those lines going across the
state of New Mexico into another
state. That's what this bill is
about.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, I appreciate
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, when we look at the bill,
uh, the House Bill 14, that, uh,
the chairman is bringing forward
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
look at the substitute you're
bringing forward. It seems like
the very fundamental way of uh
assessing value of implementing,
uh, a fair rate of taxation that
brings Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, benefits back to the state.
They just don't mess, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and uh I
think that uh if I was to, I'll,
I'll, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
wrap up by saying, um, I, I
respectfully oppose the floor
substitute, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I want to strongly
suggest that while understanding
that there are two fundamentally
different things. One is being
severed from underneath the
surface of New Mexico. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, one is
shining down on the state. One
is
flowing into the state, uh, if
it blows from our neighbors in
Texas or, you know, wherever
it's coming from, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, and Ms. Treeger,
gentlemen, further, I'd like to
uh suggest that there's some
sort of, as we're looking out
into the future, which I know we
all do. Would you agree, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that keeping
the cost of electricity is it
powers more and more things,
keeping that cost as low as
possible is sort of in our
interests, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman,
um, I don't really care what the
cost of electricity is in
Arizona and California.
In New Mexico, I would agree
with you that, that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's fair. Although
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
might point out that as the
gentleman mentioned, uh, the
largest onshore wind project in
North America is here in the
state, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
bringing billions of dollars,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, from
memory, I can recall that there
are hundreds of millions of
dollars going to rural
communities and school districts
over the next 30 years, then Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
They wouldn't go there without
uh those transmission lines,
those wind towers, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, maybe in some cases
more solar panels going out, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, so I
think we're, we're sort of
doing, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, would you agree that
as we get more transmission and
more electricity from whatever
source, the more that we are,
are, are generating and the more
we're transmitting all around
the state, maybe the places
outside, maybe the
Inside, does it get easier to
interconnect, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, things in the state.
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman,
uh, yes, I would think so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's my
understanding too. And Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's
another reason, respectfully,
I'd have to stand in opposition
because I think the uncertainty
of what it does to the uh that
investment going into rural
communities, the creation of
those transmission lines that
I'm pretty convinced, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, are gonna
serve more New Mexicans and
serve a data center maybe in the
northwest part of the state or
the south.
or other parts. If we don't, we,
we have a lot of interest in
building those now, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and further, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think
there may be a ton of
uncertainty because we're trying
to keep those electricity prices
low, uh, that, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I fear, I wonder
if this will sort of meet the,
the, the fiscal requirements
that are set out. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I appreciate
the conversation. I'm glad we
got to discuss that there are
two.
different um
There are two different sources
of, uh, of energy fundamentally.
One buried deep within the
earth's surface, one shining
down from above or blowing in,
uh, from above. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, both are here in
abundance, uh, just like the
turkey in the Sacramento
Mountains that we're all excited
to get after here in a few
weeks. Um, so, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I think when we
get back to the other bill,
hopefully we'll get a chance to
discuss how maybe even they
really fit together.
Uh, but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you very much for the
conversation.
Mr. Speaker, could I ask him,
Mr. Chairman, a question.
Sure.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Chair, did you put in?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I have
until Wednesday, I think, as we
all do March 19th. Although for
Turkey, I do note, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we're fortunate to be
able to buy that over the
counter.
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman,
procrastination.
Sometimes I can't with you guys.
Geller from San Juan Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
the, uh, gentleman from San Juan
yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and yes, I put
in.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
before your expert walks off,
uh, he might need to be close by
so he can answer a couple of
questions for me or maybe the
expert who sits to your left,
might be able to answer this.
Um, how many different taxes are
there on oil and gas that the
oil and gas, uh, uh, uh,
industry pace.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh, a
dozen.
A dozen
OK, so there's not just
severance, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no,
sir.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So,
Approximately the same number of
taxes on renewable energies,
anywhere near that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no, I, I'm not sure we could tax
them because, um, Mr. Chairman
asked if, if that would if they
would go bankrupt, so I, I'm not
sure that they would go bankrupt
if we if we taxed them. I don't
know. I don't know the answer.
I'm a speaker and gentleman, I'm
afraid that they might go
bankrupt if we just stopped
subsidizing them.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, the reality is what
we're talking about here is
Another tax.
On this industry
So, um, I in your bill versus
the underlying bill.
Um, you're talking about $75
million and not $130 million.
Could you explain to me why not
$130 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, this tax will
this bill will raise taxes 75
million and with the bill that
passed out yesterday from the
royalty will increase another 50
to 100 million that will more
than cover what is needed for
the earned income credit.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but as the bill, uh,
the underlying bill is today the
100, there's $130 million but
there's only $75 million worth
of expenses that are attached to
it, so there, there is a earned
income tax credit.
Uh, uh, formerly known as the uh
Ronald Reagan era working
families tax credit.
But it's $75 million is the only
expenditure in the underlying
bill, um, so, so it it appears
to me that we're paying for
everything that's being asked
for in your uh in your uh
substitute.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, back to the taxes on oil and
gas.
And then the taxes on
renewables.
You stated something uh that
this is a pass through tax.
So if this tax is placed on
renewable.
Uh
energies
They can recover that on the
back end because it's a, it,
it's a cost that they incur that
they're able to then pass on, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
this in no way takes the taxes
that are already paid by oil and
gas industries down at all. They
stay the same. This past this
tax is a past due tax to folks
in Arizona and California, which
I'm one in Arizona. My business
is over there and I'll pay that
tax.
So thank you for that, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen, um,
Since, since renewable energy
can pass this on to people in
another state, they could pay
for this, and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I, I believe that
was stated earlier by the bill
sponsor that out of state big
corporations would pay for this.
I, I don't believe that's the
case. As a matter of fact, I, I
know that's not the case. That's
a lot of in-state small uh um
companies that would be paying
this as well. This doesn't, that
would mean that only Chevron and
Exxon and Shell and
and marathon and all the big
boys would be paying this tax.
I, I didn't see an exemption in
the underlying bill for in-state
small companies. So Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen,
This under your substitute would
be passed on.
To Arizona and California.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if as
the underlying bill sits today,
is the oil and gas industry able
to pass
That on
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as we
heard, uh, no.
And Mister Speaker and Jo's
because it's a commodity, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this just goes in the expense
column without any possibility
of recovery. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, what we're the
underlying bill says
We're wanting to spend $130
million.75 million on the earned
income tax credit.
And then 65 million apparently
to the Senate on whatever the
Senate decides they want to
spend oil and gas money on
whatever that is.
But your says $75 million to pay
for the earned income tax
credit.
And we would have out of state.
Companies truly
Be the ones
To be able to to pay for this.
We're actually out of state
ratepayers would be able to pay
for this, uh, Mr. Speaker, it
sounds like a win win. I fully
support your, uh, substitute.
There is further debate on the
substitute, the gentleman from
Chavez Edri and Otero,
Representative Henry. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker to the gentleman
from San Juan Yil.
Gladly, Mister Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. Thank you so much for
this amendment. I think it's a
very well thought out amendment,
uh, and here's why.
You know, the other night in
debate when we were debating a
different bill. Do you remember
how much of the energy produced
in New Mexico is actually used
in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not remember that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, about
70% is the low. Now I've heard
that might be a low number. More
than 70% of the renewable energy
produced in New Mexico is
actually shipped out of the
state. Now, in this proposal in
your amendment, are we going to
tax the energy that stays in the
state, or is this amendment for
the, the energy that leaves the
state.
And goes to Arizona and
California.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
is for the juice that goes into
Arizona and California.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when
we were hearing earlier that
that.
By raising taxes on oil and gas,
it's kind of saying, uh, well,
we shouldn't put, I think the
word was fear mongering on to
that energy prices in New Mexico
are going to go up. Would that
be kind of the same with this
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yeah,
I mean, this bill is, is
strictly going after ratepayers
in Arizona and California.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan, the other question I
have is, is we heard that in oil
and gas, a lot of the folks that
make it are these big corporate
America companies, right? Do we
know when the renewable energy,
who are the big corporations?
Where are they located? And do
we know have any idea what kind
of revenues they might have.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would, I would.
Guests and probably bet that
they are out of state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
absolutely right. Most of them I
believe are located out of
state. There might be some here,
but it feels like most of the
big ones I happen to get
somebody, uh.
I looked one of the companies up
it's amazing net income from
this one company last year was
$6.946 billion. That seems like
a lot of money in 2024. Does
that feel like a lot to you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would not turn that down if that
was my income.
Me neither, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I would love to have
that kind of income. Now, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the other
thing that I'm, I'm interested
in because we've we've heard so
many renewable, uh, energy bills
and subsidies come through so
many of our committees this
session. The other question I
have that was asked, uh, in one
of them, how many jobs does
renewable energy create in the
state of New Mexico?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, while
the, um, renewables are being
built.
Uh, let's just take a solar, uh,
field, uh, while that, uh, in
one in Farmington in in
Fruitland actually that uh that
uh was there. I, I went and
looked at it 1600 acres of solar
and so there was many folks who
were working while that was
being built, um, now they need I
think 4 people, those are window
washers.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no,
that's right, and, uh, one of
the things I learned during it
is a lot of these when they're
built, the transmission lines,
these big, big, big, uh.
Transfer stations, things like
that. Most of the folks are
actually from out of state that
are building these. So I found
that a pretty interesting
statistic, but I will let you
know that I've looked it up a
couple of times. Nobody has said
I'm wrong, but if I put wind and
solar together, there's about,
I'm gonna say 5 to 6000
permanent jobs, full-time
employment here in New Mexico.
Does that number surprise you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
really surprised me as well
because when we're talking about
oil and gas and and how they
should be able to absorb these,
but we're afraid because we
might put, uh, renewables out of
business anytime we talk about
any sort of tax, even though
this isn't the tax, this is a
pass through tax, as we said,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. This
is a tax that California's and
Arizona is gonna pay on energy
that was produced right here in
in New Mexico that was probably
subsidized by the New Mexican
taxpayers, is that right, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
from a bill we heard the other
day, that's exactly right.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that's why I like this
amendment so so much is because
not only are we taxing an energy
that is leaving the state that
is not being used by New
Mexicans. We're not harming New
Mexican jobs because as I've
looked it up permanent jobs that
are directly related to oil and
gas. This isn't all the other
jobs around oil and gas,
permanently jobs just for oil
and gas in the state of New
Mexico. It's around 300 to
35,000, uh, folks, full-time
employees, so.
Helping
to increase this tax like you're
wanting to by taxing something
that's leaving the state of New
Mexico and not used by New
Mexicans. To me, that makes
really good business sense. Is,
is that kind of why you wrote
this amendment?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you're a mayor. I was a mayor.
When we had people coming into
our town and filling up with
gas, buying a burger, we always
loved it because they paid GRT
and it didn't fall on the backs
of our citizens.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no,
that's absolutely right. And the
other thing that I'm gonna
mention real quick is is we did
here in the presentation how
right now there is a little bit
of uncertainty in the oil and
gas industry with prices of
barrels. We're seeing the
layoffs that are already being
announced. I find it interesting
that anytime we talk about
renewables, um, I think in the
last debate, in fact, I think
the words I heard were there's
tons of uncertainty in the
renewable energies and so if
we're afraid to tax the
renewables because there's tons
of uncertainty. I find it
interesting.
We're OK taxing oil and gas when
there's tons of uncertainty.
Does that feel odd to you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yeah,
that's one of the concerns we
have when, um, and, and I think,
uh, Chief Izzy knows what he's
talking about and uh that is one
of the concerns that he shared.
That's one of the concerns that
I share.
And Mr. Speaker, I'll end with
this, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, you know, in the, uh,
presentation of the original
bill, I think that the way it
was phrased is, uh, by raising
taxes on oil and gas, this is
support for our partners. So
this is telling our partners the
oil and gas industry, we support
you, so we're gonna raise oil
and taxes on oil and gas.
I think we could say the same
thing to renewables. We would
love to support you. We have
supported you. We have given you
a ton of incentives to be here.
So this is our support to you
renewables and, uh, this is only
taxing the energy that's leaving
the state, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
think this is a great amendment.
I fully support it.
on the on the floor substitute,
the gentle lady from Donana
Notero, Representative Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gladly.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
just had a couple of questions,
um, and I think, uh, Chair Small
might have, um, asked a few of
them, but, um, I am wondering,
there's a number of exemptions,
uh, in your.
Substitute, um, and I'm
wondering how many exemptions do
you include, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
you'll give me a second.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
while he's looking for that, do
you wanna go and ask me another
question or will, or does that
depend on this one?
Um, a little bit, but, um, it
looks like maybe 5 or 6, and I'm
just wondering of all the
exemptions, who's left after
that? How many, um, how many
governing, what's the term you
used go generating facilities
would then be included after all
those exemptions, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
The users of this electricity
out of state.
And how many is that Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Um, Mr. Speaker and and lady, I
would assume folks in Arizona
and folks in California and I
don't know how many people um
those lines service.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and what mechanism
does this use to tax um those
individuals or entities, um, I'm
not seeing the mechanism to.
To then collect that revenue,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's the average rate of what
electricity costs in the state
of Arizona and in California.
Right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
but what's the mechanism? Does
that exist already in New Mexico
code or statute to bill other
states or entities or
individuals in other states, um,
I, I'm just not seeing how that
is directed in in this amendment
um in the substitute, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Speaker Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, it is not and this
bill will will implement that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
point to the line where that um
where it names how this will get
promulgated, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
bear with us one second.
It's on page 2.
Uh, starting with a.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen and um is there,
again, is there a system does
the state of New Mexico already
do this with other things, um,
like is there, will there be a
new system.
That will have to be set up by T
Tax and Rev or by some other
agency or department, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady know
the uh this would have to be set
up.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and is there um an
additional, is there an FIR on
that of how much that would
cost, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
um, the tax and rev department,
we didn't uh hadn't visited with
him yet.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So that's number one
why I can't support this, um,
substitute is uh we, I can't see
the fiscal impact that that
would have on the state, um, and
it might cost more than what it
actually brings in, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, my next question,
Mr. Speakerer gentlemen, uh, can
it looks like this substitute
also amends the tax
administration Act. Can you
explain pages 4 through 7,
please, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's the two credits that
we're taking out.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and uh,
it looks like a lot more than
that. So starting on page 4
lines 13 and going through page.
7
Page 7.
Towards the uh line 20.
It lists a number of taxes, um,
that.
You name or the the substitute
names um.
Page 4, line 10, the
administration and enforcement
of the following taxes or tax
acts as they now exist or may
hereafter be amended.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
these are all taxes that are
currently in law right now.
Uh, yes, I'm aware, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and um you're, the
amendment says the substitute
says that then the following
taxes may be amended, um, I, I'm
just wondering, are you this
reads to me as if you're open
the um substitute is opening up.
The tax code for changes in
amendments, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
they just put this, uh this bill
in that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that,
um, again, I think this is um
this substitute is just not
written well, um, the original
bill doesn't have any of these
additions in it and for me, um,
the way that I interpret this is
that then depending on the
revenue that comes in or doesn't
that the tax code can then be
amended and um and completely
changed, um, potentially much
more.
Easily and without due process,
and we heard in Taksin Rev in
our committee yesterday that
creating an uncertain tax future
for businesses in New Mexico
it's just not good economic
policy, um, and then so next Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm also
noting that the earned income
tax credit is still in the
committee substitute, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen, and so,
um, it looks like you're OK with
adopting the issues, uh, or
adopting that policy.
Um, even though, um, there were
some arguments to it before, but
this seems like you're OK with
it, so that's good to see in
this substitute, however, I
won't, um, I won't be supporting
the committee substitute. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
There is further debate on the
House floor. Substitute
gentlemen from Oteroentator
Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would my friend from San Juan
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind gentlemen. So, I will
first of all just say I really
like this idea.
And I have no idea why, but
there's been a couple of bills
in the last few years who, which
have done something similar to
this. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
first question, I, I know that,
well maybe not a question, but I
think we talked about what it
would cost for this to be
implemented in the department of
taxation and revenue and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there was an
FIR for the last 2 years on this
bill, thankfully, and that FAR
said it would cost about $39,000
they would need to hire one new
FTE and so that would answer
people's questions if they had a
question about that. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, can you tell
me a little bit about the
The taxes that we're gonna be
collecting in any way, shape or
form does your bill or your
substitute, say the word, the
words severance, taxes in any
way.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And so I guess in
previous debate, there's been an
attempt to conflate severance
taxes with the tax that you're
trying to put on consumers that
don't live in the state of New
Mexico. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you just confirm
with me 100% that these taxes
would be paid not by New
Mexicans.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, there
may be some if they um use those
lines or utilize the utilize
those lines at some point in
time, but uh those taxes were
paid by Arizona and California
end users.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and I agree with
you, uh, a majority or all,
pretty much all the people that
would be paying for this would
be from out of state. And so,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
also heard that.
I've heard this argument in
committee as well, by the way,
that this would annihilate in
totality, the industry of solar
and wind, so Mister Speaker,
gentlemen.
Do you think this will
annihilate oil and wind in any
way.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't think it will annihilate.
Well, I don't really know. Maybe
if, if this went to the
subsidies as well, it could, but
I don't think it will.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I would be
inclined to agree with you on
that because Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from the what I've
seen, there are other states
that have very similar taxes
like this.
There are many states that that
levy taxes on renewables such as
Michigan.
Iowa, other states like that,
and those are not hardcore blue
or red states. These are, these
are states from across the
country. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, would, would you
agree with me that
companies that are spending tens
of billions of dollars in the
state to build these lines and
to build these transmission
projects to create new solar
arrays.
Do you think that these
multibillion dollar companies,
many of them which are in China,
by the way, there's one that's
coming that was just announced
the other day from China, but
would you agree that these
multibillion dollar companies
are likely not going to be
annihilated by approximately, is
it 70 million that we're getting
from them?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, as a, as a business, small
business owner, I don't deal
with the numbers of the zeros we
do here or, uh, you know, $10
billion company, they have a
playbook that they operate from,
they know exactly what they're
gonna make, they know exactly
what their costs are and $75
million should not hurt them in
any way, shape, or form.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle, gentlemen, and I
agree with you and I think that
this idea is one that's
inventive, and I also wanna just
make a point that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this is not some
like.
Right wing extremist idea.
This bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, was previously
brought forward by Senator
Padilla.
And former Representative, now
Senator Trujillo.
In 2020, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
so this idea is one that was
actually started by the
Democratic Party. Does that
surprise you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it,
it does surprise me, but my
point here is if, if we're gonna
lose oil and gas, then at some
point in time, and we have all
of them here now, so let's put
them all in, uh, and, and I'm,
I'm for all of those, but for
this tax that folks out of state
can pay then we ought to take
the opportunity to let him pay
that.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, gentlemen, and I
think that this is just such a
A good idea, in my opinion, and
I think that when it comes to
this, not a single New Mexican
will be taking the tax hit but
rather people who are being
shipped our power to another
state, which is, by the way, Mr.
Speaker, right now tax-free, not
a single excise tax is levied on
renewable energy while there is
a 3 and 3/74% statewide tax on
oil and gas as well as many
minerals and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that does
not include grocery reces taxes.
That does not include local
taxes that does not include ad
valorum. In some counties, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they're
paying upwards of 20% of what a
barrel of oil is worth.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
last question, do you find this
to be fair and equitable tax
policy.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, as I
mentioned, I think it's fair,
but as a former mayor, I think
it's really great because the
people in this state aren't
going to be impacted one bit by
this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I've heard, I've
heard that as well, and I've
heard arguments that say this
could be bad tax policy because
we're subsidizing it on the
front end and then we're also
charging it on the back end. But
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would
make the case that if we did not
heavily subsidize this industry,
it would not exist in this state
at all. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House for substitute for house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 14. We
are on a table in motion to
house floor, substitute for
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for house 14, a vote
of yes, and the substitute would
have been tabled a vote of no
and we are back on the
substitute. 32nd bull clock. The
vote is now open.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 35 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. House floors
substitute to house taxation and
revenue substitute for house 14
has been tabled.
Gentlemen from San Juan, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, body
at some point in time, we need
to take a very, very um strong
look at how we are going to be
doing this. If we're going to
produce clean energy in the
state of New Mexico and that
clean energy is leaving the
state of New Mexico. How are we
going to tax and how are we
going to fund all of the
programs that we use in the
state of New Mexico that's my
question today. I, I, Mr.
Speaker, I don't think this is
good tax policy. I still think
that when
We're looking at cutting the top
of our blanket off and sewing it
on the bottom and saying this is
our blanket is now longer. This
is good tax policy. It is not,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen. There is
further debate, gentlemen from
Donana, Representative Small.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, with the gentleman from
Rio Rio Ariba San Juan and
Sandovallo.
Mr. Speaker, I yield gladly to
my friend from Donana County.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, uh, gentlemen, thank
you, chair. Thank you, friend.
First, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, I was reflecting, uh, you
said that this will help a pro
at least 100,000 New Mexicans,
the tax cuts, is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Speaker and
gentlemen, currently,
Answer is yes, but currently we
have about 205,000 people that
enjoy this benefit with the
addition of this new tax
incentive, we will add about
another 101,000 New Mexican
workers. Wow, thank you Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen. So
we're, uh, adding a huge share
of new New Mexicans to, to
utilize this benefit and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think I
was hearing you say, and this is
built on the work that you and
as you've went through, uh,
past, uh, folks have done, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it seems
like this tax credit is focused
on getting more folks into the
workforce, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, does this reward
folks who are working, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
absolutely 100%. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's uh
great to hear because Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, even as
we see sort of federally some
challenges. Ms. Schrier,
gentlemen, there are still more
job openings in the state of New
Mexico, then there are folks
looking for jobs. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, what you're
telling me here and what you're
sharing with all of us is
through your work and the
leadership and the work of all
those on the task committee that
more New Mexicans will find
more benefit going into the
workforce, going into these new
jobs that are being created all
around the state.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
are absolutely correct.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. That's,
that's really exciting news. Uh,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
builds, this is gonna uh
continue to increase the amount
of tax benefits and tax breaks
that you and other leaders have
brought before the body. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it seems to
me that that number, uh, with
what we're looking at today is
well over a billion dollars of
taxes that have been cut for New
Mexicans uh during the time that
both you and I have had the
privilege to be here along with
so
many others. Is that accurate,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, you, you
touched on a great point, which
is why in my introduction I gave
so much credit to those that
have come before us that shared
the tax committee because it's
through their, their vision
really that we've created this
really amazing text structure
creating progressivity in New
Mexico that honestly, New Mexico
leads the entire United States
in tax structure and their
benefits. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
That, uh, that is so exciting
and it really, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, think it
touches, uh, in stories that all
of us can uh really know whether
it's from our own situations,
from, uh, our families, from
neighbors, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, you know, my mom,
I recall, she worked multiple
part-time jobs, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, providing for my
brother and I, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it sounds like, and,
and worked super hard.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think, uh, as we're moving in
the direction that you're
leading us in, uh, the idea of
rewarding more New Mexicans who
are getting into the workforce,
uh, making it easier for them to
uh find their careers, uh,
through other investments that
are being made, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to increase their
skills and go into jobs that
support their families here in
New Mexico. It's so important.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
wanna now sort of talk
the mechanism and, and I was uh
pleased to bring House Bill 548.
1st, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, did
you, uh, I learned about the
differential between what we tax
um natural gas and oil and the
emergency school tax
specifically, uh, I learned
about that basically this year,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, is that
sort of does that track with,
with your uh understanding of
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, you and I spent quite a
bit of time together over the
past year and a half,
especially, uh, being a member
of the Legislative Finance
Committee. So when you learned
about it, I learned about it and
there was quite a shock in
regards to what it what it
uncovered and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I also have that
shock because Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I'll, I'll work
to be very concise, but I think
this is a great history, uh,
that's been helpful for me to
understand and and has some
really serious uh and good
implications for our state, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
And I think reflected in the
bill that you're bringing today
shows, uh, a lot of nuance
shows um an understanding and
appreciation for, uh, a number
of different facets in the
state. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, my understanding
is that back in the 9 mid 1980s,
the federal government created a
large credit for looking for
natural gas in really tight
formations at the federal level.
Yeah, mid 1980s. Is that your
understanding, Mr. Speaker?
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that is my
understanding as well.
Great, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's also my understanding and
I've got, uh, I would highly
recommend that uh energy
information Administration, EIA
remarkable amount of data, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
The, the short history is the
federal tax credit came into
place mid mid 80s in sort of the
early to mid 90s, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, observing that
federal tax credit that was
reducing the price, the state of
New Mexico actually increased
the emergency school tax on
natural gas. Is that your
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? and gentlemen, that
is in my understanding as well.
But to even add to that, that's
why I appreciate you so much and
why I credit you.
4 and my introduction as well in
regards to bringing information
and a wealth of information in
regards to the background in
your institutional knowledge of
oil and gas. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
I, I appreciate that it's one of
the, uh, I know the core
responsibilities that we have
with our finance committee but
also I know so many others from
different perspectives, uh,
including within the industry,
which I, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
deeply uh respect. I think I and
so many others continue to learn
from, uh, daily. And Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
It seems to me that at that
point, the state of New Mexico
instituted basically uh uh 85
basins Point increase in the
natural gas, uh, emergency
school tax is that would that be
fair going from 3.15 to 4?
Uh, that's my understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I don't know who is
here in the mid-nineties, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, but I think
that that shows, um, it's just
something for us to think about,
remark upon, uh, observe, and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, one
of the great things that we can
do with EIA is to go back and to
observe what prices were back
then for both natural gas and
oil that were received sort of
broadly by producers. What
production?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, was, uh,
of natural gas and oil, uh, back
in that time. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
The one of the reasons, just
looking at that natural gas
side, one of the reasons that
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it seems
like the federal government
instituted a large tax credit.
Again, we see that the, the tax
increase was imposed by the
state back in the mid-nineties.
One of the reasons is that
natural gas infrastructure is
pretty extensive and expensive.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Speaker and gentlemen, I agree
with you 100%.
Great, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I, and that's something that I
think is good for us to think
about, particularly Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, as we think about
economic innovation and growth
and the potential for uh new
investment in the state because
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding is that there's
one oil refinery, uh, remaining
in the state of New Mexico, sort
of half and half, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they, they're half
and sort of the growing side of
their business is biofuels, uh,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
have as a much older part, not
necessarily receiving new
investment is traditional oil.
Is that your understanding, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Speaker and
gentlemen, from what I read and
what I understand, yes, sir. And
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding as well, but on
the other hand, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there's a wide range
of natural gas investments that
are either being made or or
proposed in the state, uh,
different parts of the state,
including in the Northwest, the
Southeast, other parts of the
state. Would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Speaker and gentlemen, I agree
with that 100%.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
seems like if we're looking at
what you're bringing forward in
your bill today, reducing, uh,
by 10 basis points that
emergency school tax on natural
gas we're actually really
leaning into and supporting
investment in natural gas
infrastructure, and the
associated economic development
in the state of New Mexico.
Would you agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Speaker.
The savings are immense. I
would, I would agree, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
I think that's uh uh mark that
we should show sort of nuance
and uh and uh working, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think to
get as much of a good
perspective because when we
looked at the unbalanced nature
of this, what we had in two
really good conversations in
house energy and in your
committee in house taxes that
there's 3 ways to equalize. One
can go up, one can go down all
the way, or Mister Speaker
General gentlemen, there can be
uh sort of a beginning towards
moving and meeting in the
middle.
Would you agree, would you say
that's the route that is being
uh chosen in this bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, yes, sir, and I
would also expand that, you
know, when you brought the bill
to our committee and when it was
presented to the Environment
Committee, but when you came to
our committee and house taxation
and revenue, I, uh, recognize
that this can be easy for you.
It's never easy to want to do
anything different with oil and
gas in New Mexico, but the fact
that you stood, you stood.
Up for something that you read
about, you understood, but you
found that the flaw in the
system was, was, uh,
commendable, but the more, even
more commendable to that was
that you listen to the comments
of the committee. You listen to
the comments and the, and, and,
and the concerns of advocates
and by virtue of that then here
comes this new amended bill. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's
right. And I think that shows
the, the value, uh, some of the
value of the process uh as we go
through. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you and thank you for uh
running the committee in the way
that you do, which welcomes in
uh more questions, more
feedback, and looks for always,
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman, the
middle ground that's doing work
for New Mexico and the fact, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that we're
growing substantially the, uh,
New Mexicans were going to
benefit from working more, uh,
and receiving this tax benefit
is again very exciting. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I just want
to note for the body that, that
natural gas, uh
Federal natural gas, uh, tax
credit. My understanding through
conversation and committee
hearings that went away in 2003,
and so, uh, what we saw sort of
a legacy of where the state
raised the rate, uh, because of
the uh federal government had
lowered a rate, but once the
federal government, uh, sort of,
uh, went back, took away that
tax credit that that the state
hadn't acted and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I know and I wanna
thank the action.
that we're seeing here today
again dropping from 4, dropping
10 basis points from 4 to 3.9.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, now
I want to go on to uh a little
bit about uh my understanding on
oil production and oil price.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, and
if we could
Uh, I'd like to go back, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding is that in um
December 2016, uh, and this is,
uh, looking at the energy
information Administration.
The, the price of oil that New
Mexican producers received from
EIA is 4874 $48.74. And Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, 13 million,
13.035 million barrels of oil
were produced that month. Again,
according to EIA, which is
already substantially above sort
of a 40-year average in the
state that represented already,
would you agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the increase from
horizontal wells, uh, and
production in, in the southeast
part of the state, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, absolutely agree.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
then moving into uh, into
December, um, the, the price of
oil as we looked through there,
I looked through these dates,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
price of oil at the very tiptop
got up to $63 roughly, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, maybe a
little, yeah, about 6302, um,
but really hovered in that high
40s, maybe low to mid-50s.
strange, would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and this is going through
December 2019, my time frame.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you'd
be the man to know. I made
reference to you earlier in my
introduction when you talk about
uh utilizing that app on your,
on your cell phone, the WTI app,
and always watching the markets.
Uh, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I think there are so many in
this body who do it, and I've
been, uh, grateful to learn from
and we have to look at that
because it does have deep
importance and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm so pleased that
the discussions we're having
both in committee and on the
floor recognize honestly and
talk about things like oil and
natural gas production and
prices, uh, and the different,
um, all the different facets
because Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's an important and honest
conversation for the
State. And so when we look to uh
production in December 2019.
Oil production, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, would it surprise you
if the EIA said that over the
course of that time where prices
never got up to above $64 a
barrel, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that the production
went from 13 million barrels in
December 2016 to 32.7 million
barrels in December 2019. Mr.
Speaker, I believe you.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
part of the remarkable story
that we're in.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
want to, um, you know, that
shows, I think, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, although it was a
different time. There was, there
was clearly more reinvestment in
production,
less uh uh of shareholder
buybacks which we're seeing much
more of now, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
Would you say that the oil and
gas, the, the oil and natural
gas industry have become even
more efficient at producing
since that time period?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
absolutely efficient. Great. And
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
would be my understanding,
observing, uh, from, from the
numbers that I'm seeing. And Mr.
Speaker, and obviously
conversations within the
industry that are so important
to us as well. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that break even
price, that ability to invest,
um, it's probably gotten lower
since that time, even Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, as we saw
production grow massively. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
like we've talked about on this
floor, um,
Interestingly enough, I guess,
in December.
Of
Uh, December of this year, the
EIA numbers are uh 65.5 million
barrels of oil produced, uh,
pretty remarkable. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
The, uh
That shows us that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
Uh, what we're looking at, would
you say that um we've tailored
and uh you know, in contrast to
the mid-nineties where there was
an 85 basis point change, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this is much
more of a modest adjustment up
and also a modest adjustment
down on the two main areas, a
little bit up on oil, a little
bit down on natural gas. Would
you agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it provides that
modest.
Uh, up and downward trend to
make sure that we're considerate
of what's going on with the
markets, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I I agree and it's very uh I
think that's a credit to this
legislature, uh, and, and sort
of working to have the best
understanding. Further, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I noted
that you talked about in your
introduction as we read through
the bill that in sort of even
more understanding and really
seeking to understand how
important production is in the
state.
in New Mexico that there's sort
of a trigger that's set at $55 a
barrel. Is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen in the bill,
absolutely, and that's something
that you were, uh, steadfast in
making sure that we had in this
bill because we never know what
might happen but those safety
triggers are important, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I agree. I
want to thank, uh, uh, feedback
and conversations that help to
illustrate that, I think, uh, a
approaching things, I think in a
uh prudent in, in a cautious but
in a
very values-driven way, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, because I do
want to go back to uh sort of
one of the things and, and it,
it, it sounds political. I don't
mean it that, uh, I mean it
observationally, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the oil
and natural gas industry seems
to do, uh, quite well, uh,
under, uh, obviously, we've seen
during the time here, but also
at the federal level when there
is uh uh uh, uh, you know,
federal.
administration like the previous
administration or, or others,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, one
of the reasons might be that
there's a lot of economic growth
and things like that. Would you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Speaker and
gentlemen, I agree 100%. And Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
also agree that uh in certain
areas, particularly within this
industry, things like tariffs
can actually present a lot of
challenge, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, including, uh, for
things that have to do with
metal.
which obviously goes in the pipe
and a whole lot of other things.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
seems like you're using a whole
lot more pipe when you're
drilling 2 + mile laterals, uh,
would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Speaker and
gentlemen, the global effect on
this oil and gas industry is
immense. And in regards to what
you talked about and when you
have to go and pay for an
additional, uh, whatever it is
on a price per per pipe.
That's gonna have a huge effect.
it could, and, and I think here
it seems like within your bill
here, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that if the current
administration with the
uncertainty, uh, uh, and risks
that it's posing that your bill
takes a very uh uh appropriate
and, and, and cautious approach,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm very
pleased to be part of that that
looks at that price and says we
want to ensure that continued
production is very much
here and a part of our state,
uh, in this, would you agree
with that, Mr. Si, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I agree with you.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
great. I think um that
represents uh a legislature, uh,
that is engaging with a lot of
nuance, a lot of detail, some
remarkably big numbers which we
have to acknowledge, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, but
doing it in a way that is
seeking to do the best by the
state and that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, brings me back to
what you said at the beginning,
which is, you're seeking to
provide and we, if we vote for
this today, are providing a very
significant
tax benefit for a very large
number of New Mexicans. Is that
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, with
the vote today, we are providing
a benefit never seen before in
this state, leading the pack in
many cases in many other states
in regards to the benefits
provided for working individuals
in New Mexico. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's new, it's, uh,
really welcome for me to hear
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're also lowering, uh, one tax
on things like natural uh the
tax on natural gas, which is uh
something that uh will
potentially build a lot of new
jobs in New Mexico and bring new
investment.
And really extensive and
important infrastructure that
can do a lot of good things for
the state. Is that also right in
your bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it's all in this
bill.
Great, and we're doing that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, in a way
that is, uh, observant of some
of the federal risks that are
being created by the current
administration, there's no other
way to say it. They're doing the
tariffs, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they are, uh, doing things that
could significantly harm the
workforce that is so vital for
all parts of New Mexico,
including within the oil and gas
industry, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they're also thinking
about doing things that could uh
welcome uh oil and natural gas.
back onto the world market from
folks that are invading.
Neighboring countries. Does that
surprise you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, at this point,
nothing surprises me. Fair
enough, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and I think all of that is to
say, uh, your bill, uh, brings a
never before seen benefit to
over 100,000 New Mexicans, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it does so
in a way that's gonna increase
folks in the workforce and give
them uh even more of a chance to
earn a good living here in the
state of New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, it.
does so in pretty uh hopefully
nuanced understanding of where
we are, uh, as a, uh, energy
powerhouse, uh, worldwide, and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it does
so, I think in concert with
production, uh, part, you know,
in all ways, uh, that Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think is,
as we all acknowledge is very,
very important to the state. So
I'm proud to stand in support of
your legislation. I want to
thank you for bringing forward.
I want to thank members in the
different committees.
for really important
perspectives. This is going to
be continued to be one of the
central areas that we have to do
the best we can get the best
deal for our state, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and be the best
partner at the same time, and it
seems to me your bill does that
in a way that frankly, we
haven't seen before, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and that is
fully a credit to you, the
committee that you lead, being
able to do that in a uh a way
that's never before seen to
provide new benefits never
before.
provided is uh is just really
impressive to see, and I wanna,
uh, urge the body to support it.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Chavez,
Representative Murphy.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
well, the gentleman in chair
from Rio Riba Sandoval and San
Juan.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from
Music.
Chavis County.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. I'd like to, uh,
offer an amendment and, um,
I'll have it uh
Circulated
Well I vote please, Mr. Speaker.
You will have your roll call.
John, would you be kind enough
to read us the 231 number on
that amendment?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, 231-962.1.
OK, that's what we have. We'll
wait for that to get passed out.
Gentlemen, the amendment has
been passed out and it is online
gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. um, this
amendment, uh, which I hope, uh,
will be considered friendly is
essentially House Bill 403,
which passed out of the Energy
Committee, um, unanimously, uh,
after working with Chairman
McQueen and vice chair, and what
it does is it directs attacks
that the oil and gas industry
pays, um, for the plugging and
abandonment of wells where
responsible party cannot be
found.
And, uh, currently that tax
generates between 120 to $140
million a year. Uh, most
recently the OC, the
Conservation division has been
using about 20% of that, roughly
20 to $30 million to plug an
abandoned wells, um, and this
tax, uh, this actually directs,
uh, more of those resources, uh,
to the oil conservation
division, um, so they can plug.
abandoned and reclaim some 350
sites that have become a
backlog. Uh, there is one change
I note, um, to 403 and it begins
at the bottom of page one and,
uh, prior to July 1, it keeps 2
2026, it keeps the current
distribution rate amounts of
19716%.
And then, uh, uh, after that,
uh, beginning in 2026 to 2027,
50% of the money will be swept
into the fund in 75% for the
next year and then 100%, uh,
after that. And uh uh as
discussed in the Energy
Committee and, and during other
testimony, uh, we anticipate
that this fund in a matter of
years will, will be more than
sufficient to, um, plug
abandoned and reclaim, uh, any
sites that may be
uh left.
John Riva Sandoval and San Juan,
is this a friendly amendment,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
didn't even get a chance to talk
before your amendment. I feel
bad about that, uh, just reading
it over and, and looking at the
potential that it might have. I
have just simple one question,
Mr. Speaker, if I may ask the
gentleman, um.
How much does this reduce the
general fund revenues now and in
future years.
Well, in the, in the future, uh
Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, um, it's unknown
because we, we don't really know
what the price of oil is going
to be at that point.
But, um, based upon current
projections, it would probably
be somewhere around 800 to 100
million. Now to remind the body
that, that the industry pays
this tax specifically for this
purpose, yet it hasn't been used
for that, um, at least
extensively or completely for
many years, and that's, uh, uh,
this would, uh, fix that
injustice. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
then if you're utilizing the
gentlewoman lady, the gentle
ladies' uh bill from Bernalillo
County in this consideration
then the FIR does a state in
fact that it's about $121
million hit to the general fund.
Is that your understanding as
well? It could be in the future,
yes, but it doesn't change the,
the, the distribution formula in
the, in the, in the immediate.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, because of that, this is an
unfriendly amendment.
There is debate on the
amendment, uh, the gentleman
from San Juan, represented
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Chavis County you
I do yield with my friend from
San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, we had a pretty
robust discussion of this in, in
at least 2 committees and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the, the
There seems to be general
consensus.
Um, that this is a good idea.
And uh Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
I, I would like to talk about
why.
Um, I think that it's had
support up to this point, uh,
moving through committee even
though it's stalled, got to the
tax committee, uh, Mr. uh,
Speaker and gentleman after uh
the
Uh, discussion about what might
go into a, into a uh.
Tax bill omnibus bill, uh, after
those discussions had
I guess ceased
Um, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, just a couple of
questions.
Just, just to make it clear.
Uh
If this were to go into effect,
if we were to add this to the
current bill, what does it do to
next year's budget?
And, well, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentleman from San Juan, won't
have any impact, um.
For my understanding. So Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that's
the change you made from House
Bill 403, correct? It would have
gone, has 403 would have gone
into effect this budget year
would have gone from
Approximately 20%, which is
going to the uh staying in the
reclamation fund, um, it would
go, it would have gone up to in
2026, it would have gone up to
50%, staying in the reclamation
fund, is that correct? That's
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Some speaker and gentlemen, uh,
as I'm
Recalling those numbers.
That would have been from what
is currently only 20% staying.
In the reclamation fund for the,
for the, for its purpose to to
uh reclaim.
Abandoned and orphaned wells.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it would have gone up.
30% in 2026 to 50% and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, at that
time, that was maybe $40
million. Is that correct?
40 to 60, and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, 40 to 60 is what I
recall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and then it would
have gone up from them 7 up to
75% the following year and then
100% the next year. So under
this proposal.
Zero effect on the budget next
year. So we're, we're not.
We're not taking away from
anything.
And then in 2020 this would give
us enough time.
In 2027, so next year when we
come in in a budget year to help
us.
Uh, then start making sure that
a greater percentage stays in
the reclamation fund. Um, and
then for the next 3 years until
100%. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Currently, how many abandoned
wells.
Are there in the state of New
Mexico?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, my understanding, uh, the
latest numbers from the old
conservation division were some
350.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen and uh.
There were, there were more
wells than that, but most of
them are on federal lands, and
so, uh, frankly that the dollars
in this, uh, fund are supposed
to go at least to state lands,
they could flow over if there
was um a reason to, to go after
some of those federal um
projects as well, but currently
we're just prioritizing New
Mexico wells, is that correct?
That's the 300 number, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen,
that's correct. There's
estimated, uh, 1700 wells, I
believe is the number.
on federal lands, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, the
federal government pays, uh, to
plug and abandon those and
reclaims those sites, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, and
many times what they actually do
is contract with the whole
conservation division to perform
that work, but they, uh, they
pay for it.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
You've been, uh, this is your
first year as a legislature as
as a legislator, uh, your first
time serving on the House Energy
Committee, uh, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentlemen, until now.
Uh, we're what, 62 days in?
Um
Would you say that it's been a
constant.
Uh, repetitive drumbeat from
folks saying that the oil and
gas industry is leaving behind
messes and is unwilling to clean
up their messes. Is that what
you've heard, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen in the last, uh, 52
days.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and, um, as you and I
discussed, we've been paying
into this fund since I believe
the early 90s and uh we being uh
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas
industry and uh had that money,
uh, had that money, uh, been
accumulating in the fund like uh
it was intended, we would
probably be somewhere in the
100s of millions of dollars that
we would have to this point.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we'd be in the
hundreds of millions of dollars
and we wouldn't have any
abandoned wells. It was.
is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you're, you're right.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh,
You're fortunate because you've
only been here for a year
serving on that committee. This
is my 9th year serving on that
committee, so for the last 9
years, I've heard about how
irresponsible the oil and gas
industry is.
And that uh you guys uh in the
oil and gas industry, you and,
and other producers are just
constant polluters and and uh
somewhat it almost sounding at
times as if it's on purpose and
without at the very least
without, without any regard and
so Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
The reality is
This reclamation fund, I've
heard you describe it as, uh, if
for, for the average person to
understand it's like uninsured
motorist. Um, could you explain
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen?
Uh yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, the, uh, you
know, uninsured motorists fund
is something Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen that anybody uh with
car insurance pays into and
basically if you're hit by an
uninsured motorist, um, you can
collect from that fund, um, so
it would be like paying into
that fund and then all of a
sudden, uh, going to it and, uh,
and the person in charge of the
fund says, sorry, I, I took a
trip to, uh, Las Vegas and, uh,
lost.
all the money out of the fund,
uh, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and so, um, we have
heard, um, um, quite frankly, a
number of times we occasionally
hear about how we produce the
cleanest oil and gas and in the
uh in the world, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but so often we hear
the other side, which is simply
not true, and that is that
industry is not paying for and
cleaning up other companies'
messes that are in our industry.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Mr.
Speaker, and, um,
Um, gentleman from, uh, San
Juan, I don't know of any other
industry that does this. There
may be, there may be some, but,
uh, but my industry sure does,
uh, Norma Speaker and gentlemen,
as a matter of fact, right now
we're having to deal with uh
putting money aside to uh go
after abandoned, uh, uranium
mine, uh, that have been left
since the 40s and 50s, and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, we've
also found out that there's over
1000 dry cleaners that have gone
out of business.
Throughout the years that those
are Superfund sites and or not
Superfund sites, they're really
left to us, so New Mexico gets
to be the super fun to clean
those up and we're putting $50
million aside of taxpayer
dollars. So the industry did not
cover that. The industry didn't
pay for that, but in your in in
the oil and gas industry, there
is this uninsured, it's
uninsured is probably the wrong
term. It's just an example
because reality is, everybody
pays for this while they're
drilling.
And producing and then the idea
is if at some point in the
future, a business, somebody has
trouble, goes out of business or
something, for whatever reason
they're abandoned maybe by
potential mismanagement or even
a bad actor.
Uh, that, that leaves behind
these wells. The idea is the
industry has paid into this.
To, um,
Reclaim that area, not just the
well itself, but the, the, but
the top, uh, the surface area as
well. So the Speaker and
gentlemen.
Contrary to what
I get to hear every year.
Uh, that oil and gas is
irresponsible. This is very this
is a very responsible fund.
But the reality is we as
legislators have been
Doing what we always do, we take
from the oil and gas industry.
And redistribute it and that's
what's happened. So this
currently this fund, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, is being
redistributed to the to uh about
$100 million.
Or so every year and this would
just slowly get us back to where
we need to be. I think this is a
great amendment. I understand
that there's been some
discussion that we would talk
about this in the interim, but
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
high time.
That we just stop spending every
dollar.
And stop looking at the uh oil
and gas industry as a piggy bank
that we can rob money from for
any other project we want to do,
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what we've
Uh, there's kind of a saying
that if you rob Peter to pay
Paul, you'll get Paul's vote,
90% of the time, and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm afraid that's
what we're doing today, so I
fully support your amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen from San Juan, um, I
think the consensus coming out
of the, uh, the, uh, Energy
Committee, and I note that it
was unanimous. There were
revisions made to it, um, and
that, uh, I remember one comment
and that is, is that we ought to
use the money that, that we
collect for tax for that
purpose, for the purpose that's
collected. And so I think this
is a very good amendment. It
does not, uh,
Um, impact the budget near term
and, um, would urge the body to
support.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
house floor amendment number 1.
To house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 14.
There's been a motion to table
amendment number 1 to house
taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 14.
A vote
For of of a vote of yes when
when the when the amendment will
be tabled a voter no and the
discussion will continue. The
vote.
is now open.
The vote is almost.
The vote is now closed by a
count of 37 in the affirmative,
28 in the negative. House floor
amendment number 1 to House tax.
How's taxation and revenue
community substitute for House
Bill 14 has been tabled.
The gentleman you still have the
4.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, um,
From my Reba Sandoval, San Juan,
Mr. Chairman, um, get back, uh,
I'm gonna start back with, uh,
addressing Mr. Speaker, um, the,
uh, some of the remarks that
were made and then get into the
bill itself, um,
Chairman, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, you, uh, you
mentioned, um, mass deportations
twice in in your comments,
perhaps 3 times, but I caught it
twice.
Can you tell me where those are
occurring, um, when they
occurred or give me some uh
reference source because I, I
certainly have not heard about
this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, when
this administration started, uh,
earlier this year that was their
first threat was to do perform
mass deportations, and we
recognize that here in New
Mexico those mass deportations
would in fact affect agriculture
and oil and gas to oil and gas,
I cannot give you an exact date,
time, or person or place, but
the point I'm saying is that the
threats are there and they're
real.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, I have certainly heard
about some deportations of
certain violent criminals and,
and gangs and so forth, but, you
know, my, uh, men and women that
work for me are in the oil
fields of southeastern Mexico
and West Texas, and I would
certainly thank Mr. Speaker and
chairman that anything like that
was occurring, I'd certainly
hear about it.
But you can't give me, uh,
excuse me, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, but uh you don't have
any specifics.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, only
the specifics in regards to the
threats that were made by the
president himself.
Uh, and Mr.
Speaker in general, I think, I
think, uh, that he was pretty
specific about that, but I'll,
I'll stick to the bill. Um, you
also, uh.
Um, had some speculation about
where layoffs may be occurring,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and I
was curious if you had heard or
read that Halliburton has, has
announced a 1000 person layoff.
Are you aware of that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have not heard that. Tell me
more, please.
Well, they're not the only ones,
um, Mr. Speaker, and, um,
Cudweller is also said that
Chevron has announced up to 20%.
And one of the things, Mr.
Speaker, and Chairman, that you,
you said that, uh,
I found particularly interesting
because once again, I'm not
aware of it. You, you suggested
that perhaps
Any layoffs were due to mergers
and acquisitions. Can you give
me examples of any large mergers
or acquisitions that, that may
have resulted in, uh, in
layoffs.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, when
I talk about the mergers and
acquisition it's.
Simple that in regards to New
Mexico there has been some of
those that have taken place over
the past several years, but when
we talk about the reductions
that you make mention of
Halliburton, you talk about
Chevron. Those are global
reductions and a lot of those
layouts happen that happened
there, most likely won't happen
here.
Um, Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
it's been my experience that
when large companies are really
any companies start to lay off
the layoffs are felt across the
spectrum, and I know for a fact
that there's, uh, that, that
there's layoffs, uh, happening
in the, in the southeast part of
the state, um.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, um,
one of the things that, um, that
was also discussed, I think it
was between you and, and uh
Representative Small, we're sort
of looking at pricing, and one
of the things, if I understood
this right, was that there was,
if you took the 2019 to 2024
price.
It was something on the order of
$48 if I wrote that down
correctly. Do you recall that,
um,
That line of questioning or
discussion, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
remember the line of
questioning, but I don't
remember the dollar figure we're
talking about.
I'd just like to point out that
that by looking at that period
of time, you take in the COVID
time, uh, basically 2,
and 22. And at one point, the
price of oil actually went on
the futures market into a
negative. And so I think that,
um, my guess is if you look post
that, you'll find the prices,
uh, Mr. Speaker and chairman
were quite a bit higher than
that.
The other thing too, Mr. Speaker
and Chairman, I think that you
have to take into account is the
20 to 30% um inflation that we
felt during the previous
administration, that's being
felt in the oil field and pipes
and products too. So those, uh,
that then uh would drive that
number, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman.
From, uh, quite a bit higher in
terms of break-even prices, um.
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, uh,
you quoted a price I believe of
somewhere in the, in the
mid-thirties as, as the
breakeven price. Do I recall
that testimony correctly, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, when I
made mention of the
mid-thirties, there were a lot
of variables surrounding that
number, so it was anywhere
between the mid-thirties, even
$55 upwards.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, um, or
excuse me, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, I, I don't know if you
had had a chance to talk with
the, uh, Izzy, uh, about this
because uh we had a long
discussion, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, that, uh, there's a
very big difference between the
lifting costs, which is the cost
to actually lift a barrel of oil
and process it, uh, versus sort
of the, the return on investment
costs and um there's a number of
uh studies out, um, that seemed
to show
No matter which basin you're
looking at throughout, uh,
throughout the country, uh, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman, you're
looking at a, at a return on
investment costs of somewhere in
the low to probably mid 60s. Mr.
Speaker, Chairman, that number
seemed reasonable to you at all?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm reminded with regards to uh
my discussions with Chief Izzy
here is that, uh, that lifting
cost could depend, uh,
On the return of investments
sought by a company certainly
could be a whole lot higher, but
many of these individuals that
are earning a full return on
their investment or doing it
within 6 months to 2 years. 100%
return on investment in that
short, short amount of time is,
I would say, a pretty good deal.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, uh,
Chairman, what is, what do you
think the, uh, average decline
rate is is on these horizontal
wheels.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, Chief
Eazy tells me it's pretty steep.
That's exactly, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, it is, it's something
on the order of 60%, so they do
come in fairly high, and they,
they do return in investment,
but, um, at some point, and it,
it may be, um, a year, it may be
3 years, um, but there's, uh,
the actual return over time is
pretty standard and, uh, in the
industry. So I get back that we
were at a perilous point, uh,
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, in
terms of oil prices right now,
we're rapidly approaching that
mid.
60 range.
And are you not concerned, uh,
uh, Mr. Speaker and chairman
that we're going to see a fall
off in, in the industry
activity.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I, I, I don't have the
firsthand.
Appreciation that as you do of
the business being being in the
business yourself. But I would
say, and I would have to rely on
our economists here and, and
then when they tell me that that
the uh future is still looking
bright that we have 102 rigs
here in New Mexico still, which
is up from last year and that
the price is remaining steady,
uh, we have to rely on our
economists.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
um, I can tell you as a fact
that rigs are being laid down
right now. As a matter of fact,
the one that we are running, uh,
we'll finish up this last well
and, and we'll be released, um,
and I talked to, uh, my
colleagues in the fields feel
all the time and, and, uh, they
have similar plans. Many times,
uh, Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
you don't see the immediate
effect because, um, companies
many times, Mr. Speaker, um,
And Chairman contract for
multiple rigs. So that becomes a
contractual obligation, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman, that they
have to fulfill before they're
ready to release the rigs, but I
would caution you, um, that I
think that day, 102 is going to
be uh dropping a pretty, uh,
pretty rapidly, Mr. Speaker and
Mr. Chairman. I want to talk
about uh one other
Excuse me, another area and that
is, uh, proven reserves. Um, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman, uh,
Chairman, if I recall you, you,
you felt like that the one the
gas, we might be out of oil and
gas, uh, sooner rather than
later. Can we go back to that?
What's your views on, in terms
of, uh, of reserves and and and
remaining production here and
here in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the,
my outlook on reserves are
Pretty basic, honestly. I mean,
I, you heard me, I my
introduction. I, I use the
analogy of a pinata, right? So
the reserves is however much
this natural resources continue
to provide New Mexico for New
Mexicans, right? So once you
continue to keep hitting it or
tapping it, it's gonna run out
eventually. So if that's the
extent you're looking for,
that's the, that's, that's my
example, but please enlighten
us.
Well, it looks like based upon
my um research that we have
proven reserves about another 50
years and perhaps unproven
reserves, Mr. Speaker and
chairman of another 100 years.
So I hope that, uh, uh, prices
and regulatory activity and and
tax policy will allow those
reserves to be, um,
Produced, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, because I think you
would agree that, um, being that
New Mexico produces the cleanest
barrel in the world, and that
doesn't come without cost, you
know, Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
there's a lot of regulatory
compliance costs that go into
producing that clean barrel, but
I think he'd agree with me, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman, that if
that being the case, then don't
we want the last barrel of oil
ever, ever produced to be in New
Mexico barrel oil.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know if I would say that
personally, but I imagine maybe
you would or the Mexicans might
want to say that.
Depending on who you wanna ask.
Um, Mr. Speaker and Chairman, I
mean, I, I guess I don't
understand that logic because
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, what I
would say is that we want that
sale of that barrel to inner to
the benefits of the people of
New Mexico and that's how I sort
of get to where I, I'm going, do
you not see it the same way, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
engaging in this conversation.
I'm learning as we're going, but
I appreciate your line of
questioning.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to go now to the bill, um.
Itself and let me sorry.
Get it here. I
I'm gonna actually go.
To the Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
I'm actually gonna go to section
or excuse me, page 14, they
earned income tax credit.
Portion of the bill, um, just an
aside, I, I worked for somebody.
Years ago, um, and, um, whenever
he sold something, he'd always
take the contract.
And go to about the middle of
it.
And I said, why, uh, Mr.
Gunderson, why would you do
that? And he, and Mr. Speaker
and Chairman, he said, well, he
said, I figured the first half
of the contract they give me
everything I want in the last
half of the contract, they take
it all back. So, um, in this
case, um, the really good part
of this bill, in my opinion, is,
is the back half of the of the
of the bill. The earned income
tax credit and um did I hear
That
Let me just ask this for I don't
recall the number exactly, but
it seemed like, um,
Representative Duncan was
talking about um sort of what an
average family, uh, might get.
And Mr. Speaker and Chairman,
could you remind me what that
number would look on an annual
basis.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, I
would ask you what, what's your
definition of an average family
in New Mexico. Um, I just say,
uh, I think the example he used
was 2 kids, married, 2 kids.
Mr. Speaker, Jim.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that'd be $1000.
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, that's
a lot of money. That's good. Um,
so if this bill goes through,
Mr. Speaker, and, and Chairman,
Um
It's going to raise, do I recall
something on the order of 130 to
150 million. Is that right, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
would raise about 130 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chairman. So 75 roughly goes to
The earned income tax credit.
Where, where does the other, uh,
whatever the math is there, what
is that, uh, $55 million go?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
common practices it has been
since I think uh my predecessors
and I have been a part of the
tax committee as chair as
chairmen and women that uh we
retained a portion of that and
send it over to the Senate for
their initiatives based on the
tax initiatives that they've
heard in their respective task
uh.
Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and, and
Chairman. So, if somebody in my
industry calls me up and says,
uh, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman,
and says, uh, OK, I understand
we're getting hit with $130
million 75% of it goes to the
earned income tax credit, um,
what do I, what do I say to him
about where the rest goes. We,
we don't know that we have to
wait until the Senate decides,
um, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we're not breaking any tradition
in regards to this, uh,
actually, I actually encouraged
the, the, the Senate this past
year, or this, this year, as a
matter of fact, to see if they
could uh have their
Um, projects in our, in our tax
bills that left here but they uh
retained the right to amend it
on their side.
All right, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chairman, or Chairman, um,
It sort of reminds me of, of
how, how this bill came about in
the first place, at least the,
uh, 548 portion of it, Mr.
Speaker, and, and Chairman, um,
it was filed on the last day,
11th hour.
We weren't told we being the oil
and gas industry, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Chairman, we weren't told
how, you know, how much, uh,
where it was gonna go or, or how
much it might even be, and yet
here we are now with this bill.
We know where 75 goes, uh, Mr.
Speaker and Mr. Chairman, but
we, we can't, we, we can't tell
the, the Mexico, um.
Public, where the other 55
million is going to go?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
recognize your concern. So, uh,
here in this body we have checks
and balances on what uh we do on
the House side and what the
Senate side does on their side
and then if we don't, uh, uh,
then what happens then is that
they'll mend it on their side
and they'll come back here for
concurrence once it's submitted
on that side. And so we will see
it again.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Chairman, I guess I'll tell
everybody just to wait to figure
out we're $55 million may be
going.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to go back to
sort of the history of the, of
the tax, the equalization tax
and um it was explained to me,
um, at least during our it came
out, Mr. Speaker, uh, Chairman,
during one of the committees
that, um, this was uh horizontal
equity, um, equity, and so, um,
I don't understand how those are
equalized when we have one that
ends up oil being effective rate
of 3.43.
And another one being 3.9. How
is that equalized across uh,
across the tax code, Mr. Speaker
and Chairman.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I go
back to the considerations that
are, are a gentleman from Donana
had with uh.
With the industry in regards to
how this is equal. So originally
it had come out to we were gonna
just have both of them at 4% but
after again consideration by by
both he and industry and and
taking consideration from those
conversations that we've had
with members. I mean, that's
where the 3.43 comes from and
then it goes down on natural gas
to 3.9 thereafter, uh, for the
gas folks, uh, leaving them of
about $11.4 million.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
Chairman. I, uh,
I, uh, also want to touch base a
little bit on, on, um, I think
Representatives Smalls comments
regarding the section 29 federal
tax credit that, um, went away
some 23 years ago, and that was
the reason, um, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, isn't it that um the
legislature raised the severance
tax rate from 3.15% on oil,
excuse me, it's left 3.15 on
oil, but it raised it from 3.15
to
So the 0.85 and, and, uh, is
that your understanding of the
circumstances, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
sir.
Um, now, wouldn't it, Mr.
Speaker and Chairman, wouldn't
really now that that tax,
federal tax incentive has
expired. Shouldn't the gas rate
come back down to the oil rates
since that's what it was
originally intended to offset.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that, uh, has been expired since
2000 2003.
And, and industry has continued
to grow and, and, and thrive in
this state, so, uh, that'd be my
answer to that.
Well, Mr. Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, I think it's, I think
it's sort of the same thing as
my previous amendment and that
is, is that um it would seem
that good tax policy would be to
actually spend the money, uh, on
the things that it's intended
for or in this case, since it
was raised uh because of the
federal tax credit that's now
expired. Um, it, it, the, uh, it
ought to go back to the original
rate. What am I missing here,
Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know what you're missing
here.
Well, I, I, I guess, I guess,
uh, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chairman, um, it just seems
logical and, and fair to me that
that's exactly what should occur
and I'm, I guess I'm, I'm
curious as to why you don't
agree with that. Speaking
gentlemen, I don't know if it's
a matter, but I don't agree with
it, but at the point of
Where we're at today is that
this is the bill that's
presented in front of us and
this is what we're considering
so had we had discussions prior
that'd be great but at this
point in time.
We are here.
Um
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, um,
no, uh, and I acknowledge we
didn't have any, any uh
conversations previously. As a
matter of fact, um, this tax
bill, as I stated, just came up
a few weeks ago. As a matter of
fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman,
I didn't go through the interim
process. It, it, it didn't even
come, um, it didn't even come to
industry uh before it was filed.
And so, um, I think that we
would have welcomed that sort of
discussion, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Mr. Chairman.
Um
I want to go to
And the front part of the bill
now, the back part of the bill,
I think, is, is, uh, they earned
income tax credit is a very good
thing. And, uh, I, I would
certainly support it, um.
It's kind of the heart of the
bill when you agree, uh, um, Mr.
Speaker and Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it's certainly the part of the
bill that uh provides the most
benefits for New Mexico but
obviously to be able to provide
the way to provide those
benefits is also an important
aspect as well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Chairman, I'm, I, I think about
it and I think, you know, the
heart is good, but the front
part of the bill where it's
funding is, is maybe not so
good. It's almost kind of like a
Frankenstein to me that, uh, uh,
the heart is healthy, but, uh,
I'm not sure that the brain is
as healthy, um.
Jenny, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, can you, can you
describe sort of the
consultation process that has
happened since, um, uh, with
industry and other stakeholders
since the bill was introduced a
few weeks ago.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
not firsthand because the bill
was like a being mentioned
before, uh, the, the sponsor is
from Dona Anna, Chairman Small,
and he brought this to both the
environment uh committee as well
as then the House taxation and
Revenue Committee so during
those times, uh, industry was
well aware of what was going on
and, and according to again the
conversations that I've had with
Chairman Small is that uh the
consideration was provided and
was accepted by industry to have
conversations and that's why we
see it, uh, pulled back from
what one.
was a bill to raise about 400 to
$450 million and uh create that
4%, uh, flat rate to now what we
see today at about $130 million.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, I appreciate that
explanation. I am curious. I see
in one of the things that we
were talked about, um, uh, oh,
Madam Chair, now, uh, Madam
Speaker, and, uh,
Uh, chairman, um, is the $55
trigger. Can you describe to me
um, how, how that was arrived
at.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and, uh, Madam
Speaker, excuse me, and
gentlemen, so that was uh a
prudent measure that the
chairman put into this bill
based on his conversations with
industry leaders so to make sure
that, as well as our economists
actually to make sure that if
ever that does in fact happen
where we fall below $55 per
barrel that uh we would be able
to, we would have to pull back
on this.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and,
and chair, um, I, I don't
disagree, uh, with that number,
and I think it is a well thought
out, I would probably put it at
60 or 65, but
Um, I think at, at 6055, that's,
that's a reasonable number. But
then I see and if I could take
you to pages.
8 and 9.
And beginning on a on page.
Yeah, beginning at 8 on on line
20, excuse me, there's a $15
reference.
Um, page 9.
3 lines 3 and 4, there's a 15
and an $18 reference and then
line page 9 on line 11, there's
$1.15 per 1000 cubic feet
reference, those all seem to be,
um,
Mr. Madam Speaker, and Mr.
Chair.
All seemed to be tied back to
some sort of triggers that must
have been done many, many, many
years ago with that, uh, would
that be correct? Would that be a
correct assumption, um, Madam
Chair or Madam Speaker and Mr.
Chair. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, those are really,
really, really old figures.
Um, Madam Speaker, Mr. Chair,
I'm curious, um, why, why
weren't those numbers updated?
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
it's a really, really just a
policy choice that um never
really made it a part of this
bill.
Well
Madam Speaker and, and chair
that they are part of the bill.
I'm just, but, but they're
basically triggers that, that
really are, are now sort of
meaningless. Is that, I mean,
when was it'd be, it'd be pretty
unusual, um, Madam Speaker, Mr.
Chair, for those to kick into
effect, uh, would you agree with
that chair?
Yeah, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm glad you brought
this up because this this is
just, this is existing statute
that, you know, we, we could
have we could have updated it,
but we didn't at this point.
Alright, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Um,
Mr. Chair, I think that just
about concludes my
Remarks and take just a second
here to review my notes, please.
I think that's it. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and chair,
appreciate it.
Seeing further debate, um.
The gentlewoman from Dona Anna
Otero.
Thank you Madam Speaker, uh,
will the gentleman from Rio
Arriva Sandoval in San Juan Yil?
Mm
Madam Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Dona Anna Rotero
counties.
Thank you. I just had a couple
of questions, um, because
yesterday I was in committee and
it felt like we were talking
about this all day. And so, um,
I just want to come back for the
body and uh for those watching,
um, to bring those conversations
um here so that we can get a
clearer picture, um, first, um,
Madam Speaker and chair, do you
know how many profits
How much profits were generated
since 2021 in the lower 48 for
oil and gas.
Yeah. Uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle ladies, so all and guests
attributed more than $213
billion in dividends as a matter
of fact, more than 136 billion
of those in buybacks just in
2024.
So over 200 billion, is that
correct?
Yeah, over 213 billion actually
in dividends and more than 136
billion in buybacks in 2024. And
if I can expand, Madam Speaker
and, and gentle lady over the
last 4 years, net profits have
actually increased by 16% and in
the best performance for the
industry, uh, as, as a matter of
fact, he's 2023, 2024, um, years
in the past 34 years, so they're
they're doing a, a pretty good
job.
That's amazing. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, Madam Speaker, and
gentlemen, and how much um is
the state of New Mexico asking
for um with House Bill 14, can
you remind me, Mr. Speak Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, initially we were
looking to hopefully raise about
400, maybe $400 million but
that's been largely pulled back
and at this point in time, the
way the way the bill is
presented today, it's about $130
million.
Excellent. um, thank you for
that. And then Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, are you familiar with
the tax benefits that oil and
gas companies enjoy if they
operate here in the United
States, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm not quite fully versed on
all the benefits they receive,
but I would love to hear more if
you have that information.
Um, I do, and actually there's
several major tax benefits um
that are available for oil and
gas companies and investors that
are found nowhere else in the
tax code, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, for instance, the
oil and gas industry benefits
from several federal tax
exemptions including the small
producer tax exemption allowing
a 15% tax deduction on oil and
gas income.
Um, and, um, and so that allows
smaller producers to um to
compete and be able to generate
income and still be able to
deduct 15% of their gross income
from oil and gas properties, um,
essentially making that portion
tax free.
Um, also they have intangible
drilling costs or IDCs, uh,
which typically make up a
significant portion um of the
total cost of drilling a well so
upwards of 60 to 85% of the
total cost of drilling a well
can be fully deductible in the
year that that expense was
incurred.
This means that investors can
deduct these costs against their
taxable income in the year
they're incurred rather than
depreciating them over time.
Um, and then on top of that, um,
if a well is producing income,
um, they can consider the
percentage depletion allowance
or PDA, um, that, uh, is an
ongoing deduction that offsets
reduced resource availability,
um, and then this can provide
consistent tax relief to
producers, and so, um, there are
also like lease operating costs
on administrative, legal, and
accounting expenses. And so, um,
I think that there's
just a great number of tax
benefits that this industry in
particular benefits from that no
other industry in the state of
New Mexico, um, can see and as
chair of the Texan Rev, are you
familiar with any sort of tax
benefits that New Mexico might
have that would compare to
something like I've just
described, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and
generally, thank you for
educating the body on in regards
to all of the federal, uh,
incentives that oil and gas
receive. So at this point in
time here in New Mexico, uh, oil
and gas can deduct royalties
from its severance tax
liability.
Uh, and also the transportation
expense to make sure that that
product can get to market. So
those are some prime examples.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and then I also
wanna adjust, um, I wanna shift
a little bit our conversation,
so that's the amount of um of a
profit that we're seeing and
then what we're requesting in
terms of uh producers being able
to uh have the privilege of
taking this resource, uh, from
New Mexicans, uh, I wanna shift
to then, uh, the kind of zoom
out to the bigger economy, um,
and so I asked these questions
in texts and revs.
Um, that industries across the
country are adjusting their
first quarter outlooks, not just
the oil and gas industry, um, do
you know why, why that is or
maybe Chi um Chief Torres might
be able to also um uh illuminate
our conversation.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gently, so
at this point in time,
We were, as, as the discussion
went yesterday, there's a number
of factors related to this. So I
mean, I think it all stems
really at this point from a
declining consumer confidence in
regards to where this uh where
our economy is going at this
point in time, so hopefully
there's gonna be a point in time
where that shifts, but until
that time shifts, we are looking
at declining consumer
confidence. Uh, we're looking at
inflation, we're looking at
concerns over inflation tariffs,
high interests, uh, do you want
me to go on, or does that get, I
think that suffices.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
thank you. uh, so, um, in
addition to that, just having
people uh be concerned about job
loss or uh loss of Social
Security payments, I think might
also be something that consumers
are feeling uneasy about, um,
and when, when people are
feeling uneasy about the
economy what do consumers tend
to do, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and gently,
they just, they don't spend
money because they're fearful
that if they do spend it, they
won't have it to replace.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, so they can track
their spending and so they'll
spend less, um, they will
usually go for cheaper products
on the shelf and so, and now as
a state, if a state is feeling
uneasy about um revenues or the
economic outlook, what does a
state tend to do, um, you know,
in comparison to a consumer, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
from Donana and Otero Counties.
Those are great questions, you
know, as a state, what we have
done over the past several years
is we've built reserves, right?
I mean, the, the reserves that
we have now today and you made
mention of one yesterday that
the way the budget went over to
the Senate had a 32% reserve to
make sure that we are creating a
sustainable, uh, budget
framework for New Mexico, right?
So you build reserves, you plan
for sustainable spending, you
can um set up accounts with
savings and investments to help
afford.
spending in the future, right?
If you're looking at New
Mexicans, so there's a number of
ways, uh, that, that, that we
can do things, but I mean the
the.
You, you bring up some really
interesting points in regards to
the uncertainties that we are
faced with, uh, as we are
entering 2025.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and so when we are as
a state and as consumers are
facing this uneasiness and
economic outlook, um.
When I, I guess I'm asking, is
it prudent for us then to look
at additional revenue sources
and say, um, and then create
some more insulation around both
consumer and state budgets, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, and absolutely, and I
would say that the, the manner
to which the gentleman from Dona
Anna approached this this matter
to which is trying to raise
revenues, uh, for this incentive
that we will provide to Mexicans
is, is one great example, but I,
I think it's really unfortunate
that uh industry continues its
quick backlash to make sure
that, to, to, I think, put fear
in, in folks that
If don't mess with, with oil and
gas, right? But when, when we
can say we find that flaw in
regards to, uh, old, old, uh,
statutes that don't make sense
anymore we wanna update those,
right? But when we talk about
using that as the mechanism to
then fund the incentives that
are provided to New Mexicans,
that's a great one. That's a
great one that every, mostly
every single New Mexican that is
working today will feel that's
half of the of the workforce in
New Mexico will benefit from
this. And when you can see
isolated, maybe we're insulating
ourselves from what the federal
government is doing today. We're
insulating in the way that they
can insulate their pockets to
make sure that the more of that
money is staying in their
pockets so that they can spend
it on their families and their
lifestyles.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen and so this is why I
think House Bill 14 is really
timely, um, partly because, um,
not only does it come at a time
where I think at the beginning
of the legislative session times
we were looking good. The
outlook was confident, um,
people, people were feeling
confident about their own
household economy and that
changed, um, pretty drastically
in
Does the time that we've been
here in the session, um, I think
that, you know, some of the
numbers are beginning to look
different, um, and so as we're
looking at that and not knowing
what the next coming weeks or
months are gonna look like the
next quarter. I think it's
important for us to think about
a bill like this as something
that can insulate our local
economies, our state economies,
but also individual families and
um and so I.
So not only, I think it would
have been timely if that weren't
happening in our economy, if our
outlook was looking a little bit
brighter, but now more than ever
I think it is clear that we have
to make sure that families have
what they need that they know
that New Mexico has their back
in terms of making sure that
they have money in their pockets
and so you're telling me that,
um, nearly half of New Mexicans
will not see a a state tax
liability that they um will not
have, we're extinguishing their
Their tax liability and I'm
wondering when low income people
are given that sort of tax break
what do they tend to do with
that extra income, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and dental lady,
they, they use it to survive.
Many cases, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, when we don't have
initiatives like this, right?
Every single dollar that they
make, they know they're gonna
have to put them away because
that's their, their tax
liability, right? But when you
talk about these working
families in New Mexico, most of
them will either spend it on
their families, spend it on
their utilities, spend it on
their rents, spend it on, on
whatever they have to do to
survive, but they spend it in
New Mexico's economy. That's why
I made mention before is that
while we're talking about the
$75 million investment.
And, uh, into this expansion of
a tax credit but we're really
talking about is then spurring
economic, uh, uh.
Uh, uh, an economic boom in New
Mexico upwards of about doubling
that to about $150 million that
will be felt in every single
community in this state, meaning
that if you have an extra.
10 bucks in your pocket, you
might be able to splurge and go
buy yourself a hamburger at the
local restaurant. You might be
able to do if you have an extra
$100 in your pocket, you might
be able to buy your son or your
child or your, your number of
kids that pair of shoes to make
sure that they have it for the
school year or that jacket in
the wintertime. So there's a
number of ways that we see this
play out, but the fact of the
matter is that this injection of
$75 million into this, into
this, in, in a bill like this,
excuse me, um, we'll, we'll
really definitely reap the
benefit.
s of doubling if not in many
cases, even more of that, the
economic benefit for New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I really
appreciate that, um, just like
getting down to the, to the
ground level about how this
could really impact families,
um, and when, um, as chair and
tax and reves you were thinking
about, um,
Um, this policy, this, this
piece of legislation, um, were
you thinking about the economic
outlook in the future where you
are you just like, this is a
plan that has worked across the
country and we can expand on
that and can you, uh, help me
understand your thinking behind
this bill too, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Madam Speaker and
lady, yeah, thank you for the
question. You know, the, the,
the planning for these types of
initiatives don't just begin at
the beginning of the session,
right? So these types of, of
ideas and brainstorming sessions
begin.
When the last session ends,
right? So you want to continue
to grow and build upon the
momentum that we have built in
New Mexico, as I may mention,
and I'm proud of in regards to
the tax structure and the
progressivity that we provided
our New Mexicans in this state.
And so when we, uh, during the
interim last interim, we had a
number of initiatives that we
looked at and, and I may mention
in my introduction that Lichter,
the Lincoln uh tax credit was
one of those, right? And so when
we talked about those that was
leading up into this session,
right? That was before.
That was right around the time
when um we found out who the
president was gonna be. That's
around the time when we figured
out what maybe the initiatives
and, and the, and the proposals
were gonna be for the
administration, but it was also
a time to which
Then we had to pivot.
We had to pivot because we were
unsure about what that meant for
New Mexico, right? What this new
administration would be for New
Mexico, who, who it would impact
in New Mexico, right? And then
surely that as we came into the
session and early or
mid-January, we recognize that,
hey, this is, this is gonna be a
little bit tough, so that's why
we made sure that this was our,
our premier part of the tax
incentive or a tax credit that
we were gonna ensure that we
would be able to try to provide
to New Mexicans.
Uh, all focusing on something
that will help get people then.
The credit they deserve, meaning
that they would be able to get
off the sidelines, right? Those
that have been contemplating
wanting to go back to work or
not, uh, trying to figure out
whether the economy works for
them or not, get them off the
sideline, up off the bench,
right? to make sure that this
research proven federal program
that we already have in place.
Would move the needle for New
Mexico.
And by all accounts it's worked,
it's working, and it will
continue to work in this
expanded version, because then
we also account for single file
uh earners, those that are
making minimum wage, those are,
that are working part time. We
are expanding on those families
and reaching even much more.
And thank you to the, the, the
Republicans in our, in our
committee that made mention of
this, we're reaching much more
into the middle class to make
sure that they get a benefit as
well. So we're talking about
this, we are reaching at this
point should this bill go
through, we will reach upwards
of over 300,000 workers in New
Mexico.
Think about your community in in
Dona and Donna Otero counties.
about all those people that,
that, that you know.
Work part time. Think about all
those people you know that work
for minimum wage. Think about
all those families that you know
that are making and struggling
with their $70,000 income.
Think about how much more money
they could have in their pockets
to buy their children food.
Think about much money more
money they can have in their
pockets to pay the rent and not
stress every single month.
Think about how much money they
can have to afford the gasoline
that is gone up because of the
tariffs that have been waged.
Think about how much more money
period that they will be able to
expand on things that are
important to them versus having
to pay New Mexico back for the
tax wages that they will now
have extinguished.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, thank you for
that, um, explanation and also,
um, talking about our
communities, 300,000 New
Mexicans that can benefit from
this single earners, um, which
before, you know, we'd say you
needed to have a family, you
need to have a kid, and now
we're saying, no, you can just
be a single earner and now you
have a benefit. Um, I think
that's gonna, um, stimulate our
economy incredibly.
I think it's going to encourage
people, like you said, to get
off the bench and get into the
workforce and then as you said
when I, when I think about our
smallest communities or
communities that are made up of
folks like this, um, I think
about Chaparral.
And Chaparral is both in Donana
and Otero counties, uh, there's
about 20,000 people who live
there. It's an unincorporated
community, much like the
communities that I hear, uh,
members in, in this chamber talk
about there's not a lot of GRT
base uh gross receipts tax is
pretty low there. Um, they've
got, you know, $2 generals and
some uh local restaurants, but
mostly it's uh schools and
daycare centers and um and
that's about it and.
when I think about chaparral.
Um, the median household income.
In 2023 for Chaparral was
46,000.
And for 20,000 people an entire
community.
An entire community where the
vast majority of people make
less than $50,000 a year, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, are
you telling me that an entire
working community like Chaparral
would not be paying any state
income tax.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
based on those, uh, examples you
provided? Absolutely.
So thank you, gentlemen and
Madam Speaker, and so now think
about all of our communities
where uh I describe chaparral
and it and it's, and maybe it
sounds a lot like communities
that that you represent.
They're small communities they
might be rural there might not
be huge industry there or maybe
the one industry is the truck
stop like in Vaddo where I grew
up, there was the truck stop,
and then they got a dollar when
I moved out and I went to
college, but that was it. And so
communities like this that make
under 50,000 60,000, 70,000 a
year, even.
We might be wiping out the tax
liability for entire communities
across New Mexico.
And so that is incredibly for
me, uh, revolutionary in terms
of what that could boost for our
economies so imagine entire
communities having additional
money to spend and what they
might do with that extra
economic strength from an entire
community, um, I don't know if
you have anything else
additional to add to that, um,
Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, given the, the
communities that you represent.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you for that example, the,
the, the vivid display of what
Chaparral is like because
It's probably like a lot of our
towns and communities all around
our state, right? When you think
about those communities from
Raton all the way down to
Carlsbad from San home to, to,
to Gallup.
You you describe New Mexico. You
described New Mexican
communities, right?
When we talk about providing
that tax incentive that that it
completely extinguishes.
A person's tax state tax
liability to keep my money in
the pockets. That's a big deal,
right? And, and so I'm, I'm glad
you talked about this because we
talk about consequential
legislation in this body, right?
Everybody feels like they have.
The best piece of legislation,
right? Everybody feels like they
have something that's gonna
change the world, right? And,
and, and for each of their
points, I hope that they do and
to their credit, I hope that
they've done that.
But here in New Mexico, right?
We talk about and I made mention
of this in my introduction,
right? I, I, I knew that this
was gonna go one of two ways,
right? We're gonna talk about a
lot about oil and gas and and
how dare we and and pour oil and
gas or we talk about the
benefits that we're gonna
provide for our communities,
right?
Here in New Mexico we have a
long history.
Uh, related to extractive
industries, right? Our people,
our lands, our resources, in
many cases have been exploited,
uh, and New Mexico hasn't
continues to pay the price.
With this piece of legislation.
This is a tax paradigm shift for
all intents and purposes. This
is a tax paradigm shift to
benefit families to benefit
communities to benefit those 300
and
300,000 plus workers here in New
Mexico.
To help those workers to help
those families to help those
households that have 123
children that are making around
$70,000 this, Mr. Speaker now,
and madam, uh, gentle lady from
Donana Altero counties.
This, this legislation, this is
tax justice.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, tax justice. I love
that. I think part of the, um,
we've heard a lot of metaphors
today and, and in the past
several weeks, um, pinatas,
Peter and Paul, um, uh, lots of
different metaphors and I think
the best metaphor when you talk
about tax justice and, and what
we're facing right now is also
uh more of a symbiotic
relationship too, like that's
what we're trying to move
towards is that it is
extractive and exploitative, but
rather that it is symbiotic. The
oil and gas industry, just like
many industries in New Mexico
need healthy families, need
healthy people that can come to
work, um, that are able to come
to work because they have their
basic needs met and so when we
provide people with the
financial ability so that they
can get their basic needs met
they're going to be able to go
to work and when we're gonna
have a strong workforce.
And so I think it's more of like
a flower and a hummingbird.
That these two things need each
other, uh, to survive and
thrive. We need, you know, the
pollinators, but those
pollinators also need the nectar
and so that's the metaphor that
um that I'd like to go with
today, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, when we talk about
the ideas that can pull the
ideas and the policies that can
pull people out of poverty, um,
and do it in a really structural
and systemic way and so, um.
And so I want to thank you for
this piece of legislation and
um, and really I'm excited to
support this. I encourage, um,
this chamber and my colleagues
to support this bill
wholeheartedly. I can tell you
that um we will see an impact on
the health and wealth of our
local communities in that and so
um so I wanna thank this. I also
wanted, um, invite the chamber
next door to completely support
it fully as well.
Um, I, it's been an honor to
serve on Texan Rev on on that
committee, um, I've learned a
lot and then, um, also, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and a gentleman, um,
also wondering if there are any
other policylicies that compare
to this that can pull people out
of poverty and entire
communities out of poverty, um,
such like this, this policy
here, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
You know, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, you bring up some
amazing points, love the
dialogue that we're having this
afternoon and you talk about are
there any other examples, you
know, I can, I can name off a
number of examples that we've
done and that this body has
actually worked on specifically
the former tax chairs uh Speaker
Martinez, former chairwoman, um,
Chandler in regards to really
those expense expanding of tax
credits, right? Making sure that
we're looking after and looking
forward, uh, looking
After
Our families and our communities
in this state, right? So we
start talking about those types
of benefits, and I can, I can
name them, right? We, we talked
about the GRT reduction, right?
We talked about just last year
the uh child tax credit we
talked about Lichter we talked
about, um, just last year again,
the restructuring of the tax,
uh, structure to make sure again
that every single worker in New
Mexico, whether you're at the
lowest or even the highest.
Received a tax deduction.
That's a big deal in itself,
right? But so to build upon or
continue to want to build upon
those types of initiatives is
why we're here today. And while
I would like to consider and
continue to consider that this
be the shining star of this
bill.
I recognize that the Senate may
have other initiatives, right?
And, and, and that's their
prerogative. But for this to be
the shining star need not to be,
um, downplayed by the potential
impact it might have to an
industry that in just in New
Mexico again, has net profits of
upwards $10 billion just in last
year. So when we talk about.
Wayne and how the pendulum
swings, right? We wanna make
sure that we're doing things
with the right focus that's
intentional.
And when you shift your
priorities just a little bit and
start looking at our communities
for what they are and our people
for what they are, and we can
start helping them.
To benefit for their families
for their future, for their
children, for those yet to come.
That's why we're here. That's
why we come here to this house
to try to talk about things, in
some cases, fight the good fight
to have good conversation to
deliberate and in some cases
vote on things that may be
uncomfortable for some, but for
some of us we know that it's the
right thing to do.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
in this case, this is absolutely
the right thing to do, and this
will help again upwards of
300,000 plus workers in Mexico
to ensure that we are insulating
them from the uncertainties of
what's going on today.
Thank you so much, uh, speaker
and gentleman with that I yield.
Uh, let's go next to the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Sapansy. Mr.
Speaker, this matter having been
under consideration for 3 hours,
I moved to close debate. We are
on a motion to close the debate.
All those in favor of C59.
Pa.
The I have a debate is closed.
Who said that?
General from San Juan Riva
Sandoval.
Mr. Speaker, in body, thank you
so much this afternoon for the
deliberations. I appreciate
every single one of yours, uh,
discussion points, but at this
point in time, I would move that
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 14 do not pass. We are on
final passage of how taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 14.
The vote is now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 40 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative. House, taxation,
and revenue Committee substitute
for House Bill 14 hasduli Paz's
house.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
members, we're gonna keep going
with 3rd reading, but we've got
to do a little bit of
housekeeping. The gentle lady
from Brin Leo represented Anaya
with an announcement.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
I know you all have been waiting
for this legislative event of
the season, and I just wanted to
let everybody know that you're
enrolling and engrossing
committee will be having their
committee dinner tonight on the
floor, everybody's invited.
And, uh, this announcement is
both from myself as enrolling
and engrossing, uh, committee
chair for A and um
Representative Gonzalez for B.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So
there's dinner in the lounge for
the entire chamber and the
staff. Yes, it's for everyone,
Mr. Speaker, it's not quite here
yet, but we wanted to make sure
that nobody was ordering dinner.
don't eat yet because there will
be dinner for the chamber and
the staff, courtesy of the
enrolling and engrossing
committees AMB in the lounge.
First time ever.
For those committees hosting a
committee dinner.
Gentlemen from San Juan, Mr.
Speaker, are we on
announcements?
Yes, we are. Speaker, I'd like
to take a point of personal
privilege.
Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to
say, um, I actually appreciate
the discussion we had over the
last 3 hours, and Mr. Speaker, I
think the reality is that last
debate is just uh an admission
on behalf of this body that we
in New Mexico cannot live
without the oil and gas
industry. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker
Chavez, Representative Chavez
said that Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Uh, if I
could take a point of personal
privilege, your point.
Mr. Speaker, thank you so much
for recognizing me, uh, again,
uh, following the debate that we
just had, there's a couple of
things that I really wanted to
point out if I could, uh, that I
heard during the debate, um, I,
I think it's interesting we use
the word over and over towards
the end of tax justice, um, you
know, I think when we talk tax
justice, uh, sometimes it, it
might be we have a spending
problem, um, because when we say
tax justice to, to an industry.
Uh
That contributes over $4.7
billion last year to our budget.
Um, to say that it's tax
justice, uh, when we're, we're
taxing an industry and yet we
cannot tax a renewable energy of
the energy that is leaving our
state.
So Mr. Speaker, uh, I just.
Really want to point out that
when we have these things affect
our small communities, um,
communities like mine, uh, when,
when we get forgotten some so
often, uh, that with tax
justice.
As those industries continue to
do their layoffs and how it
affects our small businesses,
our small service companies, who
are the first.
Well to be affected in our
communities when the oil and gas
industry declines.
And Mr. Speaker, uh, the last
thing I, I just want to say is,
is,
There was plenty of capacity at
the beginning on the budget, but
we passed a budget with $130
million that cut into the
reserves. We just passed a tax
to add $130 million so that we
could have capacity for the tax
credits.
Um, and since we were quoting
Ronald Reagan earlier. I did
look up my favorite quote from
Ronald Reagan.
The problem is not that the
people are taxed too little.
The problem is the government
spends too much with that, Mr.
Speaker, I yield.
Thank you gentlemen, gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 100 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker, move adoption We
are an adoption of favorable
report for Senate Bill 100. All
those in favor of say no.
Opposed name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 221 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Mr. Speaker, and move adoption.
We are adoption of favorable
report for Senate Bill 221 as
amended. All those in favor of
Xeno C and I.
I suppose.
The report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 290 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption. We
are adoption report for Senate
Bill 290 as amended. All those
in favor signify by saying I.
All the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 345 has let it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker, and with adoption.
We are adoption of favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
345. All those in favor of
sitting 5 but I.
All the supposed the I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 357 as amended.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
Wanda Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption favorable committee
report for sending about 357 as
amended. All those in favor
signify butsena.
All the supposed name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 376
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted to you Juna Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're an adoption of Fall
committee report for Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 376. All those in
favor and I say no.
All the supposed name.
Yeah, SAA committee report
adopted.
A lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 78.
Senate Bill 226.
Senate Bill 411 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed. Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 120 as amended.
Senate Bill 127 as amended.
Senate Bill 259 as amended.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 456 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luann, Senate chief clerk.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation.
for Bento and Naya, are you
ready on item number.
53. Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, will
you get me to that point that
action is necessary for place in
Senate Bill 417 on final passage
has been taken. It is now
subject to debate, to amendment
or substitution generated to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, you
have in front of you
confirmatory adoption Senate
Bill 417 and what this does is
it creates a new section in the
New Mexico Adoption Act, um, to
allow those who use assisted
reproduction to petition for
more streamlined confirmatory
adoption instead of the more
traditional process. And with
that, Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 417 do now
pass.
We are a final passage of Senate
Bill 417. The vote is now open.
What's what's close.
The border is now closed by a
vote of 62 in the affirmative, 3
in the negative. House Bill for
Senate bill, Sen bill 417 Hazuli
Paz's house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
Cerrato, are you ready on item
33. Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you
get me to that point that action
has served for place in House
Bill 7 as amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution and
later to explain the bill. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will this bill
develops the Children's Future
Act and Fund. It creates the
fund that will essentially
establish baby bonds in our
state and creates an active um
task force will help, uh,
develop the rules around that as
well.
have uh amended the bill after
consultation with the um uh.
We turned the bill with
consultation with the
appropriations Committee to
ensure that the eligibility was
very clear in in the process and
uh I have with me my two
experts, Michelle Gilbert and uh
Teresa Madrid, uh, who will also
be here to help me answer
questions and with that, we
stand for questions.
There is from the herbs and very
little.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentleman lady from
Santa Fe, please yield. Yes, I
yield to the gentle lady from
Berna Leo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Can you tell me?
Why baby bonds.
And if I may continue.
Mr. Speaker,
How does the children's uh
Future Act help address long
term wealth disparities in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady for the
question. So baby bonds have
been established in a number of
states across the country. What
this would do is it would start
to uh develop the fund so that
we can begin to ensure that uh
we're building a corpus for it,
um, over time after 18 years,
the first set of children would
have access to this fund and uh
they would be able to access it.
It would act as a trust fund.
Uh, the bill clearly lays out
that they would only be able to
use this this this this resource
for education, um, housing, so
for.
a home, um, uh, uh, by or
starting a new business, um, and
investments and retirement. So
once that fund grows over time,
then we then we anticipate
there'll be some starter money
as they begin their lives. We
believe and and actually it's
been seen a lot of ways and it's
even cited in the uh FIR that
this is a wealth building
program to ensure that children
and adults would have access to
essentially taking, um, uh,
those big steps that are really
important that folks may not be
saving for. Uh, and this
version of the bill or this this
bill, we ensure that it's
available to all New Mexicans
because as we know, you can be
middle class in New Mexico and
still living paycheck to
paycheck. So it makes a big
difference. We also know that um
wealth shapes health and
developmental outcomes. So we
expect that it would increase
access to health care, uh,
afford healthy, uh, goods and
services and help folks feel
less anxious about their future
and more in control of their
lives.
Thank you, thank you so much,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Is there a connection between
the financial stability of
families and their health.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Absolutely
there is, and it's not just
about having access to going to
the doctor or having access to
those um uh those services, but
it's also the stability that
we've seen, and we know this, a
lot of the research for early
childhood in particular, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, shows that
when parents feel more secure
about their economic stability,
they're able to bond with their
child. They're less stressed
about that. It reduces
incidences of ACEs in in our
communities, as we know, which
are adverse childhood um uh uh
uh uh uh experience.
Thank you. Thank you gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
beyond the impact to an
individual family.
How could a statewide baby bonds
program strengthened New
Mexico's economy in the long
term.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. In particular,
uh, when you see it's, it's,
it's uh when you when you see
these opportunities coming out
overall, it strengthens the
entire 3rd grade. It strengthens
the entire community overall.
Um, what you have is, uh, people
beginning to invest their
dollars back into New Mexico.
And so again this fund would
ensure that they would have more
access to putting that down
payment on a home that they
might be thinking about buying,
and it may have been put off
because they didn't have the
generational wealth that a
number of people.
you have access to, uh, and they
might decide to go to graduate
school, um, maybe they wouldn't
have access to that before. They
might be the first in their
family to go to to graduate
school, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and that would increase
the number of, of professionals
we have in our state. So we see
this is really supporting our
economy overall but just our
communities in general again,
when people have financial
stability, they are able to um
do more for their families in
the long run.
Thank you gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker,
Gentle lady
Baby bonds are great for
children's futures, and I
believe in our babies and in
their families.
But I wonder, shouldn't
government policies first
address what children and their
families need now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady for that
question. I, I think that we can
do both at this time, and I
think we've seen that be a
possibility. Um, as we know over
the past few, uh, sessions we've
been able to invest in free, uh,
lunches, breakfasts, and lunches
for our kids at school. We have
free college for in-state
tuition for our, our schools as
well. We know that we've
invested millions of dollars in
career development, um, and for
certification programs as well
to develop our workforce to get
them ready and to those higher
paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
This we are doing a lot to cover
what we need to. In fact, we're
looking at a tax package that
also would do this as well. You
know, these are, these are
considerations that this body
focuses on the working families
so that they can continue to
grow. What baby bonds does is a
little bit different. It ensures
that when people are looking
forward, they have something
forward to look to, um, and, and
like I'll go to my own
experience, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you know, when, when I was
looking at grad school, when I
was looking at buying a home, I
needed help to make those big
risks.
And those are big risks, but
they're important risks for our
communities that people are, are
homeowners. The people are
getting those educational
opportunities. With that being
said, we need to make sure that,
that people know that Mexicans,
you know, are, are getting
support along the way, but also
as they're planning for their
future as well.
Thank you, Judge Alati.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, you've touched on a lot of
these points, but I'm wondering
if you could summarize for me.
How you think the children's
Future Act could impact how
families.
Plan their financial futures.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. You know,
again, I go back to that example
of buying a home. Uh, we know
that a lot of our parents or
even grandparents' generations
were able to buy a home much
younger and they're able to
plant, you know, plant their,
their, their roots in New Mexico
and ready to build upon that,
and it allows people and, and so
again, we know that people
nowadays may not have the
financial ability to think of
buying a home, a stable place
for their children to be raised
and to have that opportunity,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. So
again, those investments
are critical to giving people
the opportunity. But I'd like to
also mention one piece that is
really exciting to me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
opportunity to start a new
business, um, you know, we know
that investments into our
businesses are critical so that
we can see our small businesses
grow and, and, and we can see
our industries, you know,
flourish. But the problem that
we, that comes into this is more
about the, the people don't have
the funds to take the risk in
the first place. And so, well, a
small business might be a risky
endeavor. It's, it's a prudent
one because you're investing in
yourself.
you're investing in your
community, there's all these
aspects of that. So really,
giving people the opportunity to
take these big risks and even
these big important steps in
their lives really will help our
communities overall and I think
transformed the, the, the
well-being and, and we also
know, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that when people have access and
know early on they have access
to certain scholarships or
certain college monies.
Oftentimes they perform better
in school, um, because they know
that this is an option for them.
For those that it was never on
the table for, they may not have
that same opportunity.
and may not have that same
forward thinking.
Thank you gentle lady. I
appreciate the information, um.
I've been taking a look at this.
I know that there were a few
versions that were out there, so
I am very appreciative for New
Mexico's children that this is
actually that you've brought
this forward, uh, and I thank
you Mr. Speaker, that's the end
of my questions. Thank you.
You gentle lady, there is
further debate. The gentleman
from Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Will my
friend from Santa Fe yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Sandoval County.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and kind
lady, um.
So
Will every
Baby born from now on, um.
Will they qualify for these,
these baby bonds. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, actually, in some of the
input, the answer is yes, but of
course there's always an
asterisk. um.
What this bill does and and
especially with the amendments
that we added, we added some
specific criteria that you had
actually mentioned earlier when
we had been discussing it as
well. And I, I did want to point
it out because I know we'd had
this conversation earlier on,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
um some of the eligibility would
require them to live in New
Mexico, be born in New Mexico, a
graduate or or get a GED and
then also have taken a financial
literacy course so yes they
would have access to it with the
asterisk that they would have to
fulfill those other requirements
as well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um,
How
So the criteria, one of the
criteria that they, they have.
Maintain residency.
Um
Or they've lived here in New
Mexico.
All their life. Uh, how are we
going to verify that?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, for the
question. This was something
that we've directed to the task
force to verify for that exact
reason that when you're
identifying where a child lives,
it may be a more difficult task.
And so seeing how agencies would
need to work together to verify
that.
OK, um, I would hope that they'd
be able to change that because
I'd hate to see members of the
military be cut out of this
because they don't maintain.
A house in New Mexico when
they're
Um
When they go to basic training,
they move out of state.
If they get um
rotated into Europe. They're not
living here in New Mexico, so.
Um, I would hope that this this
task force would take that into
account because it would be a
shame.
To cut out uh the people that
are putting their lives in
defense of this country, um, is
there some, is there a provision
in here that that's gonna be
possible? Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm, I'm really
glad you brought up that
question because again, this was
an amendment we made in
understanding that there are
unique family circumstances and,
you know, New Mexico's families
are not uh exempt from that, um,
in one of the amendments we
added as part of the task force
to offer additional guidance,
including any clarification on
the residency requirements.
Um, I think that's really
important because I, I, I will
be honest with you, you know, as
we were looking at this bill, we
didn't want to say 5 years or 10
years or, or, you know,
something specific and, you
know, that your parent lived
here or something along those
lines. We wanted it to be
available, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to children born in
our state, you know, who believe
that New Mexico is their home
and so we do look to the task
force to offer more
recommendations to ensure that
all those children are included
that see New Mexico as their
home.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and kind lady, and it
looks like in the amendment.
Um, there were changes made to
the temporary task force. Can
you tell me what those changes
were? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So, uh,
specifically to the task force,
we wanted to address the SIC's
concerned. They did not
necessarily want to be on the
task force, so that moved over
to the LFC and we also made it
clear that um they can elect
from amongst themselves who the
chair and the vice chair will
be, um, we felt that it was more
prudent to allow them that's the
wrong word, it was, it was, it
was better for that.
task force to choose amongst
themselves the chair and the
vice chair, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady in the so other than taking
the SIC out of the uh
Out of the membership,
everything else stays the same.
Speaker, gentlemen, for the, um,
so we take out SIC's
representation at their request.
We added LFCs, uh, in, in their
place, and then we allowed them
to just choose amongst
themselves who would be on
there. And uh the other thing,
as I mentioned earlier, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is they will
contribute to the conversation
about what qualifies as um
residency uh as included in
here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and how, how big of a
check are they gonna get?
When they reach 18, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, again, uh,
good question, and this is
something we're looking to the
task force for recommendations.
As you know, as you can tell
here that what this does is
establishes the fund will grow
over 18 years, establishing the
corpus of this fund, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, and while it
is not a guarantee, it is
ensuring that as many children
as possible will be able to
access this, um, you know, we
talk about uh funds and interest
rates and all those aspects of
it to make sure we're not just,
um, uh, leaking, taking it dry.
So, part of
conversation that the task force
will be advising on is if we're
setting up the corpus at X
amount, how much will they be
able to withdraw? And that will
be of the recommendations they
will provide for uh this body
and the governor, uh, and the
the other chamber as well, uh,
before next legislative session.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and is it gonna be a lump
sum check or they're gonna walk
out of there with a check for.
$40,000 or
Is it gonna be incremental once
you.
Graduate high school once you
finish.
Uh, college once you start a
family, once you, uh, how is
that gonna work?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. So what I, as you
know, the, the fund is mainly
for 5 specific reasons,
education, buying a house,
starting a small business, um,
investing or also retirement.
And so, uh, what they decide to
use it for and when they decide
to utilize it, um, is a
different piece of it. Some
things that we had talked about
is, you know, will this be run
kind of like a Roth IRA, right?
Where the money is kept invested
and then should you need to
withdraw it for before
retirement, there are specific
terms that you have to meet in
order to withdraw that so it's
not taxed at certain level.
s so I could, so I would
anticipate, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that the fund will be
run in a similar manner.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, could you
Could you direct me in the bill.
Where it sets up what.
What this fund will be used for?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
gentlemen, give me one second.
Let me just pull it up for you.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that should not have taken me so
long. Page 2, in section 3, it,
it starts on line 9 in the
original bill, um, it says the
purpose of the fund is to to
beneficiaries, um, in pursuit of
education, housing,
entrepreneurship, retirement,
and investment opportunities,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, so.
Um
There's a, there's a baby born
tomorrow.
Um, in 18 years.
In order to qualify for this.
They have to be pursuing
education, buying a house,
starting a business.
Uh, retiring, uh.
I don't, I don't get that one.
Um, or investing the money, is
that correct? Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
to access the funds and plus the
other things we talked about the
financial literacy course,
graduating from high school, the
residency requirement being born
here, yes, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
Then there, there's a
possibility that there are
children.
Um
being born tomorrow.
That will not be able to
participate in this, my
understanding that correctly.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, yeah, so
they don't hit those
qualifications and if they're
not using the money for these
specific purposes that are
outlined here, that is correct.
thing, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so unless this this.
18 year old
Um, is.
Has decided to go on to college.
Um, is gonna buy a house. It's
going to start a business.
Um
Or has decided to invest.
The money
They're, they're not gonna.
They're not gonna get any money
out of this.
Is that correct? Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
and I, I appreciate the
question. I, I'm, I, I wanna be
a little bit clear. Should they
decide to withdraw their portion
of it at a later time, they
would still continue to have
access to that. Now that might
be a decision for someone that
wants to, says, you know what?
I, I went to UNM. I got a free
education. I inherited my
mother's home. I, I don't need
access to these funds. I'm gonna
let it continue to mature until
I'm 55, 65, and I want to use it
for retirement. Um, you know,
should, you know, depending on
what the fund is at that amount,
that could be
Something like half a million
dollars for retirement that they
have already saved. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I myself didn't buy a
home until I was in my 30s.
Should they again, let it grow a
little bit longer to have that
nest egg, they can also make
that decision, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Um, kind lady, so.
So it's not
A nice check when they turn 18.
And they go do what they want
with it is it is it gonna be
paid directly to the school? Is
it gonna be?
paid to the mortgage company.
How can you explain to me how
the how that's gonna work.
Um, if the money goes directly
to them.
Um, can you clarify that for me,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I, so again, some of
this is part, partially going
through the task force overall,
how that mechanism will work.
But I go back to the Roth IRA
example, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, because typically how
it gets taxed or how it gets to,
you know, pulled in that sense,
it has a check on it. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, you
know, it is not in this fund or
in any other example that
exists, uh, you know, a free
check, uh, to go buy a, a fancy
car that ends up losing all its
value within.
5 years. It's, it's antithesis
to what this, this, uh, fund is,
which is why we want the task
force to take that time in a
transparent manner to make sure
we have those mechanisms in
place to protect the fund and
protect those individuals.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and, and I'm
I'm, I'm trying to.
phrase my next question.
correctly and I mean, I mean no
disrespect.
To use the sponsor or to the
drafter.
Um
I'm, I'm gonna let that question
percolate a little bit, so I, so
I ask it correctly.
So
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um.
Do we have any idea?
We're investing $5 million.
Uh, in the fund on a general
fund.
This year
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so we
have, so, as of all
appropriations in any bill that
got stripped, we have worked it
out with again the, the, uh, the
Senate side to ensure that a
million dollars would be put
aside for now, as with most task
force we would anticipate
something like $100,000 to be
used for that task force, and
the rest of it to begin, uh,
earning in that fund, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady in the $100,000 is gonna be
used for
Travel expenses.
Hiring an economist, what, what,
what's the $100,000 gonna be
used for, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's, that's a
rough estimate of what that
would be for, but that would be
providing for the task force
overall. So again, a, a staff
person to assist with bringing
them together, you know,
organizing meetings, all those
aspects take, uh, time and money
and in the past when I've seen
task force, they specifically
are around 100K or so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and well, is there um a
provision in this bill that
They will need to report back to
the legislature every so often.
How long is the task force gonna
be around? Is it gonna be?
In perpetuity or are they going
to meet for 2 or 3 years and
come up with recommendations.
Can you, can you kind of walk me
through that part of the, of the
proposal.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. If you look on
page, I'm looking at the uh
amendments in context as well.
If you look on page 5, line 14,
Section C in the original bill,
it explains that all the
appointments need to be made by
July 1st of this year and that
they will um develop all have
recommendations including
potential, uh, you know,
legislative proposals if
necessary, um, and they will
report back to us by the end of
the year, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on their findings.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and does
it say how long these
appointments last for?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. This is
specifically for that, that 6
month time period before we come
back to sessions, should there
be adjustments along the way,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and I
would anticipate that some of
this should be seen also, you
know, for the LFC as well in, in
that development as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady. So that $100,000 is going
to be expended in 6 months?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
that, that's an estimated
amount. And again, if you look
at staff time, typically, um,
you know, the, the task force
having the meetings, developing
all those aspects. Oftentimes
that does come in around
$100,000 Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, la, so
it's not going to be
Um, an economist from LFC that's
involved in this, they're gonna
hire.
Um
Outside
Employees
By outside I mean.
Not currently employed by the
legislature or a state
government agency.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it says
on page 4, and this is one of
the amendments that came in as
well, uh, starting on line 18
that staff and administrative
support for this task force
shall be provided by LFC. And so
that in particular, I mentioned
that just because again, it
would be, but we don't want to
have an unfunded mandate on them
to to develop this as well. So
this is why we would, we would
have to pay them for their time
and efforts for putting together
the task force, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so.
So the staff and administrative
support for the task force.
Uh, will be employed by LFC, so
we're giving LFC $100,000 to
accomplish this.
Because it would seem to me like
those salaries would already be
taken care of. They'd already be
budgeted.
So what I'm trying to do is I'm
trying to figure out.
What's the $100,000 going to be
used for?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
that's an estimate. There's a
million dollars that has been
set aside for the fund and
anything that's necessary for
the task force, uh, from my own
experience, having seen Task
Force put together before.
Typically it's because of the
additional work required, um,
that they need to be able to
provide that support. So again,
that is an estimate of what
would be the amount, but that
would be what I've seen before,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady. I, I got myself appointed
to the wrong task forces.
We always did it for free.
Um
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, so the
question that's rolling around
in my mind is there seems to be
a lot of questions unanswered
questions.
Um, about how this is gonna
work.
About what the qualifications
are gonna be about what we're
going to do for people, um.
Enlisted in the military.
Um
And about how how much money is
involved initially.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, do you
see?
A yearly deposit from general
fund into this fund.
Um, as the corpus takes time to
grow.
Is that, is that
A possibility.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
mean, it, it would not be the
best use of our funds to do it
on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. The point of, of a
fund like as we know, is to
ensure that it is growing, uh,
money invested today is worth
more tomorrow, and that is what
we're looking to grow upon. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
objective here, and this is
partially why we want the task
force to offer recommendations,
um, is to ensure that we're able
to maximize what we're getting
for the what we're we're
investing in it, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and kind
lady, um.
So other than the the uh.
Requirements of what this.
Newborn is going to have to go
through in 18 years. What other
recommendations is the task
force is gonna come up with.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. If you go to
page 6, that outlines the uh
begins to outline the
13 things that they'll be able
to review, um, and I'm, and the
13th being the additional
guidelines on residency to
ensure that we are capturing all
of the different, um, uh,
different, different living
circumstances that New Mexican
children have, uh, and so that
would be the 13, and I, and, you
know, I'm happy to go through
any of them in particular if you
want to walk through any of
them, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
thing, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, kind lady, so, so the one
that.
Initially interested in
interested me.
Was, um, on page 9, the
eligibility requirements.
Um, because I do, I am concerned
about.
Um, making sure that our our
military members.
are not gonna be disqualified
simply because they left the
state.
Um
To, to join the military, so I'm
glad to see that that is gonna
be one of the.
One of the tasks that this task
force is going to look at.
Um
And you go down the list
application processing time
periods.
Mechanisms for transferring and
and expending the money.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
Do you have any idea how long?
This task force is going to.
Exist because it would seem like
some of these things are gonna
take.
A while, I mean, I, I don't know
that they're gonna come up with
all these recommendations in 6
months.
Um
Do you have any idea or is is
there a provision in here that
it could last for 2 years, 3
years, 5 years.
Um
I, I, I see the, the provision
works 6 months initially and
they're gonna report back to the
legislature.
But it seems like some of these
tasks are going to take longer
than 6 months to accomplish.
Is there a sunset on the task
force?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. The, the
task force is required to report
back to us and we'll be done in
December 31st with their
recommendations, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Miss Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, sorry, uh, and, but I
do want to add to that that um
this isn't happening in a black
hole, Mr. Speaker, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, we have examples
across the country, um, of, of
how this works and and what we
can see it working already.
There are pilot programs that
are in our state currently and
to ensure that this works. So
again, if they were coming into
this completely fresh and there
was no example to look at of
what has succeeded in the past,
um, I would have a similar
concern, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, but they do have a
starting place.
And thank you, um.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
There, but there is no sunset.
On this
Um
Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
are pulled together to put
together a report that is due on
December 31st. When that report
on these specific items is done,
then that task force is done,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker, um, gentle
ladies, so the task forces
dissolved.
Um, as soon as that report is
delivered.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Yes, when
they have turned it in in
December 31st, that that is
done.
And is there anything in here
that says any unexpended.
funds out of that $100,000 goes
back to the corpus or goes back
to the general fund.
Again, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Speaker, and gentlemen, uh, the,
the money is for use for the
fund and what is necessary to
put together the task force
through December 31st will be
utilized for that.
So there's not a return back to
the fund. It was utilized for
the for the task force and when
that's done, that's done, Mr.
Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
So just say they are very
efficient and they use $60,000
instead of the 100.
What happens to the $40,000.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that will remain in the fund
itself. OK, that's what I was
curious about. It stays in the
corpus.
Of the baby bond fund. Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, um, thank you, Madam
Speaker, kind lady.
Um, and I'm just on page 7, they
stripped the $5 million and, and
reinserted 1 million.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, as
with all appropriated bills or
all appropriations bills, you
may strip out the appropriation,
and it should appear in the
budget. We've been working with
the Senate and we, we have a
million dollars set aside for
this.
And um, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Do you, do you expect additional
investments into this fund.
Um
And out years 5 years from now,
we realize that it's not growing
as fast as we'd like to.
Are we gonna put another million
dollars out of general fund
money in there.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that is part of the task of the
task force is to identify the
amount that we should be putting
aside for this fund and should
that not be reached, then it
would be expanded as to what it
has, but again, uh, this
specifically says in there that
they would offer recommendation
on the amount.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady. I appreciate the
conversation.
There is further debate,
gentlewomen from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield, please?
Yes, Madam Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from McKinley.
Thank you very much, um, the
first question is, is I'm trying
to get a little more, uh,
focused on what, what we're
doing with this bill,
particularly since it was uh an
appropriations amendment done.
I'd like to ask first, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, is
this, uh, an initiative that was
born out of the corporation for
enterprise development.
Madam Speaker, General lady, no.
Um, Madam Speaker, how about
prosperity now?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
yes, that was one of the
organizations that put together
a similar pilot program.
Uh, Madam Speaker, well
prosperity now is the um.
Program that was that was
initially corporation for
enterprise development which
started the individual
development accounts, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, so I'm
fairly familiar with it, um,
years ago, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, my office ran an IDA
program and it was very similar
where um savings accounts were
set up, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, set up for very
specific kinds of purposes. One
of the qualifications was you
had
had to meet a certain poverty
threshold and then from there
you could only use the funding
for going to college, buying a
home, buying an automobile.
And I think those were the only
3 things in our program, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, that we
were allowed to do, but I'd like
to ask, so basically with these
uh preparation amendments you're
setting up a fund the
capitalization amount would be
based on the recommendation from
the task force as well as any
future qualifications and is
this gonna be a matched fund,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady?
No, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
no.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
are you allowed to have matched
funds. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
thank you, gentle lady. I, I had
to go back in my mind and said
wait a second, that can
absolutely and may be a
recommendation from the uh from
the task force as proposed
legislation to improve upon the
current minimum requirements.
Alrighty, so, uh, basically this
is just setting up a fund, a
non-reverting fund, uh, the
general guidelines are the
beneficiaries have to meet
certain uh criteria and then uh
the full capitalization wouldn't
come until later, is that
correct? Thank you, madam, uh,
speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
That's correct. We, we are
giving the opportunity to
develop this through the task
force, um, and being able to run
it through again the intern
process and making sure, but we
want to start the fund now and
also begin to include these.
kids that are born this year,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
fund would be a million dollars
coming in through the Senate.
Madam Speaker, General lady yes.
All right, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
There is further debate, the
gentle lady from.
Captain Sierra Socorro and
Valencia, uh, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
Yield, thank you, Madam Speaker.
I gladly yield to the gentle
lady from uh Catherine Sierra
Secorro and Valencia. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I'm curious to know, and,
and I think that, I think I know
the answer, but I'd like you to,
to tell me anyway on the the uh
the money can be used for
education, housing,
entrepreneurship, or
investments. Is that correct?
Madam Speaker, uh, Madam Floor
leader, and also retirement
should they decide to leave.
the fund that long, Madam
Speaker and general Leni, and,
and how Mr. uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, is that going to be
monitored, um, if, if the 18
year old just decides they want
to sell ice in Alaska. Is that
going to be anything monitored
for entrepreneurship or they
just say, I want to open a
business and here you go. Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
again we have models that
already exist that show how to
ensure that this money is being
used.
Appropriately. And again, I, I
go back to, I look at the Roth
IRA, um, again looking at direct
investments into specific funds,
um, there are different ways of
doing that, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Part of the reason
we have the task force is to
ensure we're doing this again,
the mechanisms for this are done
in the most effective manner.
So Madam Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, so they will be just the
task force will be.
Making all these rules, is that,
is that a, uh, fair to say,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
glad you asked. They will not be
making the rules. They will be
making recommendations that will
then come before this body, um,
the governor's office and also
the Senate as well. And should
we say this looks like a strict
prudent way of, of ensuring this
money is, is distributed, maybe
it's through a scholarship,
maybe it's through, um, you
know, a specific, um, um, uh,
you know, capital program, etc.
you know, we can look at those
recommendations and we as a body
can make a decision about them.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
you're saying it will be voted
on by the legislature, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, should
they, uh, change, should they
recommend anything that requires
legislation, that would be voted
on by this body.
And Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
in your opinion, would that be
something that would be required
to be voting, voted on by the
legislature?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
what aspect?
The aspect of.
How they would be able to use
the money. The aspect of um.
The task force setting up.
The rules that say yes this is a
prudent way to use this money,
and this is a fine way for, for
you to, for us to say, um, OK,
yes, this, um, selling ice in
Alaska would be a great
opportunity and how, how, how do
we know?
That they're going to approve
every single
entrepreneurship that comes
through that they want every
entrepreneur, my husband.
is a he is a sick entrepreneur.
I mean, he, it is an addiction.
And I keep telling him, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, if he does
one more thing, uh, it's, he's
gonna get it right in the chops.
So how do we know?
We've had businesses that
failed. We've had businesses
that thrived and so how do we,
how are we going to know if it's
very specific.
In the in the legislation,
education, housing,
entrepreneurship and
investments. What if they want
to invest in something that's
not very prudent.
How how do we make those
decisions and, and who is making
those decisions? Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I'm glad you
asked this question because I
think especially in this era,
um, we've done a lot more in New
Mexico to um have a better hold
on uh how investments works, how
to grow, um, uh, businesses
that, that, you know, we have
venture capital funds that we've
begun investing in. And, and to
your point, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, starting a business
is a risky venture and it
prevents a lot of people from
even with great ideas, even with
fantastic bank loans, etc.
uh, you know, set up ideas, they
still face an uphill climb. The
idea of this is that it ensures
that um these funds are used
prudently. Now, what I'll go
back to your question. Will that
be vote now every single
business venture would not be
voted on by this body and we
could go through each individual
aspect. However, overall,
they're going to propose
additional rules that we may
need to, need to pass by this
body and especially in as it
comes to sharing information
between agencies, for example,
right? TRD might have
information on, on a.
this aspect that, you know, WSD
does not have access to. So
understanding that there's going
to be some uh relationship uh
DWS, uh, you know, working out,
that stuff that will go through
this spotter. Mr. Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, but overall,
um, the, the goal here is to
ensure that they do have access
to those funds. And again, I
could see that being in
something like a scholarship or
something like a specific, um,
you know, round of investing,
um, a specific, uh, outline of a
business, you know, that has to
be submitted before, and those
are, those are proposals.
that will be offered as
recommendations by the task
force and this body will be able
to vote on what those look like.
Should they be prudent to that,
should that, I hate that word.
Sorry, shouldn't that be
relevant to uh legislation, Mr.
Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so, so
it's really it's unknown. It's
the task force decisions,
recommendations are really
unknown. I see how the task
force has developed, um, once
again, I would, if I would have
been, uh, on my toes, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
have had an amendment to say if
these if these task force
members missed more than 2
meetings, they're out.
So, uh, be sure you, you can,
you can rest assured, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, that I'm
going to bring that amendment on
any commission and any task
force in the future because I
really liked that, um, because
if they're gonna do this job, I
want them to be committed to
this job, whether you know it's
like I said before, here we are
doing things for, for free. Um,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
how are we going to guarantee
that this will be for every
child born in New Mexico.
And because there's really no
eligibility spelled out in the
bill.
Or is there? Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
And it was after consulting with
um the uh appropriations
committee that we did add to it
a section that is just
eligibility for that purpose,
um, you know, and again this is,
this is, I think one thing that
myself, my, my co-sponsors
really appreciate this bill that
we're proud of in a sense, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, that
this isn't just for certain
types of sick kids. This is for
kids across New Mexico, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle ladies. So I hope the
task force doesn't recommend
something, anything different.
And if they do recommend
something different, I hope it's
voted on in the body of this
legislature. Um, my next
question, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady is the date on, on this
bill is January 1st, 2025. So
can you tell me how many babies
have already been born in the
state of New Mexico, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, presuming
to about 22,000 births every
year and they're about we're
almost done with the first
quarter I'd assume somewhere
like 5500 or so.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I just find it interesting, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, that
we're setting this up. We're
naming the babies.
Not specifically, but in the
date and the, and we don't even
have any money. We don't know
what we're doing. We don't have
the task force. We don't really
know the, the, the bill, what's
gonna be uh moving forward,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
next thing is what if.
Um, a child, uh, uh, God forbid.
Passes away.
Before they can cash in this,
what happens to that money? Is
there any beneficiary set up? Is
there anything like that?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um,
again, this is something that
why we're creating the corpus
overall for the children of New
Mexico, uh, unfortunately you're
right, you know, there may be
22,000 births in New Mexico this
year. Not all of them will turn
18, unfortunately. And so
ensuring that that corpus stays
there, the intent of this is to
be for every baby that is born
that reaches the, that hits
these parameters and presuming
that some of them may not, they
would not then have access to
those funds, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, just, um, uh
unfortunate question that I need
to ask because, you know, we've
had
We have a lot of babies die,
unfortunately here in the state
of New Mexico and, and there's a
lot of us in this body that are
trying to fix that, but, um, so
my next question is the
retirement piece of it.
Um, since it's named in the
bill, wouldn't that be in
violation of the anti-donation
clause?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
don't see that, no.
Um, I'm probably miss Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
we'll have to get an opinion on
that because I think just giving
money to someone and they can
use it for retirement.
is probably a violation of the
anti-Donation clause and so um I
think we'll, we'll officially
ask for an opinion on that. Um,
my next thing, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady is, um.
I'm curious to know.
Is there
I, I, I see the task force part
of it and I see how it's set up.
Is there, um.
They're going to make the
referrals.
To how the rest of the story is
written.
Uh, and then who.
There's no really telling how
that decision is going to be
made. It will be the task force,
and then the task force will
give the recommendations to
whom?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that would be to, uh, again,
these chambers, ours in the
Senate and also the governor and
I do want to point out one thing
that I think you pointed out
that's really important just to
help clarify as well, um, again,
part of what they're tasked to
do is ensure that the, that how
the money is distributed is in
line with New Mexico's laws and
statutes and so that is one of
their many tasks they have to
do, um, should they find that
this is something that would not
somehow inherently work. It
would be something that we'd
have to deal with within this
chamber to ensure that was the
case.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, thank you for your
answers.
I yield.
There is further debate, the
gentle lady from Bernalio
Representative Royal Calero.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady, um, please
yelled, uh, Madam Speaker, I
proudly, uh, yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo, my, uh,
kind co-sponsor.
Thank you so much, Madam Speaker
and um.
Gentle lady, I wanna thank you
and the other sponsors and the
entire entire.
Um, legislature for.
Anticipating the needs.
Of the future of our families,
of our children current children
who will be our.
Greatest population.
Um, that we will see in the
state of New Mexico so first and
foremost thank you so much.
And um Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I'm very proud.
Um, to join you.
And um but I as always and you
can tell that I've lived a long
life because I have many stories
to share.
And um Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, if you will indulge me.
Um, a story.
That um relates very much to
the.
Intergenerational poverty.
That we've had run rampant in
our state.
Um, I was recruited.
To take over economic
development for Cibola counties.
Um
Many years ago I think it was
back in 2001.
And um
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
had the opportunity to witness.
Um, what had been, and I've
spoken before about the booms
and busts.
Of, um, our economies.
In this state that had.
Contributed to empowering.
Our family's economically.
But just as they were seeing
those economic empowerments
through one or two generations
they then were subjected to the
busts in those economies.
And uh what I witnessed.
As a new recruit actually coming
back to to the state of my
heritage.
Was
I was at the local Walmart in
Grants.
And I was standing behind.
Um, several generations of women
with their babies and some
babies.
And I happened to engage in
conversation with them, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
And found out that I was
witnessing 4 generations.
Of women
That were from grants.
The great grandma.
The grandma
The mama and then the children.
Every single one of those
generations, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
We impoverished.
In fact, they stood in line.
Trying to figure out what the
cost of their food was going to
be.
So that they could share.
Um
Not share each other they each
had food stamps they were all on
food stamps.
But the the the youngest, the
mother with the the youngest
children was on WIC.
And um
I engaged them in conversation
and was asking them, um.
questions about their lives in
grants in Cibola County.
And it literally broke my heart
because I heard hopelessness.
I saw hopelessness.
I heard helplessness.
And I saw helplessness.
Because
They had no way of being able to
express.
Getting out of this.
Their cycle of poverty.
That each one of them.
Shared in their experiences.
Based on their location and
having been subjects to these
booms and busts in the economy
which left them with no
security, madam Speaker and
gentle lady, no hope for the
future.
The only thing they could hope
for was that they could keep
their Section 8 housing.
That they could still qualify.
For there every year for their
food stamps.
That their children could
continue receiving the WIC
assistance through school age.
Or whatever that parameter was.
And
Would you say, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady that this is
what describes why.
We are um.
Setting up baby bonds is this
what.
Intergenerational poverty is.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. Yes, that is
absolutely what generational
poverty can look like, um,
absolutely.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
What I'm describing and what I
saw Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
As I said, was in 2001, 2002,
around that time period.
Those same conditions.
Exists today.
In 2025.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
If we don't do something.
To break these cycles of
poverty.
Today, while we can.
Which I believe Madam Speaker
and gentle lady is.
The whole reason why we're here.
We're not, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady offering a handout.
Are we gentle lady? Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Absolutely not. This is
about investing in the future of
our families and investing in
the future of New Mexico.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank you gentle lady.
It is precisely for the reason
of breaking.
Poverty cycles that we've spoken
so much about in this house.
Throughout the years that I've
been here and what I witnessed
as an advocate in this House of
Representatives before I became
elected and serving in this
house.
We've been talking about.
The poverty cycle in our state
forever we've been talking about
ranking number 5, I mean 50.
Do you know, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, what our current
ranking is as far as a poverty
level is?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I do
not.
I will, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, our current ranking.
We're no longer 50 but we're 45
of 50.
After
This gentle um Madam Speaker and
gentle lady after having been.
As I said, witness to, um.
What we've been doing in this
House of Representatives and
this legislature as a whole.
And we've attempted to do.
For many years we've seen our
own cycles of having high
revenue streams, low revenue
streams we've been in crisis
we've been out of crisis.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, as has been mentioned over
and over again and we get a
reminder all the time of how
rich the state is.
In our current state of revenue.
And we have been in the past few
years.
And because of that, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady from my
perspective we have an
obligation.
To do wise investments.
In order to guarantee that we
continue to rise out of that 50
now 45 hopefully.
We continue to to um decrease or
increase, I'm not quite sure
where I'm going where that goes,
um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
But we need
To do something.
To quit putting a band-aid.
On the cycles of poverty and the
generational poverty that we
have witnessed in this state.
Forever it seems like that this
is what we've been talking about
so.
What I learned, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady.
In my lived experiences.
And then when I went on later in
life and studied and.
Received my master's and I
learned from a very wise
professor who used to hold a key
position in the state.
Through my public policy, uh.
Public budget
Class
Was that the greatest way we can
serve.
Our population in this state of
New Mexico.
Is to provide the means.
By which our families, madam
Speaker and gentle lady could
rise themselves out of poverty.
And could control.
Their own destinies.
But we have to give them that
ability, madam speaker and
gentle lady, and that's why I
believe.
That this
Effort
In House Bill 7.
Is probably one of the most
significant.
Ways in which we can provide our
families.
That lift up
Lift out
And be determinants of their own
futures of their own current
days, uh, living circumstances
just because we set up a fund,
madam Speaker and gentle lady.
That is an investment fund in
the future to ensure that we get
we break those generation cycle
generational cycles of poverty
does not mean that we have the
right to dictate.
What those individuals will do
with the with their money
because it becomes their money.
The investment becomes theirs,
madam speaker and gentle lady to
do what they envisioned they
would like to do.
Is that correct in how I'm
interpreting what we're
attempting to do, gentle lady,
madam Speaker, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady,
and I would add, overall, yes,
wealth begets begets wealth, as
we've seen, um, time and time
again, you're, you're more bold
to take, um, risks that aren't
necessarily risks, they're just
scary because they have big
price tags, uh, gentle lady, uh,
Madam Speaker, but I would also
add that, you know, I believe
what what this bill does.
in an important way is that it
benefits all children of New
Mexico because as we know,
middle class in New Mexico may
not look like middle class in an
extremely wealthy state, you
know, I remember I went to
college and, you know, people,
you know, buildings are named
after grandparents, not my
grandparents. Buildings are
named after other folks'
grandparents, and that's a
different experience because
they can take different risks
knowing that they have that
backing of their family and what
this does is for the children in
Mexico it says if you want to
take a big and important risk,
specifically getting your
education, buying a house,
starting a.
business investments or or just
saving for your retirement
overall if you wanna take those
big bold steps, you may not have
your, your family backing you
because they may not have the
resources. New Mexico is backing
a new and New Mexico believes in
you, Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, one of the biggest
fears that I have as a mother
and a grandmother now of a 10
and 8, a 3 and a 2 year old
grandsons, all 4 grandsons, one
of my biggest fears is that I
leave this world.
And not be able to have
provided.
For my family's future.
That's my greatest fear, madam
speaker and gentle lady, as I
Become um.
As I age
And I don't know what else to
say, but as I'm aging I'm still
a young nana.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady and hopefully with this uh
new knee I can run around more
with our grandchildren, but my
greatest fear is that.
So my greatest gift.
In turn,
To my 36 year old son who just
started his family he's the
father of the 3 year old and the
2 year old.
He's also a young entrepreneur.
He's been self-employed for for
years. He when he began, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, he
had no idea he was gonna be a
father.
And so you know like any other
young entrepreneur, he took a
lot of deep dives.
Then
He's now a father.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
And now
He realizes.
That
His ability as a young
entrepreneur he's no longer that
young, he's 36, but he's, he's
still young entrepreneur and a
young father.
He realizes that he's got to be
planning for the future.
One of the first things he did
with a big contract, madam
speaker and gentle lady is he
bought life insurance.
That was a big deal and the
reason he did that, I asked him,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
I said why life insurance?
You're so young.
And it broke my heart to hear
the explanations.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
he said, Mom.
Do you realize that the greatest
levels, the highest levels of
cancer right now that are
occurring.
are in my generation?
My age group?
He said
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
mom, you and dad may not be
around.
If something like that were to
happen.
So he invested.
With limited money he could.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady in
a life insurance policy.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, for me, this is the life
insurance policy we're giving to
our future.
Populations in the state, we are
providing them a lifeline.
To their future.
We are providing them a means by
which they can self-determine.
How that life, how they will use
that lifeline.
And I think Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
That's probably the greatest
gift.
That we sitting in this house.
In this Senate and this
legislature as a whole.
Can give
To our future generations,
everything that we have done
thus far in the 13 years that
I've been a legislator.
And everything that we've done
that I've witnessed before that.
As we've legislated.
Has had Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, a short term effect.
We no longer can afford Madam
Speaker and gentle lady to
continue providing short term
um.
Rescuing
We can't continue to respond to
crises.
We can't continue, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady continuing.
To legislate for today.
And not for tomorrow.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, we
have an obligation to be
legislating.
For the future.
That's what our job is all
about, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
I was researching.
As you know, that's my favorite
thing to do.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and I saw.
I don't know, uh, I can't recall
and I couldn't find it right
now, but I think one of the
states that began a pilot
project.
And then continued um but they
named it.
The hope for tomorrow fund.
I thought that was beautiful.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
because that's exactly what
we're doing.
With HB 7, the known as the
Children's Future Act and Fund.
It's the hope for tomorrow fund.
That's beautiful. I wish in
hindsight, um, we would have.
maybe looked at
At the name but it the name
doesn't matter it's what we do.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady in
longevity.
It's what we do and how we act.
In ensuring that our children.
Get
That we break the cycles of
poverty.
Create cycles of opportunity and
give our children the hope for
tomorrow.
That is Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, what I believe.
Is the greatest task we have at
hand these how many days? 8 days
or I don't even know anymore
that we have left if we do
anything and we leave this
legislature, it would be.
To enact
House Bill 7 as amended.
And I urge the members of this
house to vote to please to
secure.
The hope for tomorrow for our
children.
In our children's future Act and
fun and thank you again, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady for
allowing me to join you in this
effort thank you thank you.
There's further debate, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Madam Speaker, with
the gentle lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. Yes, madam
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa Fe. Thank you,
um.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, as
I've stated before, I think this
is an excellent uh.
Way of us really addressing.
The issue is just
Many of the reasons previously
stated by the gentle lady from
Bernalio.
And her life, her lifelong
vision and um.
Dedication to being a
representative in their service
to New Mexico.
Um
And I just.
I think that this is a good
idea. Like I said, I've, I've
said in committee when we were
in LC made. I want to say thank
you for making the uh amendments
and taking the bill back and,
and really working through it. I
just have some clarifying
questions, um.
In regards to the legislation in
front of us today.
Um
In your bill, your bill is to
create a task force.
And the task force will make
recommendations and those
recommendations will create
The, the type of fund or the,
the prescribed fund that um
That is an investment fund, can
you clarify that for me, Mr.
Madam Speaker, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
So yes, the bill does two things
in particular. Uh, it creates
the fund, it, well, actually I
say 3 now because of the
amendments that we came through
with the committee that you're
in is part of as well. So it
creates the fun, it outlines the
minimum eligibility required,
and then it creates the task
force for this year to go
through and put together some of
the mechanisms that are
necessary to ensuring that we're
doing this in a prudent legal,
uh, in the best possible manner.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, Madam
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, so
I'm gonna ask you a couple of
questions because I asked the,
the Mexico state treasurer Laura
uh Laura Montoya when she was in
front of LFC actually she was in
front of ATFC um, when, uh, the
beginning of the session, and I
asked her because she's very
excited about the baby bond.
She's gone all over, you know,
the state. She's had some
national recognition for this
idea, uh, to bring forward to
our state and I asked her some
questions when she was in front
of us, and I don't know that
she, she, uh,
Uh, she had her own ideas, I
guess, separate from some of the
questions I asked him the
question I asked was,
Why are we doing the bill this
way rather than maybe um
changing or amending the 529
fund education fund.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, so the 529
fund, to my understanding is
specifically for educational
pursuits in particular, um, you
know, should the fund be run
similar to that, that would make
sense. But we really wanna make
sure that these are
opportunities for these, uh,
young people of New Mexico to
invest in, again, either their
education or starting a new
business or entreprene or uh
investments, uh, retirement or
buying a home, Mr. Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so, so my
question to her was is there
some redundancy?
because we already have an
education investment fund with
this be redundant or how do you,
what is your perception, um, on
that in regards to your, your
bill, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. I, I believe that there're
a little bit different because
when I'm putting aside a 529 for
my daughter, um, you know, that
I, that I'm, that I'm very
blessed that I'm able to create
or my daughters, I should say,
um, you know, it's because those
are the private funds that I'm
able to afford from our family,
uh, but what this fund does is
it says the money that uh the
resource.
sources that are available to
New Mexicans are also behind our
kids as well. And so it ensures
that they also benefit from
this. Mexican kids uh across the
state.
Thank you, ma'am uh Speaker
general, so you're saying that.
The funds, the way that this is
going to be funded is through
our general fund, Madam Speaker,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, so
the fund would, would receive um
resources funds from the general
fund as and hopefully as
recommended by the task force,
again, that would go through the
LFC process. It would go through
the appropriations process, etc.
um, but really what this would
be is, um, you know, get a
complimentary aspect to a 529 or
a Roth IRA, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you, thank
you, uh.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, so
what would the for what the
vision of, of getting uh
building that wealth.
For our, our future for our
children in the future. What is,
what is, uh, does this uh bill
outline what that what that
could look like, or is that just
something the task force is
going to have to decide, Madam
Speaker. Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I guess what, what
aspect are you looking to, Madam
Speaker, like what, what amount
of money would it, would we need
to be investing for, you know,
those, those benefits, uh, uh,
for investments of the future
for them to invest in a house
or.
or those outlined items, Madam
Speaker.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, you know,
I'm gonna say that we're looking
to the task force to give us
some guidance on that,
especially what is the amount
that we're hoping that they
would withdraw, um, as mentioned
earlier by uh the gentle lady
from McKinley, you know, there
are some examples of, of, of
other versions of this and how
much those uh young adults were
able to utilize um berries, um,
you know, one of the examples
that I'm looking at from
Prosperity now that they had put
together was an initial $6000
that was invested over time that
grows and then they would have a
fraction
of that that they anticipate or
it's not a fraction, they'll be
able to access around 22,000
once they were 18 years old. Uh,
again, this is a fund overall
that would be growing, uh, as we
know SIC has been able to get
some, you know, wonderful
returns, and this would be
something that DFA would be able
to manage annually once the 18
years are up to make sure that
we're doing it in a way that
lasts for all of the generations
in New Mexico or as many as
possible, um, as many as I can
we can anticipate, um, to ensure
that they're able to access
that.
Thank you.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I have no doubt, you know, that
that our SIC and our investment,
um,
Uh, agency would, would really
be able to um help in all these
ways who would
Again, for those changes that
you made those amendments, um,
and I just need some
clarification because I don't
have the bill in front of me. I
just have some notes.
Um
So the task force would be
created by LFC and then the task
force would then decide.
How much money we're gonna be
able or make a recommendation
rather of how much money of the
general fund we're gonna need to
uh make this investment fund,
which is modeled like an IRA
which I guess it's like a 529.
And there are other funds like
this already that exist in like
local governments or elsewhere.
I'm trying to get a clear
picture of what all exists
already, madam.
Speaker, gentle lady, thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, gentle
ladies. So, um, a 529 is an
educational fund that is used
for educational needs for the
child, um, a Roth IRA is a
retirement account. However, you
can pull it out tax-free early
for a very specific purposes
like buying a home and other
pieces as well, um, so that's
why I compared those two because
those are, again, investment
funds that are for specific
reasons, um, you know, again,
retirement, uh, housing or
education in these cases, um,
but I, I use those because we've
seen.
those models as well, um, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, the task
force would be um administrated
and staffed by the LFC, um, but
it would include a
representative from the state
treasurer's office, um, a
representative from the DFA, uh,
rep and then one public member
appointed by the governor and 4
public members appointed by the
leadership, uh, in this body on
either side of um um of the
spectrum and uh and the same
from the Senate, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I believe
it starts on page.
5 we look, no, I'm sorry, on
page 6, just exactly lining out
the, the, what they would
contribute to this. So the
financial plan for financing
this optimal design, a
determination of eligibility
additional ones like
certification they might need,
um, and, you know, it goes on
for about 13 different items,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, thank you, madam, uh,
Speaker General Lisa, but, but
the task force is going to
ultimately make the
recommendations to
This body as as as to how much
money they feel like we could
afford to invest in how we would
build this fund essentially is
that correct, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, that would be an
aspect of what they could
recommend and it's to the
governor and to again, both
chambers. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, and
LFC would be.
In charge of this, essentially,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, and
how many FTs are we going to
need from the LFC to do this,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, they
would be in charge of the
administrative aspect of it and
also the there was also another
piece of that, um.
Uh, staff and administrative
support for it, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um, as mentioned
typically when I've seen task
forces that would be, uh, you
know, taking, uh, it's usually
around $100,000 for staff.
Again, that would be taken from
the million dollars that we
anticipate coming into the
budget, Madam Speaker, but how
many FTEs, um, full-time
employees would be needed from
the LFC to manage and
administer, Madam, madam.
Speaker.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
again, I would leave that to
LFC. They did not, um, outline
in that sense, but I, but I, oh
no, they, they did here, um,
perhaps too with how they've
looked at it here, um, I'm just
looking at the FIR, however, um,
you know, again, that's what
the, the fund could also the
amount appropriated would also
include thank you Madam Speaker,
generally, I just want to
express a little bit of concern
there because.
Of what our LFC task is really
arty tasked with and all the
things that they do for us and,
and how much, how the high
performance levels that they
have and so I understand why you
want to
have this there because of that,
but I, I just wanted to say
maybe we can go back and look at
that later because I feel like
I feel like this is just another
thing that you know that we're
putting on and and unless we
have those new hires for them
that um I just be cautious about
that, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
And um
I think you took care, did you
amend the, the timeline, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, because I
think there was some issue with
the time, the time of when this
starts to when the information
needs to to be derived by this
uh task force. Can you lay that
out for me, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Going back, I was
just talking with my experts.
We're just looking at the LOC.
We anticipate it will be around
1, not 2, but looking at the FIR
we don't see a call for.
Full-time staffer, um, but, but
I just wanna put that out there
because the LFC does put
together the FIRs just to help
round out that answer. Um, the
timeline for establishing the
task force will be starting,
they would have to be appointed
by July 1st of this year and
they would have through the end
of the year to put together the
report, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that, um, I don't
know if that changed things, uh,
but it sounds like it did. So
thank you for that, um, I think
there are gonna be some other
questions and I'm, I'm listening
to the discussion, but all, all
in all, I think that this is, I
just like to um say I'm, I'm
looking forward to what the task
force is gonna have.
To um
Uh, report out to us because I
have uh I have some other
questions as this is laid out,
but my understanding is that
we'd have the opportunity to
talk to them and and maybe have
discussion but they have
meetings that we could attend to
or would they just, they, um, be
participating in LFC hearings
during the interim, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady, um, they would be meeting
and they would, um, yes, they
would be also meeting in there.
I'm just trying to pull up there
the show on uh is it page 5?
Yeah, it's page 5 line 16.
I'm looking at the moments in
context, that's why I'm going
back, but it says they shall
meet not less than once per
month at the call of the chair
or at the request of 2/5 of its
membership to carry out its
duties. So there would be
meetings to attend, uh, there.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and um,
yeah, I think that, you know, I
just had some clarifying
questions because of how you,
you know, those amendments came
forward. I and I just want to
say I appreciate you, uh, going
back in.
You know, looking at uh some of
the questions that we had in
HAFC and I think I still have
some, but I, I'm listening to
the conversation, but I, you
know, all in all I think this is
a a really good idea. I just,
um, as we move forward and
looking at the reports and
everything, I think we're gonna
have our questions will be
flushed out then and we'll have
the opportunity so, um, I'm just
looking forward to that because
um.
These are, these are good ideas
and I just wanna, you know,
having served on HAFC and, and
Just having some other questions
regarding the budget and how
much this is really gonna take
so that we can have that
prosperity and, and what, what
we're gonna have to invest in,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you that I yield my time.
There's further debate, the
gentleman from Colfax, Curry,
Harding, Quay, San Miguel and
Union Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does
the gentle lady yield? Madam
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Colfax, Curry
Harding Quay and Union and San
Miguel counties. yeah y'all both
got it pretty darn right.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
you know, I've learned in life
that most of us want the same
thing. We want, uh, clean air,
clean water.
A good job, enough money to pay
the bills, you know, a nice
place to live and something to
that to drive that's not gonna
break down on us and, and I
think this is what this aims at.
And and uh I've also learned
that how we get that.
Uh, or how we seek to get that
is oftentimes the result of our
past life experiences of, of how
we're, how we go to, go about
trying to get it.
So I think this is an honorable
attempt, but I, I think that we
may run into some problems. Uh,
the, the first one that I see
is, I think the direct gift of
money to, to an individual is
probably the definition of
violation of the anti-donation
clause. I mean, if you take
money and give it directly to an
individual, uh, if that were
legal, there would be no
anti-donation cause. We, we give
education.
we give a lot of different
things and tax breaks we give,
uh, training and, uh,
But I think that I think we're
gonna have to find to have an
opinion on that. We may have to
do something here if this comes
to pass to deal with the
anti-donation clause because I
do believe it's a, a violation,
uh, there may be some other
folks that disagree with me, but
that's what we come here for.
So, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, as I
go down through my questions,
some of them have already been
hammered on a little bit, but,
and you were asked how much
money would they receive and you
said you didn't know.
But I would say that if they
received that 16 $18,000
it's going to take an influx of
230 million per year to pay off
that debt of $7 billion by 2043.
Who would pay that?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
two pieces of this, uh, so, uh,
the question of who would pay
that, this is why, you know, uh,
you know, as well as I do that
growing that corpus, especially
in that 1st 18 years, is going
to be critical to making sure
it's long-lasting, which is also
why it's under the direction of
DFA. How much gets distributed,
um, so that we aren't just
raiding the core of it. We are
constantly asking for constant
influxes to manage it
appropriately. If a family were
to only be able or family, an
individual will only be able to
Access $5000 Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is $5000 more towards
their wealth building in the
future than they had before, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. However, I
know that we see how our funds
grow, and we've seen the success
of um SIC investing and the
treasurers investing, um, even
in the hardest times, we saw the
corpus 4 SIC remains stable or
grow at that time, Mr. Speaker,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen. So
I, I appreciate that. I also
want to go back, I, I, I
understand your concern about
anti-donation, which is
Why the task force is
specifically tasked to ensure
that we are following New
Mexico's laws and statutes
because I, I do believe that
should it be through a
scholarship? Should it be
through a specific program um
that you are purchasing the
home, you know, there, there are
aspects of how this money can be
distributed because I don't
think any of us want to see an
18 year old go into an office
and come out with a big old
check that defeats the purpose
and that would not be in line
with the efforts of this to
ensure that it's for education,
buying a house, uh, building a
business, entrepreneur era,
investing in.
In investments or um um a
retirement. So I just want to
kind of address that as well
because I do think that's a big
piece of what the task force
will also be looking at, Mr.
Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
didn't run this number, but I'm
sure you have a 22,000 babies a
year, uh, invest $7000 for each,
uh, what does that commit us to
per year?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, so
some of the early estimates that
I've seen on this have shown
that if we initiate with a
corpus or with with that word uh
with the with the initial
funding of something uh like 500
or 600 million, then you're not
looking at having to take out um
100 million here or 100 million
there. You're looking at the
long term. When I was doing the
looking at it, I looked at, um,
just for, uh, if you were to
ensure that each family got
around a $6000 initial
investment which we could
anticipate could grow to about.
$20,000 that would be something
like $100 million but again, the
objective here is not to wait
till tomorrow to begin investing
those dollars. It's to make a
formidable investment so that it
grows over time and that it's
utilized. And that DFA can be
responsible for how it's
distributed, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, the budgets came and went
this year. So if, so are we
committing a future legislator,
let just lature.
So I'm sorry, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm committing you.
Just kidding. No, we're not
committing a, a future
legislature. It is again to grow
this fund to how, how big it can
get. And again, relying on DFA
and the treasure to, well,
relying on the treasurer and the
SAC to continue that investment,
to continue to see that grow
responsibly and.
relying on the DFA to ensure
that the distributions are, are
done so in a way that is
responsible and continues for
longer, uh, generations. Madam
Speaker, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, what if
the state's no longer able to to
contribute to this one.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That is
partially why the, the fund
itself is, is not guaranteed.
Um, it says it also has it in
the title. I believe that is in
it's on the first page, sorry.
Um
15 and 16 on the first page, um,
that it's not necessarily
guaranteed, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. We still, that
protects the state should we
have a, you know, significant
downturn or if the fund isn't as
robust as we'd hoped it would
be, um, but this does set up the
fun and creates the task force
to give us the best opportunity
for ensuring the longevity of
this fund, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
Who would manage the trust fund?
I'm sure you said to sometime
during all this, but I didn't, I
didn't hear the answer to that.
Who would, who would manage the
trust fund?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
for the 1st 18 years, SIC would
manage all the investments, but
it would be housed under the
treasurer, um, and then after
the 1st 18 years, then 2/3 of
the funds would be invested by
the treasurer for because it's
short term, uh, withdrawals and
1/3 would be by SIC, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
are there other funds, and I
heard a little bit of this a
while ago, but I didn't hear it
all. Are there other similar
funds that exist.
Uh, and have they been
successful?
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
there are actually many
examples. So Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, Connecticut, uh,
District of Columbia have both
enacted theirs, um, and they
have, uh, they started with an
initial endowment for a 3200 for
each child in Connecticut plus
earnings on the endowment, uh,
and Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
and Washington DC, um, they,
they do theirs by annual deposit
of about $1000 to do it per
child, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
but also we have examples and
communities and and um
organizations that are doing.
it independently. And what's
interesting, madam speaker,
gentlemen, is just the option
that this might exist for their
future has given these families
and these examples, and I, and I
look at, um, the community
partnership, um, you know,
there, those families have
really pointed to the hope it
gives their families, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, for
the future.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
some of us have lived through
the time when this legislature
was sweeping funds and, uh,
I've seen the time when walking
down the hall, you could see
millions of dollars disappearing
from programs as they go. The
only fund I know that cannot be
swept is the permanent fund. So
how, how would this legislation
deal with that?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So I think
there's 2, if not 3 things I'd
point to. Uh, one is, um, the
like the reason, part of the
reason why the permanent fund is
so successful, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, is because of the
effective uh uh uh investments
we've seen from SIC, um, you
know, I, I've learned during the
interim in our, uh, investments
and pensions and just learning
how they've decided to divvy up
their investments, making sure
that there's a broad array of um
different funds that they're,
they're going into has made a
big difference, Mr. Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, but
I would also say that that
non-guarantee also is a chance
where if, if it needs to be
paused, if it cannot be granted
in that year, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, you know that is
available to the state and it
and it really is up to what is
possible. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, there's nothing in
this bill that says that, I
don't, I don't know, should
there, should there be a a short
in here that we would need to
pull it from somewhere else.
That's not the guarantee. The
guarantee is that should the
funds exist, should the DFA feel
that it's responsible um to
distribute the, you know, a
portion.
of that, um, that they would be
able to do so, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I, I feel that there is a great
risk of that, uh, you know, as
long as times are good, maybe
not so much, but, but in times
to come, maybe so. Uh, who would
appoint the task force?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, on the original bill, if you
look on, uh, page 5 page, sorry,
page 4 and 5,
you have a representative from
the treasurer's office and then
uh one from DFA and then a
public member appointed by the
governor and then one from uh
the minority leader, one from
the speaker, and then one from,
uh, the pro tem and one from the
minor minority leader in the
Senate, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, that
sounds fair.
Now, the, the last question, uh,
which is to me the question is
why are we
Committing now and studying it
later, committing now and
appointing a task force to give
us recommendations later
committing now.
Uh, in appropriating money
later. Why are we not appointing
a task force.
Studying this.
Good idea.
Finding out how it would work if
we can afford it.
And then making that commitment.
At a later time or not making it
because yeah, the, probably an
additional question is.
What if the task force doesn't
think it's going to work very
well.
Madam Speaker, General, uh, and,
I, I really appreciate that
question because I think it kind
of gets the crux of why this is
necessary to, well, it is,
that's what you're asking. Why
do we need to do this right now?
It sets out the parameters
overall for um what we want this
fund to do and establishes that
the kids that are born this
year, uh, would have access to
this opportunity as well that
we're not skipping a generation,
but in 18 years they'll be able
to see something, but what I
think is really critical is that
this is done through the
legislative process. Uh, I
myself dedicated grow money last
year.
Um, to ensure that the treasure
could um research this. This has
been a passion of hers for a
long time. And she's, you know,
been one of the people that,
that's been promoting this as
well. And I think that, um, you
know what this she has that task
force that was put together
from, from her perspective, but
I believe doing this through the
legislative process with
representatives from the
leadership through the
legislature on both sides of the
aisle and from both chambers,
does it in a transparent manner
that makes it easier for people
to understand where it's coming
from. Uh, so, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I, and I believe the
other
So this is making sure that we
have recommendations that we can
pull from that again, had gone
through a process um with the
full understanding of these, of
these different individuals,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
you know what I, what I hear is
more of a vision. I, I think
that, uh,
Maybe voting and putting it into
law now might be getting the
cart before the horse. Having a
vision is, there's nothing wrong
with having a vision, but I
think to obligate future
legislatures to a payment plan
that we have right now, uh, to a
vision that we have not explored
fully to understand the cost.
Um
Might be a little, a little more
than, than I can support today,
but I thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Madam Speaker.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend from San
Juan.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. The current
administration in 6 years has
spent $75 billion that hasn't
moved the needle very much on
poverty, has it?
I apologize, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, can you
repeat the question?
The current administration has
spent $75 billion that had in
the six years and that hasn't
moved the needle much on, on
poverty, has it? Mr. Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I would
argue 5 steps is better than
what we had been doing and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I also want
to point to something I thought
was really neat. Um, so you and
I, I'll look at like the US, uh,
world news, uh, report, and they
rank all the colleges for
different things and one of the
neat things they had was um
first generation students to go
to college, the first in their
family to go, and
you and I suddenly broke through
the top 10 of that, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen. So again,
that kind of investment, I think
will be fruitful in the long
run, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
the number and, and you're well
aware of this, you're highly
educated young lady. The number
one driver for getting people
out of poverty is what Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I believe
you're referring to education.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, we pay for every kid that
goes, that goes to school in New
Mexico, don't we?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
should, uh, for higher, uh, uh,
public school, of course, should
they go to public school in uh K
through 12, and, uh, some also
for a pre-K. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, we also have a
free college tuition for
in-state schools. That doesn't
include housing and things like
that, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I'd like to make
one thing perfectly clear from
the way I see things, this is a
handout, plain and simple. It is
a handout.
Um, I'm not saying it's not a
hand up, but it is a handout.
Thomas Jefferson said.
And I'll quote
Luck is dressed in coveralls and
sweat. The harder you work, the
luckier you get.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
when I was in college, I cleaned
toilets for a living.
Um
Now
Let me go on a little bit.
While I was in
Committee and and hearing this,
um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I wasn't for it.
But I may, I may come around a
little bit. I'm not really sure.
Um
I think this is going to be a
great bill.
For families, they're large
families.
I think farming and ranching.
Um
I think you're going to be two
of those that are gonna benefit
homeschool kids are going to
benefit from this as well. Um.
But I'm wondering, are you going
to limit the amount of kids that
get to receive this.
Handout
Madam Speaker, um, um,
gentlemen, this is intended as
an investment for all New Mexico
kids, um, I don't think like
and, and as I mentioned earlier,
you know, some of the proposals
that are on the table now in
other states or may be enacted
are focused, focused on, you
know, those recei receiving
Medicaid. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, we decided very
explicitly not to do that and to
ensure that New Mexican children
can benefit from this fund
overall, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I'm glad to
hear that because
I've, uh, I'm a father of 4
beautiful daughters.
I've got 14 grandkids. I'd like
to get a couple more so that I
could say next year, you know,
I'd like to welcome a new
grandchild here.
Um
So I wonder if we're going to
discriminate because I'm from
that Mormon family.
And there's a lot of Catholics
in this room. We're going to
take all the money.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
if, if there are more kids born
in our state with a declining
population and there are more
kids that feel like they are
invested in by the state of New
Mexico who who are willing and
able to take a chance on doing
something big. I, I have no
problem in ensuring that all of
them have access to this fund,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
All right, I, I'm, I'm gonna
tell my girls to get after it,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
One last question for you, um.
Would I be able to get this
money?
If
And I
Uh, I'm going to use the term
that was used, um, trying to
think of some, some other way to
do it, um.
Would I be able to get this?
If I was that young.
Young person 14 that had
committed murder.
And was on that um.
Scholarship
Uh, for that, those funds, would
I be able to get this as well?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, you know, we talked about
different scenarios. I think the
Madam Leader also had brought up
the idea of, um, should someone
have died, you know, what that
might be. Again, we're looking
at the task force to offer some
provisions as well. I look at
this fund not as a handout,
because a handout is something
that I can spend tomorrow, you
know, walk out with that check
and just get it. This is an
opportunity to be able to afford
to learn how to fish, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, it's an
opportunity to learn how you can
be a part of this, Madam Speaker
gentlemen. The, the provisions
we have in here sure I think.
key things. One is that it's a
person that is.
Dedicated to New Mexico, they're
born here. They've been born
here all their lives like this
is their home, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. It's also somebody
that is taking financial
literacy and it's also someone
that's looking to invest, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. So again,
we're looking at those those
kids, those, those young adults,
and maybe even those elders,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, should
they not utilize their funds at
the age of 18 who can use that
to comfortably retire. You know,
the goal of this is to ensure
our kids have a chance against a
a country where there are many
trust funds, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that they have a
chance to also
and build wealth in our state,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
you, you didn't answer my
question, but I'm, I'm gonna let
it go, but I will contend with
you.
This $20,000 and I don't think
it's even gonna be 20,000 by the
time they get it if they choose
to take it at 18, whether they
go by, um, go to school. I
don't, I don't know what they'd
use it for there, but whether
they choose to go into business
as, you know, myself, I did, um.
But that money made may move
that needle a little bit and I
certainly hope it does for those
who take it and do the right
thing with it.
Um, I'm not sure it's gonna get
out of the courts fast enough to
do that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
There's further debate the
represent the gentleman from
Sandoval and Santa Fe
represented McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, does a
gentle lady yield. Um, Madam
Speaker, I, I yield to my
neighbor from Santa Fe and
Sandoval.
Mr. Speaker, generally, Madam
Speaker, General lady, um, uh,
I, I like this idea, um, I'll
tell you I grew up.
Uh, with the investment adviser
as a father, so, you know, I,
I've, since from a young age
have been uh taught about the
importance of trying to set
money aside. Uh, so I appreciate
that, um.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
typically though, like if, if I
invested money, I could set up
an account for my kids if I put
$1000 in that account, um, that
they got when they're 18, you
know, it, hopefully it grows,
maybe it doesn't, but they would
get the, the benefit from that
specific investment, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
not set up that way, is that
correct? Like the money, the
investment doesn't track with
the child. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen
That's correct. It, it's a whole
fund, um, and then upon 18
years, the DFA will, uh,
determine how that would, how
much would be distributed and
how that would be distributed so
that the fund can continue to
last, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
generally, and, uh, and did I
hear that you're hopeful that
the payout might be about
$20,000 when they turn 18, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I believe
so and again looking at the um
the pilot program, they invested
around 6700, uh, when the person
or it it reaches the age of 18,
they anticipate that payout will
be 22,000 and then again if they
wait until they're 65 utilize
it, they expect it'll be in in
excess of half a million
dollars, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Speaker, generally the, uh,
right now, I guess we're just
setting up the program. We're
not actually funding it to a
significant extent. Is that
correct, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that is correct and
partially because we want to
make sure it goes through the
process in a, in a very
transparent way that LFC can
look at what's possible. And,
and I go back to my, my previous
statement, Madam Speaker or Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, you know,
if, if, if it's 15,000 instead,
or if it's 10,000 instead, that
is still a sizable investment in
our future, madam, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
So, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
Can you touch on the
anti-donation clause issues. I,
I, it's been brought up a couple
of times. Maybe you could just
walk me through how this works.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, again the
primary, one of the primary
tasks of the task forces is to
ensure that we do not go against
um the laws or the statutes or,
you know, again, the
Constitution of our, of our
state and I believe and I
believe looking at this, there
are ways to do that. You could
be through a scholarship
program. It could be through an
investment firm. It could be.
You know, developing certain
accounts and how it's
distributed, but, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you know, as
much as I might, and, and uh
create those different uh uh
scenarios, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I would love to hear
back from the task force with
their expertise on ensuring that
the fund can be expended in a
way that is that is uh in line
with the uh anti-onation clause
and all of our laws. The last
thing I'll say about that is
that, um, as I mentioned, you
know, we're not looking to just
give a check out, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, directly to an
individual, which
I would absolutely see it as a
violation of that. But we're
doing it for very specific
reasons, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that I believe we can do so in a
manner that would be in line
with the anti-donation clause.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, um,
as currently situated.
And the scribe, uh, I think you
have a real problem with the
anti-donation clause. Um, you
might have, you know, maybe the,
the task force can figure it
out, uh, maybe you have 18 years
to solve it, you know, I don't
know, um, I, I think it's a
problem, uh, just sitting here
sort of pondering it, you know,
you might be able to structure
it in, and this isn't, you might
need to change the structure of
the program, but, you know,
maybe it's like an investment
tax credit that if you, when you
turn 18 and if you can
that you've, uh, had your
primary residence in New Mexico
for the past 18 years and you
spend $5000 towards your
education or towards home
purchase and, you know, maybe,
maybe it's not 18, maybe it's 18
to 25, somewhere in there. You,
you can claim a tax credit, uh,
and, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think that's, that's a
way that we've, uh, through our
tax policies is the way we've
addressed the anti-donation
clause in the past, uh, it seems
to have held up, uh, so I.
this is something you can look
at the task force can look at,
um, I, I am.
I'm uncomfortable. I'm a little
concerned that we have this
proposal we're moving forward
and we're saying, here's this
potentially really significant
issue, and we're gonna solve it
later, and we haven't solved it
yet. So, I, I, I, I, I think
it's a very
Um, forward thinking idea and I
appreciate that uh I do think
there's some work left to be
done.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is debate from Eddie and
Lee, Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentle lady from
Edie and Lee. Thank you so much.
Well,
Gentle lady, I don't have any
questions for you, but I just
wanna share a little short story
that just happened this
afternoon.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
while we've been here, uh,
debating in the House chamber, I
received a text message from one
of my sisters, uh, she spent the
day sorting through old
photographs of when we were
children and she came across a
bank book.
From Seattle First National Bank
and it turns out.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
know, and these, you're not old
enough to know this, but they
kind of look like passports and
I.
I'll just hold it up they're
they're small and they have, you
know, where you put in numbers
and it's called the bank uh
deposit book.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, it turns out
That my parents started a
savings account for me at
Seattle First National Bank when
I was 3037 days old.
And um the initial deposit was
$55.
And then in the months that
followed they made deposits I
suppose when they could afford
to they didn't have much.
In fact, they would, uh, end up
raising 4 daughters.
But one of the deposits after
the initial deposit, Mr.
Speaker, was $15 then $17.
Then $5.80 and then one deposit
was 50 cents.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, my
parents did this for me, not the
government.
And I believe that's the way it
should be.
I think this uh bill proposing
baby bonds really truly ends up
being another giveaway, uh, paid
for by our taxpayers.
And I do believe, as has been
stated, there is a problem, Mr.
Speaker, with the anti-donation
clause.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would rather we take.
The money that would go into
this.
Uh, project and invested in our
children's education, making
sure that they can read and
write and do mouth math
calculations.
And we heard it said, Mr.
Speaker, that uh the reference
to a fish, if you give a person
a fish, that person will eat for
one day.
But the rest of the story is
that if you teach the person to
fish.
That person can make a
livelihood and feed um his or
her family. So, Mr. Speaker, I,
um, I do not plan to support
this bill. I think it's uh truly
speculative and not ready for
any kind of implementation, even
the calling of a task force, so
I, I will, uh.
Unfortunately not be supporting
the bill. Thank you.
See no further debate, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe to
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I thank
the body for the debate. Mr.
Speaker, I move that House Bill
7 as amended do now pass.
I'm
We are on.
Final passage.
Of
how's Bill 7 asm ended. The vote
is now open.
So
What about clothes?
Why are you all voting against
that cute picture.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 30 in the affirmative 26 in
the negative. House Bill 7 as
amended as duly pass his house.
And I know no one took a picture
of that to post on social media.
Gentle lady from.
The lady from Santa Fe, are you
ready on item number 11?
Yes, I am, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point? necessary
for place in the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 169, has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution the generally to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The public expression
Act is a uniform law that helps
us upgrade the anti-slap
legislation nationally. With
that, I stand for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move the House Judiciary
Substitute for House Bill 169
does now pass. We are on final
passage.
How's judiciary substitute for
House Bill 169, the vote is not
open.
No.
What what cause?
By a vote of 42 in the
affirmative, 22 in the negative.
How's judiciary can be
substitute for House Bill 169
has duly passed this house.
Generally from Bern Leo
representative Anaya.
Are you ready on item.
Number
21.
Yes, I am Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that action
is for place in Senate Bill 283
on final passage has been taken
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution you
need to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 283 clarifies and ensures
that youths in CYFD custody are
receiving all of the federal
benefits that they're eligible
for, that that money is not
going to CYFD for their care.
And with that, I stand for for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
now. I move that Senate Bill 283
do now pass.
We are in final passage of
Senate Bill 283, the vote is
open.
It's about to close. The vote is
now closed by a vote of 63 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. Senate Bill 283 has
only passed his house.
Gentlemen from.
Chavez Representative Murphy,
are you ready? I am ready, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you very much.
Um, and item number 46. I'm just
kidding.
I'm number 20.
Howvie 468. Yes, sir.
The director like that election
necessary for placing the House
with 468 on final passage has
been taken, and it is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Yeah, I meant to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um,
House Bill 468 provides
guidelines for how state flags
will be disposed of. It is
consistent with the US flag code
uh for um our federal flag.
And uh I've also worked very
closely with the Za Pueblo, uh,
on making sure that we got it
right, uh, as the, uh, uh, own
the symbol, um, the the symbol
on, on the flag.
I, uh, don't have my expert with
me, uh, but she did provide a
statement and I would ask that
my co-sponsor and friend from
Donana Sierra and Socorro
representative Dal Read her
statement from Sierra Socorro
and Donana. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, so this,
this was brought by the Girl
Scouts of Troop 1804, and Adrian
Vihel Martinez is doing her, uh,
Final Girl Scout project. She's
been part of Girl Scouts since
she was 5 years old and she's
attended these ceremonies and
civic events with the American
flag was lowered and retired
with great honor and dignity,
but the same honor was not given
to the New Mexico flag with our
beloved symbol. So when it came
time to her, for her to select
her project to earn the highest
award that Girl Scouts can earn,
she went through the process of
finding out how they, she could
get this procedure changed.
And she turned to our very own
Eagle Scout Representative Mark
Murphy to lead this charge for
her. So, um, now we are hoping
that the flag of New Mexico
bearing bearing the Pueblo Zia
will be um retired with the same
honor of the American flag.
Right, there is debate. The
gentleman from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez.
thing, Mr. Speaker, will the
gentlemen, please yield.
I will certainly yield to my
friend from Sandoval.
Mr. Speaker, gentleman, does the
flag have to be in use for 25
years in order to be retired.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker, and, and
now, uh, representative that
does not.
So how, how would the flag be
retired?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the flag is usually retired
after it's been worn, torn, or
no, uh, further, um, it's been
compromised from its display
ability. Typically, then, um,
there is a, uh, recognition
ceremony conducted by a military
organization, um, Boy Scouts,
Girl Scouts, and, uh, the
preferred method is, uh, burning
the flag in a respectful manner.
thing, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
is this the first bill you have
on the floor.
It is, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Representative.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I hope
you have a good song.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker
See no further debate, the
gentlemen to close.
Thank you Mister Speaker, I
would, uh, move that House Bill
468, uh, do pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 468.
The vote is now open.
You get switched the vote way
too quickly. You gotta wait till
it's 2.
Oh shoot.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, would you like
to, would you like to, uh, amend
your vote? No, the the Martinez
caucus has made their well
known.
But I haven't closed the vote,
gentlemen from Sandoval, how do
you wish to vote?
I wish to vote.
In the affirmative.
And so do I.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative.
You're in the negative. How's
468 we pass this house.
Congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
The gentleman to sing. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, you'll
probably recognize the words you
may not recognize the tone, but
I'll do my best.
Blame it all on my roots. I
showed up in boots and ruined
your black tie affair. The last
one to know, the last one to
show, the last guy you thought
you'd see here.
Because I got friends in low
places just look at the New
Mexico legislature. Oh, I got
friends in low places where the
whiskey drowns and the beer
chases my blues away and I'll be
OK. Yeah, I'm not big on social
graces. I'll slip on down to the
legislature. Oh, I got friends
in low places. Thank you very
much. Congratulations.
Speaking of friends in low
places is a gentleman from Brit
Leo, Representative Andres
Romero.
Ready.
And item number 47. It's messed
up, Mr. Speaker. Could you get
me to that point, please?
That the record reflect that
election is replaced in Senate
Bill 82 on final passage has
been taken and it is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 82 would amend the Capital
outlay process for schools to
extend temporary reductions for
schools local match. You would
also get to rid of two
sub-requirements for um the
state local match for school
districts. So with that, Mr.
Speaker, I'll stand for
questions. There is debate. The
gentle lady from Valencia
Mirabal Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Bernalo
yield, Mr. Speaker, I'll yield
to my friend in a very high
place.
That's
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, uh,
gentlemen. Um, I, I, I really
love the changes that this bill
does because it it really allows
so many of our school districts
who don't have the, the money
to, to match, to be able to
replace their, their, their
buildings, their, their older
stuff, but there's still a
little bit of schools out there
that just kind of don't fit into
any of these waivers, with that
being said, Mr. Speaker, I have
a hopefully a friendly
amendment.
Well, the gentle lady kindly
bring the friendly amendment to
the rostrum.
Gent lady, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is
0231909.1 that passed out by our
surgeons and posted online and
Has the amendment been passed
out? OK, we're almost there.
Looks like the amendment has
been passed out and it is posted
online, the gentle lady to
explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, what
this amendment does, well,
really what criteria be of of of
the bill does is it help out,
helps out um smaller schools
that right now with the current
uh verbiage it it is uh 800 if,
if you have 800 mem um or
students and then it lowers the
mileage so what this does is in
its current form, it kind of
leaves out um just a few, I
should say maybe around a dozen,
I think, um, I think maybe.
16 school districts that are
just not small enough to qualify
for that uh to fit the criteria
B, but they still don't have the
tax um the um base in order to
be able to, to bring up their
village or uh for to meet other
criteria so what my uh amendment
does is it just bumps that uh
strikes 800.
And it uh bumps it up to 1500
and that will be able to allow
so many more, uh, districts to
be able to qualify for their
waivers so they can replace
their buildings.
Um
Mr. Speaker, yes, this is a
friendly amendment.
We have a friendly amendment.
To all of the
Audience sold out audience in
the gallery that is a friendly
amendment.
Is there
Objection to adopting the
amendment.
See none you have an amended
bill.
lady from Valencia, back to you.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Speaker. This is, this is gonna
make a lot of school districts
happy, so, uh, thank you.
See no further debate,
gentlemen, to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 82 is amended,
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 82 as amended. The
vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The borders are closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 82 as
amended Auli pass this House.
Your lady from Santa Fe, are you
ready on item number 51.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
I think I meant the other lady
from Santa Fe and of Lujan.
Hey, gentle, uh, can you get me
to that point that action is
replacing house energy
environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for AA 394 as amended.
It's some final passages and is
subject to debate amend or
substitution. General later to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, HB
394 uh creates a clean energy,
uh, or natural resources board,
uh be um.
With uh with Ener's, uh, agency
and um.
It's something that we really
need, uh, to really focus in on
how we are creating a new, uh,
looking at our economy through
our energy scope and the focus
and the happy to report that I
worked across with uh.
With um the gentle.
Folks are in this, this, uh, um.
Membership, Mr. Speaker, to get
this through, and it's something
that I feel that will really
benefit our state as we are
looking to further our, um,
See you later or close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do now
move the HB 394, uh, do you now
pass?
We are on final passage of House
Bill 3 of House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for us with 394 as amended, the
vote is not open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 54 in the affirmative 10 in
the negative.
How's energy environment and
natural resources Committee
substitute for house with 394 as
amended Azuli passes house.
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Are you ready on item number 58.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
If the record reflect that all
action necessary replacing House
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for ASO 618 and final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate and many
members substitution they'll
later explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, this
bill, uh, was at the request of
do it. It removes duplicative
work so that the enterprise
project management office can
support um the departments and
the way they're supposed to,
they can focus on oversight and
training and project support
rather than focusing on just
the, um, the, the um the
process, the procedure for
procurement. Um, it saves money
because the GST does the same
thing. I have with me the do it
secret Manny Barreras as my
expert and with that I stand for
questions.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
government
The House government, uh,
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 618 do now pass. passage of
government elections and affairs
Committee substitute for O Bill
618. The vote is not open.
What's about close.
So what is not closed by what of
64 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. How's government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for our C16
has really passed this house.
Gentlemen from Ben Alilo San
Romero, are you ready on item
number?
46. Mr. Speaker, could you get
me to that point? the record
reflect that all action is
necessary for place in Senate
Bill 75 as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker Senate Bill 75 would
amend several sections of the
educational retirement Act,
including the receipt of gifts,
unclaimed member contributions,
uh, minimum, uh.
and cost of living adjustments
with that, Mr. Speaker, I'll
stand for questions. See debate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 75 as amended
do now pass.
of Senate Bill 75 as amended.
The vote is now open.
I was undecided.
The road is not closed by what
64 in the affirmative 0 in the
negative. Senate Bill 75 is
amended is passed this house.
And lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown, are you
ready? and item number 52.
Mr. Speaker, I'm ready, um.
I have a witness or an expert
joining me, uh, Mr. Speaker, and
members of the body
for place in Senate Bill 199.
The final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 199 pertains to the
administration of the local DWI
grant program. The bill proposes
to shift some funding, uh, to
the local government division
within DFA to hire additional
personnel to provide greater
technical assistance to the 33
local DWI programs. I stand for
questions.
See no debate to close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that Senate
Bill 199 do now pass a final
passage of Senate Bill 199.
The vote is now open.
Oh
What's what's close.
The it's not closed by a vote of
63 in the affirmative 0 in the
negative. Senate Bill 199 Auli
pass this House.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
All our members have a special
announcement.
Where is Chito?
Can you please bring him down
here?
Cheeto
Today
Is your birthday.
Happy birthday happy birthday to
you. Happy birthday to you,
happy birthday, dearcheo.
Happy birthday to you.
And because it is his birthday.
He has requested that we don't
work tomorrow and that will be
his birthday gift.
Give the man a hug. He deserves
it.
Thank you for spending your
birthday with us, Chito.
We're gonna keep doing 3rd
reading, but we just have to
take a little break for some
announcements. Anyone else with
some announcements before I go
back to 3rd reading.
Birthday wishes gen gentle lady
from Bern Leo, Mr. Speaker, just
did not do this at the end for
health house Health and Human
Services we will be meeting
Monday at 9 o'clock. Enjoy your
half an hour.
members signal lady from San
Miguel and Torres with a
basketball update.
Mr. Speaker, actually not a
basketball update, but a
tortilla update because when you
win, you get tortillas.
So that is a courtesy of a
former Representative Ricky Hill
brought again just some
celebration from Las Vegas, but
I also wanna send uh a minute
just to thank our house and
rolling and engrossing committee
dinner sponsors, our friends. We
put up some signage but just to
thank you to Sky Devore, Roger
Gonzalez, Julian Kub, Kim
Lagarde, Danny Mackey, Vince
Martinez share.
Of course Marlo Schultz, Jason
Thompson, John Thompson, Randy
Traynor, Ashley Wagner, and
Jason Weeks that helped make a
dinner tonight possible so thank
you for feeding us on this very
late evening.
Remember saying no thank you to
the enrolling and rossing
committees A and B for committee
dinner tonight. Very nice of
you.
Gentlemen from Bertillo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Education Committee will meet
Monday morning in room 309 at
8:30. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady from.
Brilio Valencia Socorro,
McKinley San Juan Cibola
representative Abeta. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I want to give a
special shout out to my good
friend Alison Sosi, who married
Jeffrey Sosi today and I could
not be there for their wedding,
but a special shout out to them
and also to Sandia High School
to the Benali sisters and their
team for winning the the 5A
state championship girls title.
Congratulations to the San Di
Matadores.
Gentlemen from.
Chavez, Eddie and Ode
representative of Henry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to make another quick
announcement as well, uh, since
the last time I got to stand up.
Uh, I thought I would let
everybody know that the Artesia
Bulldogs are now state champions
in basketball.
Congratulations to the Artesia
Bulldogs, state champs.
Gentlemen from Ria Riva San Juan
Sandoval, Representative
Valente. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, we will not be meeting in
house taxation Revenue Committee
on Monday morning. Thank you.
Boo.
I have 3 tax bills in your
committee, OK.
Jalii from San Juan McKinley.
Thank you.
Mm
Your house state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee meeting will meet on
Monday.
8:30, don't be late.
Uh
Bring you tortillas, make your
own burritos, young lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and will we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
So an objection. It is so
ordered, gentle lady from
Katherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia Representative
Armstrong, are you ready on item
24?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point action
necessary for placing house
health and human Services
Committee substitute for house
with 343 as amended and final
passage has been taken and it is
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that generally to
explain the bill. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Um, this bill makes
the Department of Health the
leading the lead.
Carra Agency and with more
specific expectations, uh, for
Kara and some CYFD information
and my expert witness is, um,
the Department of Health
Secretary, uh, Gina De Blasi,
and I stand for questions.
Berlio Torrens, Representative
Lord.
You, Mr. Speaker, will the
gentle lady from the largest
county in all of New Mexico,
please yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
I yield.
I've been quiet today, but of
course it's a CYFD bill, so I do
have a few questions for you on
this. When I look through it,
Mr. Speaker, dental lady.
I started on page and it's just
gonna be a few questions. I know
everybody's tired and they want
to go home, but this is
important, important issue to
me.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
noticed that we start off with
some definitions we're talking
about.
Um
On page 6, I meet her ongoing
safety and well-being of a
substance exposed newborn or to
provide prenatal or perinatal
support to a pregnant person
dealing with substance abuse.
Can you tell me a little bit
about what we plan on doing
forward, uh, with these babies
that have born, been born drug
addicted or have a drug addicted
parent, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, the plan will be is defined
to where um there is a.
A navigator that, uh, if a, if a
baby is born exposed, um, that
they help.
do a plan of safe care. It's
called a plan of safe care and,
um, the parents have to follow
that plan.
Mr. Speaker Deity, uh, and that
was gonna be my next question,
is this now mandated or is it
just saying you should. It is
now shall, not me.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so if we have somebody
who comes in with a baby that is
drug addicted, they and the
parent also has drug addiction.
What would be the first steps
that would happen with that
parent and the child, Mr.
Speaker, gen lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, this is prenatal and um
and born addicted, um, and so
the first step would be, um,
the, the, the.
Staff would contact the
navigator, the navigator would
come and do uh a family
evaluation, uh, and set up the
plan of safe care.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
they do the plan of safe care,
uh, is there any assessment to
make sure that the home is safe,
that the child is going into.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, there is, there is a plan
of, of safe care for the infant
to make sure they're going home
to a safe place, uh, and.
And a home visit.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if that parent is drugged
addicted, do they have to go to
some sort of rehabilitation or
is it just suggested that they
go. Uh, like I said before, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, there is a
plan of safe care including
anything and, uh, that the
parents need and the baby that
will be in the plan of safe
care.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, I
just want to ask one more time.
So if somebody came in their
drug addicted, did what they
have to go to rehab and get
clean before they get the child
back, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentle
lady, they would get referred to
treatment, depending on the
openings and things like that,
but yes, there would be a
referral to treatment.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I will support this bill, but
I'm extremely frustrated because
we missed the mark a little bit
here. There's been my biggest
frustration since we got here.
Babies are born, drug addicted
to a drug addicted parent, and
we're not mandated say you have
to go into rehab and get
yourself clean before you get
the baby because I have too many
sheriffs and law enforcers tell
me about half dead children
because parents are going home
and still smoking fentanyl in
front of the child. So as my
biggest issue with this, I'll
vote for it because it does make
some changes, but it's not far.
enough. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. There is
further debate, the gentle lady
from Donana Hidalgo Luna,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady yield? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and I don't have questions, but
I just want to say thank you.
I want to say thank you for the
investment of time.
And the care you've given into.
To, uh, improving the situation
for the babies that are born
drug addicted and for their
families as well. I'd also like
to say thank you to um Deputy
Secretary secretary Kathy
Phoenix Doyle and uh secretary
Casados, I know they, they tried
hard to improve this and
improved it quite a bit there's
there's support, their
resources, and there's
accountability and our babies
deserve that, and I believe,
honestly believe this will save
babies' lives and uh so it's
very important and I'm
really grateful and it's not
perfect, but it's, it's a huge,
huge improvement, so thank you
so much. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate from
Senator Anaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a
gentle lady yield. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield.
Mr. Speaker, I just want to
stand in support of this bill
and thank the sponsor. Um, I
wanna thank you for the time
that you took to talk to me
about this and share your story.
Um, so Mr. Speaker, um, that's
all I have. Thank you so much.
Seeing no further debate John
later to close. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I now move that,
um,
House health and human services.
Oh, I don't know what that HB.
Committee sub for 343, uh, do as
amended do now pass. We are a
final passage of House Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for house with 343 as
amended. The vote is not open.
What's about to close.
The vote is not closed by 66 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill 343 as amended
has duly passed this house.
lady from Bernalior
representative Thompson, are you
ready on item number.
34. Yes, Mr. Mr. Speaker, can
you get me to that point? And
can I get my expert in, please?
I'll I'll go really slow, let
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
with 78 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, so what House Bill 78
does it only um.
s to federally qualified health
centers and federally qualified
health center lookalikes. It
started out as a much bigger
bill including hospitals we took
all of that out at the request
of different people and what the
340B program is Mr. Speaker, is
that it's a federal program that
that allows um.
Pharma
To sell
drugs at decreased prices to
certain entities including 340B,
um, I mean including federally
qualified FQHCs and FQHC
lookalikes. There are over 200
of them in the state and 80% of
them are in rural areas and what
happens is the the discounted
price of the drug, the money
that's saved then has to be by
law plowed back into the patient
care so it provides for FQHCs
and
lookalikes, um,
Serve people with um no
insurance or who are
underinsured so that what this
program does it allows those
entities to put the money back
into patient care and with that,
Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
Bern Representative Nicole
Chavez.
Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady, will you yield, Mr.
Speaker? I yield to the gentle
lady. Thank you, gentle lady. As
you know, I know we, we talked
about this as you were
presenting this bill in health
committee and I had some
questions and concerns then and
I know that the bill has been
amended so I'm, I'm very
thankful for that, however, I
still have some concerns on this
program, um, as we're aware, we
know that the 340B program was.
Cred so that the low income, um,
health care clinics could then
offer that medication at a much
lower discounted rate then
regular pharmacies, hospitals.
Correct. Madam Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes.
OK, but we are aware that
currently in the process is
getting, the program is actually
um not being utilized correctly
and people are.
Overcharging. So say a hospital
could then get a drug at the the
340B discount for say $2000 and
then they would then bill the
insurance company for $22,000.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this has no
hospitals in it. It's only FQHCs
and lookalikes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
this what's happening with the
340B program nationally, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, there
are problems with it nationally,
but we can't fix those and what
I'm trying to do, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady is save these
safety net clinics.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I just want to read off that the
average profit margin for
anti-diabetes medication,
dispensed at 340B pharmacies,
they have a 90% margin that they
build on top of how much they
pay. The average profit margin
for brand for gastroenterology
prescriptions dispensed at a
340B contract pharmacy has a
90%.
Profit margin as well.
The average profit margin for
brands for cardiovascular
prescriptions at a 340B contract
pharmacy has a 71% profit margin
and then the average profit
margin for respiratory agents at
a 340B dispensed contract
pharmacy has a 67% profit
margin.
So what's happening is.
There is abuse going on in this
program, and I just wanted to
point out here in the state of
New Mexico, it seems like 340B
has become less about patience
and more about boosting the the
bottom line, and I know that's
what we're trying to protect,
um.
He it saying that employers in
New Mexico pay an estimated
$54.5 million in health care
costs due to the foregone
rebates.
As a result of the 340B program.
This leads to a $2.6 million
reduction in state and local tax
revenues, so I just want to
point out there is a lot of
abuse happening and the reasons
manufacturers are asking
everybody that participates in
these programs is so that they
can monitor.
And watch where the
prescriptions are going and if
the savings gets followed
through, so with that I have an
amendment.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
bring your amendment to the
rostrum.
Mr. Speaker I asked for a roll
call vote, please.
I don't see a% of how raising
his hand yet.
OK, roll call, you have roll
call.
lady from Berlio, will you
kindly read the number on the
bottom left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, 0231886.1. get
this passed out and posted
online and we'll come back to
you to explain the amendment.
Gentle lady from Bernardo.
Did, uh, did you happen to read
that the 231 number?
I did, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Has, has that there you remember
been passed out?
Looks like it is it all?
OK, the amendment has been
passed out and it is online,
gentle lady to explain the me.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
house floor amendment 2 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 78.
The amendment starts on page 2.
Line 5.
Strike and.
And then between lines 5 and 6,
insert contract pharmacy with
the meaning.
And then renumber succeeding
paragraphs.
On page 2 lines 12 and 13 strike
pharmacy contractually operated
obligated with an applicable
entity.
Same thing on page 2 lines 17
and 18.
On page 2 strike lines.
20 through 26, and insert in
lieu of therefore.
20 through 24, sorry, um, and
then add nothing in this
subsection count shall be
construed to deny restrict or
prohibit a manufacturer from
requiring an applicable entity
to provide claims information to
a manufacturer for the purpose
of verifying compliance with
federal law.
So
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
all this amendment will do and
accomplish is protect
transparency, just to ensure
that the drug manufacturer can
request claims data information.
This allows them to verify that
they are appropriately providing
340B drug pricing to eligible
entities.
gentle lady from Berna Leo
Thompson, is this a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it is not.
OK. There is debate on the
amendment, John lady from Santa
Fe Representative Sapasky.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Yield.
Gentle lady, leader, I will
yield.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh, and
Mr. Speaker, um.
This is an issue that I've spent
a lot of time working on, um,
over the last few weeks and
really reading, it's a very
complicated program, gentle
lady, and um.
One of the things I really
appreciate about uh the the
legislation as it stands, is it
really focuses on protecting the
federally qualified health
clinics and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
Are you aware of the profit
margin that uh these federally
qualified health clinics, uh,
or, well, they're non for
profit, so but the margin that
they are currently operating
under.
Are you asking me if I know if
they're profiting from the 340B
program or are you asking me.
How much of a discount they're
receiving, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I, I guess I mean at
the end of the year after
they've paid out, uh, you know,
the salary, the wages, all of
their contracts and fees and
expenses for equipment, uh, how
much, how much of their revenues
left over at the end of the year
just globally, Mr. Speaker, um,
Madam Leader, I'm sure it's a
very small margin because we are
talking specifically you asked
about those clinics.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, this, uh.
This proposal, I, I, I fear your
amendment, um.
Would
be incredibly damaging and sort
of go into why we are, we are
passing this legislation and
generally, Mr. Speaker, I share
your concerns about the 340B
program broadly, um, it is a
very complicated program and
there are a lot of entities that
are profiting off of this
program that uh uh that I feel,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
just warrants a really hard
look, um, so totally agree with
you gentle lady that.
We should have a global sort of
look into what are the entities
that are profiting off this
program, including the
pharmacies, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think the
intention of your amendment is
to really have the pharmacies do
that reporting, um, to the, uh,
pharmaceutical manufacturers so
they can look into are they
actually reinvesting the dollars
from this into the patients that
are indigent and need.
to help is, is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Mr. Speaker rep, um, Madam
Leader, yes, so I believe
without this amendment we're
just saying that the FQHCs can
have drug discounts contract
with retail pharmacies to
dispense the 340B drug to
someone not eligible under the
340B program with no questions,
and we do know that they do
contract with many pharmacies
and the pharmacies are not
willing to provide that claims
data, and that's where we get
into this.
Specific issue that we're having
today.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I too share that
concern because the 340B program
is supposed to reinvest those
dollars, you know, all of the
entities, whether it be a
hospital, whether it be uh uh a
public clinic, uh, a state-based
clinic, whether it be uh an
FQHC, all of that funding is to
be reinvested back, um, however,
to fully execute this.
Um, what it would require a
federally qualified health
center to do is is potentially
higher 2 to 5 additional staff
because um Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I'm not sure if you're
aware, but I spent a bit of time
talking with some of the staff
of some of the FQHCs in
preparation for this bill and
This, your amendment would mean
that every clinic that is sort
of a frontline clinic would have
to have dedicated staff.
To provide to each and every
pharmaceutical manufacturer a
report on every single
medication prescribed to every
patient, um, and the fact that
it was sent to a contract
pharmacy, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I'm not sure, um, if
in, in the preparation of this
amendment, there was a
realization because you need not
only the contract pharmacy to
provide that reporting you.
You also need the FQHC to match
up the patient record, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and were
you aware of that?
Mr. Speaker, um, Madam Leader, I
am aware of that. I work with
FQHCs often and I do know that
the problem is because the
prescription pharmacies do not
want to provide the claims data
that is needed from the
manufacturers now the
manufacturers know that.
Millions actually billions
across the United States, um,
are.
Being made off of the.
Prescription drugs that they're
giving at a discounted rate for
the 340B program.
But the savings isn't followed
through. It even happens at
hospitals or facilities here in
this state.
So they say they're selling the
manufacturers giving the drug
for $100 and.
The insurance company can be
charged or the individual can be
charged $20,000 for that
medication and it's happening
all across the United States, so
they are requiring the claims
data and that's why it's needed
so that they continue to they
can continue the program and
continue to offer the 340B
program on a federal basis.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I agree that we need to really
investigate the use of 340B,
particularly because there was a
very high profile case that was
reported in national newspaper
that took place right here,
right here in Santa Fe, right
here at home, um, where, uh, an
individual is being charged
$23,000 for, uh, a drug that
should have been provided, um,
at a much lower cost, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm not
aware of any accusations or any
uh findings.
about federally qualified health
centers, um, doing that, uh,
similar type of billing. And so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
me, um, I can't support this
amendment because it would mean
that these federally qualified
health centers that are sort of
hanging on by a thread that
brought this legislation forward
to ensure that patient services
would be protected, particularly
at a time when costs are rising,
you know, costs for everyday
folks.
are rising. Food prices are on
the rise. We've talked about egg
prices in this chamber, um, the
cost of everyday essentials is
going up and so more and more
people are going to be depending
on these frontline clinics and
gentle lady, I, I, I would love
to work with you on sort of
doing a global look because I do
think we need to look at the
hospitals, we need to look at
other the state clinics and make
sure that patients who are
receiving, uh, treatment at a
public health clinic or also
which
are using 340B, um, and, and we
can include, I think some of
these frontline clinics in a
global look, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um.
This is gonna require every
frontline nonprofit clinic to
hire, um, you know, potentially
at least one additional person,
but maybe up to 3 to 5 people
because every pharmaceutical
manufacturer has a different
database and so these frontline
clinics that are already billing
1015, 20 insurance companies are
now gonna have to have a person
available to submit this
information on a daily basis to
each and every pharmaceutical
database.
Now, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, I have asked the
pharmaceutical manufacturers is
they would come up with a single
database so that it wouldn't
take 1 to 3 to 5 extra people to
perform all these, put all these
transactions, um, and I hope
that that's something that the
pharmaceutical manufacturers
will consider because I think
that would be a great step for
them to take so that it'd be
easier to verify these claims,
um, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the, the purpose of this
leg
translation is really to shore
up these frontline clinics, at
least for the next year, while
we can come up with a
comprehensive solution and so I
cannot support this because of
the increase in cost to those
clinics and um but I appreciate
the intention because I, I too
really am concerned about this
program and how it's being
implemented and um Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if you'd like to
respond to that, please do.
Mr. Speaker, um, Madam Leader,
yes, and I actually thought if
we were working on this
legislation instead of bringing
this, we should have worked on
legislation to create a three
party clearing house for claims
level data to ensure the 3 340B
properly, uh, the claims from
clinics, hospitals, all
participants are complying
correctly. That's what we should
have been working on, um, a
clearing house, and I also am
concerned because 8.
other states have tried to
create legislation or have
created legislation.
And all 8 are currently in
lawsuits right now. Um, most
have been.
Overturned by the federal.
Federal government, so I just
wanted to point out the one that
is closest to us is West
Virginia and they just ruled in
December of 2024, found that the
prohibition on seeking claims
data in the West Virginia Senate
Bill 325 stands as an obstacle
to achieving the federal
objective of preventing fraud in
the 340B program and that is
almost identical to the language
we have decided on today.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that. I read uh.
Or I think federal district
court opinions on this topic,
um, there was a Mississippi case
that actually ruled the opposite
in some of the language is
similar to what we have before
us today, but I will say that
all of those states had much
bigger bills actually closer to
the way that this legislation
began and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think because this is so
narrowly tailored to support
those federally qualified health
centers, you know, we think of
La Familia here El Centro up
north.
Um, there's La Puebla down south
there's there's so many of these
front line clinics that are just
hanging on by a thread, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I, we
almost lost La Familia in Santa
Fe, which has been providing
care for decades over the last
uh year and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm hoping that
because this is such a narrowly
tailored bill at this point that
it will hold up uh in the
courts, um, because it's
affecting a much smaller number
of patients and much smaller.
smaller number of facilities,
um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
The, um, the, the some the
rulings have been mixed and some
of them have been upheld, and
so, so I, I just, uh, I don't
want to belabor at this point,
but I would appreciate the
opportunity to work with you on
this issue and the in the
interim because I think we do
need a bigger solution that it
pulls in all of the parties and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
can't support this amendment
because I think it, it really is
targeting um our most fragile
safety net clinics and um
imposing requirements.
on them that we wouldn't even be
imposing on our very largest
health facilities, so, um, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
appreciate the conversation.
General lady from Bernelio.
Mr. Speaker, I moved the table
house floor amendment number 12,
House Judiciary Committee
substitute.
To house Judiciary Committee
substituted House Bill 78.
There has been a motion to
table.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78.
A vote
Of yes we'll table the bill a
vote of no when we will continue
discussion. The vote is now
open.
Oh, the vote is now closed with
a vote of 33 in the affirmative,
31 in the negative, uh, house,
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 708, the amendment has been
tabled.
General Lead close.
Do I still have the floor? My
apologies. You still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
well, let's hope that we don't
have a lawsuit that we're
looking at, but I'd like to see
what the, what the language
looks like at the end, but I
really think without oversight
of the 340B program. It's stray
far from its safety net purpose
and profit engine, and they
can't keep going unchecked and
unmonitored. Thank you so much.
It's a slippery slope.
Gentle lady, you're close. Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, so, um, just a few
follow-ups, um, over 20 states
have introduced this type of
legislation. This has nothing to
do with rebates, um, and with
that I move that House committee
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78 do now pass.
We are on final passages of
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 70.
8
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a
count of 36 in the affirmative,
28 in the negative, House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for Hospital 78 has
duly passed this house.
gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Socorro, are you ready on
item number 13. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Will you get me to that
point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
House Bill 431 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject for to um debate or
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 41 amends the Watershed Act
to improve compliance with
statute, um, by
Moving appointments of watershed
boards and directors instead of
election on boards. With that, I
stand for questions.
See no big John Lady close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move that House Bill 431 to
pass.
We are on final passage for
House Bill 438431. My apologies.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. House 431 has duly
passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
But are there any announcements?
Seeing none.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
The house was stand in recess
until 10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
Well, joke, joke.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
You know, as I get older, I
remember all of the people that
I've lost along the way.
Maybe a career as a tour guide
wasn't such a good idea.
We got some good ones there.
The gentle lady from Berna Leo.
Mr. Speaker, that was a good
one.
In, in the spirit of the blood
red moon.
Last night,
Um, what do you, how do you
Let's see how, how do you, how
do you make it a witch itch.
How General Leni?
You take away the W.
The gentleman from Sandoval,
Hernandez, Mr. Speaker, what is
blue and not very heavy.
What?
Light blue.
Thank you, the House will stand
in recess until 10:30 a.m.
Monday morning.
