And and representative Armstrong
no more that died fuel than I
ever thought I knew in my life
but.
Help please put your bill on.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for being here House
Bill three fifty four is
basically reading related to
taxation exempting from gross
receipts tax and compensating
Tax dyed diesel fuel for
the agricultural services
For.
Many agricultural divisions of
the state of New Mexico in the
the New Mexico.
and other parts of the state
there's been a real issue with
a lot of things but act is
really falling by the wayside
this is one entity that was
brought to my attention by one
of my guests that I use
In fact that it is detrimental
to act.
the bottom line is is that die
diesel has a gross receipts tax
on it were regular diesel
thousand.
And that has an excise tax and
and during the pandemic in the
last year was really brought to
the attention of people that.
Die diesel fuel is not does not
have a excise tax on it because
it's not supposed to be used on
the roads excise taxes used to
help pave roads and maintain
roads and so long story short
people that were supposed to be
paying a little bit last provide
diesel.
Actually a lot more.
That regular diesel so it was it
was just a real hardship on
agricultural for sure and with
that manager I'd like to
introduce my my guest Caitlyn
Hart who's with guidelines
solutions and Mr Betty Hodges.
part is oil so I'd like to let
him say a few words if at all
possible madam chair.
Thank you good morning Madam.
You should go up to New Mexico
before the committee into the
and speak about this before you
know we're we're I would give
you a brief introduction
Marshall.
I'm third generation petroleum
market company the teacher
turned to a hundred years old.
My daughter's four generations
program the president.
We would San Juan but we service
which accounted Bernalillo
county several counties Suffolk
County stored counters for
rocket.
I've been in this business known
myself for going on fifty four
years.
We sell retail outlets
commercial industrial
governmental and mostly with
this with this product.
Full.
We primarily apply the tax
schools of New Mexico we collect
the taxes we report to Texas
tech.
The for working right to the
committee this bill has no
financial impact on my business.
Or that of any other Patrol
industry.
Gross taxes levied by the state
of New Mexico were removed.
I don't know how much the
gentleman you'd like me to go in
I do have a rich history of for
the diesel fuel issue if you
would like to hear four of the
to the.
What was the question comes up
with then we'll let you go.
Okay.
So madam chair I just wanted to
point out I know that there was
one FY are that was removed
because taxed wraps that are
there that we didn't need this
bill.
Because it was already exams.
So we know that that was a
misunderstanding then we they
said it was under review and
they would get us a new one
while they give us one that was
completely outrageous now again
it's under review and they
should be submitting a new money
for trying to madam chair figure
out if there's any way that
taxed Rav which I doubt I can
tell you what was used for
construction and what was used
for act but I think suppliers
could potentially get us a great
number and so we are working on
that as well so with that madam
chair we stand for questions and
and thank you Representative I
want to say we had the same
problem we could separate out my
knee you know there's all these
here you can set with we
couldn't separated out in a
meaningful way so we were faced
with the same problem so thank
you for bringing that up I think
I'll leave it to the tax
experiences some now come up
with a decent FIR but we were
having the same problem so thank
you for that so
I will go at now thank you
Representative for yourself I'll
go to the audience how many in
the audience are in favor of
this legislation.
And how many are opposed to this
legislation.
Okay I'm going to have the the
people in favor of this
legislation speak first and if I
could see your hands again in
the first row please.
madam chair committee my name is
Laura Riley I work with
Monteverdi as a group large.
Landholders and granted out the
state and this we were in favor
of this because this is a free
financial impact on on our
producers and we are not in that
in terms of the the few.
Thank you.
extra.
This Madam chairman and still
cannot farmers and ranchers for
more Mexico I see this bill
because we use in our taxes on
diesel go from roughly five
cents a gallon to twenty five to
thirty cents a gallon last two
years and this I would also like
to point out this is only the
diesel which used off road it's
in all our cultural.
Our vehicles on the highway the
actual use of the the farm
tractors and those things I love
the drive uses for so support
armed supporters still thank you
very much thank you Sir yes.
Hi.
My name is Ross going on here
Mexico coverage we stand strong
support of this bill bring a
little bit of personal to it.
It's very hard for us to step
out of five thousand gallons of
diesel.
Around our farms and ranches.
Compare the price of the liver
Farm diesel to what I could pull
the trigger town for
filling up in Indiana highway
fuel.
Costs less to use highway fuel
use our fuel that's that's what
we've got an issue and I would
greatly appreciate your support
on this bill thank you thank you
Sir.
Yes.
Good morning chair members of
the state trust a registered
this The New Mexico Chile
Association we sent a strong
support of this bill because it
provides a finance right our
farmers desperately need times
of inflation the master thank
you yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee tenure of our
adjusters lobbyist for Mexico
for livestock that will echo
what Mr king and Mr form
mentioned in New Mexico for last
year's and strong support thank
you.
and the committee.
excuse.
Generally it is
thank you.
At.
I thank you and good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm Beverly it's sync
I would Terry producers of New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of house bill three
fifty four as you all know those
involved in agriculture can't
pass on additional costs they
incur so this is a common sense
bill that will help our
producers and we would like to
thank Representative Armstrong
and others for bringing it
forward thank you.
Thank you.
will now hear from
By far has thank you.
Good morning madam chair
Samantha Farm castle LCS Asian
districts general counsel I'm
here this morning and strong
support of this bill farmers and
ranchers all of the Act
community are the only ones to
buy retail and sell wholesale
this is something that
absolutely needed during times
of inflation when everybody
starting at the grocery store
and it starts at the farm fields
in the farmer's barn in the
farmers trust in their diesel
they need help with all their
input this is one good way to.
Thank you now if your from
Carla.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here speaking on behalf
of the New Mexico business
coalition which represents
hundreds of businesses thousands
of New Mexicans including the
valuable agricultural community
will take up a lot of your time
there's been great testimony by
the Billsponsored and others in
support of this bill New Mexico
business coalition urges you to
pass.
This bill as well thank you
thank you Sir
the committee actions
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for this bill so.
This goes back into history it
goes back to the farm bill farm
Act.
And what these kind of things
do.
In the Mexico thing the whole
picture when we put all the
tools together is we produce
food.
At a lower price for the
Americans the person.
And that's that's what we have
to understand is why.
Farm.
And food production.
Gets treated in a certain way
it's to help the country and and
this goes back way back to the
depression when people couldn't
afford it the.
And so we have that this.
Tradition our state is this law
but it's tradition so that we
can produce food for the people
have to pay a service charge for
food.
I have farmed and ranched all my
life.
And.
Farmers are good stores part of.
I fought hard to health a.
Barnfield distributor.
There in my district because.
NMED was trying to shut down.
And there wasn't any other farm
fuel.
Within.
A thirty mile radius of this Mr.
When it came down to it and
having hearings with and then be
the.
Madam chair.
I'm not pointing it out but when
when it came to the committee.
Not a lot of people in NMED
didn't understand what important
to us.
They didn't understand that it
existed.
They didn't understand what was
about the mechanics of it was.
For the farm fuel.
And and it's very understandable
because the the percentage of
farmers we have in the state.
But I feel is a important.
Troll for farmers to produce.
Affordable food for the for the
people of this country.
And we've had.
S. where farmville was exempt.
From G. R. T. madam chair and
Representative and
representative of my force yes
Sir.
And madam chair representative
why is.
That it started getting taxed.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for that question
it had a sunset clause on it and
it I can't remember the year
madam chair that sunset it but
I'm sure it was a year where we
were sleeping in every single
corner of the state of the
state's budget two years twenty
fourteen twenty fourteen so
there you go there you have so
it was it was allowed to sunset
at that time.
And the madam chair and and
Representative is your go to
sunset Madam chair
representative I do not have a
sunset on okay and and and madam
chair representative I believe
that's what this is is we should
have a sunset this out of this
other go on and if something
happens drastic in the state or
in the.
Nation that we have to go back
to and get everybody division
there for sure I would imagine
farmers and step up to the plate
and order agriculture you have
to do so so I think it's
something that is led by the
cracks.
and we need to put it back in
place and we need to support our
farmers are a people who produce
our food.
If not we're gonna see food keep
going up in price and because of
the cost to produce and I think
you have a real good deal here
but you brought forward.
We'll see how the committee
votes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
You.
the chair recognizes that
Representative Kate's thank you
madam chair of committees thank
you Representative Armstrong
I I would like to ask question
in your expert witness
are you so you're saying that
the only cost difference between
the dyed diesel and the road
diesel is taxes.
Thank.
The manager of.
Representative member Kate.
We have one system one diesel
fuel in the state Mexico.
And that is the regular
committees.
For tax purposes that the school
is died.
For the different textures.
But
the the primary is different.
And by virtue of the fact the
clear diesel fuel is used on a
highway for this excise tax
collections were down twenty one
cents per gallon.
The the Dodd fuel use whatever
gross receipts tax Ms we
prevalent in whatever County the
distributor operates.
And it in my case project one
eight eight eight point one five
percent.
And when I met early on with the
Representative Armstrong.
June
The.
Calling off tax and all the
support that twenty one since
operation protective forty two
cents which becomes punitive for
people not was higher.
Thank you thank you madam chair
committees thank you
Representative are offering this
it is so this sunset that's
really read all of our analysis
say that it's already sent so
you do think that's where the
confusion is because the sign
Senate and we don't we don't
have a bill.
Once the sun set and that's why
they ask for the research is
that here Madam chair
representative the the problem
is government taxes.
To be plain and simple because
it's on it's it's if you
actually go to that section it's
almost impossible to read and
you know there's a special fuels
Tax there's it's it's divided
out so we get really needs to be
fixed so there's confusion all
the way around and and we're
going to fix thank you thank you
madam and yes chair I I'm gonna
say we have the same problem we
work two days on this thing
trying to get into all the
details and it's buried in
legislation with more than
statute very in statute there in
statute and so there is
confusion so I agree
Representative reset madam chair
thank you very much
Representative Armstrong thank
you for bringing this bill this
tax that we do have to sign a
waiver on that we do submit to
our supplier and.
Therefore the specialty will
excise tax was put in place I
know that even my parents way
way back when sign this special
use for Dodd diesel on farm use
or other ranch use is so.
It was an oversight I know lots
of bills that we're seeing this
particular sessions I do have
that sunset clause on there
because somehow it was dropped
and it probably came out
whenever we were struggling for
money.
It was bad deal but if we were
sleeping in defense we.
Take care of that this is not
the the dye diesel for
affirmative for ag use of.
We don't produce.
We are many we are.
Exempt from this and.
I know that the varmint
Department for well there was
checking other vehicles.
And then I ended quite severely
if there was on road use and
their diesel pickups tested for
the right to die.
And it is for it so they're
making sure that it is strictly
for this and madam chair I agree
that we don't need to have a
sunset clause of this particular
ability proves it and what was.
Put together today and it says
a.
C..
Exemption from the gross
receipts tax and compensating
tax of the receipts from selling
in the use of special fuel died
in accordance with federal
regulations for agricultural
purposes it's very
straightforward very simple and
that's what needs to be madam
chair that's all.
In terms of would like to
whenever the all of the
discussion is indeed I would
like to move it to pass.
See more disk no more discussion
we have to pass a second.
The third.
Okay that is there any
opposition to this bill.
Therefore I Representative
Armstrong you have GPS thank you
madam chair of just one little
closing comment is that you know
we're we live in.
Places that we love we are here
to educate about why do that.
Listening we appreciate your.
We appreciate this.
And I didn't see Representative.
Ferrary outside it.
It is Representative.
Is.
As for are you still listening
because.
And she came in.
For.
Then there.
This.
Sure.
This is.
More.
Thank you.
So.
We will
have other staff.
Senator.
Your question these.
Okay Representative Ferrary
please house bill one fifty two
on the table.
Thank you madam chair three
fifty to seventy seven yeah my
glasses my.
I know if this thing happens we
thank thank you madam chair
thank you for your patience
while we get set up
House Bill three fifty two
Prohibits the insulation of non
functional terror and I'm sorry
madam chair I have some handouts
for pictures of what that looks
like.
Committee staff and that are
thank you.
And of.
It prohibits the use of possible
water to irrigate nonfunctional
tur beginning in twenty thirty
and it requires nonsense for
that is removed to be replaced
with drought and climate
resilient landscaping
and it also sets it up where
Municipalities directs the
compounds in the palace.
To pass ordinances to carry out
the steps and goals of HB three
fifty two and prescribed
penalties for failure to comply.
It's a water conservation
enactment.
And
Starting to January of twenty
five there's no further
installation of irrigated
turfgrass on nonresidential
properties where the grass has
no recreational purpose or is
merely decorative and also in
January of twenty thirty January
first no further irrigation with
possible water of non functional
turf on nonresidential areas
that's the key nonresidential we
are doing this people
at residences whereas
within the service area of a
large public water system and
also in January first of twenty
thirty nonfunctional Turk that
is removed will be replaced with
drought resilient and climate
resilient landscapes.
I would like to introduce my
experts of Christine Chavis and
she will explain how the groups
of them working together to.
Not that.
The the water lines has helped
formulate this.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Christine Travis and I currently
service the president of the New
Mexico water conservation
alliance which is a professional
organization that promotes water
conservation and efficiency in
the state of New Mexico it is a
collaboration of many counties
municipalities technical experts
in the state focusing on water
conservation efficiency.
And I just want to let the
committee know that the city of
Los crucis the city's Santa Fe
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
water authority the office of
the state engineer and many of
our regional and national
partners came together to write
this bill and to bring it
forward of the two of us the
Senate the City of Santa Fe and
Albuquerque water authority just
signed on to the memorandum of
understanding of that many of
you are probably heard about we
have thirty different
signatories and I think I
different states and as part of
that commitment nonfunctional
Turner is one of the targets
were supposed to look at
reducing optional trip to the
state or Senator to introduce
five thirty percent.
And so the organization all of
these entities have successful
water conservation programs in
place already but we're here to
try to advocate for more
participation more support from
the state I think we're going to
need of handful of tools to
really get this through these
challenges that are coming upon
us and even though we're all
successful in our water
conservation efforts for here to
ask for for even more.
With that manager will stand for
questions okay how many people
in the audience stand in favor
of this bill.
How many are against.
Okay we'll hear from the member
in the background that
participate in the federal.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is on
the building and a healthy
rivers senior policy analyst Wes
advocates.
Your is a regional nonprofit
organization fighting financial
impact to the state environment
economy and people of the west
R. healthy rivers program works
yes Representative lakes
wildlife recreation agriculture
is our communities we support
cities and towns across the west
becoming more water efficient
and it actually involves local
seasonal policies related to
turfgrass in Colorado.
Approximately forty percent
usable water to Mexico's out
in state you're decent and most
of that water does go to non to
non native high water turfgrass.
Well there are appropriate in
places uses for your inner fine
our parks sports fields
playgrounds and even our yards
much you're gonna turn has
little or any purpose functional
programs transporting on
Wednesdays from non hostile to
grass to drugs.
Landscapes reduces our our water
then ensure that water resources
are used efficiently.
This bill is a cost effective
solution to insert the code
communities growing smart from
the start and it is an approach
that more more communities are
using.
Thank you very much thank you.
Montoya to our
our caller.
Meghan Markle parts Marci.
Six.
Thank you very much madam chair
and committee members my name is
Megan Marci and I am with
Christine and New Mexico water
conservation alliance board
member and water conservation
professional and I just want to
put forth my support for this
bill this is the first year that
our alliance has been involved
in the legislative session and I
think that's because many of us.
Imperative to do more than we're
doing in our own communities and
programs
as Christine discussed this bill
builds on an interview that was
recently signed by thirty
Colorado River basin water
providers committing them to
take additional measures to
reduce water consumption
including the removal of non
functional turf in light of the
historic low flows and reservoir
levels on the Colorado River and
we have that same situation on
the Rio Grande.
we've done a tremendous job is
Christine stated of reducing
water use over the last twenty
five years and many of our
communities here in New Mexico
but we need to find new ways
across all sectors to do more of
that in the face of drought and
climate change we really think
that the elimination of non
functional turf makes sense I
would call it low hanging fruit
turf grass requires a lot of
water in our area climb it and
we can invest water inner for
it's actually used for
recreational purposes but we
need to remove ornamental turf
and replace it with landscaping
that's climate appropriate.
we're looking for the the
legislators help in
ensuring that New Mexico matches
the efforts of other western
states to retool how we use
water as our water supplies
become more limited thank you
very much for the opportunity to
provide comment thank you and I
will go to our next person can
use.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and can use some
speaking today for both the
coalition of sustainable
communities Representative
chapters your club and for the
reasons already stated we're
struggling sport of the bill
thank you thank you.
Next we have on this morning
just.
And markets sorry.
Thank good morning madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Sandra Morris and I'm
the senior manager for policy
and programs for the alliance
for water efficiency I'm
speaking in support of house
bill three fifty two the
alliance is a stakeholder based
fiber one C. three organization
dedicated efficient Senegalese
Water we have members across
North America including
utilities and local government
members in New Mexico Alliance
members in the southwest have
pursued a variety of landscape
transformation projects programs
and policies and these have
resulted in significant water
savings Furthermore alternatives
to traditional turfgrass better
drought and climate resilient
are common in the southwest and
I've been a statically pleasing
because of the water savings
potential the alliance support
this bill thank you thank you.
For.
Now we're gonna hear from
forecast.
EBITDA.
Good morning again madam chair
and the bar council for the very
patient district we also stand
in support of common sense
conservation farmers are the
original conservationists than
we think are Representative
Ferrary for bringing this bill
forward in our area of the state
a common problem is always that
everybody wants to look at for
what I need to do more to save
more water but the reality is Ag
is doing all it can cities and
counties need to be during their
part also wasting water and
outdoor you sent that don't
communities where agriculture
does needs to be a thing of the
past we support this legislation
we urge you to pass thank you
Samantha now turn to members of
the committee and I
Representative someone was
sleeping conditions thank you
madam chair thank senators so
where the boundaries on this
when it says city municipalities
and counties.
Is.
Or where the boundaries for this
this bill would apply those
rules that that you're.
Thank you madam chair and
everything similar all refer to
my experts because.
Madam chair.
Committee Representative Zamora.
Of the the physical boundaries
or the legal boundaries physical
the physical matter so there's
fifty four public water systems
that will be affected by this
bill and each of them will have
the ability to develop a program
with stakeholders in their
community and to also provide
penalty within current
structures that already exist so
for instance the City of Santa
Fe has we can program with
enforcement secretary and so
it's the idea that that
responsibility would fall within
that program and madam chair
presenters so.
This bill would not in.
Four would not force anybody to
do this.
Instead you're asking them to.
Enact ordinances to carry this
out.
Am I correct in that Madam chair
in.
Madam chair Representative
Zamora that is correct we did
want to every community is
different and the opportunities
for non functional turf removal
and replacement are different
certainly the City of Santa Fe
is very different from the City
of Albuquerque and so the idea
was to that every every
community develop with their
stakeholders no not only of
developing a program to address
some functional Jr but to
further the definition of non
functional terms to increase
penalty if they wanted to to
make the the bill more stringent
but
I don't know if that answers
your.
So madam chair and presenters
so.
This bill in layman's terms.
Gives a definition difference
non oil tariff and asked me
counties and municipalities.
But it says shall enact
ordinances not may show okay so
that's that was my
administrative.
So it will enforce.
It will force them to.
The followed by the bill the the
water heater for.
Okay.
Madam chair representative more
just like they do for other
things that you know we tax
station understand but it also
on.
We're transforming landscapes
and urban areas of to bring much
needed habitat and mitigate heat
islands
that the effective heat islands
for communities while saving.
Chair I have more questions
thank.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative programs for the
we're always gonna look at ways
to to conserve water and our I
agree with all of those leaders.
And usually takes a three
pronged larger budget city water
we followed there's a tech on
where the caller Services water
please that's that's a so we're
looking at with students great
madam chair hi with this
Representative apply to
university.
madam chair I'm going to defer.
Madam chair Representative Lara
every every entity has the
ability to provide a waiver for
instance in New Mexico State
University recycles a lot of
their water is it on campus and
so it's not potable water that's
being used for irrigation so the
university and would receive an
exemption that so this is just
your creation of non functional
terror I using potable water and
again I don't want to see term
because there really is a
difference between actual turf
and turf the entire receives
covered in turf but it's those
pieces that are referenced on
the attachments that info
received those are the pieces of
turf that we're really looking
at changing okay thank you for
thank you madam chair so it's
this would also provide
formidable grasses as well.
Madam chair okay Madam chair
representative what is so
ornamental grasses as long as
they were in it and drop
resilient landscapes in contrast
it's the the ornamental turf
that exists in the front of
shopping centers and parking
lots of the airport it's those
pieces so ornamental grass for
us has different meanings
because some of those are native
plants so that they would not be
included thank you for thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative K..
Thank you madam chair
Representative thank you
That is Act and sponsoring this
bill and and I really think for
reinforced.
I mean a New Mexico there is no
greater assets in one in which
we are constantly trying to
protect which is water and and
looking at all forms of water
ground water service
and so I really appreciate that
I want to just clarify a couple
things
Of one is when we talked about
the municipalities I just want
to be able to read page two
section four this includes
public water systems which means
a system.
Public of water for human
consumption through pipes or
other constructs they anses is
such system has at eight fifteen
service connections or regulated
service are the average of at
least twenty five individuals
daily sixty days of the year so
I I very much appreciate that
that specificity I was actually
wondering why are we allowing
individuals so twenty thirty.
What what why why did the needs
seven years sentiment this.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Kate's.
well so a water conservation
program whether it's focusing on
indoor rebates after it into any
water conservation program takes
years to develop I'm especially
when you involve the community
and stakeholder groups to really
inform the program and so
working from this force city
municipality those processes
take a lot of time and so we
really want to engage the public
make sure that we're all on the
same page and what not
functional turf is really
implement the strategies to
determine how much non
functional turf exists and where
those opportunities are to look
for funding to be able to
develop an enforcement program
that will be able to enforce
these type of ordinances and
those things just take time Fund
which is part of the reason why
we're here is to ask for this
legislation so it actually moves
up that timeline if each of us
individually in our facilities
for trying to push this forward
and the City of Santa Fe it
probably would would go forward
but it's still takes time for
that to happen so
We're just making sure that
there's enough time to make it a
successful program and madam
chair representative of there's
nothing to keep them from going
faster and implement it much
sooner.
I thank you madam chair and
representative yeah I at I
appreciate this I I know that I
was around when the federal
courthouse in Albuquerque on
loan this went from a rolling
grant hill which I found highly
offensive for the federal
government does not know where
they were at which is high
desert to be able to switch to
zero skating and I think that it
made a huge difference and
something that in which I was
proud of the downtown area and
so thank you once again to bring
for the stuff.
I think Representative Armstrong
yes thank you madam chair
can you have a list of the fifty
for entities that this affects.
we don't have it as an
attachment to bring it forward.
I think the office of the state
engineer has selflessly can find
it offensive Jareth thank you
madam chair I would like that
was just because I'd like to
know who all fax
and then madam chair who gives
the exemptions like for the
university who would be giving
that exception.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong.
The city of Los crucis the
municipality in that area would
be providing the exemption
port New Mexico State University
in that case the City of
Albuquerque would be looking at
UNM and so every respective
utility be looking to university
to see whether or not a place
not that there's not a lot of
opportunity on college campuses
to remove term that's not what's
regional are being used but I
think the universities would
have to be the effort on that
especially if they were using
the reuse system like in New
Mexico State University okay
thank you madam chair and thank
you for that and so
If such system has fifteen
service connections so those
Natalie The New Mexico fall into
that.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong I'm not sure I would
have to make sure I one of the
reasons why we did find for that
threshold to is that for the
really really small water
providers market try to burn
them with this type of program
it's mostly for the larger
utilities that already have a
program in place with the excuse
me implemented we're trying to
be considerate of the smaller
communities in the third and it
would be to them.
Thank you madam chair and then
on section C. line twenty two S.
as a possible water shall not be
here eight non functional tour
or non Ross on nonresidential
property if they have their own
wealth how does that affect
someone who has their own well
as watering whatever they want
to water with their own well.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong if right now this is
just using potable water
provided by these different
service providers and so
domestic wells are not being
considered as part of this bill
if it's being you're getting
from the domestic violence not
addressed in the school current.
Thank you madam chair and and
currently that's always the
problem because one once we
start implementing bills and
passing laws and then it comes
back and gets amended to
possibly do that so about that
scares me a little bit makes me
a little nervous and then madam
chair I was just curious to know
is often that we.
Shao by ordinance prescribed
penalty that we're giving a
directive to county or
municipality or anything is that
a common language used in the
bill do you happen to know.
Madam chair representative
I'm I'm not sure okay then if.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong we wanted to make sure
to include that so that every
every utility and had the
opportunity to build that into
their apartments otherwise this
would just be sort of a from the
recommendation and you know we
would talk quite the affected
want to try to have across the
state with regard to
conservation savings.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you ma'am for that it's
not really an opportunity it's a
shell it's a mosque if the law.
And I think the counties this is
this is the problematic sure
that I have with lots of
legislation that comes down
where you know the counties do
these ordinances and they sent
us a
we've passed this ordinance and
the the state doesn't really
care if they passed that
ordinance or not they're going
to the state's gonna tell but
they can't can't do and so I
don't really like that language
in there I think.
Personally being for rural New
Mexico it would be better off to
the counties wanted to implement
it go to the counties and push
for them to implement it in
their own County I'm sure they'd
be a lot of people that would do
it.
I personally don't think that we
need a law mandating counties to
follow this ordinance it's just
my personal opinion but I still
would like a list of the fifty
four that it does affect thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews thank you madam chair
and thank you all Representative
for.
Coming up with this idea
I live in Albuquerque New my
constituents probably I live in
part of Albuquerque.
Medians which contain grass and
trees and the rose some Senator
rose not all of them by any
means comic parkways and it's
really nice area and I know that
my constituents would not call
those areas functions track for
they call the vehicle including.
And and yes.
Property values and I can think
of a lot of other things so I
I'm in answering questions
because I know that if I vote
for this that we we do our post
as session meetings with our
constituents
they're gonna probably ask me
some more questions on ask you
off.
Okay.
so my first question is.
Do you have any just introduce
fifty communities that this
applies to how much
non functional chapter there is
and what the cost would.
To replace it with more.
Finally.
Madam chair representative
Christine I'm sure has a good
answer for that.
Madam chair representative
Matthews.
So the right now we have
California and Nevada who have
possibile pretty recently and so
we're collecting information on
that but in New Mexico we're
estimating that it's going to
cost about three to seven
dollars per square foot and
again we're not just removing
non functional terms we are
replacing it with climate
resilience landscaping and so we
would be removing anything we
would just be replacing it with
something that is more
beneficial blasts uses less
water and you know has multiple
benefits of being dative for
pollinator plants that adds
habitat to and find savings as
well.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews I just like to add that
many water systems already after
conversion rebate programs in
place like Albuquerque offers
two dollars is where so this is
something that.
You know if it's in a park
that's fine because it's usable
but if it's in an area where
people are you know likely to
walk on it or you know enjoy it
it could easily be replaced with
you know non function with
functional landscaping it is
still you know
Beautiful there's a lot of zero
stating we do it a lot in the
past crucis where we have
the trees for you know he
medication and things like that.
Madam chair representative thank
you
I also live in an area of the
city where a lot of this we have
one sitting down on the
replacement and so forth and so
and so it's not that I'm opposed
to it is that we are talking
about is in in my particular
district race and it will be
very noticeable change
if.
Do this and one of my questions
is that in these need.
Grass medians there's also
treats.
And.
Is there.
It is your anticipation that the
trees would also be removed.
Madam chair representative
Matthews note that trees are
important part of you know
Having the you know at the
ecosystem and you know like I
was mentioning that he
medication
and also for habitat so it would
not be that in it for sure we
want to make sure that you
understand it's not residential.
It's it's commercial areas of.
Our public areas it's not a
residents residential area.
Of Madam chair representative
I've are you I did not
understand that in the bill I
thought it was areas where you
had.
Well I should say Madam chair
representative.
It's not for homes and of its
more commercial and public
areas.
That are.
Nonfunctional.
This is where I representative
said the medians in the middle
streets with.
I yes okay yes okay no no I
understand okay and and
Albuquerque quite frankly has a
very aggressive.
This is the wrong word but a a
program to get people and has an
available.
results in reduced.
The city.
this is.
And
So what here Representative is.
Do you have an estimate of about
how much water part of part of
award which saved the speed
fifty communities difference.
Madam chair for two Christine.
Madam chair representative
Matthews we do have estimates
that in California have
definitely reported their own
estimates but again the just
recently enacted the legislation
source still collecting some of
the data but few estimating.
You know millions of gallons of
acre feet.
The reason why is because turf
require so much more water than
you know as sustainable
landscape would and so the
conversion would save water but
we're also investing you know
water and something that's going
to replace it long term.
Thank you.
Chair representative
I'm gonna support this because I
think it is direct that we
should be doing going to sleep.
Changed very functional.
Something else
and
it.
It.
And and then the new part of the
city even up in the northeast
heights program with their
changing how to do that and I
think everybody understands is
yes.
and so when I get blow back at
the house session meeting I'm
gonna give part of.
I'll be glad to doing it Madam
chair representative.
Thank you representative
Representative the sale madam
chair thank you very much
Representative R. F. RRE an
agency Chavis thank you for
being here today.
And representative for Ferrari
us I was intrigued whenever I
was reading that Alice's from
the office of the state engineer
and I'm assuming that you have
read it up like I.
And it's not it's it's I mean
whenever and
I see the.
Analysts here at this I'm not
the agency
that other significant issues in
regards to the bill that you're
presenting us with to date.
Homeowners association what are
the requirements going to be
there.
Madam chair representative on it
says is self pay.
the HOAs normally have their own
landscaping requirements and you
know what you know from mandate
the community to sort of follow
them and so we were looking for
governance you know when
governments like that occurs and
we know that they're probably
doing the best that they can do
it's in those other areas that
don't have an H. away when we
feel like there's more
opportunity to assess whether or
not there's not functional chair
in the biggest part is that
there still has to be the study
you know within each community
to understand and agree which
pieces of turf in the city
following the guidelines of non
functional turf and to make
payment plans to replace them
with more drought resilient
landscaping.
Madam chair representative hard
Ferrary I'm sorry I did.
It is yes whenever you say that
the different community talk
show and to me that's very
important because you have used
the word Salam page two page
three of the bill shell is the
shell do that counties
municipalities.
Including Representative rural
municipality shall enact
ordinances and shall prescribe
the penalty.
Is your the pardon on local
communities that they have to
police areas.
Of their particular district so
that they are in compliance with
whenever you're talking about
this is what California has done
this one but it has to do we
really want to follow what
California has done because
frankly they are an
administrative.
Madam chair.
Going on with what the offices
dated to near has.
Spelled out in this public life
change with the representative
for a Ferrari of.
It is stating.
Of page one live twenty five
minutes in the.
From the office of the state
engineer.
Delete water harvesting in.
Do you systems.
You.
This is kind of our follow up
here.
So property with the rest of I'm
sorry I'm on the wrong.
And after systems include drip
water harvesting and reuse
systems.
On page two where they delete.
Water harvesting what life to
delete can rely in rainfall as
start insert their of.
Once established precipitation
would replace rainfall.
Have you read that yes Madam
chair representative for our
Madam chair representative he's
out no we didn't have access to
that.
Okay.
Madam chair I I received this.
Variety of believe yes that's
what about that this is a two
two yes that's whenever I
receive.
What I'm kind of curious.
Whenever.
I get something from the office
of the state engineer those are
the ones who really know what is
going on in our state and how to
help with the water crisis that
we do have going on year after
year after year of our state.
Of.
Several years ago Representative
at the end Representative Stuart
was carrying a bill of to help
pollinators.
Madam chair and Representative
Ferrary and mischievous.
How would we ensure that the
pollinators are going to be able
to thrive in this new.
Eight again that we're going to
make tremendous penalties place
Madam chair representative del
These thrive more with the
different plants that we zero
state with and so the bees
should be just fine I don't know
that these really thrive on
terror.
Madam chair and representative
Ferrari and this Janice whenever
we're talking about having.
Our municipalities and all.
Kandace municipalities make
these changes we do know that
those the plants will be.
More often than not taking them
to replace all these madam chair
and representative.
I was looking at the if I.
In there stating.
But.
The also on February tenth.
They're the estimated.
Because the loan but it could be
significant so we're putting
that burden on our local
counties and municipalities is
that correct.
Madam chair representative
I will the first.
Madam chair representative so.
Act but the idea is that the
conservation programs that
already exists this would just
be another tool to about
most of them already have a four
step programs that can be
applied to this and I just
wanted to respond to the comment
on that and California in the
field of water conservation and
efficiency were very very
fortunate that we work pretty
closely together with our
regional national partners to
pilot programs to learn from
each other California certainly
didn't may not have have done
things as proactively they're an
issue she chose not functional
turf was under emergency
response from the state to
immediately conserve water
Nevada was something along those
lines so the ideas for New
Mexico to really being proactive
and to start putting these
things in place so that we can
start work and this time it.
Madam chair representative for
our in this yes Preciado
Committee maybe there but we are
this state.
And we do have people out there
not just of from the Rio Grande
quarter for the rest of the
state that take into account
that we do have to preserve our
walk in is of of support says
whiskey's for drinking and
waters for she in that that's
what it boils down to.
And whenever we.
Your bill includes
Representative Ferrary the words
shell we are mandated to
thousands that they have to do
is and therefore I have a
problem thank you madam chair
thank you Representative seeing
now for the debate would you
like to make a motion for to
pass
Septic motion do not pass.
Second.
We have the assets to to keep
food do not pass the clerk will
call rules.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes for a do not pass.
Representative Kate's.
No for do not pass.
Purpose of yes Representative do
not pass.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
As for now.
Representative Matthews now.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Allison.
And now.
Yes it
is.
The yeah I was no for two passed
so it is it is a four four
that means I'm sorry
Representative.
Will not pass.
In a type of.
This yes.
And here I.
That meant they do not pass this
table in the motion to do pass.
Back up.
With the.
No to do taxes that was table
and so they do pass.
Does not a president.
The okay but was four for
there's anti and therefore that
bill just before.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Yes
Representative claim
representative upon your bills
on the.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee Ms we find
expert witness
Representative.
All.
Senator and I I our interest
secondary.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Holt attorney and general
counsel for staff station.
said.
Post page two of two Michael
hold.
Is you are with us as part of
of general counsel with the
workers comp administration.
Warning Mr chair and committee
happy Valentine's day to day
routine four House Bill three
thirty house bill three thirty
mins.
A state statute of the workmen's
compensation act to remove the
statutory exclusion of farm and
ranch labour's from workman's
workers comp comp coverage.
In addition the bill clarifies
language includes gender neutral
language existing statute.
The bill removes the and
constitutional language in
statute to comply with the
current case law chair.
With that stand for.
We
haven't heard of it the man for
discussion purposes.
On the building your amendment.
I thank you.
Sure the amendment.
This has a simple language
clarification.
So madam chair
On page two one seven.
At the brackets and the wind
through and construe to be.
R. seven point on page three
line twelve.
The brackets and the one through
or be construed to affect.
And is willing to check.
The committee a moment to look
at your your limits on should be
on the first page before the F..
Okay.
To.
A discussion on the amendment
Cheryl entertain discussion on
the amendment I just any of the
members of the the questions on
and then.
Madam chair of the question.
Here Representative is to hold
on to.
The way it let me read it out
loud to make sense starting O.
line sixteen.
In the provisions for insured
still a surrender budget player
and four of their rights.
My under if I reading that
correctly now if the men that is
still in place.
Of the thirteenth.
Madam chair.
Representative Ezzell.
Hesitant to the amendment is to
restore.
Current statutory language when
you're drafting of the bill we
were trying to do for Texas
clean up.
we got overzealous I would say
cleanup yeah and our original
intent to conform statute to the
existing Supreme Court opinion
store intent with the amendment
is just to restore
existing statutory language and
madam chair representative and
Mr help that's what I was have.
At the rate that they didn't
need to be restored back in
place.
Thank you very much thank you.
Was there any other questions
from.
Not okay.
Forward on madam chair of move
that the amendment to house bill
three there's just
to accepted second there's a
second by Representative
Armstrong is it any opposition
to this amendment.
Representative Hon you have an
amended.
Like to present anymore.
Yes managers what we started off
by saying that those simple
amendments the bill still
stands.
In respect to cleaning up for
that we are compliant state
statute is in compliance with
federal.
Representative.
I think you have your I'd like
to recognize them and family
members in the audience who are
in favor of this legislation.
I am the members against this
legislation okay is that your
support.
Shares any monies for registered
lobbyists for builders trust New
Mexico to self insured workers
compensation group we stand in
support of the.
Bill because you already have it
is that moves unenforceable
provisions of the statute that
is.
Mexico.
Thank you for anybody else okay
let's turn to the members for us
pre pandemic.
On the court.
Let's start with.
Stephanie Welch.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Stephanie Welch and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we
thank the sponsor for
introducing this important bill
as already has been stated the
bill makes an important
technical change to bring the
workers compensation act up to
date many years ago the New
Mexico Supreme Court struck down
the agricultural worker
exemption in the workers
compensation act finding it to
be unconstitutional yet the
exemption illegal and
unenforceable has remained in
the statute that only creates
possible confusion over
agricultural workers right to
workers compensation.
Workers compensation also
protects employers by requiring
workers to use the workers
compensation system one injured
rather than civil litigation I
formally eliminating this
language from the act this bill
ensures there's no confusion
about farm and ranch workers
inclusion in workers
compensation and for that reason
we support this bill and urged
the committee to passage thank
you.
Thank you now we'll go to June
the act.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Juliana
coop and I represent the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
and we really appreciate the
sponsor bringing this cleanup
bill I think it will help
workers across the state thank
you and I also madam chair want
to point out my joyless on the
practices in this area and he's
he said he can't get the
function to raise.
His handout table columns.
Of thank you
my dad or will recognize you if
you can get on.
On the oil yes yes I.
Are you there.
I am thank you I'm sorry about
that I I couldn't raise my hands
madam chair committee members
thank you very much I'm a
workers compensation attorney
are practiced in this area of
close to twenty years and this
change as already stated by
Michael hold and and others
attorneys this is important to
bring the statute eliminate any
confusion to bring the statute
in compliance with Rodriguez
first brand Westbury which held
this exclusion on constitutional
removing this.
The provisions the motion for
farm workers will help clarify
for anybody within the statute
make sure they don't have to go
research additional case law and
eliminate confusion as to
whether the exclusion is still
in the and in existence are not
thank you thank you Mr.
More we will recognize.
Chairmanship of the chief
Jeremiah rich.
Thank you madam chair.
I Jeremih Richie I'm general
counsel Representative New
Mexico mutual which is the
largest workers compensation
insurer in the state and we
appreciate the agency and the
sponsor and and caring for the
statute and making sure that's
up to date and we also
appreciate their care and and
making sure that these cleanup
efforts don't go too far upset
and some of the the key
provisions of the act that are
are working quite well at the
moment so we we stand support of
the bill again appreciate all of
you and and this effort.
Representative okay that is on
the testimony from the audience
and we have any members.
Wishing to speak thank.
Representative is that thank you
madam chair.
Representative live on Mr help
thank you all for being here
today and for clarifying
everything that's going on here
because the courts Freeport did
find this to be arbitrary and
capricious that was done in
two thousand sixteen I believe
this when it was.
Madam chair and members of the
committee the only
The nemesis I really saw.
Was from.
Mexico racing Commission.
That that was the only analysis.
Madam I did see that as well and
it's not being specifics but I
will do I do I will defer to Sir
hold on this mission.
Madam chair of Representative
Ezzell
I I'm not sure
What the racing commission
Would to do having to do with
this bill
And of the Senate in FY are or
what you're looking at are
having fun and I'm not sure the
are you see submitted in FY are
explained the bill but I'm not
sure with dog in the fight the
recipient should have quite
honestly okay madam chair thank
you very much for that response
Mr health agency Lujan you're
exactly right Mr hold the racing
commission analysis has nothing
to do with this particular bill
else bill three thirty I can't
help feel that might just be a
lobbying effort for Senate bill
three thirty six that's that's
my feelings on it I'll stand by
that of.
The the exercise riders Mr Madam
chair representative on Mr house
of and the jockeys I don't know
if his child and then with the
farm and ranch work in at the
riders that riders what about
them are they gonna be loved in
Department agricultural use of.
Crews and
Do any of these folks that are
just landed to get W. too's from
the racetrack.
Probably not so
I don't understand how the
trucks are going to the
employees of this we're.
The racing commission is head
with their.
Maybe that behind Senate bill
three thirty six
That have that but this has
nothing to do racetrack it's a
workers comp Act is what it is
and check out there is to
Representative yes thank you
very much thank you
Representative and I I did have
the committee announces the.
I don't know if you can get that
I don't know what the full that
our body outside from the
committee or the house.
Thank you.
is there any further debate on
Representative Black Panther.
Thank you
any opposition to this is second
time.
Matheus Representative seconded
by Representative then it is
etcetera any opposition to this
Ocean.
I see none Representative.
You have.
Thank you.
Representative McQueen.
I.
With.
The queen would you put on the
table thank you for being here.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
House Bill three four six
changes our current forfeiture
statute to a ten year period our
water for future.
New Mexico faces the difficult
future when it comes to auto
race.
We we already have more water
rates that we have water.
We have a situation where we
have.
Increasing demand for water in
decreasing supplies.
So disappointment is going in
opposite directions if you think
about something like say
housing.
We have we're a housing shortage
with increasing demand for
housing.
In our supply isn't increasing
fast enough to keep up.
But leases curves are headed in
the same direction.
We come so water and water
rights they're headed in
opposite directions.
We have decreasing supply for
two reasons one.
We are.
We have a warmer drier I I.
The drought the past few years
is the new normal.
That's to be expected.
They're estimating at twenty
five percent reduction in flows
of the day twenty five percent.
So
you might sometimes heard at
you know surface waters are
checking account groundwater's
our savings account.
We've been spending our savings
account for decades.
So we're pumping the heck out of
the ground water doesn't charge
in a meaningful period of time.
And of course when surface water
is not available.
One option is to move that water
right to grow.
Wishes exacerbates this problem
there were drawing down our
officers.
These two the speakers are
decisions collision course I
mean there.
It's not system.
In New Mexico faces difficult
choices.
This bill isn't that difficult
to assess.
This bill is the lowest of the
low hanging for.
So water is the use of correct
right.
You have the right to use the
water to a phone call so it's
different than.
What this bill does is.
Clarifies and makes more useful
our existing state policy of
forfeiting.
Unused long dormant waters.
Search statute for four features
a five year period.
Five years of non use will
result in forfeiture Water Act
the trick in our current statute
however is that it requires
notice from the office the state
engineer in here for so it's
four years in on use.
Plus notice and then you simply
have another year to put the
water please.
That's that you the best of my
knowledge has never been used.
Because off the state engineer
recognizes he wouldn't be useful
that if you've received no the
city hand use your water right
to the.
Your gate something and whether
or not it was meeting file are
you would put the water on the
land and you claim benefits
please and so by using the
current forfeiture statute we
would run the risk of actually
increasing.
The previous.
This bill would change that.
So it would it would take the
the.
Four point one system in changes
to it in your system.
If you do use your water right
which again is a right to use
the water right to own water for
ten years.
Then you would be subject for.
All the existing exemptions.
In the forfeiture statute
remain.
Those include various water back
banking systems and the
conservation reserve program in
federal law.
you can still apply for an
extension.
If you don't use your water
containers so you can get a
three year extension and you can
apply for another extension
after that there is no real cap
on that.
This this system L. add one more
thing the the ten year period
under this bill would start when
the bill takes a.
So we're not going back in time.
We're talking about going
forward so this to the the main
change of this bill would not
have any impact.
For ten years.
But then in ten years we would
start to retire Water Rights
that aren't being.
There was a support.
Because we have increasing
demand people are gonna be out
looking for water.
There to be of cities developers
are gonna need a source of
water.
For water rights more likely to
water rights so they can buy up
water rates that haven't been
retired they're gonna move them.
And they're gonna sink deep
wells to access Graham.
We already see that.
What this bill is intended to do
is get at those paper writes
those long dormant Rights.
And by doing so.
We will protect.
Ag users.
We will protect people on wells
we will protect people who don't
have.
AEP pockets or deep wells.
Because of assaulting in New
Mexico water flows uphill
towards my.
That's what's going to happen.
That money should be out there
buying a paper rights.
Which will cause additional
depletions.
And harm people who are actually
using their water.
That's what this bill is
intended to do.
I want to address a couple
questions that come up.
the state is
Have some concerns I believe the
city is going to have their own
WaterFix.
It's fairly easy it's internal I
don't know how many is a kids
are doing that but it's
something they should consider
that would protect any water
right in the water bank would be
protected from for.
there's language in the current
statute that says talk about
circumstances beyond the control
of the owner of that language is
essentially subsumed in section
C. of the statute which allows
for reasonable cause for delay.
Okay so if you result because if
your water was available that's
right I.
You still have to be monitoring
your water.
And if you have a bill the usual
waters for ten years you should
file the paperwork at the state
engineer and say I'm so in the
uses water itself out there is a
suggestion one analyses that if
someone was only receiving at
fifty percent delivery with the
other fifty percent be subject
to forfeiture.
Well first of all first even
apply it would have to not be
delivered for ten years.
Which is kind of unlikely we
service expected the climate to
produce occasional what years
you know drawing I.
Even.
in ten years they could still
file for an extension.
The point is we want people to
be active stewards of their
water rights.
Not just like someone here again
this piece of land at some point
in time and maybe has water
rights attached.
the extension applications or
mystery that they cannot be
protest.
So there's not a hearing or
objections to.
Well as I said the ten year
period starts with the bill.
Not going back in time.
So.
We're in a bad situation when it
comes solar.
This bill is intended to prevent
the resurrection.
Of long dormant keeper Water
Rights.
And there will be speculators
right they'll be people looking
for land that was irrigated once
that might have water is that
haven't been officially severed
or or retired.
There any the by those rights
for pennies on the dollar maybe
by land because the water is
potentially more valuable and
then they're gonna try to so
that water for those water
rights to.
Cities and there's.
And we ship in New.
Thank you Matt.
Thank you Representative.
The only up to into the
affected students in the
audience how many stand in this.
And how many people do we have
against this bill.
We will first here for the
people in favor of additional.
Madam chair members of the
committee of creditors Natchez
and the general counsel for the
state engineer and we would like
to thank Representative McQueen
from our it's not a comfortable
of reality for confronting but
he's.
Two hundred
trees had on this bill and we
just want to give a little bit
of explanation not repeating
what he said which generally
they I think
but I agree with that with this
rationale of that from our
perspective what we're looking
at is a quarterly management of
when we have less supply we have
to curtail we do that the legal
fair and and an orderly fashion
where we don't have lawsuits
flying everywhere we don't as of
people's reasonable investment
backed expectations blown up in
their face and.
Dormant Water Rights said
Representative McQueen this is
dressed for real there are out
there and if we have a group of
users to been using our water
right or who've been ready
willing and able to use its
waters available
our our our then jump the line
by somebody who's council water
right that has been used in
seven years that that harms the
folks are actually using water
we to have heard the concerns
over folks here who are who were
concerned about this bill
we've we've.
But we we want folks especially
in our community and communities
in over or sensitive to their
concerns water rates are gonna
be taken away that is not the
intention to the office the
state engineer for people who
are are
ready willing to use water
initial water shot of we have
worked with folks on extensions
of time we also have been
pursuing for for chairman folks
Sir
of.
Thousands out without water
supply available this is really
about getting back to the
original intent of the
forfeiture statute was which is
go out go out
the Russians and so thank you
for letting me I'm going along.
chair and also be available for
any questions thank you thank
you for that and in that yes
the morning members of the
committee that that Germany
Senator registered this for both
of us left okay we may simply
that
we support this legislation
because the simple fact remains
currently over.
The number of water rights makes
act benefits of water resources
difficult and unpredictable.
A lot of work for for the
success of your appropriated for
we do understand respective the
objections of those opposed it
but simple fact there needs to
be something on this point
because there has been over for
patient walks back.
Now for the people.
Both.
This.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I oppose the
bill of would you like me to
speak now then now just wait and
I'll get back to okay all right
thank you thank you we'll go
back to the audience and members
opposing this bill.
Average your hands please those
wishing to speak yes.
Okay.
For more New Mexico.
our state opposition of this
bill because one very important
thing on the stand for.
And I know the state engineer is
taken away Water Rights.
Used this will also allow them
not to get this notice takeaway
water rights that we have so
it's very difficult for us to
spend all that money to put them
to use this notice that that
might be taken away it's very
difficult for us to that so
that's the reason and and as he
stated they have the power to
use no they should have been.
The state into.
But for that reason I'm opposed
to this thank you Sir
try to.
The
chair members the committee
might install it for you a
registered lobbyist with the
three point background.
we believe that this bill will
actually because of all due to
water right owners to use of
like a waste water to keep them
in good standing the of those
schools are waste of water
worker protection because water
shortages and divisions owners
this as a Mr K. pointed out the
office state engineer already
has led to take water rights of
four nine used but they do
notify the owner of five years.
For for for for that reason was
that.
Thank you Sir.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is my
phone on the executive director
New Mexico flying Association of
our members have concerns with
this bill in that the permitting
process to put our money.
Together and get a permit to
operate sometimes exceeds ten
eleven twelve years we have one
that they're trying to.
Pardon right now that's been a
process eleven twelve years a
big part of that is taking Water
Rights in doing that so they
just handed Water Rights is our
first year will start the goal
of the on the ten or eleven
years just because of the part
of our.
Very concerned about that
because the just mentioning that
they already existed when the
state engineer can jump in and
take.
Thank thank you I think the yes
madam chair members of the
committee to fear of our
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we do send respectful position
this morning water ice freezers
most valued assets under special
for agricultural production the
legislation before you proposes
to amend the current forfeiture
statutes which will negatively
impact our state's farmers and
ranchers currently at the
producers at risk fitting their
water right the state engineer
must give the producers notices
non use and when you're here it
mentions rectus this with
legislation which will enact
automatic forfeiture process
with no due process our state
water rights holders deserve the
opportunity to be seen their
water rights and this
legislation of the opportunity
thank you yes.
Committee my name is Chelsea and
I'm the director of public
policy at the New Mexico chamber
of commerce we respectfully
oppose H. B. three four six
within our current system the
state engineer have as you've
heard has the ability to
rectifying on use of Water Act
with notice the water right
holder in time for.
We have concerns regarding due
process was a proposal for you
today we believe everyone should
be focused on staffing in the
office of the state engineer the
root of the issue.
Forty two ten of the state their
major concerns with the current
language being proposed our
members do not support.
Forfeiture or government
accusations for acquisitions
this will affect many of our
industries including pass.
Thank you Sir.
Chair members the entire state
reserve this for the New Mexico
association seven minutes from
time we posed over reason stated
previously we appreciate the
current process the notice for
membership to protect our water
rights we ask Committee protect
on water rights to process
Representative Harper due
process thank you.
Anymore yes Sir.
madam chair committee members
money was the set up around term
former from quest in New Mexico
and I'm also the president of
the young community just need
some we have over fifteen
hundred thirty eight acres that
protect as well as hundred
sixteen percent this are members
or setup we strongly oppose bill
is house bill three forty six
this bill would significantly
reduce the available water
rights and quest area
particularly from the former
plus the money had and also this
bill would also reduce the
federal water rights for all the
other local sectors in our
community so for those reasons
not the focus.
Thank you
the back to the.
Those.
We have a for measures of line
up focusing this this Taylor
will now we're.
Good morning thank you of again
Madam chair members of the
committee I oppose the bill and
I I am here today representing
the San Juan water commission
and its executive director Aaron
Chavis.
Representative select energy
services which is in southeast
New Mexico both opposed to for
future bill because it will harm
owners of water rights the San
Juan water commission itself is
protected because it's a forty
year planning entity but the
ranchers and farmers and other
and and community water users
community ditches are not
protected.
And there this was our water
rights in jeopardy almost sixty
years ago in nineteen sixty five
the legislature added the
protection that the state
engineer must give notice before
forfeiting a water rights of
this bill is you know eliminates
that due process is not right in
this unconstitutional to take
property without notice and an
opportunity for hearing.
The effect will be to force
owners to water rights to file
applications for extensions of
time even if they have a
judicata or license Water Rights
in the past people with Weiss's
rights were educated rights have
not had the file extensions of
time now they will in this will
further stress the limited
resources of the state engineer.
As important in this is very
important if a water right owner
leases their water rights for
ten years which is allowed under
the statute they will
automatically in effect.
Forfeit their water right
because at least of a water rate
does not equate to beneficial
use and so for example in quest
of the money the former money up
there I understand is leasing
Water Rights to local people to
farmers and the acequia is but
under this bill is the least
that water rate for ten years it
is automatically forfeited this
is a huge problem with this bill
the standard and your yes I will
go to the next up
we're going to go to the US now
pass.
Morning again madam chair
members of the committee I
promise I'm on the stand when
you for today I'm Smith of our
castle for the elephant Butte
irrigation district and we stand
in respectful opposition to this
bill this bill is
unconstitutional on its face
what right is a property right
in New Mexico and with all due
respect to your Representative
it is not a trick that current
requires notice before you can
be deprived of your property
right it is a constitutional
requirement enshrined in
American jurisprudence that
before you can be deprived of
life liberty or property must be
afforded an opportunity to
address the court for the
hearing examiner whoever will be
depriving you of that right
automatic forfeiture sales
process and is therefore
unconstitutional the problem is
not the state engineer relax the
necessary tools the problem is
that they fail to employ the
necessary tools because of
strain related to finance and
staffing and other issues we
agree there's serious situation
in New Mexico EPA is currently
fighting probably the money
heard about earlier in the
opposition we have been fighting
that might for about twelve
years and they've tried to
revive old long standing water
right on paper exists but in
practice do not and what part of
our senior users.
Those are significant problems
but this is not a solution that
would work we respectfully
request do not pass.
Thank you know next are there
will be
I
think that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and that really
it's in go with dairy producers
of New Mexico Water Rights are
essential to agriculture in this
legislation could negatively
affect our producers especially
with removing notice another
protections for these and other
reasons already stated we
respectfully oppose this
legislation thank you thank you
we go on to.
the card but I don't think it's
car.
Mary thank.
The right madam chair it's Leri
Sonntag here thank you as an
individual as part of the better
together New Mexico advocacy
network and also as a landowner
in five different counties I
want to echo the constitutional
concerns of already been raised
have also pointed out that as a
landowner my understanding is
that the state engineer can take
water rights if you're using
those rights from water views
now we're talking about giving
the state engineer the
opportunity to seize Water
Rights if you're not using water
this is exactly the opposite
approach to what everybody's
hearing that we need to conserve
water not force the unnecessary
use of it it's like at the end
of the fiscal year and by the
works of the government which I
did for twenty six years now
almost seven
the word gets out if you have
money in your budget use it or
lose it Santa Claus is a waste
of millions if not billions of
dollars a year within government
because people spend that money
so they don't lose it that's
exactly what this bill is
encouraging.
Landowners to use that water
somehow or you will lose the
Water Rights wrongly oppose
house bill three point.
Thank you so much and I will go
on to
Quest.
Good morning this is Louise
state it goes I am from I am the
treasurer and a member of quest
to citizens association.
And we have two hundred fifty
percent this in our association
madam chair good morning I
apologize for the
for the disrespect
And committee members we
respectfully but strongly oppose
House Bill three forty six this
bill is causing great certain in
our community among our state
yes those ciation members the
amendment creates a new ten year
forfeiture period under which
any water right that is not
being used for its approved
purpose for ten years a lot of
medically for it to the public
and be subject to no
appropriation at the discretion
of the state engineer.
This could therefore deprive
Cuesta in other rural
communities throughout the state
of access to our local water
resources star local as secular
as are also concerned that this
bill was significantly reduce
the water right availability
from the former quest the money
this bill will harm rural
communities throughout the state
and I ask the committee to vote
on house to vote no on house
bill three forty six and I thank
you for your time thanks John.
Thank you madam and the
Representative Quinn has asked
to respond Representative thank
you madam chair I want to
respond a couple comments which
were mistaken first off Mr king
suggested the water right to use
the subject to forfeiture that's
false.
This bill implies Water Rights
nothing is so that's something
incorrect Freeport mac Moran
talked about the views Water
Rights and you don't we have a
variety of conservation programs
in place to water rights and and
thank you very has a water rates
in those kind of programs his
Freeport mac Moran owns a lot of
water
You do not have to use your
water rights to protect the
there are plenty of other
options.
There's a COVID Senator comments
about the process if you feel
if your water rights report
fitted under either of the
current Citrix session for the
proposed section you have a
right to go to court to
challenge that.
And you could show if you can
show that you in fact use those
rights that be determined by a
court of law.
I would note one the one that
now sees the bill.
Mention which I think is a good
point the the ten year period
limitations for adverse
possession.
So if you own land in someone
else's.
Using a land claiming your land
is possessing your land for ten
years.
They have a right to that land
that's what power as recession
section works.
That is this it's not taking
it's not.
Process the way the statute
works
it was said this was this was
constitutional taking through in
it was also said that a ten year
lease would automatically result
in for.
Just for those water rights if
at all likelihood that they're
least serving special needs.
That's what protects you from
for future.
So it's simply not true there's
a lot of misconceptions about
this bill this off here about
this bill which is unfortunate
what we're getting at is the
rights the the the
representative from the B. Aidid
talk about and how does the
parades can impair our existing
more users we want to protect
the people are actually using
the water rights by getting rid
of the focus for.
Thank you to ensure the
committee for debate.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr madam chair and
Representative are you I do have
a couple of questions
Do you know the definition of
beneficial uses.
Madam chair of those of our
second cited for you it's
it is the standard by which we
judge Water Rights
includes any of variety of uses
of including of course
agriculture municipal industrial
drinking water in the state has
recognized.
Employees.
Okay thank you for that I know
that's been a concern and
I know you're aware of madam
chair those St Augustine plans
issue that's going on
So I I wondered Madam chair
representative you know we have
this use it or lose it.
Situation Mexico and so do you.
That having this kind of law on
the books would enhance.
Or or not the the use it or lose
it do you think more people
Madam chair representative let's
start using their water because
they were afraid that they're
going to lose you think it would
exceed you know people just use
more water because they don't
they want to prove their rights
mentors of our insurance
appreciate the question
I think a lot of people are not
aware of the variety found space
programs the case of water it's
into so the they're not
obligated to use the and that's
something we could probably work
on to make sure people know that
that's available I think if you
have an issue Water Rights in in
ten years
I mean to me ten years is a long
period of time to not be using
water it's
I think
there Friday things you can do
with water rights you can sell
arts in the spot rates you
transfer water rights I mean
there various ways you can put
them to beneficial use or put
them in the conservation program
so I don't think this would
result in the kind of wasteful
use
that some have suggested.
thank you madam chair and thank
you for that response I am I
know people that.
Run water out on the ground to
prove their use because that's
the way the statute it's it's
user.
And so what what happened Madam
chair representative if.
If someone would they fall under
the the COVID of.
If they follow their land and
we're being paid to follow their
land by the state but not using
their water with a fall if they
did that for ten years what they
lose their be in danger of
losing their water rights Madam
chair representative Armstrong
two things one if you're if
you're simply wasting water
you're not the official using so
simply writing it out on the
land I I do not care is there
might be an argument over.
No a factual arguments like.
You know you're getting
treatments for your case
something I know our online.
secondly the the the the state
engineer has impassable in the
future you young people not to
use water rates I I believe
those if they aren't already
part of an existing conservation
program they could easily be
mate and once again the the the
current statutes and.
It's sort of if you read the
statute it's a it's a little bit
clunky because they just are
added to exemptions on as they
thought of them and it probably
could could he's use of our our
reorganization but there are
multiple lawful exemptions to
forfeiture all those remain the
proposed.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative so on on page two
line fifteen when the party
entitled to use to the use of
the water fails to beneficially
use all or part of the water
clean so they only use part.
Could they possibly lose the
other for.
manager percent reduction that's
correct so if you the water
ready for
of forty acres and you're you're
getting ten.
in the.
For ten years and here is the
other
they preach that potentially
with the service for future I
think before that happened
you might secretary water rates
on the ten acres so you can get
more do my routine which is
encouraging the rear gate you
might consider selling those are
so good so really that the ten
year non use period is a
substantial period serious
studies.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and so have
happened you know if the state
engineers office has been
sending out notices.
Of non use to the best of my
knowledge they have not ever.
You madam chair and
representative do you know why.
Of.
Chairs of Armstrong because they
believe that if they send those
on line use people would pour
the water on the ground the
thing is and that would increase
the previous.
And madam chair reserves are me
at one point the state engineers
office isn't really proactive
about this I don't have the
research they're not have
monitoring water use I think
when this usually comes up is
when someone seeks to sell or
transfer their water rights and
then if they look at the period
of nine years
you know seems to be trained for
the water to put them to another
use you can you can be sure that
so it maybe you haven't used to
water rights in ten fifteen
years.
But you you apply the same
chairs office for for transfer.
The state engineer offices we
have a user already exists in
ten fifteen years and then we
have a year to two years so and
this is no problem we can use in
New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and
representative this I think all
of this falls into my personal
opinion on why the state
engineer should not be appointed
because it changes every time
there's an election and possibly
be elected.
Might be a cure to this because
I know that whoever the governor
is that appoints the state
engineer they have to walk to
the beat of that drum and maybe
this is taking place
But just an opinion thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Representative
some more thank you madam chair
and thank them for bringing this
bill forward
My biggest gripe about this bill
is.
Taking somebody's Water Rights
without full time how does that
come about.
The manager is more of a again
syncing cheers not proactive you
would like to come about when
someone saw to seller transfer
water rights that is not being
used in a long time and they
would file and application for
change in place and purpose of
use with the same tears Office
center nears office would review
the file sometimes they review
their of photographs that each
of the station things like that
and if they determine that it
had been used in the proposed
that you for ten years they
would have the opportunity as
saying that it had been for for.
And madam chair representative
part of those one of those
things.
Mentors is more under the
language of the statute the
first two state and be able for
appropriation
I believe the reality of that is
there simply retire because I
don't think we have the water
resources for continued
appropriations.
But Madam chair representative
they could be appropriated.
Madam chair Representative
Zamora the the way the
appropriate waters you
potentially use for should
follow application then you put
the benefit show Houston you
submit a proof of beneficial use
if the water is not available
thank you for pre and in many
areas the seniors are declared
that
Operations are closed basins are
close FTEs rivers are fully
perfect so there there are there
are more appropriations
happening hopefully.
And madam chair representative
but.
There could be a situation or
not.
That much water for those water
rights said now but if native
they can be moved to a location
where there would be some water
right.
Madam chair representative more
I think usually when they're
moved there that the groundwater
wells.
the finding service available
surface water in the state
Is not something that happens
often so what what what happens.
Is developers and the
you spell these I the water
rates moved with the water
rights to one of their
particularly deep wells
and that's how they make use of
the.
Chair and representative of
their there are there are all
kinds of situations I know that
we saw some water rights on the
Pecos river
Being brought down River and
then moved upstream from an
investor from up from another
state and it really caused a
ruckus with the a second.
People there because it was
moved from a place that had less
water federal waters to New
to irrigate upstream so so those
situations that exist
Have an.
Having.
Water rights taken away without
modifications this.
Doesn't work
There's a lot of situations we
got scenarios we can go into
with that that.
Why and how and everything else
that's my biggest.
I guess this bill I was really
surprised at the state engineer
was standing up in support of
the bill.
Seems like I have a lot to learn
there on that.
Maybe for a second round the
that's all my questions for now
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative them just so
they can infinity notes that
house is scheduled to begin at
ten thirty I have excuse the
committee so we excuse them
participation for candies
Representative he said.
Madam chair thank you very much.
Representative McQueen educate
me the other day.
As a supporter of this field as
water right that is my property
Rep which is great with that
chair representative Ezzell
absolutely it is a usufruct
right it is the right to use the
water.
And it Madam chair
representative of Queen it is my
right to use my property right
if I decide to either retire
that riders sale that rider
lease that right is that is that
correct chair representative as
well yes.
And madam chair Representative
Representative the queen.
I do want to make sure I'm
understanding this right on page
one of your bills whenever
you're referencing on line
eighteen starting at a city to
despot is twenty eight that is
strictly for surface water is
that correct Madam chair
representative so that is
correct there is a separate
provision of the act applies to
go.
And madam chair that is of I
have worked at page seven line
thirteen in that area right
now here is the pertinent to
groundwater is that correct
because it is continued on page
eight hundred just talking about
seventy two seventy two that's
twelve this one through twenty
eight is that correct mentors
and so yes okay so I just want
to make sure I have the stride.
Here Representative McQueen
whenever we're talking about
proving up water right.
And.
This is something that the
office of the state engineer has
done in the past during times of
drought.
In there was a couple that
needed to they were selling
their their property.
They were.
Going to move into a retirement
home they were that age they had
no heirs they had proof of that
water right before they could
move off this property that
water right hand be used in the
oil over twenty years.
But in that time and drove the
state engineers office decided
they had to prove up that water
by dropping part down hold
impending that water that makes
a hell of a lot of sense that
New.
Madam chair so madam chair
Senators up that's the nature of
the current statutes.
And how we take this is that
particular statute so whether
we're thank you but changes
statutes generally go up the
after those that are so in a and
it makes no sense what so ever
into the specially in times of
drought the order was sent down
the party.
The result that's what my
proposal to well not entirely.
Madam chair in the case of that
particular couple if there had
been years and they lived out of
state and like I said this
couple was getting up there in
age and this is a what if so
instead.
One of them was starting to.
There was serious Alzheimer's
okay.
whether the.
Well as the other at the
capitol.
Let's not quite in tune to what
had happened in the past in
regard to the Water Rights.
If those legislative ears did
not know any better except that
happen to.
Benefactors at this.
With those there's have been
notified.
How would the state engineers
office now with your bill went
into effect hello those
particular there's no if they
would not participate.
They would not go through County
clerk's office to fund
recipients of the state would be
would that be correct
and that's a little bit far out
there.
The.
Madam chair representative so I
I would agree that that's a
little far out there this I
doubt the state engineers and.
Practice of tracking down here
seventy I suspect the we need to
send notices they send it to the
address of record on the water
right in their water it's.
So miss madam chair and
representative of Queen.
There could be errors out there
that would have no idea.
The water rights or what the
ultimate cost is would be unless
they do make a response with
that.
Knowing okay.
Our.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen.
Whenever you are talking about
the forfeiture forfeiture of
those water rights on page two
of your bill.
Starting on the business go down
to about line twenty.
Senator is water right shall
revert to the publication be
regarded as appropriated public
law.
Can you explain that please.
Madam chair
reserve those up with this is
similar to.
Services or as question that's
that's the same language in the
system section people come
online to that same page.
Right the public water I was
just repeating the the the
language I I do not believe the
state engineer would allow for
their creations.
Madam chair with that water
remained with those water rights
remain in this to keep the
faith.
Madam chair representative
they'll those water rights at
their forfeiture also did with.
They would they would be retired
they would not be available to
to move out of the.
That they would remain in that
particular by is that correct
madam chair representative
publicly Madam chair
representative so we miss it
this way I I think for the water
rates be retiring that.
Would make it more likely that
the waters the face one of the
concerns is that these paper I
have the ability to be moved
and there's you know.
Complexities with moving between
different basins I know there's
a developer
couple years ago in Santa Fe
what Water Rights in Sapporo new
them up to Santa Fe I don't know
how that works it doesn't seem.
Reasonable to me but you know it
might be the same Rio Grande
basin.
but when the water rights are
forfeited the they go away so if
the water hopefully would stay
in that based.
And madam chair representative
with queen you're exactly right
that there is a difference
between what water and paper
water rights because we saw that
have ever there was a bill for
that was going to put in a big
subdivision on the west side of.
Albuquerque and the question I
ask at the time was do you have
water right yes we did in us to
do you have what rights.
stammer random notes I did not.
And we have also had the.
Yes Representative Zamora was to
a.
Look at the Columbine scrupulous
profiteers if you want to that
have gone down and they have
about water rights with the
planet moving them with no
specific in use this is pure
speculation.
Which brings me to my next point
madam chair and Representative
McQueen.
Lots of areas that are in our
state have a.
Especially on the side.
Have participated in the C. R.
P. and I'm sure I bet you know
what that means is called cross
section program some of that
land over there which was at one
time irrigated that's been in
see our pay for.
Over twenty years.
What happens those water rights.
Madam chair representative was
L. I believe.
If we're talking about the same
thing that is the language on
page two line twenty four I'm
sorry could you repeat to one
point four this year P.
I believe this conservation
reserve program provided by the
federal student security act of
nineteen eighty five shall not
be computed as part.
So if they're in the program
that's one of those conservation
programs I was talking about
there are a variety of things
that happen to be a federal if
you're in that program the clock
is not to.
Madam chair representative.
But if we're talking about are
to be paid is basically.
How many how many miss madam
chair and representative with we
have many it just fully to code
bases are there and state of New
Mexico.
Madam chair of.
Our reserves L. I can answer the
question
what I'm not going to put you on
the spot Jan Representative
McQueen I will say we're we're
very behind in general on our
education madam chair and
representative yes we are we are
definitely this far as I knew
the only truly at G. K. did
basin is the previous prices and
see ideas right they're pretty
damn close.
Of that is done.
This just proves that as a water
ride a.
I do have that is my property.
Not property right in out of the
the legislative government type.
Madam chair representative we
have heard the pros and cons of
those The standing in support of
this bill of those in the in
opposition to.
And the.
Hi.
I received a paper in madam
chair representative correct me
if I'm wrong those that are not
eligible for forty year
protection plan includes safe
use community did just farmers
ranchers or individuals or
corporations owning Broadwater
rights is that correct I'm sorry
in ASEAN heads nodding in the
background.
Chair representative so I
apologize could you repeat your
question yes I can Madam chair
representative between.
I have received this is a.
To those that are not eligible
for the for your protection R.
S. thank you's community ditches
farmers ranchers for individuals
or corporations owning Water
Rights.
Madam chair representative is of
the forty year exemption I
believe it is one for a counties
in this house as far their water
planning and I'm not finding it
right away that is just one of
many exemptions for so so while
individual planners might not be
eligible for that one.
There are several others they
are.
Madam chair and representative
would bring.
This I can't I have that to the
your with Marc summers with them
want this stuff and I don't want
to go and cheer my question
here.
Curious.
And this is under the analysis
from the Office of the Attorney
General.
In.
I hope you have that analysis
yes you okay on the second page
of this analysis from the
attorney general's office and
your bill summary.
If you look down at the third
paragraph under that it starts
out with HB three sixty four
main sections seventy two dash
twelve dash eight seventy two
dead five days twenty eight so
that the team your forfeiture
period will be applied to non
uses of water begin on July one
twenty three.
That the current four year for
fifty appearing still applies to
non uses of water prior to July
the first twenty twenty three.
Simply put after July the first
twenty twenty three forfeiture
is evaluated on the ten year
basis but the four year
forfeiture period still applies
to those water users who have
failed to use their water prior
to July first twenty twenty
three that's a very important
statement I do Madam chair
representative going would you
agree with that.
Chair representative the the
self what that is is we decided
that the current for your
system.
Repeal that the need.
Even though it has not been used
maybe it could be in the future
we left that in place for ten
years and is as delayed repeal
intent.
In the the proposed ten year
period would start I think it's
actually July first of this year
the bills passed in that would
be day one of ten years so after
ten years the current system
would be repealed and this
system will be fully in effect.
Madam chair of thank you for the
response of I still have
concerns over everything that
we're reviewing here as the
number of emails that I got the
number of wells in the number of
people that stop me.
That are opposed to this bill is
madam chair quite frankly
overwhelmed.
The night is assuming that the
rest members of the committee of
the the more or less the same
amount of the bills that are.
Madam chair of a Free State the
tenacity of the of the sponsor
of this legislation here frankly
I cannot support thank you very
much thank you Secretary.
Representative Matthews thank
you madam chair Representative
justifiable questions.
You begin your presentation
talking about people who were
going up for our rights.
and then the the whales and the
part of the purpose or at least
the purpose of this legislation
proposed legislation to curtail
that activity plans to discuss.
Madam chair representative
Matthews it's secretarial.
The the acquisition in and the
complete actually use long
dormant Water Rights the the th
the way you would normally do
that is with grandma because
there's just not service
Waterville and the people who
generally can't afford to do
that our developers and.
Madam chair representative what
I don't understand about your
proposed solution is what would
prevent these purchasers.
From buying the rights during
the ten years that you're
waiting for project to occur.
Madam chair of the
Representative Matthews at I
think that's a fair point this
you know starts with start the
clock a new and we did that way
because of this fair right in I
just want people to think they
would be immediately subject to
for thank you at the current
have currently use their their
water rights for ten years they
met the counting on that no this
provision well so I I didn't
want to take you know pull the
rug right out from under so the
clock would start with the bill
there would still be the
opportunity for this kind of
speculation that Representative
Ezzell Lou two which is exactly
what I'm trying to get at people
buying up dormant Water Rights
and putting into use for large
scale developments.
Madam chair representative I
understand that but.
It seems like this isn't a very
good solution sense this could
still continue it could continue
for fifteen years.
That these water rights were
In here your period time here
we're for future madam chair
there's a there's a saying that.
The best time to plant a tree is
forty years ago and the second
best time is now
I I'm of the age to ten years
goes by pretty quick then chairs
of Matthews in ten years we will
wish we had this bill I hope we
will have it in ten years this
is gonna be really important.
Madam chair representative.
One of the questions you have
any legal authority for the
proposition that you can take
property rights without notice
and opportunities to.
Madam is a math test results not
taking that that term of art in
law this is you know it's a
forfeiture of the usufruct right
for failure to use.
At the prior to the completion
of the forfeiture process there
were there would be this.
The water rights were forfeited
and you would have the
opportunity to be heard at that
time you would not have the one
your cure period under the
current session.
But that the same chair could if
they found that the more it's in
this for ten years they would
then provide those throughout
Florida and for for you could
appeal that the court.
Mr chair representative sample
little bit like somebody sending
me a notice that they're
Representative that that they're
taking my house and either get
out but I want to maybe I ought
to meet have lost my house
without any notice from the city
that was taken.
Madam chair
Representative Matthews I think
the better analogy is is adverse
possession the some of the
discussion of the property for
ten years they can file an
action to obtain legal ownership
and there are a variety of other
elements to be sure but this is
you you have a use for it right
you have to do with that
knowledge that these for parade
is dependent on the initial use
of that right.
You know this would not be
surprised people this isn't the
staging here driving around the
state.
Taking people's property that's
not this bill describes.
Madam chair representative I.
I do say adverse possession is
different because.
The Senators and jobs specific
but in any event
thank you thank you for your
responses and questions from.
Thank you.
Procedure for the debate yes are
some COVID that is thank you
madam chair representative I
think I fully understand what
you're trying to do here to do
nine players with that of
unfortunately a lot of concerns
or constituents back home about
this and I just wanted to me for
review of the show by tax forms
will say.
Thank you thank you Mr
Representative Zamora madam
chair moved it up I just said
that we have the a motion on the
floor and the first two tests
the second.
Our second by staff the clerk to
call the roll.
Your.
Yes I do not.
It's yes to pass.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes yes.
Explanation.
Yes.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative.
Yes with explanation
Representative Matthews of
Representative I appreciate the
problem and that too working for
a solution I just really
concerned that.
This is what probably be very
effective solution and secondly
the concept of I I disagree with
the concept of the notice
happened to.
The.
As.
Four.
Notice for the taking.
And the Representative endocrine
once lost about thirteen to one
I couldn't believe it I was in
charge of the committee and
maybe that slowed I thought it
was a good recommendation and I
said I wanted the record to show
