Mm, we're we're gonna do 8.
OK.
Um, any, any questions on that
from the committee?
Uh, any other announcements or
business from the committee.
OK, so we have um
We have 3 bills up today, um,
and the order on the agenda as
it's on the table. It's not the
uh order uh.
That we sent out
So we're actually gonna flip the
2nd and 3rd. We're gonna do
house Bill 34 2nd.
But we will start with House
Bill 13.
Um
One second.
OK, uh, House Bill 13
distribution system and
electrification plans with
Oakland V Hill whenever you're
ready.
Good morning. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, pleasure to be in
front of all of you, this bright
early morning, I most, you know,
I'm representative Day Hoffman
v. Hill, um, House District 15,
North Valley of Albuquerque and
uh sitting to my right is
Michael Kinney. He's gonna be
acting as my expert today. He is
from Western Resource advocates,
and we're here to talk about
what we've been calling power up
New Mexico.
So, uh, Mister Chairman, I'm
gonna start kind of with a
personal anecdote, which I think
sets the the.
See for you well as to how we
got here with this bill, Bill,
why it's important and um why I
hope that all of you can decide
to support it today, so.
is your mic on? It is. Can you
just maybe just a little bit
closer.
Not too close, right? OK.
Check, check, I think that's
better. Thank you.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, my work
with Power Up, um, came, I
believe, kind of in the middle
of the 30 day session last year.
Marcos Gonzalez of Bernalio
County Economic Development came
to me with regards to the trade
port project that they've been
working on for quite some time,
and at the time I was the chair
of the House Transportation,
Public Works and Capital
Improvements Committee, and he
said, Madam Chair, we have a
problem. We are trying to do all
of this trade port development
and we don't have.
have any power.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico, which was a recurrent
theme for me, Mr. Chair,
because, um, as I had been
working on that type of economic
development work, I had also
been working on the expansion of
the electric vehicle charging,
uh, grid infrastructure with the
rollout of the National Electric
Vehicle infrastructure Act money
from the federal government, uh,
which if many of you, you're not
familiar, requires a level 2 or
3 DC fast charger every 50 miles
on each of our three interstate.
highways here in the state of
New Mexico, which sounds like a
great plan, Mr. Chairman, if you
have the power and the grid to
support such a thing, which
unfortunately, New Mexico at
this time does not, so, um, that
became the uh impetus for power
of New Mexico, we said this
sounds like a great idea, but
halfway through a 30 day
session, it's just not gonna
happen and because this is such
wide uh reaching implications,
we want to do it right. So after
that such concluded Mr.
Chairman, we
uh, put, put together a
consortium of over 64
stakeholders, we began holding
biweekly meetings, um, for about
9.5 months to talk about power
up and develop a bill that we
feel was right size for New
Mexico and would work to
accomplish uh what it is we're
trying to do here today, which
is create a modernized and
augmented grid for the state
that will allow us to grow and
allow us to continue on our
mission of reducing carbon
emissions.
and also fostering economic
development throughout the
state. So as we put together
this group of stakeholders, um,
we went through a lot of a lot
of ups and a lot of downs, um,
there are currently 3 sections
of the bill, there is an
amendment that we would need to,
we need to discuss, Mr.
Chairman, that I believe has
been passed out to your
committee, I just want to make
sure.
OK, did you pass the amendment
and these amendments were sent
out to the committee.
OK.
And can you read the
230 number on your amendment.
You know, Mr. Chairman, that'd
be a, a great thing to do if I
actually had a copy of the
amendment in front of me, which
I do not. Give me one second.
OK, it is.
Uh, 0.230232.3.
I'm, I'm sorry.
Once more.
0.230232. OK, so.
OK,
um, someone like to move the
amendment for discussion.
Mhm
Would you, would you care to
explain the amendment?
what this amendment does is it
takes out section 3, which is
section of the bill in its
entirety, I can go through why
that is necessary in a little
bit, um, and it also, uh,
changes language on page 8, line
25, it strikes or avoiding and
inserts in lieu of, so we're
just simply taking out that
language and also on page 3,
line 22.
After resources it inserts,
which may include
performance-based compensation
for aggregated, distributed
energy resources, which is VPP
in simpler terms, Mr. Chairman.
OK, um.
We still need to go to the
public, kind of like to get the
amendment taken care of first.
Is there any uh discussion on
the amendment. Would you like to
go into more detail about why
you're taking out the virtual
power plant. Yes, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So, um, throughout our
discussions, uh, we're very
excited about virtual power
plants for those of you who may
be unfamiliar with the concept,
so we have, you know, these
large electric school buses, um,
for instance, when they're not
being utilized as buses, they
can be plugged in into the grid
and utilized as kind of like on
the spot.
power sources and so we're
seeing, I, we're seeing
utilization of that technology
everywhere, especially in New
Mexico, but it's nascent and so,
um, to put together a regulatory
scheme for virtual power plants
at this point in time, a lot of
the um.
Um, feedback we received is that
it is um.
Too early to try and put
together a scheme for that,
because there are some federal
grants that have been rolled out
that, for instance, PNM is
utilizing that money to set up
their own VPP program and so
they would like the flexibility,
uh, and care to be able to do so
and then come back to us and,
and, um, also in cooperation
with the PRC we could put
together a rule at that time,
but it just seemed to try and
regulate now, uh, would be
putting the cart before the
horse, so instead with this new
language, Mister Chairman
We are allowing, um, the
utilities to utilize this
technology should they so choose
without putting any regulatory
limitations on it, so that's,
that's what this amendment does.
OK. Is there discussion on the
amendment? Is there any
objection to the amendment?
Um
OK, let's have a motion motion
for adoption adoption
OK, is there any opposition? OK,
so you have an amended bill.
Um
Uh, uh, any anything further on
the bill before we go to the
audience?
Um, and also, Mr. Chairman, I
want to call out representative
Meredith Dixon, uh, just to
thank her, she was a very
important part of our
consortium. She attended those
meetings, um, she added a very
important voice to everything
that we're trying to accomplish
in this bill and um I'm gonna
leave it up to you, Mr.
Chairman, it's, it's a, a, a
very.
Um
There's a lot of information in
this bill. I'm happy to go
through it as much or as little
as you want me to every all the
information that's in front of
me is also in front of all of
you, so I'm gonna leave it to
you if you want to go to public
commentary now or we can talk
more about the bill, it's I'm at
your disposal, Mr. Chairman.
OK, why don't we go to the
public just um show of hands,
people here in support of the
bill.
Uh, people in opposition.
OK, um, let's, uh, we'll do
public comment. Um, let's, uh,
Let's take no more than 3 on
each side. Uh, we'll start with
the opposition.
Hold on, we'll get a microphone.
It's on there we go.
Mr. Chair, Representatives, my
name is Glenn Weel. I'm a power
systems engineer and a public
regulation specialist who
monitors PRC activity for 3rd
act.
I have read this bill and
similar bills in other states.
Third act supports the spirit of
HB 13, but not the language in
front of you today.
HP 13 could simultaneously
contain customer costs, expand
community-based renewable energy
capacity and expand retail sales
for electric utilities.
Unfortunately, as drafted, it
does not achieve these balanced
goals.
HP 13 adds new risks for rate
increases with certain overrides
on reasonable and prudent
rate-making.
Two of these risks are
highlighted in M nerd's posted
analysis. I wanna call your
attention to Mner's concern
about the difference between
quote reasonable versus just and
reasonable.
You'll see this in their
analysis. Uh, these are
arguments used for cost
recovery.
Finally, it is common for
utility regulation bills to
include general consumer
protection and specific
protections for low income
consumers and neighborhoods.
These protections appear.
In the most similar law in
Colorado just passed, and also
in the PRC's draft rule, which
addresses the same issues as
section 1 of this bill.
Unfortunately, consumer and low
income protections are largely
absent from HB 13. With a few
amendments, HB.
13 can be strong, uh stronger
and more consistent with
existing statutes. Um, the, uh,
amendment to remove VPP um, as
we just heard, uh, remove some
mandatory requirements from the
utilities, those mandatory
requirements include the ability
to
Uh, for competitors to bid
fairly against the utility and
uh if you look into what the VPP
third party competitors are
doing their innovative, and
they've brought costs down in
other states. Um, so I think we
need to open up the market, uh,
to fair competition. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, um.
I don't think there's anyone
else in the room in opposition.
Uh, I see a hand up online. Is
there opposition online on Zoom.
So I see Steve.
With his hand up, Steve, are you
in support or opposition?
In support.
OK, is it, if there, is there
anyone online in opposition?
OK, not seeing any. So Steve
will come back to you, um, maybe
3 people, uh,
And the public would like to
speak in support.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Mike D'Antonio
with Xcel Energy. We serve
electricity to the eastern part
of New Mexico. I want to commend
the uh sponsor of the bill and
her expert witnesses, uh,
they've uh really established a
uh a good comprehensive uh
process uh for several months
that we met and they took into
account several of our concerns
with the bill. Uh, I want to say
that from a broader perspective,
uh, this bill does really
nothing more than sets up some
rulemaking.
opportunities at the commission
and, and one of the things that
we're excited about is that
we're we're having trouble
serving all of our load here in
New Mexico. We're looking
forward to having a stream more
streamlined uh kind of concept
for distribution planning, and
with that this bill we think
accomplishes that and allows
potentially us to provide
service to customers in a more
expedient manner, and it will
probably put in Mexico on a on a
better view view shed with
regards to economic development.
development projects and when we
compete against other states
for, for a new, new, new jobs,
new businesses, if they look at
New Mexico and we're, we're
more, more efficient in
providing that uh power to our
customers, uh, it'll make a big
difference, so we like that,
that part of the bill. We also
were uh uh interested in the
beneficial electrification
aspect of the bill, which will
allow us to work with our
commercial industrial customers
and set up a potential programs
for emissions reductions. So
with that,
We support the bill.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee, my name is Jim
Desjardin, the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We have over 60 plus
diverse members and we've been
around since 2004. So first of
all, I want to give a big thank
you to the sponsor,
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
for coordinating a very diverse
stakeholder group on this bill
and we, we need to do more of
that. Um, we're in the midst of
a profound change in how
reproduce and use energy.
We're on the process to having a
transition to 100% carbon free
electricity in the state per
statute. We can also generate
energy in our homes and
businesses, and we're doing that
in 50,000 places as we speak.
But we're also in the very early
stages of a huge growth in
demand for electricity with
electric vehicles, building
electrification, and the new big
thing is data centers.
This bill is a, this bill
addresses the situation with
requiring utilities to have a
distribution plan for
electricity. And by the way,
there's not one in place that's
um very interesting. There's
mechanisms in place to use
alternative ways to avoid
expensive grid upgrades,
enforcement mechanisms helps
customers electrify buildings
and it provides a solution to
deal with grid upgrades when a
solar system is interconnected.
A couple of other things that we
really like hosting capacity.
ana ly s is basically measures
the capacity and distribution
lines. That's not currently
mandated.
And flexible interconnection. So
it basically allows the
interconnection of renewable
resources in a way that allows
us to put more on the system.
Let me just say one thing.
Like most legislation in this
building, in other buildings.
This is not perfect.
And we were very disappointed
that the virtual power plant
section was removed, which would
have allowed the networking of
those 50,000 solar systems that
I mentioned, if they had energy
stored them to dispatch.
We urge a due pass of this
legislation. Thank you very
much.
Good morning. My name is Mark
Trujillo. I'm with the
International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers Local 611
IBEW.
Um, we stand today in support of
this legislation.
Has echoed I will echo some of
what she described, but um.
I think it allows for us to try
to what's going on in our state
and in our nation.
For as
Demand for electricity.
Maybe it's not perfect, I don't
know, but.
We can
Move forward today.
There's amendments that could be
brought forward.
We certainly
We've
I participated in the
stakeholder, and it was a very
diverse group.
Um, that you don't see very
often. I was on calls with
people that I would not
normally.
Everybody had the opportunity to
bring forward their.
Um
Thoughts and ideas.
I think this is a solid piece of
legislation that
Should be passed today, and we
do recommend they do pass in
full support of this.
OK, thank you very much. We'll
take two comments from online.
First up, we have Steve, if you
could see your name for the
record.
Steven Fishman.
Uh
So, um, first of all, I, I am in
support of this bill, um, but I
want to say that, uh, I
Agree with many of the remarks
that were made by Mr. Winkle in
opposition.
And actually, I sent all the
committee members, uh, a note
saying that I was not in support
of this bill.
Um, and I'm a former, well,
former chair of the public
regulation commission.
And I've seen that close.
How, uh, legislation intended to
do one thing fell well short of
what it could have achieved, uh,
Because of mechanisms within the
commission.
And um I think we can do a lot
to improve this bill in terms of
uh helping you achieve what it
intends to achieve, uh, with
some fairly minor changes.
Uh, the, quite frankly, I
haven't had a chance to work
with the sponsor on, um, to
discuss, um, given what it can
do, uh, I support it, uh,
frankly, distribution has been
virtually unregulated with
current PRC procedures and this
bill really addresses that issue
and uh I love that portion of
it. Uh, do you think it needs
some more consumer protections.
And I do think it needs some
Uh, procedural improvements so
that uh what we try to achieve
doesn't get hung up in the PRC
process.
So with that, I just say I
support, um, we need to do some
more work on this field to get
it where it needs to be, uh, but
I think the intent here is
terrific.
Um, and that concludes my
comments.
Thank you very much,
Commissioner Fishman.
Uh, next up we have the Sane
Chamber of Commerce.
Good morning. My name is Bridget
Dixon. I'm the president CEO of
the Santa Fe Chamber of Commerce
over 600 members. The savvy
Chamber's mission is to
strengthen the local economy and
serve as the voice of business,
and that means advocating for
reliable and timely electrical
service, a foundational need for
economic growth in Santa Fe and
across New Mexico. Ongoing
delays in connecting businesses
to the power grid and outdated
infrastructure have held back
business expansion and
investment for too long.
B13 provides a long-term
proactive approach that ensures
our grid can support economic
development while keeping costs
in check. The bill creates a
clear planning requirements,
accountability measures, and
workforce development
opportunities, ensuring that the
businesses can grow and operate
with confidence. The South
Chamber Commerce urges you to
vote in favor of HB 13 to power
up New Mexico's future. Thank
you.
OK, thank you very much. um.
Representative, uh, do you have
anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee?
Not at this time, Mister
Chairman. I think we're ready to
take questions. Thank you,
Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
and Representative.
Um, I do have
Several questions on this, and
obviously we, we spoke, we've
spoken a couple of times.
Um
But um
I, something that has been
mentioned.
even today.
Uh, by, uh, members of the
public who have spoken,
including for PRC commissioner
Fishman.
Um, my biggest concern, and I,
and I'll get to that. My biggest
concern
Is the lack of consumer
protections.
And so most of my questions are
gonna be directed eventually
towards
towards that end. And so,
It is no surprise to you those
are the discussions we've had.
Um, but I, I would like to ask.
I know you mentioned 64
stakeholders.
who
Some of your main stakeholders
that attended. I mean, I'm, I'm
glad there were 64, but who were
they?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Montoya, I have
an Excel spreadsheet, actually,
if you just give me a second to
access that, I can read all of
them off to you and I don't need
you to read all of them off, but
I, I would like to find out, I
guess, more specifically.
Um, I, I've had conversations
with uh
Uh, folks from PNM with uh with
uh
El Paso Electric.
Um, with
The non-regulated, uh, um.
Utilities as well, the co-ops
and municipalities, and there
are, there is a lot of concerns.
In this, so I'm just wondering,
and also uh some of our one of
our other
Members actually I think talked
with Excel.
And there there seems to be a
lot of uh
Concern
With this bill that
Uh
In particular around, yes, rate
recovery, they're guaranteed
rate recovery.
But
The concerns in particular with
the regulated utilities.
I
They already
Have certain requirements under
the ETA and they are trying to
comply with those, which means
They have been going through a
process of rate recovery, so
there, so
Anybody who receives a bill from
one of those.
Utilities have seen.
The rising costs already and
there's further that they have
to do because obviously the ETA
is not completed yet. There are
several more things that have to
be
Uh, implemented to get to where
the ETA wants them to get to.
Their concern is
This is another set of
Separate
Uh
Expenses that will be passed on
to their ratepayer.
When really the current
ratepayers.
are not necessarily the target
of this.
Um, the, the, the, the, the
folks who will benefit most from
this are people involved with
economic development.
Interests
And
New customers coming into the
state or passing through the
state.
But the reality is the current
ratepayers.
Would bear the cost.
And that seems to be
The main conversation.
That was had is
They're already put in a
position of rate recovery.
For what they have to do to
comply with the ETA.
This
would mean more rate recovery on
the same.
current ratepayers.
So
If, if you could.
Um
To to my question about
stakeholders.
What
Consumer advocates.
What
From the, from the public, from
the people who would actually
have to pay the increased cost.
Would not the ones that would
not necessarily benefit.
From economic development.
Who was included in the
stakeholder meetings.
That is specifically concerned
with the rising costs of rates.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and Representative Montoya, so,
um, first I'll, I'll begin by
saying that the uh many of the
co ops were involved in our
discussions, initially we
decided to exclude them from the
purview of this bill, just
because this is um what we look
to as an initial step co-ops are
not within the purview of the
PRC, which is actually part of
that rate recovery and that um
that uh consumer protection over
laying um framework that you're
talking about.
So co-ops at this time are not
within the bill, but they did
participate in our stakeholder
process and I actually have
permission to state uh today
that they raised no concerns as
it relates to the, uh, you know.
Raising costs for them and their
constituencies, um, uh, you said
it best, we already have all of
these um.
Standards that have been set
into and codified in law that we
have to meet through the energy
transition Act and otherwise.
And so what power up New Mexico
is actually designed to do is to
help us right size, especially
the regulatory process through
the PRC so that we can
turbocharge this process that we
are already right in the middle
of doing, and so while there is
and I, I'm not gonna stand in
front of you, Mr. Chairman and,
and, and Representative, um,
Montoy and tell you no, this
isn't gonna increase costs.
This has to increase costs, of
course, because we're building
out infrastructure, but that's
what the cost recovery is built
into the bill within the
protections in the purview of
the PRC. That's the PRC's job.
Anything that we're asking for
to be accomplished in this bill
has to go in front of the PRC
and go through their rigorous
process to ensure that they are,
we are not passing on costs to
the public that are, um,
excessive or in a way piling on
on top of what people already
feel.
rate increases that they're
responsible for, and there's
actually limitations in the
PRC's own process as to how much
cost recovery has to be limited
to. If he gets less than 0.5%.
So anything that we're doing in
this bill is within the purview
of the PRC has to be approved by
the PRC and we'll go through
their processes and most of the
spills actually about refining
PRC processes and taking away
roadblocks that have kept us
from um.
Augmenting and modernizing our
grid because of stagnant rules
that are not working for us now
in modern times
before. So it's not so much that
power up New Mexico was going to
add on to costs, we already have
these costs. We're already doing
what we need to be doing, power
up New Mexico is about removing
regulatory barriers to allow us
to do this faster, better, and
in a more efficient manner so
that we can accomplish more in
less time.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and um
Represented for that answer. So
So there were no
Members of the stakeholders that
were people like AARP or folks
specifically concerned about.
And I'm talking about consumer
advocates.
PRC are not consumer advocates.
So there were no consumer
advocates as part of this.
Uh, of your stakeholders. I do
believe, and again I I can um
pull up the the chart here. I do
believe that AARP at one point
was part of our consortium, and
I think that people always did
raise generally, hey, we need to
be very careful about cost
recovery, we need to make sure
that if we're allowing people to
put tariff riders or to increase
base rates that we do it in a
way that's um.
That can be absorbed by the
public, especially since, you
know, very sensitive that PNM
has just recently asked for
another rate raise
That can be absorbed by the
public, especially since, you
know, very sensitive that PNM
has just recently asked for
another rate raise
uh build out, so, um, I, you
know, again, people did say we
have to be very careful so as to
not do too much too soon, but
again, we are, there are
limitations within both the bill
and the PRC's process as to how
much those increases can happen
within a specific period of
time,
what, what I saw as a limitation
was not up to 0.5%.
It says no less than 0.5%.
Uh, so I, I don't believe there
is a limit, the limit is, if
it's less than 0.5%, they can't
ask for for rate recovery. But
if it's over, so I, I don't see
any limitations in the bill,
not, not one.
Um,
so, and, and that's, that's
My overall
Problem here is because
As it is right now.
The, the ETA.
is a requirement.
On the PRC.
They don't have a choice but to
do what's in.
In the ETA. When we do this as
well, it's not optional.
It's optional right now to them.
But if we pass this legislation,
it's no longer optional to the
PRC and they have to give rate
recovery is what the bill says.
So I, I don't see any consumer
protections, not, not limited. I
don't see not a one consumer
protection in here.
And that is my
That is my big issue. And so,
uh,
Like I said, when I, I, I, I
know, I know that.
PNM
Excel
And uh El Paso Electras
electric.
None of them are standing up in
favor of this bill.
Um, there, I've, as I talked, as
I talked to them, they're all
standing neutral.
That is my understanding, and I,
and my further understanding
from El Paso Electric is there
asking
To not be a part of it. They're
trying to, they've asked for a
variance. They've asked to be
released from this.
Is that incorrect? because it's
it's what's been communicated to
me.
By those organizations.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Montoya, I would ask that you
would correct misinformation and
that you just heard in a
representative from Xcel Energy
stand in front of you in support
of the bill. So I, I would like
to make that correction in the
record, um, as it relates to uh
PNM and also El Paso Electric,
they have been, they have been
very involved with the
stakeholder process from the
very beginning. We have been
working with them extensively,
many, many hours have been spent
with general counsel and their C
suite to a point where.
Everybody feels like it is gonna
accomplish good things to the
state of New Mexico.
Um, I don't think that it is
fair to characterize any of
those conversations that have
been had between me and other
stakeholders, um, as being in
support or not in support or
being asked to be left out or or
be brought in, I, I, I think
that this is um quite, you know,
respectfully, Mr. Chairman,
Representative over politicized.
Um, so, um, you know that we're
here because we're trying to
serve, we're trying to solve a
problem that many of us, I
think.
No exists here in the states,
um, public utilities don't have
an option as to whether or not
they serve their customers,
that's part of, that's part of
what they do is being a public
utility, so this bill is about
helping them to better serve
their customers and build out an
infrastructure in a way that
gets power where there has been
none before, including in our
Permian Basin in places where,
um, economic development is
especially strong within the
state, so, um, again, I can, I,
I'll, I'm.
happy to give you the list of
the stakeholders if um that will
answer your question, but I, I
kind of feel like, um, you know,
if, if you want more language in
the bill for consumer
protection, Happy to talk to you
about that, um, I'm also very
careful, I don't want to step on
the toes of the purview of the
PRC. They've been great partners
with us and working on this
bill, and we want to make sure
that we preserve their process
in the same way that we preserve
ours. So thank you Mr. Chair and
uh representative.
I, I hope that
Trying to protect consumers is
not.
Ever considered over
politicizing an issue.
Um, that, that's, I, I believe.
I mean, at every committee that
I go to, we hear about
The poor, we hear about.
Uh, marginalized communities, we
hear about.
Uh, the most disadvantaged.
And
When we, when we're talking now
about something that is
concerning.
What would directly everyone
pays utility rates.
From someone. And if they're if
they're uh under one of the
regulated utilities, they're
definitely going to pay these
rates. As a matter of fact, I
see another bill going forward
through the process to try and
limit the effect of rising rates
on the on low income folks, and
that's a huge percentage of New
Mexico, which just means more of
the middle class will be paying
for this.
And the biggest problem I have
with that is, they're not the
beneficiaries of this. The ETA
is already covering the fact
that the current ratepayer.
Is covered under the entire ETA.
This
Benefits economic development.
This benefits.
How we, and that's a good thing.
I am, I am pretty, I'm very much
on board with doing things that
will help us grow our economy,
but there has to be some
limitation as to the ratepayer.
Hang
For that expansion, they're
already paying for the for for
the change.
But, um, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I'm not trying
to say that they stood in
opposition.
I, I didn't, when I, when I
asked, are you in, are you in
favor of this or you against?
And
In particular, PNM and El Paso
Electric said,
We neither in favor or against.
And then I further heard from El
Paso Electric that they're
trying to be exempted from this.
Now
If that's incorrect.
Uh, one of them said something
different to me than they did to
you, but that, uh.
I went to them because this
directly affects them.
And when I was asking what are
the concerns?
The main concern is they're
already pursuing almost every
year because of the effects of
the ETA pursuing increased
rates.
This would only be further
increased rates on their current
ratepayers.
That being the case, it, I don't
believe it's fair to ask the
current ratepayers to pay for
economic development for
possible future ratepayers.
Not when we're in the midst of
current.
Inflation in America that we've
not had in in many years at this
level.
So this is
That's why I'm asking
specifically PRC is great. They,
they do have a mandate to,
within what we pass as law.
Within the parameters of what we
pass as law, there to do it and
as reasonably
The best fashion as they can to
keep rates down within what we
mandate they do.
If we mandate they do something,
they don't have the option of
saying.
No, you're not gonna get any
rate recovery here. No, we're
not gonna, if we put this in
law, it demands that they do
this.
And then it further demands that
reasonable rate recovery will
take place.
And it's not
Up to 5%. There is nothing that
limits that.
It's
And particularly in this in this
bill, it says no less than 5%.
0.5%, not 5%. I'm misquoting it.
So
Um
I'm just wondering, is there not
a way?
To do this and have the future,
those, those organizations that
are looking at this for the
purpose of economic development.
How, how do we, it, it doesn't
appear there's any way to pass
it on to them.
It appears that
The only way to do this is to
put it on the backs of the
current ratepayers. Otherwise, I
would imagine you would have
a law or bill.
To do that. So
Uh, Mr. Chair, I am just trying
to balance, how do we go forward
with what we're already mandate,
what we're already mandated.
The utilities to do.
And
And once again, the only concern
I heard from the, from the
co-ops.
And the municipalities is.
At what point potentially
Will we try and mandate
something like this on them when
their rates are already high
enough.
And so I heard it from
People in support of your bill.
That they that that they're not
enough consumer protections
here.
That is my sole interest at this
point.
I don't have currently.
Where I'm at.
Uh, I'm under the Farmington
municipal.
Electric
Utility. So they would, they're
exempted from this. So I'm not
I'm not really protecting them,
they're they they're, this
doesn't affect them.
This affects
Ratepayers
And the P&M distribution area in
the Excel distribution area in
the El Paso distribution area.
Uh, the El Paso Electric, so
we're talking Donana County,
we're talking Bern Leo County,
we're talking Santa Fe.
In reality, I'm still.
Kind of a little bit out of
place here because I feel like
I'm a representative from a
distant different area trying to
protect.
Consumers in your area, but this
is a concern.
I will not belabor the point any
more than that. I think I made
the point.
But even people in support of
this bill.
are concerned that they that
that they're inadequate consumer
protections.
and if, if I could just um
respond very quickly, Mr.
Chairman, and and and
Representative Montoya, and
thank you because you've jogged
my memory in terms of, um, you
know, rate recovery and consumer
protections, one thing that has
not been discussed at any point
is economies of scale, Mister
Chairman and Representative
Montoya. So in other states
where power up bills have been
initiated into law, what we have
seen as rates have actually come
down because with the
augmentation and the build out
and the modernization of the
grid.
The more energy that we get into
the grid, especially through
renewable energy and energy that
we know that is coming down in
price, the more we use it, it
actually, it acts as a driver
down in price. So while it will
require uh, will require rate
increases upfront as we see the
buildout of this infrastructure
so that we could reach power can
reach communities that have
never had power before, talked
to some of uh our constituents
in the Navajo Nation who have
literally never had power to
their houses at any point in
time.
and could have power as it
results from the passage of this
bill, if we put more of that
energy in that grid, it's
actually through economies of
scale going to bring prices down
and those savings will be
lasting, and those savings have
to be passed on to the consumers
again through uh all the
obligations of the public
utilities have to serve those
communities.
And representative
I know very much about the
Navajo Nation and about 50% of
the folks who live on the
reservation do not have
electricity, and the big reason
is is because the homes are so
far apart.
It, it doesn't.
There's, there's no way to get
recovery.
On infrastructure going into
those homes because they're so
far apart.
Nothing in this bill would help
the Navajo Nation.
Nothing in this bill would help
those folks who are living so
isolated.
It just doesn't happen.
Otherwise it would have happened
already because.
It would have been economically
feasible.
And I wish.
That this is what this would do,
but that's not what this would
do.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's why I'm very excited for
the the virtual power plant.
Part of this that we're gonna be
taking on at a later time.
Well, I appreciate it, uh, Mr.
Chair.
But uh
This would be a lot easier,
Bill, to support.
If there were some caps in
place.
That
No more than this.
Whatever that number is,
whatever that percentage is,
whatever that is.
Some guarantees for the
consumer.
That yes, there may be some
increases, but it would be no
more than.
I don't see any of that in here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just like what we heard from Mr.
Fishman, I mean, this is a huge
bill, this is our first
committee, we've had a
commitment to um listening to
every stakeholder that has an
interest in the bill, looking
forward to working with you or
anybody else to consider to
craft more language that would
make it a better bill, always
open to that.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya, Representative small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh.
Thank you, sponsors really
quick. My understanding is that
rates from El Paso Electric have
stayed flat or actually gone
down since enactment of the
energy Transition Act. Is that
your understanding,
representative?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Small, I do not have that
information, but perhaps someone
from uh El Paso Electric here.
I don't know if they're here
that, that, that, that is my
understanding, Mr. Chair. Uh,
representative, it's also my
understanding that in the rape
case following the energy
transition Act and petition for
lower rates.
For the act because the costs
were lower. They could have been
a little bit lower, but the
costs of drops in CETA for PNM
customers related to energy, not
related to fuel charges. Is that
your understanding?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Small, yes, I am aware of that.
Those are my understandings. I
think that along with the point
about um Xcel Energy standing in
support of this bill, sort of
just helps us clarify, and I
appreciate that opportunity.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rosa.
Anything else from the
committee?
Preserved Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative.
You'll have to bear with me a
little bit because I'm trying to
understand the, the energy and,
and the grid, so uh I do have a
couple of questions that maybe
you can help me clarify.
As this expands, one of the
things that I've I've noticed in
some of the the rural
communities that I serve is
we're having a hard time getting
the load or the capacity. I'm
not sure which word that I'm
looking for is actually the
energy to the grid.
actually make these feasible.
How does this help?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Henry, I'm going to turn this
over to my expert, Mr. Kenny,
who knows a lot about this.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Henry.
Um
I think if I understand your
question correctly.
You're, you're wondering how can
we
Through the distribution system
plan process, get power to, to
the communities that they have
inadequate power or
Have no power
So currently, you know, through
the utilities that would be
covered in this, this bill,
they're doing distribution
system planning, it's just not.
Out in the open, it's not part
of the commission's process,
it's not a public stakeholder
process. So,
With this, we can see where the
utilities anticipate power,
they're required to forecast
growth forecast where they lack
adequate power, um, and come
with a plan, uh, before the
commission and for stakeholders
to respond to that. So if
there's areas where
We don't think the utility is
providing adequate power.
That's through these cases, you
could.
Pushed the utility to bring that
power there or come up with a
plan over this.
5 year budget or 10 year
planning horizon to do that. Um,
currently we have no way of, of
knowing where there's uh.
You know, not enough hosting
capacity for solar or where
there's not enough load
capacity, um, if you're going to
trigger new upgrades, this
provides a transparency to that
process.
And if I may add, Mister
Chairman and Representative
Henry, one of the cool things
about this bill is prior to now
the just the um distribution
system planning requirement
which requires utilities to
submit information to the PRC as
to where their power is, where
their power is not, how they
plan to get power there, the
timelines to get power there
that requirement to submit that
information and make it public
so that all of us have access to
it and those plans, we've never
had that requirement.
And that's one of the things
that is in this bill, so for the
first time the state in the
state, we can have a good idea
of what our power needs are and
what we need to do to build out
those things, so it's actually
one of the things I'm most
excited about in this bill.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I,
that's
I'm kind of expand on that just
a little bit so I can try to
get, get that understanding. So.
Rapidly expand our grid.
Which it sounds like everybody's
excited.
How do we know that we have the
capacity to actually make that
grid work. Like, like, where's
the power gonna come from?
I know I've heard it, Mr.
Chairman.
uh renewable energy is gonna
help with the grid and all that,
and that's great, but is that
going to be enough as as we
rapidly expand this grid.
There enough power to actually
make the grid work. I guess
that's where I'm a little
confused.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Henry, I'm going to talk to you
a little bit about my layman's
understanding and then I'll turn
it back over to my expert, but
uh.
So my understanding, I mean,
there's many different sources
of energy, right? We have
renewable sources through wind
and solar. We've got, um, you
know, oil and gas energy we've
got geothermal, we have many
different ways of producing
power, we have, you know, uh,
uh, energy created through water
sources, but for New Mexico,
especially the distribution
aspect of it has been where we
have been struggling. I think
you've probably heard, um, the
anecdote that in some places
there's a 3 year waiting list
for.
Transformers, right? So that we
can build out the grid and get
power if people need it, so for
us, it's not so much, we have
more wind energy in New Mexico
and solar energy, 300 days of
sun a year than most states
could ever dream of, but for us
it's always been about storage
capacity and distribution. So
for us, that's kind of where the
rubber hits the road, but I.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Henry. Um,
To your point,
New Mexico
Today and probably for the
foreseeables and that energy
exporter.
So I don't think there's any
concern of having enough power.
To
You know, provide that service
to to citizens here.
What, what we're talking about
more is.
If I want to
Plug in my car or upgrade my
electric panel, I may have to
work with my utility, and that
might be a very long process
today.
Um, and that's not building out
the, the grid that's just
upgrading the grid that's in
place, um.
And so this process gives us an
understanding of where grid
upgrades are needed and knowing
that ahead of time, so the
utility can act proactively, not
reactively, which slows us all
down, whether it's in our homes
or our businesses. So, uh,
The connection though with we're
talking about broader energy
generation is the way this is
set up is these distribution
system plans would be filed in
the that uh different interval
the utilities have their
integrated resource plans.
So they're understanding their
broad scale generation need. So
they have this plan to inform
the other, so they're, it's a,
it's a, it's a cycle that that.
Learns from itself what its
distribution system need? What
do, what do we need from the
transmission and generation
side. So this all works together
to make sure that everybody is
power. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Couple questions off, off of one
of these sheets that we were
given, um,
It says the bill would have
significant staff resource
implications for the PRC, which
I think is what Mr. Montoya was
talking about a little bit.
One of the questions is the
requirement for electric public
utility plan applications that
will need to be reviewed,
analyzed and decided upon. Is
that going to be a bigger
process or.
An issue
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Henry, so I mean, yes, it will
add somewhat to the workload of
the PRC, but part of what we've
been trying to do development of
this bill is to add some of the
reporting requirements that
we're asking for as as a part of
reporting requirements that
already exist, so instead of
having to submit entire
wholesale new plans, they could
just incorporate the new
information and stuff that
they're already expected to
submit. It will require more
time to, of course, evaluate.
Um, that information, but I do
understand that the PRC has
requested additional FTEs or
full-time employment positions
through their budgeting process
and House Bill 2 this year, and
um, I know that I have made a
personal commitment to advocate
to getting them more resources,
more human resources to get this
work done because we are
putting.
on the PRC and they are a
critical and integral part of
this process of you Mr.
Chairman.
That me that makes that noise.
It it is when you, when you
touch the table, it's very
sensitive to that for some
reason.
I'll quit touching things, uh,
try to make that better. Uh, OK,
Mr. Chairman, thank you. What
about um the
That the commission take action
on the submission of a plan
within within 180 days. So going
along with what you just said.
One of the things I hear, and
again this is from a co op, so,
so I know there's probably a
difference, but sometimes these
plans are taking a long time to
actually get implemented through
and moving. How does this help?
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Representative Henry,
so, um, that is exactly part of
the problem is that, you know,
there's a lot of machinations
that this information has to go
through at the PRC valuations,
reporting requirements and a lot
of that is just, you know, let's
call it what it is, bureaucracy.
And so part of what we're trying
to do with Power Up is truncate
these deadlines to get things
moving quicker so that we can,
um, again, right.
Size the regulatory aspect of
this modernize some of these
rules so that they make more
sense for what it is we're
trying to do with the energy
transition, um, and also kind of
help utilities no more, know
what to expect and what there to
be, what they're supposed to be
submitting so that we can um
make this process shorter, get
rid of the bureaucracy and get
more to shovels in the ground,
shortening that time, and, you
know, it's tough, right, because
everybody has a job.
job to do, especially at the
PRC, but um, that's kind of part
of the the natural um push pull
of, of legislation, right in
that word asking the agency,
pushing the agency to truncate
this review time so that we can
get more done and that's why
we've included those dates in in
the bill.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman, what are the other
things it it I've got a
question, Mr. Chairman, on
section.
One J uh seems to require the
commission to enforce the
statute, but without giving the
commission the explicit
authority to do so.
We see that as an issue.
Can you,
can you,
it says section 1 J. This
analysis says that it seems to
require the commission to
enforce the statute, but without
giving the commission the
explicit authority to do so.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Henry, that is an interesting,
um.
Concept on that, I mean, I don't
think the PRC is just for a
separation of powers issue ever
put in a position to enforce the
statute, you know, where the
legislature were the ones that
write the statutes, um, this is
more of, let's say an enabling
statute or enabling legislation
to allow the PRC to do the job
that we've given them to do, so,
um, that's how I would read that
language, but I'm more than
happy to have a conversation
with someone who the analyst who
put that in there to see what
they were talking about.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman.
Touching things again.
One last question I have, Mr.
Chapman.
I'll leave it, leave it right
there. The, the last question
that I wrote down while we were
talking, is it does sound like
from, from the experts or, or
the, the comments that we heard
this morning, um,
And from, from even I think some
of what our discussion has been,
seems to be that the bill isn't.
Quite ready, or there's things
that are missing from it, and
I've heard it. Let's just get it
through and then we can fix it
with amendments.
Um, I'm new, Mr. Chairman.
Is that a normal practice that
the body is to pass a bill and
then fix it, or should we fix it
and then pass it and I'm not
trying to be sarcastic. That is
a genuine question. It feels
like if we're going to do
something, why don't we correct
it upfront to where we're all
happy before we we move it on.
Representative Henry, if I can
jump in there. So it's, it's my
feeling in this committee we
we're the, the subject matter
expertise on energy and natural
resource issues, um, in, in the
past, we occasionally had big
bills.
Uh, and people would say, oh,
just, you know, pass it through
your committee, we'll fix it in
the next committee, and I agree
that's not a good practice,
especially coming out of this
committee, um, I, I think this
bill.
is in pretty good shape and has
been amended. Uh, I definitely
heard concerns about consumer
protections.
Which I could uh, you know,
with.
Not necessarily a energy issue
for the consumer issue.
Something they could work on in
subsequent committees, but I, I,
I appreciate.
You being new in the question of
just passing a bill through, and
that's something I generally uh
would would like to avoid doing
so thank you for that question.
Um, representative Homan B.
Hill, you might want to answer
that question as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative Henry.
Um, so, yeah, like I've said,
we've been working on this bill
for many, many, many months, um,
many iterations, many voices,
many opinions, um, our mantra
has been, you know, don't let
perfect be the enemy of the
good, um, which I think is, uh,
you know, a good thing to live
by in the legislature, but um,
we are continually make um, you
know, the comments represented
in Montoy to work with him on
additional language to shore up,
uh, you know, consumer
protection.
I um am very grateful to hear
the chairman say that he thinks
the bill at this point is in
pretty good shape and we hope it
is after the hundreds of hours
that we've put into it, um, but
we are, we are still working on
it, we're improving, our next
stop is judiciary, um, and there
we do anticipate some additional
amendments there, but you know
the substance of the bill is
strong, it's where we want it to
be, where it's where it needs to
be, and so, um, we would ask
that it be passed out of this
committee based on that
substance, based on the fact
that you're.
You're well aware of what we're
trying to do within the purview
of this bill and that um
additional changes in language
can be anticipated and worked
on, uh, in the meantime as we
wait for a second committee.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman, um, I guess I don't
know if it's a question or a
statement, but the one thing
that that representative Montoya
talked about would be a major
concern for me, so.
I saw it move on, I would like
to understand how we do protect
the consumers.
Um, obviously in the rural areas
we're seeing massive utility
increases or what they are, I
would just like to understand
how that looks, what that looks
like for our communities, um,
and how we
Me.
How we fix the best we can.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Henry, you are more than welcome
to join the conversation if you
would.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair Representative,
and I echo the sentiments of
Representative Montoya and
Representative Henry about the
protection of consumers and what
they'll pay being that I
represent a rural part of the
state, but I do believe Mr.
Chair Representative that
Representative Montoya, uh,
drilled that in, so I'll move on
to a couple of more of my other
questions. Um, Mr. Chair
Representative, HB 13 refers to
the public works minimum wage
Act is this?
um, considered a public works
project in New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Senna Cortez, so, um, this
language was added after our
discussions with one of our
stakeholders, IBEW, and I
believe Mr. Trujillo is still
here in the audience.
Would you be willing to explain
that. So.
Representative Hockman V. Hill,
I, I, I would ask you to answer
the question or we're not gonna
go back to the public at this
stage. OK, thank you.
Representative Senator Cortez,
we have included that language
in the bill with the um the
intent of honoring the the
public works, especially, um,
the, the salary requirements and
the benefits requirements that
are as a part of that.
Um, Bill, and so we would, I
would say yes, this would be OK,
and I guess my question is, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, is how
that applies. I'm just trying to
find the connection.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, that's just and
it applies in how we pay people
that are on these jobs working
to expand the infrastructure.
OK. And so in this initiative,
Mr. Chair Representative, how
will this success be measured
success would be um monitored
through the both the uh DSP
plans and the beneficial
electrification plans that are
submitted to the PRC, which
include requirements of the
utilities report, you know,
their progress, um, how they're
expanding these projects, where
located, um, how long it takes
them to come online, what
they're connecting, where
they're connecting it, so that's
how we would measure progress.
OK. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair
Representative, and
Things that do need improvement,
how often?
Will that be modified?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Senator Cortez,
I'm actually really glad that
you brought that question up. So
part of the problem that we're
trying to fix here is typically
in in Mexico's passed away we've
been doing infrastructure is we
kind of build the project here
as it's needed based on current
demand, and then we'll forget
about it and we'll go build
another project over here based
on current demand as it's
needed, and we're not actually
anticipating what we need to
grow. This is very different
from how other states approach
infrastructure, right, and so
one of the things.
that power up New Mexico does is
it's requiring our utilities to
think about and submit in these
plans, right sizing what they're
going to need to grow to
encompass future need.
Not just current need.
Right? So that way we're not
going, it's the same thing, same
concept with Rose, right? Like
if we build a road and we spend
a bunch of time maintaining that
road, we don't have to spend a
bunch of money redoing the road
later on, right? So it's the
same thing if we put the.
If we put the investment in
expansion of infrastructure
upfront now, that's less
investment that we need to put
in later as upkeep. So, um,
we're doing bigger projects
upfront now in hopes that we
don't have to do them again in a
smaller road, so I hope that it
does and I and I do have a
clarifying question on that, um,
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
so.
The consumer pays for the
current need and also the future
need.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, so, uh, the
consumer, what happens is the
utility goes to the PRC, they
submit their plan, they ask the
PRC for uh permission to either
do it's called a tariff writer
or a base rate increase in the
PRC going through all their
fasle of questions they have to
ask and determinations they
make, they either grant, so
based upon what the PRC allows
them to do, that rate or that
tariff is then passed on to a
customer.
again going back to this
conversation of what happens
when we augment and expand the
grid and we have more energy
coming into the grid, and we
have those downward economic
forces.
Driving prices down, which we're
already seeing in studies, um,
and in actuality throughout many
other states in which this is
happening, then those savings
are the same way passed on to
the customers. And, and Mr.
Chair Representative, thank you
for clarifying that and any new
initiative that we take on or as
we create new policies, my
concern is always the consumer
and to break that down even
more, my concern is always the
people and my people are
struggling.
Financially and any new added
cost is a concern for District
62. Um, I do have a couple more
questions. If you go to page 5
of the bill.
Let's start with line 20. I.
It says the commission shall
periodically update the
energization time periods and
energization report requirements
to reflect changed circumstances
and new information. So can you
give me some examples of changed
circumstances. Uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative Senna Cortez, um,
I mean, that could be anything
from.
You know, acts of God, um, we
had floods in Roswell, uh, we
could have labor shortages, we
could have another pandemic in
which we have uh supply chain
disruptions, that language is
always in there just to allow
for the commission to take into
consideration other factors
beyond utilities control so that
they're not in some way that
doesn't make sense or that the
commission is not doing their
job to do. Thank you for
clarifying, Mr. Chair
Representative, so at any point
they can
change the report requirements
due to changed circumstances.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Senator Cortez,
I, I don't think it's just willy
nilly, I think that there has to
be a clear record made as to
what the circumstances are and
why those obligations are not
being met, um, uh, you know, it
doesn't happen on the turn of a
button, but that language is in
there just people and impossible
situations that they.
Right, Mister Chair
Representative, how often can
they do that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Senator Cortez, uh, it does not
specify in the language.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
have one more question and it's
on page 5J line 23. It says the
commission may require an
electric public utility to take
the remedial actions necessary
to achieve energization time
periods, um, what remedial
actions are they referring to?
Um, so Mr. Chairman,
Representative Senator Cortez,
the conversations that we've
been having before about how,
you know, we've had issues with
supply chain, um, we've have 3
year timeline, you know, waiting
times for Transformers.
A lot of the public utilities um
have kind of been waiting to
make these upgrades, right for
for many, many years and so if
it takes them some time to kind
of get up to where they need DSP
plans that we're asking them to
file into the PRC, um, we're
allowing them to do that because
essentially in New Mexico, we
have to play catch up, we've
been having to play catch up for
quite some time.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
it's still not noted how often
they can do that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and and
Representative, uh, no, it is
that, but my hope is that that
would happen and worse,
everybody's getting news that
are gonna be put in place.
That Mr. Chair represented,
we're still not sure as to how
often.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, there's uh not
language in the bill, no, OK, I
was just wondering, thank you
for clarifying those ultimately,
Mr. Chair Representative, my
concern echoes the sentiments of
my colleagues here from, I, I
represent again rural New Mexico
and consumer costs, that's just
a really hard one for me and
makes it really hard for me to
support, but thank you so much
for clarifying my questions, Mr.
Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative, any
further questions from the
committee.
Said Murphy
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, thank you for
the presentation today. I too am
new and don't know a lot about
some of these areas and so, um,
please indulge me and Mr.
Chairman Representative, um, I,
I share, um, my colleagues'
concerns about
Consumer protection
Um
But I also recognize that um
The
Bread is in is in real need of.
reading.
Down in the Permian Basin we're
looking at.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
we're looking at up to 3 year uh
connection times.
Um, causing, um, us to go to
smaller um probably smaller, uh,
uh, but efficient.
On site generation when clearly
it would be better if we have.
Power grid available.
Um
I'm concerned a little bit about
the stakeholder process, but it
sounds like you had uh
Mr. Chairman, Representative
fairly expansive one, I would
hope that there was a lot of
consumer protection input and
like my colleagues, I, that's
the number one.
Issue that I see currently with
the bill. Let me jump into an
area real quick. I know maybe a
little bit about um and to have
you respond to the following.
Mr. Chairman, I've, uh,
representative, um, I received a
statement from one of my
constituents that says,
It yeah.
actively goes after non-electric
fuel sources such as natural gas
and propane without recognizing
the critical role of
non-electric fuel sources that
they play, making the grid
stable.
You feel, you feel like that is
Mr. Chairman Representative, do
you feel like that's a fair
statement?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Murphy, no, I do not feel that's
a fair statement, I mean, you
can ask any number of my
colleagues that um there are a
number of different energy uses
for different types of energy.
Um, there's always going to be,
um, needs in which petroleum are
is the right size, the right
type of energy. What this bill
does does do is it encourages
and energization in places where
it makes sense, right? So we're
trying to reduce carbon.
emissions and places where that
makes sense for us to do.
There's always going to be, um,
a place for natural gas, there's
always going to be a, a, a place
for um.
You know, petroleum and so this
bill does not penalize natural
gas in any way, all it does is.
Voluntarily for those people
that want to enter into these
energy efficiency programs,
switch to um other types of
let's say stoves or appliances
that use electricity instead of
gas if they so choose, but in no
way does this penalize, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative, um,
So I'm gonna, OK, so I
appreciate that. It sounds like
there's sort of
More questions that I have.
Um
You've addressed the the last
one, and that is.
There's always, there's been a
Mr. Chairman Representative,
there's been a growing concern
that there's going to be these
mandates coming down.
So, I'll just ask you straight
out, are you gonna take my gas
stove?
Mr. Chairman, representative, or
my water heater, excuse me.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Murphy, only
if you so choose. It is a
voluntary program.
Thank you very much. And then
the last one and, and it goes,
my my question regarding Mr.
Chairman, my question regarding
natural gas.
In my
Simple analysis goes to base
load, which eventually equates
into consumer protection.
Price, right?
So that's Mr. Chairman
Representative, that's uh where
I was headed with that.
And lastly, um, I understand
that, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative that in terms of
cost recovery, you're really
leaving that to the.
is
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Murphy, yes,
that's correct, I I feel I'm
I'm.
Um
Feel very strongly that, you
know, preemption is a big deal
on the law and the PRC has a
very specific, uh, use in our
government, and I feel like to
um to step on their toes in that
way would be an inappropriate,
inappropriate use of.
Um, of what I'm trying to do
here as a legislature with this
piece of legislation, and I
trust the PRC to do their job,
uh, within the scope in which
they're enabled to do so, so
that's um how we've.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
thank you very much, um, I'll
just conclude with the fact that
I, I think that the bill would
be much improved and you'd
certainly have my strong support
and I look forward to working
with you
at some working because I too am
very concerned.
Mr. Chairman, representative,
thank you so much.
Any further discussion on the
bill.
Sara.
The Chairman, I move a do pass
as amended.
You take the vote.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry
No.
Represented Montoya, no.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Small.
Representative Murphy.
Vice Chairana.
Harry McQueen.
Yes.
You have a DuP pass 64.
Mr. Chairman, I think one of
your members passed.
We
When
we came back, uh, really small
as excuses he's presenting a
bill, so 6 to 4. Thank you very
much Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, and if I may, I
very much look forward to
talking to most of you about
consumer protection. I'm very
serious about that.
OK, we have 2 more bills. Uh, so
if you're leaving the room,
please, uh,
He so quickly and quietly.
So if you have conversations
about this bill, you're gonna
need to take them out in the
hall.
So our next bill is House Bill
34, um.
Hospital 34 oil conservation
protect health and environment.
Um, I, I don't know why uh it's
listed 3 on the agenda that was
passed out. It is listed 2nd on
the uh website in the Goldenrod,
and we're gonna stick with that
schedule.
Um, uh, Representative Sarella,
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um,
I'm here to present House Bill,
um, the House Agriculture Safety
and Water Resources the
environment. Are we good my
expert witness.
Witness is Gail Evans for the
New Mexico climate director for
the Center of Biological
Diversity.
Mr. Chairman, we currently have
more than 73,000 active oil and
gas wells in the state.
Thousands are in active wells
and more being approved every
day.
Currently, the oil conservation
division does not have the
authority to consider public
health and the environment when
approving permits to drill.
And public health and the
environment cannot be considered
in the regulations of any of
these active oil wells, gas and
oil wells.
Hospital 34 represents a common
sense step to ensure that New
Mexico of tomorrow is a better
place by updating an adequated
antiquated law, it does not keep
up with the realities of New
Mexico oil and gas.
In 2025.
It is premised on the idea that
the government should have the
authority and duty to protect
the health of its citizens and
environments and takes an
important step to give it the
power to do so in this state.
Committee subamends section
70-2-11 of the Oil and Gas Act
to give the oil conservation
division and the oil concert.
Oil conservation commission, the
duty to protect public health
and the environment when
regulating oil and gas
activities in the state.
It does not give the oil
conservation division expansion,
expansive new powers. What it
does.
do is take the existing language
of the act and add to it.
Currently, the oil conservation
division only has a duty to
prevent waste and protect
correlative rights.
While implemented, while
implementing the act. The
committee sub adds two duties,
protecting public health and the
environment while implementing
the act. It does not prescribe
how oil, the oil conservation
division must do that.
As this committee is well aware,
thousands of New Mexicans live
near oil and gas infrastructure.
The law is currently written,
does not allow the oil
conservation division to
consider these communities'
health when regulating the vast
majority of oil and gas activity
near them.
This is despite the fact that
science has proven that this
development has serious harmful
effects in the health of the
communities nearby.
This needs to change, and the
committee sub would move us in
the right direction when
requiring oil the acquiring the
oil oil conservation division to
factor in and protect New
Mexicans' health when regulating
oil and gas.
I don't think this idea.
That we should protect public
health is a radical one.
Nor is the idea that we should
protect the environment when so
many resources such as water are
irreplaceable and are so
important to the state.
Committee sub works to allow our
state agencies in charge of oil
and gas development to do this.
That I will um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Again, my name's Gail Evans. I
work with the Center for
Biological Diversity, and I just
want to reiterate that um this
bill, the committee sub for
House Bill 34 just amends uh one
section of the oil and gas Act.
And the other sections of the
act that you're not seeing in
front of you as part of this
bill, um, remain completely
intact and unchanged, and those
sections, um, like the intro in
the beginning of the oil and gas
Act of 70-2-2 talks about how um
the, the, the point is to
prevent uh the waste of the
resource.
And um
The, the main purpose of the Oil
and Gas Act, which was
originally passed in 1934 is to
um extract the, the minerals in
a way that prevents wasting
those minerals and in a way that
protects the rights of the
mineral owners, protects
correlative rights, and there's
extensive case law discussing
that that is the purpose of the
oil and gas Act is to prevent
waste and to protect correlative
rights.
And what this amendment to the
Oil and Gas Act does in this one
section is to say that in doing
that in implementing this act in
in preventing waste of the
resource and in protecting those
correlative rights.
To implement the act in a way
that, um, protects, so it, it
gives the oil conservation
division and the oil
conservation commission, the
duty.
To do that.
And right now the oil
conservation division and the
oil conservation commission do
not have that duty.
And in fact, they don't even
have, they don't have the
authority, they don't have the
power.
To protect public health and the
environment when they're
implementing the oil and gas
Act.
And this means that there are
these 70,000 fracking sites,
almost all of them, fracking
sites or oil and gas production
sites in our state.
And all of them have been
granted with no consideration,
and that's because the oil
conservation division doesn't
have the authority to consider
public health in the environment
when it's granting permits to
drill in our state.
This is not the case in many
other places, OK, so many other
states do um require.
Consideration of public health
in the environment when um when
overseeing oil and gas
development.
So New Mexico is is not in line
with other um heavy oil and gas
producing states, many others do
have these uh requirements or
authority, um, to consider
public health in the
environment.
And I would say this is more
important than ever right now in
our state, um, that we as a
state need to make sure that
we're protected, um, and we
certainly can't, um, depend on
the federal government to do
this for us going forward. So it
seems like a more important time
than ever for our state to, to
give our oil conservation
division, the power.
To consider public health in the
massive oil and gas production.
And I'll leave it there because
I'm sure there will be
questions.
OK, um,
show hands in the in the.
Audience, uh, who's here in
support of this bill?
Who's here in opposition to this
bill.
OK, so, um.
Uh, we're gonna do, why don't we
do, uh, foreign sport and
foreign opposition, we'll start
with the opposition.
You have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs, the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies.
NOA's membership appreciates the
work that the oil conservation
division does to fulfill its
mission of making our state a
leader in reliable energy
development, promote energy
efficient technologies and
practices and protect the
environment and ensure
responsible production.
Nimoga opposes House Bill 34
because it would create
duplicative oversight between
the energy, mineral, and natural
resources department and the New
Mexico Environment Department.
The bill does not define what
public health and environment
would entail, creating unclear
regulations and oversights and
adds additional unnecessary
duties to OCD without an
appropriation or funding
mechanism.
Colorado implemented similar
legislation in 2019, leading the
Colorado Oil and Gas
Conservation Commission, and the
Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment to embark
on approximately 25 to 30 new
rulemakings across multiple
phases between 2019 and 2021.
These rulemakings have caused
the taxpayer and led to
additional bureaucracy and
ambiguous regulation.
In addition
Colorado's orphan well count has
increased fourfold in the last 4
years, and their recount has
dramatically decreased.
In the six months following the
enactment of the legislation in
Colorado, there was already a
12% decrease in gross value of
oil and gas from 2018.
In New Mexico, almost half of
our budget relies on oil and gas
revenue. So the economic toll
would likely be even greater,
hurting all New Mexicans. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman
members of the committee. My
name is Mike Miller. I represent
the Premium Basin Petroleum
Association and we respectfully
stand in opposition to House
Bill 34 while we fully support
efforts to protect public health
and environment, we are deeply
concerned that this legislation
will have unintended
consequences that harms New
Mexico's economy and energy
security in rural communities.
This bill proposes to amend the
oil and gas Act by explicitly
requiring you only got uh the
oil conservation division and
the oil Conservation commission
to implement the act in a manner
that protects.
Public health and environment.
While this intention sounds
noble, the vague language of
this mandate opens the door to
excessive and subjective
regulatory interpretations that
could stifle responsible energy
development in our state.
Excuse me. New Mexico is a
national leader in energy
production and the oil and gas
industry is a cornerstone of our
economy. It generates billions
in revenues for our state funds
our schools and provides
thousands of jobs for
hardworking families by adding
ambiguous language that about
protecting public health and the
environment without clear
definitions or guidelines this
bill could lead to over
regulation permitting delays and
legal uncertainty discourage
investment in our state's most
vital industry. Moreover, our
existing laws already empower
the old concert of division.
and the commission to prevent
waste and protect correlative
rights which inherently includes
safeguarding.
Um, public welfare, additional
mandates without clear
regulatory excuse me, guard
rails threatened to invite
litigation, administrative
overreach, and unnecessary
bureaucratic roadblocks that
disproportionately impact small
operators. We all want clean
air, safe water, and a healthy
environment. The responsible
operators in our state are
already held to some of the
highest environmental and safety
standards in the nation instead
of implementing vague regulatory
mandates that confuse and unin
unintended economic harm. Let's
focus on
Policies to encourage
innovation, responsible
development and collaboration
between industry and regulators.
I respectfully urge this
committee to vote against House
Bill 34. Thank you for your
time.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, uh, members
of the committee, um,
Representative Sarana and an
expert, um, this bill
previously.
Uh, went through the ad.
Winchester,
state your name
Jim Winchester, um.
Executive director of the
Independent Petroleum
Association in New Mexico. I
apologize. So I represent
independents, which are, are the
smaller operators predominantly.
Um,
This bill came from the AG
committee.
And um some of the discussion in
there I just want to bring up
was mentioned that
Because of the wide scoping
nature of this new language. Is
it possible that a rulemaking
could take place to say, um,
setbacks in place.
So there was confirmation that
that is is potentially the case.
I see this as
A very vague
phrase that offers a lot of
opportunity.
to do an end around on rules
that should go through
legislatively.
Um, I appreciate the expert
witness quoting from statute,
um.
She talked about the OCD, um,
Definition
Um, I just want to quote
Current statute 7412.
Which is the purpose of the
environmental Improvement Act.
To create a department that will
be responsible for environmental
management, consumer protection
offered the greatest measure.
Of optimum health, safety,
comfort, etc.
The statute further states that.
Extensive use of regulatory
bodies and boards in place.
To achieve this purpose should
be the Environment Department
and the Environmental
Improvement Board.
So, based on this information
and what's in statute,
I don't think it's appropriate.
New Mexico Oil Conservation
division to take on this
duplicative tasks.
They're already delegated to the
Environment department.
And we think it's unnecessary.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in opposition. OK, let's,
let's go online. If you'd like
to speak in opposition, could
you please raise your hand?
We'll take 2 online, the
Westfall.
Good morning committee and Mr.
Chairman. I'm Deal Westfall
executive vice president for
policy and programs at the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. And I'm here to
respectfully testify in
opposition House Bill 34.
While well-intentioned, this
still expands the
responsibilities to the oil
conservation division broadly,
vaguely exponentially with no
definition of what exactly OCD
will be charged with protecting
regarding public health or
environment.
Thus it opens up the department
to unrealistic demands, unfunded
mandates, and potential
litigation when it does not
deliver on that, which is not
spelled out. It also promises to
unnecessarily duplicate work
already being done by the air
quality Bureau and the New
Mexico Department of the
Environment.
Weave the chamber, like all the
Mexicans want clean air and
water to protect our environment
for the generations to come, and
this requires good regulations
that are clearly defined,
providing specific guidance, so
it can be determined if they are
followed or they are broken.
Unfortunately, the only clarity
HB 34 promises is massive
litigation filed against OCD. We
respectfully ask that you vote
against HB 34. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else online in
opposition?
OK, Singan, we're going to come
back to the room. Uh, people
would like to speak and support.
We'll do 3 or 4.
And you have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
And with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter. My name is
Melissa Bernardin. I'm here on
behalf of our 35,000 members and
supporters in support of HB 34.
The oil and gas industry
throughout New Mexico and the
country, pollute our air with
methane and invisible odorless
greenhouse gas that is 86 times
more potent than carbon dioxide
over a twenty-year period. With
this pollutant comes a host of
other contaminants, benzene,
hydrogen sulfide, and ozone
precursors that result in smog,
making, for example,
Eddy County, one of only 2 rural
counties on the top 25 most
polluted counties in the
country.
The Oil Conservation District
must and should
Add to its purpose, the
protection of human health and
the environment. When industry
extracts publicly owned
resources off public lands. It's
the least they can do to protect
first and foremost our
communities. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman, Vice
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Annie Lopez, and I'm
here on behalf of Yucca. We are
here to urge you today to vote
in support of HB 34 in New
Mexico, we face a series of, of,
of emergencies because of
environmental pollution,
accumulating alongside the
climate crisis, subjecting
marginalized community to the
brunt of this injustice. We see
the imbalance of state policy
favoring a polluting industry
over the public health in our
communities and protecting these
lands.
water sacred to many communities
across the state. As of 2022,
there are approximately 4 oil
and gas bills a day, meaning
that on a day to day basis,
traditional waterways like Asea,
underground aquifers, and soil
are contaminated due to the lack
of enforcement and the lack of
accountability to surrounding
communities in areas such as the
San Juan Basin and the Permian
Basin, the American Lung
Association rates the air
quality for these regions as an
F. At Yucca we see HB 34 as
serving a
serving as a preemptive measure
moving forward to ensure the oil
conservation commission is
taking into consideration the
implications on public health
and environmental protections
while issuing oil and gas
leases. For future oil and gas
leases, OCD would have to
consider the impacts of
emissions, water use and
pollution, spills, leaks, etc.
and we must work towards the
goal of adjust and equitable
transition for our communities.
And the first step towards that
is solidifying protective
measures to hold the oil and ga.
gas industry accountable to no
longer endangering our public
health and our environment. We
cannot accept a legacy
environmental pollution and
climate action as acceptable
policy decisions. We bear the
duty to protect our land, air,
and water, which is sacred,
precious, and irreplaceable.
Please vote in support of HB 34.
Thank you.
Hi, uh, Glenn Weel, 3rd Ave, New
Mexico.
Um, I want to repeat this is
common sense legislation.
We have multiple counties in the
Permian Basin who get an F grade
from the American Lung
Association, it's some of the
worst air in New Mexico.
And uh I wanted to speak to the
comment about the duplicative
nature. I don't see this as
duplicative because the oil and
gas industry has carve-outs in
most of our environmental laws.
And so this is an attempt to
plug some of those holes so that
we can
Have cleaner air and water in
our oil and gas regions. Um, so
again, common sense legislation,
please pass it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee, I'm
Tammy Feebleorn with Western
Resource Advocates, my fellow,
um, advocates have said it all.
I will just add that we truly
believe that all divisions and
all entities in the state
government should have a duty to
protect the public health and
the environment and so adding
this to the oil conservation
division. It seems like a no
brainer to us. So we ask you to
please support HB 34. Thank you.
Thank you. We're gonna take uh
one person online, uh, Josie
Zininga.
Good morning, chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Josie and I'm a
community member from Eddy
County. And today I'm asking you
to vote yes on HB 34. Many New
Mexicans, myself included, live
in close proximity to oil and
gas production. This production
is known to cause pollution, and
this pollution is known to cause
adverse health effects such as
cancer, asthma, birth defects,
premature births, high-risk
pregnancies, low birth weights,
higher hospitalization rates,
and upper respiratory.
problems. These health effects
are far-reaching and often long
term. If the OCD were to have
the authority to protect and
prioritize health first. Many
people would not have to live
under this harmful pollution. I
can tell you firsthand what it's
like to live with this
production outside of your home,
and it's really not pretty. You
live under the constant assault
of the bad smells, headaches,
bloody noses, and sore throats.
I don't want to continue to be
exposed to these cancer causing
pollutants, and I don't want my
family and neighbors to have to
live this way.
either. I believe no one should
have to live with production
outside of their homes and the
environment to be damaged. I
believe the OCD does need this
authority as private companies
often do not always have the
people's best interests at
hearts yes on HB 34 is the vote
yes for the health and
well-being of the people of New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you for that. OK, and then
we'll end our public comment,
um, before we go to the
committee, uh representative
Serana, is there anything you'd
like to add?
You can respond to what was,
what was it?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
would like to respond to the
statements made by Mr.
Winchester about um the
environment department having
regulatory authority over the
oil and gas Act, um, and Mr.
Winchester referred to the
environmental improvement Act,
and I think read from it,
discussing how the purpose of is
to um confer Optimum health
safety, comfort, and economic
and social well-being on the
inhabitants of our state and
protect um this generation and
future generations. It's a
really noble purpose in the
environmental Improvement Act,
and through that act, which was
passed back in 1971, we
established our environment
department and the state has put
in place laws such as the solid
waste Act, the hazardous Waste
Act, the hazardous and
radioactive materials Act. These
are all, and the air qualitytrol
Act.
These are all acts that are
administered by the Environment
department.
The hazardous waste Act
explicitly excludes oil and gas
activities and production, um,
so the Environment department,
when it's implementing the
hazardous waste Act is not
implementing it when it comes to
oil and gas hazardous waste. The
hazardous and radioactive
materials Act also explicitly
excludes oil and gas, um, from,
uh, it's, it's regulatory power
and so when
The Environment department is
implementing the hazardous and
radioactive materials Act. It is
not hazardous waste does not
include drilling fluids, produce
water and other waste associated
with on it goes and fossil
fuels.
So, um, likewise, uh, the solid
waste Act excludes the
regulation of all waste
associated with oil and gas
exploration development,
production, transportation,
storage, or treatment.
Um, so I could go on, but all of
these acts also include in their
purpose statements, um, uh,
statements that the purpose of
the Solid Waste Act is to
enhance the beauty and quality
of the environment, and yet it
goes on and excludes the the
waste from oil and gas
production.
So, and Mister Winchester, I'm
sure is well aware of these
facts. Um, the air quality
Control Act.
Does apply to the oil and gas
industry. Thank goodness, and
the air quality Control Act is
administered by, um, so this
bill that we have here today is
not amending the air quality
Control Act, and it is true that
the Environment Department has a
duty to prevent or abate air
pollution, and that duty applies
when it is regulating the oil
industry and frankly, the
Environment department has
failed in that duty because the
air
quality is out of compliance
with basic health standards in
areas of the state that have
heavy oil and gas production.
So we have a problem over there
with the environment department
not complying with or enforcing
the air quality Control Act in a
manner that actually makes the
oil and gas industry, um, keep
our air safe.
But when it comes to the oil and
gas Act, that's the job of the
oil conservation division, and
the oil and gas Act does not
give the oil conservation
division, the power to protect
public health and the
environment when it's granting
permits to drill, and when it's
regulating the development and
the production of oil and gas.
That's what we're seeking to fix
here today. There is no
duplication. It is and it is
adding a, a basic.
requirement in our modern age to
our oil and gas Act.
Um, I'd like to add onto this.
when she was a committee to
think about when you were in 2nd
grade.
Those were the carefree days,
right? lunch, recess, that's all
you really cared about, those
are the best things.
I want to tell you about
Jefferson Elementary in Hobbs.
It was established in 1956. It's
older than I am barely, um, 351
little guys kids, students
attend Jefferson Elementary, K
through 5 with pre-K.
the little guys.
Jefferson Elementary has 161 oil
and gas wells within 1 mile of
the school. 148 wells within
half a mile of the school.
Think about all the toxic
pollutants emitted during the
extraction and production
process all these students away.
Department of Health has said
proximity to these operations
has been associated with
elevated risk of cancer due to
long-term exposure to
carcinogens such as benzene.
These kids are going to school 5
days a week, 180 days for up to
6 years.
One more thing to think about in
the last water committee
meeting, Mr. Chairman's
committee in November, Secretary
Kenney said that 70% of the oil
and gas industry are polluting
beyond the legal limit. They're
breaking the law, and I, and I
have his committee notes from
the budget.
With 73,000 oil and gas wells,
extraction and production sites
in New Mexico, that's about 150
breaking the law.
Jefferson Elementary with 161
70% of those are 115 wells
polluting beyond the legal limit
and breaking the law.
No matter which way the wind
blows, these kids will be
exposed to toxic pollutants,
pollutants from emissions from
the oil and gas industry.
With the passage of this
legislation, the conservation
division will have the ability
to look at public health.
And the environment during the
permitting process.
This legislation may help stop
the possibility of.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I have a couple of different
sort of areas of questions, um.
The first, um, it's about the
implications and implementation.
Uh, issues, and the second is,
um, separation of powers and
legislative account.
Um
First, Mr. Chair, um, and
Representative, how is public
health defined in this?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, public health is not
defined, and it's our
understanding um that the term
public health is used in over 60
of the 77 chapters of our
statutory scheme in New Mexico
and nowhere is it defined.
And
Perhaps this is because the term
public health, um, has a
Has a a a well known or easy
meaning.
But the other point I'd like to
make is that the term public
health does appear already in
the oil and gas Act. And so
we're not introducing a new term
into the act. It is there.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, and, uh, Miss
Evans, um,
So, it may not be defined, um,
is the definition.
Um
Consistent
For the, the interpretation of
public health is it used the
same way.
In all instances.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I couldn't
answer that question, which is
the same way in all instances, I
couldn't possibly answer that
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Ms. Evans. The
reason that I'm asking is, you
know, one of the
responsibilities of the
legislature is oversight and
accountability, and frequently
we look at metrics, you know,
the legislative finance
Committee provides a number of
Um, report cards for agencies
and different things, and so I'm
just wondering, um, if there's
no um definition of public
health, um, exactly how we're
going to, um, oversee and
monitor the effectiveness of
that.
Um
The next question, um, that I
have is whether or not um this
bill has accounted for
additional staffing and
resources, um, at the oil and
oil Conservation division.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
it's my understanding from the
fiscal impact report that the
fiscal impact of this bill would
be from 0 to about a million
dollars.
Which
It is a very small number, um,
given the overall budget of the
oil conservation division and
the overall amount of money that
the uh state brings in from oil
and gas revenue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you, Ms. Evans, I thought
I read somewhere that um, it was
estimated that they would
probably need um an additional
10 FTEs to, uh, to carry out the
responsibilities of this. Um,
but I guess we could, we could
get an additional information.
Um,
Mr. Chair and um Miss Evans, uh,
could you explain, uh,
Once again, the difference
between the air quality bureau
at New Mexico Environmental
department and um OCD at Ener.
Uh, yet both, so.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, that.
The air quality bureau or enemy
D has to authorize all new um
emissions polluting emissions in
our state, and so therefore
enemyD does authorize all new
fracking sites in our state.
Um, at the same time, and an
enemyD's job is to implement the
air quality, the air quality
control Act, uh, is intended or
has, it says that we shall
prevent or abate air pollution
through NMED's job, implement
that act and to ensure that our
state complies with federal
health standards when it comes
to air quality.
OCD's job is to implement the
oil and gas Act.
And the oil and gas Act is the
act that um.
Through which OCD is permitting.
And uh supposed to oversee all
oil and gas development and oil
and gas activities in our state.
And the one thing it's not
responsible act is air quality,
that is NMED's job, but OCD is
responsible for granting permits
to drill for dealing with the
spills, we're dealing with all
of the toxic liquid waste for
dealing with getting wells, uh,
plugged and remediated when
they're no longer active. That
is all under OCD's.
ju ri s di ction
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms. Evans. Um, do you see any
instances in which um OCD and
the Air Quality Bureau might
have um.
In current jurisdiction.
In any of these issues?
Uh, there are certainly things
that they do if, if OCD's job
is, it's, it can only act within
the limits of the oil and gas
Act.
And the limits of that right now
are around preventing waste and
protecting correlative rights.
so through their ability to
prevent waste.
OCD was able to pass regulations
that say that uh venting and
flaring is prohibited.
And through OCDs uh authority to
protect air quality, they were
able to pass regulations
concerning um ozone their ozone
precursor rules. Both of those
are about air emissions, but
OCD's work was in the, the
operations and within the
context of preventing waste. It
was not within the context of
protecting public health and the
environment. They do not have
the authority to act.
protect public
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms. Evans. Um, is it possible
that there could be, um,
different interpretations, um,
that they might come to
different conclusions and be in
conflict.
Uh
Mr. Chair Representative.
Uh, if they're both staying in
their lanes, which they do.
It's not that we have a problem
of overregulation in our state.
The lanes are quite narrow for
OCD. No, I don't see a
possibility of a duplication or
conflict
I don't see anybody here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representative. I did notice
that, uh, the New Mexico
Environment Department did not
submit an agency analysis, uh,
for this bill, um, which, um, I
find a little concerning.
Um
In terms of separation of powers
and legislative accountability.
I do want to to.
Preface this with um while
Members of the public and others
may sometimes think that.
Bills, um, are common sense and
have a black and white.
Um, answer.
Um, I don't think that our role
as legislators is to simply, uh,
provide a yes or no or uh do
what may on the surface appear
to be common sense, and I take
my responsibility as a
legislator very seriously.
Um, I am, uh, very concerned
with.
Um, what I see as the delegation
of my responsibilities as a
legislator, uh, to an unelected.
Uh, board.
Um, or entity.
And so
Uh, my first question, uh, Mr.
Chair, and
Panel is how does the broad
language do whatever may be
reasonably necessary.
Align with legislative
oversight.
And what limits would exist on
the visions, Mr. Chair,
Representative, that language
that you're referring to is the
original language of the Oil and
Gas Act.
That is not language that uh we
are uh trying to change.
And I would say that all of the
regulations that have been put
in place by the oil conservation
division and the other
conservation commission have
been done, um, pursuant to that
language and the act as it
currently exists.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Ms. Evans, but we would be
adding, um, additional language
that could change the
interpretation of how people
acted, um, or did things
regarding that, um, by adding
public health in the
environment. Um, I think that,
that does make a significant
difference, um, that I think
opens up, um.
The responsibilities.
That we would be giving to um
estate agency as opposed to the
legislature itself defining um
public health and the
environment.
Um,
Mr. Chair, um.
I may respond to that.
Um, currently, uh, in our New
Mexico mining act.
We have language that says the
mining commission, um, shall
adopt regulations that consider
the economic and environmental
effects of their implications.
So that's just one example of
many examples of where the term
environment is used, um, and
where it is left to the
commission and the agency that's
implementing that act to
determine how to do that. That
is not the
Legislature's function, and I
would just say, as I mentioned
previously, and I'm sure that
Representative Small is very
familiar with this that already
in the oil and gas Act, there is
discretionary authority for the
oil conservation division to
consider public health and the
environment, those terms are
used in the Oil and Gas Act when
implementing the act, so the
exact same language is already
in the oil and gas Act. It's not
a duty.
It's a discretionary authority
when they are managing uh
produce water and waste, so.
Again, we are not implementing a
new phrase or suddenly adding
some new vague language to this
bill. We're adding words that
are used all over our statutory
scheme, including in the oil and
gas Act.
To make it a duty to do so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms. Evans. I think that to some
extent we can agree to disagree.
Um
Mr. Chair, um, and Ms. Evans,
um, and representatives, um, I
don't have any further
questions, uh, I, you know, I
appreciate the discussion and
the the delineation between the
air quality board and OCD, I
think that that has been very
helpful. Um, it does not,
however, um, alleviate my
fundamental concern about the
role of the legislature versus
the role of state agencies and
my responsibility as an elected
member.
Um
sent here by my constituents,
uh, to look at bills in all of
their implications. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dixon,
for the discussion from the
committee.
Representative small. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, I, I want to ask
a couple of quick questions. Um,
madam, or Mr. Chair.
Um, Miss Evans.
And all preface this by saying
I, I, um, respectfully won't be
able to support the legislation.
I want to ask a question and
sort of explain why Mr. Chair,
Miss Evans representative.
The reason, Madam Chair, or Mr.
Chair, Miss Evans.
In a future administration were
this to move forward.
My sense is that the oil
conservation, uh, division and
the commission, they could come
to the conclusion that
Um, limiting.
Or
In large part, reducing perhaps
stopping production based upon
Um, the
Very real threat of climate
change.
is
in the public, is in the
interest of the public.
Oh.
Is that a
Reasonable conclusion to come to
or an unreasonable one. Mr.
Chair Representative, I'm not
sure what your question is. Is
your question um
It sounds to me that you're
concerned about.
Protecting public health and the
environment would impact oil and
gas production that we can do in
our state.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Ms. Evans, I
think in large part, yes. I
think Mr. Chair, Ms. Evans, the
scenario that I imagine in a
future administration, if this
legislation passes and the
powers are delegated and
created um a future
administration and its
appointees could come to the
conclusion that the overwhelming
threat of global climate change
necessitates the uh ending or
fast curtailing of production in
New Mexico.
And Mr. Chair Representative, in
the end, a vast production in
Mexico is going to end. It's
going to phase out, um, that is
what the science requires. It is
also just what's going to
happen, um, economically, um,
right now there're, they're
already in the federal law,
there's a, a NEA process, as
you're aware.
The NEPA process does consider a
greenhouse gas emissions from
oil and gas production that has
not led to um a shutting down of
the industry, in fact, uh,
federal oil and gas production
has expanded massively, um, in
the last few years as well as
our state oil and gas production
expanding massively in the last
few years, so, um, it's
certainly possible under other
legal frameworks that include
protection of public.
public health and the
environment for oil and gas
production to uh not phase out,
but to expand.
Um, so I, I think that if you're
saying that um we can't do oil
and gas production in our state
and protect public health and
the environment. Well, that's a
real concern because we do a lot
of oil and gas production in
this state, and we are doing it
right now in a manner that
doesn't protect this bill would
give the conservation division,
the ability to put in place some
rules if it chose to such as
setbacks, the conservation
division right now doesn't have
the authority.
By rule to put in place health
buffer zones. That's why we were
here last few days ago asking
for a statute to do that because
the division can't do it.
Mr. Chair, Ms. Evans, thank you
for going through. I don't, uh,
I appreciate very much the
answer and the response, Mr.
Chair, Ms. Evans, I think in
representative like the um sort
of the very narrow delineation
versus what I interpret to be a
much broader delineation is
notable, Mr. Chair, Ms. Evans,
and Representative, the
OK.
I want to sort of lay out my
thinking and some of those
questions because
In a global system.
And in a sort of shared base in
a shared oil production basin
system with the state of Texas.
What I foresee, what I fear, and
why I can't vote for the
legislation is that an
understandable conclusion could
be reached by state regulators
in the very near future, that
would
Um
Very, very
Um, severely impact all facets
of life in New Mexico.
Would not
And cannot control the actions
in our neighboring states.
And um
Mr. Chair, not to
Going a bit deeper in that
thinking.
The reduction of burning of
fossil fuels is necessary to
curb the in my interpretation.
The catastrophic impacts in a
world where that um
That equation is sort of daily.
Uh, happening.
Are moved to transition.
to not burning fossil fuels.
Right using them.
Producing them, using them for
decarbonization, particularly in
the materials and other parts of
our economy.
I
In my opinion, Mr. Chair,
Representative and Ms. Evans.
Uh, arguably,
Perhaps likely a faster way to
decarbonize.
Than to restrict reduction in
our state.
Where that production will
simply be um taken up by either
neighboring states or other
countries.
Um
And Mr. Chair
The 7 of Saenana to sort of go a
bit deeper into that in a
Future administration in the
very near future.
The conclusion that we can no
longer produce or must
Deeply curtailed production in
New Mexico.
Would take away not only the
ability for us to invest.
In many different areas from
schools, economic development,
investing in our environment
department and M nerd.
Uh, it would take away our
ability to support citizens in
their choice to go to a
emissions-free vehicles through
tax cuts.
And other, so I think I've
explained, I appreciate very
much the conversation.
Appreciate the difference.
The nuance between these and
other pieces of legislation. Um,
and that's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Small,
Representative Murphy.
Mr. Chair, thank you, um,
Representative Sarah Sara and
Yana and uh.
Miss Evans, I feel like it's
Groundhog.
Um
Yeah, talking about 35 similar
issues.
Um, let me jump, uh, oh, I've
got once again organizational
purposes. I'm gonna go into the
need and the purpose. There's
not as much um.
Uh, in the body.
previous legislation
I'd like to talk about the
science and the studies.
Um, the, the discussions between
OCD uh and the various other
agencies.
The agency analysis and then
perhaps some
Um, potential conflicts, which I
probably will be.
Um, Miss Evans, this wasn't my
first question, but I would like
to start with Mr. Chairman, Ms.
Evans, I would like to start
with it, and you said previously
and if I
Don't quote you correctly,
please correct me.
He said, oil and gas or oil and
gas will phase out.
You believe that's correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
at some point, uh, either it'll
phase out economically, it won't
be economically beneficial, um,
or, or the resource will be
gone. Do you depleted. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Miss Evans, can
you name any sort of energy
transition.
That is completely phased out
the previous
Chair Evans, um, I, I would
concur with that because we
still burn peat wood, coal.
Um, all sorts of things. We also
use water, gravity.
So a complete transition to out
of fossil fuels seems
unrealistic to me, but.
Um, next, um, I will go into my
organized portion and that is
Uh, regarding, and I'm gonna try
to Mr. Chairman, um.
panel.
Um, I'm gonna try to combine
these and my question was, how
is it, it appears that that
there's a general feeling
amongst the panel that
OCD is
Failing to protect the health.
And
Representative Sarahana, you
made a statement regarding.
Something that centered
Secretary Kenny said.
Uh, could you repeat that? and
so I understand it.
Of the handout.
He said 70% of the industry is
polluting like the.
Air quality control, um, it
shows 30% per owls and whales.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
as we rode up in the elevator,
you reminded me that you were a
math teacher, so you're gonna
probably have to help me here a
little bit, Mr. Chair. Um,
I cannot find that statement,
but I, I do have one that I
would like to read.
German short from the Mexico
Environment Department.
And it says, uh, with air
quality being such a concern in
New Mexico.
The Environment department has
worked rigorously in the past
year to crack down on polluters.
In July of 2024, Air Quality
Bureau revealed a major
enforcement push with EPA.
Here's what it showed.
Instead of picking random
facilities, so they actually
targeted facilities as
randomized.
Enemy N M E D and EPA first
identify potential violators.
The satellite data, regulatory
reports, and other sources,
these were clearly targeted, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
targeted based upon some
indication that they'd be out.
Out of the 124, is that I think
that's the same number has been
quoted.
Inspected in April of 24, 60%
were found to be.
Out of compliance thank you very
much.
Um
So this, so it was not random.
They picked suspected sites.
And even though Mr. Chairman,
uh, representative.
Only 60% of those suspected
sites that they thought were.
problem.
We're out of compliance.
So help me, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, help me with my
math.
We've got 124 sites.
We've got 60% of them out of
compliance, being 74.4.
We've got roughly 74,00073
74,000.
So applying that math,
We would be out of compliance 1
in 1000 so if we took 1000
cases.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative 999 of those.
Not 70% out of people.
Can you, can you steer me where
I'm wrong? Yes, I can. That's
the diff, Mr. Chairman, that's
a, a different, that was
previously to the previous to
what he told us on November
25th. If you look on the back
page.
There's a graph. There's a
table.
And it says it the very first
thing is.
Compliance
And the very first line says.
Sorry,
I'm not
Mr. Chairman, I've not seen this
before, but I don't, I, I don't
wanna bog the committee down and
trying to go through it, it's
just the back page. Well, no,
actually this was a statement
from, from the Mexico
Environment departments what I
read from.
Yeah, this is their public
statement.
And so I'll move on, um, but I
would like you to see it because
you have, I will I'll take a
look at it I think people are,
but
given the Mexico MED study.
Excuse me, statement.
It doesn't.
Um, let's see here.
Now I want to go into the
information science and one of
the things being Mr. Chairman,
um.
Panel sort of being new here one
of the things that I've looked
found out is
Um, my email, I get a lot of
emails.
For and against various bills,
and I received quite a few
against.
Quite a few 4 actually, uh, HP
34.
Um, I got quite a few against,
um, uh, particularly from, uh,
the oil producing areas.
And one of the things that one
of these emails says, I'll quote
it and you tell me whether you
think this is correct or not.
There are over 70,000 active oil
and gas wells in New Mexico.
Each of these wells received a
permanent with no environmental
or Murphy
like we're reading again and I
indulged that last time I'd
prefer you not read from
materials. Can I, can the same,
uh, Mr. Chairman, the same, um.
Well, I believe it's been raised
in this committee. I was just
trying to clarify, if you could
maybe summarize it, sir. OK.
All right, so, so roughly 70,000
have had no environmental or um
any other sorts of views.
But I, I have a time, hard time
scoring that with
Find it here.
Um
Mr. Chairman, may I read
specifically a rule that's that
applies.
If it's brief, it is.
Uh, the division, this is uh
Rule 1915.5.8 enforcement
statutes and rules and it says
the division is charged with the
duty.
An obli
The state rules and statutes
relating to the conservation of
oil and gas, including the
prevention of waste and the
protection of core rights, and I
stress, and the protection of
public health and the
environment.
So the division is already
charged with that the
administrative rules, is that
not correct?
Uh
Mr. Chair, Representative, it is
true that there are places in
the rules where it says that um
these rules part of the rules is
to protect public health and the
environment. I can only assume
that that language in the rules
comes from the places in the oil
and gas Act that I've mentioned
where the oil conservation
division with the passage of the
produce Water Act back was given
the authority when it comes to
regulating uh non
domestic waste and and toxic
liquid waste to consider public
health.
The reason that um that the, the
fact is that the.
Permits to drill in this state
for the 70,000 plus active.
Uh, production sites in our
state.
Those permits to drill were
granted without consideration of
public health and the
environment, and the reason that
is true is because the oil
conservation division doesn't
have the authority.
To consider the oil and gas Act
when it's granting permits to
drill. That's one of the things
that this bill would change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
would challenge that from
experience based um but let's
try.
He said that these permits were
issued.
Um, without any, any of the
consideration of public health.
And let me understand which
permits you're requiring or
you're talking to.
When OCD issues a drilling
permit.
Does it do so on state fee and
federal land?
I, I know that it, it grants
permits to drill, um, for all.
Wells in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, I'm not positive about the
whales that are on tribal lands,
but certainly for uh whales that
are on federal land, state land,
private land, allotment land,
yes, the oil conservation
division.
Evans, um, would it surprise you
to learn that actually the fed
the permits granted on federal
lands by the bureau.
Mr. Chair, Representative, it
doesn't surprise me at all, but
it is also the fact that the
state also issues a permit to
drill for those, uh, wells that
are on federal land. So yes,
when it's on federal land, the
feds issue a permit, so does the
state.
Mr. Chairman and Miss Evans, um,
that's not been my experience.
Our experience has been that we
fill out a federal permit, we
send it for BLM approval.
And then VLM sends it to the OCD
for their files. Now, there is,
Mr. Chairman, um, my
understanding some coordination.
Thank you Mr. Chair
Representative, it's sent to OCD
for its approval as well.
So that Mr. Chairman, the
distinction is it we don't fill
out an OCD form the OCD approves
the BLM. That'd be correct, Mr.
Chair Representative, there's
been changes in the forms
required for wells that are
drilled on federal land in New
Mexico, but the statement that I
made is that the state of New
Mexico approves.
Every permit to drill in this
state, whether it's on federal
and state land, private land,
and that is a true statement.
Mr. Chairman, um.
OK, I think there's a, there's
a, there is a bit of a
difference there, but whatever,
uh Mr. Chairman, um.
Miss Evans, what are the
principal differences?
And a permit issued by the OCD.
And say a permit that is
approved by the OCD.
Issued and approved by the
bureau.
There
Mr. Chairman, Ms. Evans, or, or
representative, are there
substantial differences of
what's required under those
permits.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
would assume given your past,
um, but I, I do know that for
permits approved by the federal
government, there is some kind
of view.
And that environmental review
does not exist in New Mexico and
that New Mexico has the power,
if it's so choose to adopt a law
like this and to put in place
rules that would require an
environmental review. It could
be more stringent than or less
stringent than the federal
Environmental Review.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms.
Evans, so what you're saying is,
is that.
Given the nature of the changes
to the bill.
See if I understand this then
rules could be issued for
setbacks, buffer zones, water
quality testing.
Uh, any number of
That correct? Mr.
Representative, uh, those sound
like reasonable things that
would fall within you mentioned
as well as some other things
like notice, maybe, uh, be
impacted or their communities
are going to be impacted by a
fracking site could be given
notice, um, before that fracking
site. So would you Mr. Chairman,
Ms. Evans, would you dispute
that there um really.
very little differences in terms
of the environmental, um, and
other types of reviews between
these various permits whether
it's it's federal or state.
I misunderstanding Mr. Chair
Representative, yes, you are
misunderstanding me because
right now there is no
environmental review done.
Before a permit to frack is
granted in by or approved um by
our New Mexico uh regulatory
authorities, none.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Miss
Evans, um, would it surprise you
to know that actually there are
quite a few and um I will name
some quickly, Mr. Chairman,
regarding water safety, there's
casing and cement designs
thrashing groundwater setbacks
from uh water wells and
waterways.
Um, there's a number of public
safety issues as well. I know
that we, Mr. Chairman, uh Ms.
Evans, are you familiar with
Spill prevention and control
plans.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
I'm familiar that spills are
actually prohibited in the state
of New Mexico and yet about 4
spills happen every day in our
state and that the those who
cause those spills are almost
never.
canalized
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, spill
prevention and control plan
actually is something that's a
planning tool that we use in the
industry so that in case the
spill does happen we'll be able
to respond to it quickly,
telephone numbers, procedures
and that sort of thing.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Evans, are
you familiar with the casing and
cement designs that we have to
have addressed the gas, oil, and
water takeaway issues that are
addressed the blowout safety
equipment.
And procedures that are
addressed the gas monitoring
equipment that's addressed and,
and while you mentioned
previously, Mr. Chairman and Ms.
Evans that there is no
Um, there is no procedure for
the disposal of drilling and
other waste and actually there
are, there's extensive
procedures. As a matter of fact,
these reports all the way go all
the way down to how many trash
trailers we need and how many
porta pots we need.
And Mr. Chair Representative, I
did not say that there was no
procedures for the disposition
of waste. I do know that those
thousands of spills that happen
every year in our state, the
vast majority of them are caused
because of failures of equipment
and so they could have been
avoided if those plans that you
just mentioned were actually
abided by, and if the state
actually regulated and
investigated.
and ensured that those plans
that you just mentioned were
abided by.
And Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Evans,
uh, actually I think the
majority of the spills are due
to accidents.
Mr.
Evans, please do not interrupt
the representative. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, Ms. Evans, um,
the, um, maintenance of these
facilities is something that
every industry takes uh or
everybody in my industry takes
very seriously because the loss
of product is the loss of re.
So, um, with that, I will say
from my experience being um Mr.
Eman, Miss Evans, uh, almost 50
years in the field, um, I see
things get broken, people get
killed, mainly because of
accident, not because.
Of uh poor oversight by.
So I would dispute that.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
that's not my understanding of
the data that OCD has collected
um on available on its website.
Equipment failure.
Uh, and those sorts of problems
are the the cause of the
majority of the spills.
Evans, uh, you've made a number
of, and they're also um made a
number of statements regarding
Peer reviewed studies.
And uh I'd like to ask you about
that a little bit. Can you
define to me, uh,
Peer review process talking
about.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
haven't used the term peer
reviewed study uh today.
Well,
on Tuesday on House Bill 35. So,
um, Mr. Chair, Miss Evans, are,
are you then maintaining that
there are no peer reviewed
studies to support your position
today.
Chair,
uh.
There are dozens of peer
reviewed studies, uh, that show
that proximity to oil and gas
pollution leads to adverse
health.
Um, outcomes, especially for
children and vulnerable
populations like elderly people.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Miss Evans,
um,
I, uh
I actually did a little
investigation into the peer
review and and without um
irritating the chairman by
completely reading this and
trying to summarize it.
Um, it sounds like there is sort
of two definitions out there.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, um, Miss
Evans, a definition where
perhaps your peers who think
like you do and
And want the same conclusion
review a study and then there's
the scientific peer review
process.
That is instituted by say the
National Institute of Health.
Which of the of these standards.
studies fall under Mr. Chair
Representative, thank you for
that question. I, certainly it
is a scientifically peer
reviewed study, um, and the term
I'm using is the term that
scientists use, um, when they
refer to a peer reviewed study.
So when scientists, Mr.
Chairman, and Miss Evans, when
scientists use it, they actually
said a right of criteria, and
one of them is that it be
published in a recognized
technical scientific journal,
um, so my question is, have the
papers, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Evans,
the papers that you're referring
to.
Been published in technical
journals.
And have they been through the
scientific peer review process.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes.
I'll, I'll Mr. Chair, um, Miss
Evans, uh, I'd like to renew my
request for a copy of that
material. I believe it was.
You'd know there's been turned
out perhaps.
uh circulated during a previous
hearing or something else. So if
you could send that to
to do that. I could also hand
you a hard copy, right.
Well, I think the chairman
probably wants me to move along
to my last issue.
Which is just a few questions,
agency concerns.
DOJ analysis.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Ms. Evans says
it has the potential for
confusion, conflict, and
litigation.
Did you briefly answer that?
Adress that issue.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, as
we have said, these are used
throughout our statutory scheme.
Um, and to add them to the oil
and gas Act, which was when the
oil and gas industry was in a
very different place, as was our
state.
Um, we are simply adding a duty
to protect public health and the
environment. It would give the
agency the ability to pass rules
and regulations to interpret
what that means as it goes
forward implementing the act.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Ms. Evans,
um, I'll now move on with the
FIR.
And I note
Um, that it
It, uh, the FIR also notes that
it eliminates a degree of
flexibility.
Which
Based upon my reading of the
language, they're somewhat
uncomfortable with do you
believe that that.
Removes that flexibility
Chair Representative, if
protecting public authorizing
fracking in our state would uh
prevent some so-called
flexibility of the industry that
if it means protecting public
health and the environment, so
yes, there might be less
flexibility site has to be 1
mile away from where children
play.
Um, that would protect public
health and the environment and
might take away some flex.
Um, the Enron, um,
Analysis talks about the fact
that they're in some cases, Mr.
Chairman, Ms. Evans.
Already performing many of these
functions, but, and they're
they're also concerned about
loose definitions, and I think
something that has not been at
all mentioned here today, Mr.
Chairman, Ms. Evans,
Representative, how do we, what
are the metrics? How do we
measure success?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think what's very significant is
that M nerd isn't here today to
speak to the authority that it
currently does not have, which
is to protect public health and
the environment when
implementing the act.
And instead, I noticed that what
they say in their uh analysis is
that, you know, we already do
this through rules sort of what
we can and that's true, there
are places in the rule where
they discuss protecting public
health and the environment, as I
said previously, the statutory
authority for that comes in a
very limited way when it comes
to produce water and waste.
It doesn't come from this broad
duty, which we are trying to add
to this act to ensure that
throughout implementation of the
Act, public health and the
environment is considered.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, Ms.
Evans, a couple last questions,
quick last questions here.
There's some mention that
Colorado, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
panel instituted very similar
type of
Rural and I have been told that
it led to a large increase in
orphan wells.
drilling at the drill count has
drilling rig count has gone down
dramatically in Colorado.
That it has been especially hard
on smaller producers.
And companies in order to comply
because of the tremendous
regulatory burden.
Can, um, Miss Evans or
representative can you speak to
that and tell us why that might
not, would not happen.
How does this.
Why should we expect first of
all,
I don't agree with you that
that's the outcome in Colorado,
and I'm not even sure that
you're sure that that's the
outcome in Colorado because you
said that's what you've heard,
but I will say that the oil and
gas industry has created massive
amounts of pollution in Colorado
and massive amounts of air
quality problems and massive
amounts of spills in no idea why
anyone would think that passing
laws to
would lead to more abandoned
wells in a state when abandoned
wells create.
Environmental and public health
risks. They don't eliminate
them.
Well, um,
I have heard that, but I was
presented a fact sheet somewhere
and um given Mr. Chairman Miss
Evans that you're gonna share
your studies with me. I'll share
that fact sheet.
Um
Lastly, one last question, and
that is, um, there's been a lot
of discussion here about the
quality of the air in the
Southeast.
Versus other parts of the state,
national state averages that
sort of thing, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Miss Evans, isn't it true?
That Bern Leo County and Donna
County from the American Lung
Association or has essentially
as far as I know no oil and gas
production has received an F.
While Lee County has received a
B.
Um, I've also noted that um
asthma, um, I think, which is a
major topic.
Um, I've also noted that it is.
And some of the materials
suggested that um El Paso in
Texas contribute.
Southeastern Mexico
So, could you comment on that?
Mr. Chair Representative, first
of all, it's not true that Lee
County received a B.
Um, these counties have received
Ds and Fs, and the reason for
those grades of failing gas
pollution.
And there and these are places
in the uh world where air
quality is getting worse, um,
most parts of the, the, this
country, I believe that that
southeast corner of the state is
the only place in the country
where air quality is actually
worsening, whereas air quality
is improving, um, in other
places where they've been
getting failing grades. I'd also
the air quality is uh the, the
air reading that is out of.
compliance with federal, the NAC
standards, the National Ambient
air quality standards and that
the air quality there has been
getting worse, not better.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Evans. Um,
sure. Chairman, um, in, in, in
Bernardo County we have 671 or
actually more than that, 1000
people, um, you know what the
population of of Eddie or Lee
County is.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
I, I don't, but I, I do know
that um Albuquerque has.
So we, we generally don't have
questions coming from the the
witnesses to the legislature,
we also have two major highways
that go through our freeways
that go through our state, our
city.
So that adds a lot.
And Mr. Chairman representative
in that regard, have you
considered um
Putting a 1 mile buffer on each
side of those major highways as
they come through Albuquerque to
protect the schools, daycare
centers, and parks are located
now we're off.
I'm just gonna good for the
goose, good for the gander. I've
completed, mister, uh, Mr.
Chairman, thank you,
representative. Thank you, Ms.
Evans.
any further debate or questions
from the committee, um, so I'll
just add.
No.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman.
I, I personally think it's
appropriate to consider public
health, and my concern is when
we silo those considerations,
um, they are at least
diminished, if not eliminated.
Uh, what's the pleasure
pass on House Bill
um
34.
OK, would someone like to make a
substitute motion to table.
No, Mr. Chair, we want to have a
vote on this.
OK.
Um, uh, we have a motion to
pass.
Uh, as amended.
No, not amended.
Just to pass. Go ahead. Let's
take the vote.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Garrola, yes.
Representative Henry? No.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Representative small.
Viana.
McQueen. Yes.
So, that motion fails, 6 to 5.
Um, now would someone like to
make a motion to the table.
Yes, Mr. Chair, I make motion to
table.
Yeah
We take the vote on the tabling
motion, so, uh, vote of yes is
to table the bill.
Representative Abada.
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table.
Representative Garcia? No.
Representative Grola, no.
Representative Henry.
Yes, the table
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Yes the table.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes, to table.
Represent a small
Very true.
Oh, sorry, sorry.
Representative Abeda
Viana.
McQueen.
No to table.
So that that motion carries 65
the bill's table.
Thank you all very much. We have
one more bill today, which I
believe is also representative
Saraanos.
OK, if we do have one more bill,
so if you could, uh, if you're
leaving the room, if you could
exit quietly, I'd appreciate it.
Uh, our last bill today is House
Bill 159. Energy Project citing
and military bases.
Uh, Representative Sean,
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um,
I'm here to present like you
said when House Bill 159 Energy
Project siding and military
bases. My expert witness, and we
are honored to um.
Introduces retired general,
Hanson Scott.
I today I'm presenting this
legislation on behalf of the New
Mexico military-based planning
commission and state community
groups. It is the it is to
request notification regarding
renewable energy projects and
their potential.
impacts to military missions.
A key issue
We aim to tackle is the
potential impact of renewable
energy projects on testing and
training activity at Cannon Air
Force Base, Holeman Air Force
Base, Portland Air Force Base in
White Sands Missile Range.
Purpose of the proposal proposed
bill is to require owners and
developers of projects involved
involving wind energy conversion
devices or solar array systems
to notify the chair of the
military-based planning
commission, which is our
lieutenant governor.
Of an application to the
Department of Defense military
aviation and installation
assurance clearinghouse, and
also to provide a copy of the
clearing house's approval or
findings of adverse action.
Impact.
This legislation serves solely
as a notification system.
And I have with me General
Hanson Scott, who will discuss
further the role of the
commission and the mission of
the OSD clearing house.
And why this is important for
our community to support.
Sounds good.
Good morning. Uh.
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm the former director of the
office of Military Base Planning
Support.
On the chair of the Curtland
Community Sustainability
Committee.
Thanks to uh Representative
Serana.
For sponsoring this legislation
along with several other pieces.
Of legislation supporting our
military bases and our military
communities.
I represent the current
Partnership Committee and the
Curling Committee Sustainability
Committee.
Both representing Serana,
representing Dixon, uh, attend
our meetings as well as the
director of the state Energy
Office.
A puck stare from the New Mexico
renewable energy.
Transmission authority.
I mean the office of Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department and the executive
director of the New Mexico
Renewable Energy Transmission
Authority than most.
As well as assistant
commissioner for renewable
energy from the state land
Office. We have, uh,
From the military base planning
commission, Paul Cassidy.
With a vice chair of our
commission.
One of our key issues will last.
16 years or so at the community
level at the military base
planning commission level.
Has been addressing the impact.
A renewable energy projects on
military missions as
representative Serana said.
Our efforts in this regard date
to 2008 when the first
commander.
Of the 27th Special Operations
wing.
At Cannon Air Force Base, ask,
ask for help.
And working on the impact of
winter. The military-based
planning commission, the Office
of Military Base planning
support and community support
organizations.
It made just a key issue since
then.
Doing that addressing
encroachment.
An important factor in
supporting our military
installations.
As she mentioned the
legislation, uh, notes the
Department of Defense, military
aviation.
An installation of shirts.
Signing clearing house, renown
as the Clearing House.
their responsibilities are to
protect DOD's missions.
Regarding the military impacts
regarding renewable energy
projects.
The clearing house is frequently
the first stop.
In the process, but we often
find out about it.
Early locally.
The primary issue we are
discussing today is the
potential impact.
A renewable energy projects and
military missions.
Our focus is to ensure
The owners and developers.
A renewable energy projects.
are working with our bases.
To minimize interference with
emissions.
Thus, the direction.
The owners and developers.
Notify the chair of the
commission.
Which is a lieutenant governor.
Of an application to the
clearing house.
And to provide a copy of the
clearing house's approval.
Or finding adverse impact.
This proposed legislation.
Further strengthen the role of
the commission with regard.
To protected military missions
in Mexico.
I request the committee approve
House Bill 159.
Now san um is there anyone, uh,
show of hands, anyone here in
support of this bill?
Anyone in opposition?
Um, uh, would you like to speak
in support. So we're gonna get
you a mic. Hold on.
And if you could keep your
comments brief.
I will, Mr. Chair thank you Paul
Cassidy from the military bases
planning commission and a member
of KPC strongly support this and
thank you for what you've done
legislature historically for our
bases, and this will be very
additive to the mission.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, Raymond
Mondragon, uh, eastern New
Mexico, uh, the canyon Air Force
Base area. I also serve on the
New Mexico Military Base
Planning Commission, and we are
in support of this bill.
Thank you very much, uh, seeing
no one else in the room, and is
there anyone online in support.
Uh, Carol.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, my name is Bob
Carroll, and I am the vice chair
of the Veterans and Military
Families Caucus. We support HP
159 and recommend a due pass
determination from this
committee. Thank you.
Is there anyone else in line who
would like to speak on this in
support.
Or in opposition.
OK, so Xing then
or sorry, would you like to add
anything briefly before we go to
the committee?
I, I passed out you're, you're
passed out a a paper that shows
the DOE look at um where we need
transmission line very close to
our bases, so that's why we need
this, so we know what's
happening within our state make
sure our bases stay safe and.
OK, thank you very much,
Representative Montoya.
I think it was just a couple
brief questions.
Um
Representative and maybe expert
might be, be better to answer
this. Um, so I'm, I'm actually
Just what exactly?
Is the concern with
The either solar or or wind
turbines being near.
What's the actual concern?
Mr. Chair, representing Montoya
the
Yeah, uh, concerned with wind
turbines.
has to do with the height.
498 ft.
Uh, our missions and cannon fly.
200 ft low level.
They also uh
Tomanlies 200 ft 100 ft low
level.
And so we just want to have the
developers.
Work with the planners at the
bases to minimize the impact if
we can.
So thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
In the, in the bill itself
though, is there a requirement
to work. I'm not seeing that
there's a requirement. It just
seems like there's just a
notification.
The
Mr. Chair, representing Montoy
the.
Requirement is for the
developers.
notify the commission.
So the commission can ensure.
The developers and the bases
work together.
OK.
So, uh, you would, you would
assume at that point.
Probably a some sort of
memorandum of understanding or
something would have to be.
Agree to. I'm, I'm just, I, I'm,
I, the, the reason I'm asking
these questions is,
To the standpoint of the the
private property rights of the
owners, they're
And in the development.
I'm just, I'm not seeing any
teeth to this, um, more of just
a, and I'm not suggesting there
should be. I'm just, I'm trying
to follow the logic of just
Notifying and then what can be
done after that.
Mr. Chair Montoya hopefully the
developer.
If he or she is looking at a
Wind turbine plan.
And it's right
Overlapping at the level roots.
Maybe the developer can move it
a half mile or 1 mile or
something like that.
So thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um,
Is there any concern with
With solar
Cause I, I'm, I'm not sure
because this kind of seems to
encompass everything.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montreal I just focused on wind
turbines.
Solar can be an impact, but in
most cases, the developers of
solar arrays contact the bases.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. I was
just trying to figure out the.
The reason this specific course
of action. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And you represent a small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, General. Um,
representative,
uh, general.
My understanding is that there's
been work with uh the renewable
energy, um,
Industry and looking at some
potential technical amendments
to sort of further clarify that
it, the focus on notification
and collaboration, Mr. Chair,
but also avoid um sort of, uh,
More regulation, red tape, and,
and not building. Is that your
understanding?
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
not aware of any technical
amendments. We just want the
The developers
Uh, to agree to talk to the base
and the bases. General, thank
you and Representative, um, I
hope that we can clarify as we
go through the process, because
Mr. Chair, representative in
general, I think some of the
same concerns that I, that might
be held in other industries
where sort of notification is
Is substituted.
Or in for, for extended delays.
And for opposition to sighting
of renewable energy projects,
which I'm not, I don't, I, I
acknowledge is not the purpose
of this. I think the same
worries that might exist.
In other industries, I would
sort of foresee those same
concerns here and acknowledge
that.
Both missions and the uh suit
the unique nature of our state
make us an incredible place in a
worldwide place of importance
for the DOD missions.
In addition, we have that same.
Uh, distinction, Mr. Chair,
General and Representative for
our renewable energy, and I
don't want us to
Slow down our uh building of
renewable energy.
You think that's compatible.
Mr. Chair, and representative in
general with sort of what you're
working on here.
This reing small, I think it's
very compatible.
Now we have.
Renewable energy developers in
some cases, talking to the
installations, but it's a little
late.
process.
We want to make sure that uh we
get ahead of the curve, so to
speak. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative General, that's
great. That's, uh, and Mr. Chair
Representative general, um, sort
of a separate question, although
it's something very connected to
what we hear about in this
committee. Is there any position
on PFOS?
That the commission is taken up,
given the um DOD sites are the
source of a great deal of P5.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Representing the small of the
commission as far as I know.
I might defer if I could.
It's not the subject of this
bill. I appreciate sort of the
initial answer if there's
additional follow-up, I'd be
welcome, but it acknowledge it's
not the subject.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Any
further questions from the
committee.
Uh, representative Seria, I had
one, brief question.
Um, just to be clear, the
military-based planning
commission is a
A state entity.
Or is that a federal
created by state law.
OK, great. That was my only
question.
Um, what is the pleasure of the
committee.
The motion for to pass and the
second, um.
Can give this a shot. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
OK. Singan, you have a unanimous
to pass.
Uh thank you very much. That
concludes our hearing for the
day. Uh, I'll see you Saturday
at 8 a.m.
And um
I heard someone say 7
represent small will be very
excited that we have 2
hospitals. So there you go.
It'll be great, uh, we are
adjourned. My middle name is
