It.
Representative.
Representative is.
It
was the.
Thank
you Senator.
This.
It's.
We.
Also.
It
is.
But.
Three.
Is
that right.
From
that.
Thank you Sir.
What part
with legislation.
It was.
It really.
It access to work right okay so
we.
Service to district.
Your.
What what does it all previous
documents these.
It it.
Be able to talk back to the.
If you apprised from.
One is if.
That somebody that is so that.
The
public is
Was.
Yes.
The public.
What.
Because the just.
Halfback's spot posted you know.
Thank you for the process.
We
would be sitting here.
What
do you think staff to future.
I think that this is the way
forward.
We went from the shop state what
your.
To.
This.
It.
Thank you.
Which I think there's the
public.
Government public.
Access to the.
You.
Public.
Just
be on the line this legislation
that's.
Thank you.
that.
This.
The committee Representative.
Okay yes.
Is it supposed to this.
Committee
with that.
When I actually think trump
supporter of this bill.
Very discreet.
Located throughout the state to
be access.
That
we did.
Jobs.
So.
It's.
This.
Thank you
thank you this legislation.
What.
I just want.
Support of this.
It takes.
But what made it.
Thanks for.
Senator what.
I was at the.
Madam chair representative
please.
The original price but.
Basically.
Full access.
It's a real complicate.
Complicate.
Just posted you
might have.
So I think it's important that
copy.
What is the
back.
Whatever.
After all this
will bridge.
What.
We have.
What is the what do you think
your first twenty.
At what point.
All that we do with the with.
We just what they do please.
This thing happened the protest
this
is something that.
Please.
As for the.
Representative this year.
What is this.
Thanks to do this and all of
the.
If we look at.
The.
That's a possibility but.
Well
this is aspen possible.
That.
In
are the.
Wait.
If you.
It is very.
You know with the intensive
separately so we.
Basically the state for
successfully and those folks
that are well trained their
senior staff at this point in
time so I think we're lucky that
we have that that will trade
group for the most complex set
of records in our state and the
because there's so many
transactions of the roll Senator
over the years it's going to
take up it's kind of like CSI
really in in records management
they have to really analyze of
your Representative some of the
the people together there's a
relation back process is very
intricate so it it does take a
really good expertise that are
located inside of the office of
I think that thank you for that
Mr state engineer you madam
chair I was wondering where you
where you stood on is it is time
for order against an online
of course is our state engineer
on.
What was very pleased with the
compromise of the only issue
that we have is it's a statewide
application we're not sure
expenses thirty three district
office of the certainties no
it's necessary in a row addition
basically.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator.
Representative Ezzell madam
chair thank you very much thank
you for bringing this bill
forward Senator Pirtle.
how many.
Districts are in the state of
New Mexico.
Madam eight hundred two seven
manager.
Sen said and madam chair.
Have any of these files ever
been removed from the district
to office.
And identities questions unless
I know the answer.
And madam chair are you asking
me or the state engineer madam
chair Mexican Senator to be.
It's not quite sure the state
engineers and madam chair I
believe they have already been
on started the the process.
And madam chair that's exactly
right and that back in.
To administration to go there
was there then.
Of all these files some of the
files were removed whatever they
did come back pertinent
information was missing from the
spot several pages missing from
the spot the little sticky notes
that the senator was talking
about they were these are
historical documents and they
are persons.
Property rights madam chair.
Whether we heard about the state
engineers planning removing
these records there was a
meeting and I do appreciate
state engineer of being there B.
as soon I think you saw the
interest that was.
Exhibited during that meeting
and thank goodness he said that
they would look at the issue
madam chair and senator part of
your one of those in attendance
as well of I do appreciate the
state engineer taking into
consideration what those
documents did contain and what
we needed down there in case we
did need to do water transfer
case we needed to sell those
water rights Madam chair Senator
Pirtle have any the records out
of the district to office as
yeah district to office been
removed lightly and not been
returned.
And madam chair for the stage
speak to that thank you madam
chair of the state engineer I
would like to leverage on that I
would appreciate it.
After the New Mexico.
We did take a the the block
records of the board we actually
got this arrangement of the two
we started of of of some
transport of the records and the
and those have been this call.
Madam chair I guess my question
is Mr state of.
State engineer have those
originals been sent back to all
schools to the district to
office or not.
Madam chair representative so
all I'm not absolutely certain
but there is a community that
they would they would be
available to be copied with all
the records.
Madam chair of the concern there
was there was several people
that got hold of me from the
upper Honda of some of the water
conservation district about
those particular Water Rights.
Papers and I had no way to
answer some people did go down
to check at the district office
there and they were not there at
that time.
So I was concerned there madam
chair.
Senator Pirtle is Lee County in
the district to office.
And madam chair Representative I
don't believe so conversation I
don't look at the I am C. map
that they that much attention to
be quite honest I know I'm a
district to and I go to the
office local if possible and we
have to work.
And madam chair maybe the state
engineer could answer this next
question for me because I'm not
real sure.
What is the make up of this at
the distance of the.
Water districts that do tile
district to.
I know it's PBS CDC at the.
And senator Senator I don't
know.
I wish Aaron because he could
line up just like that member
services of of yes of the the
county is in district two
the hunger is a district to
water uses of that area
and and the other goes all the
way up to the point some area.
So it would be four hundred
eighty two yes.
Okay thank you for that
responsive Madam chair in the
discussions that we had with the
state engineer and then ongoing
regarding PPA CD and the
district to office at.
Thank goodness
I appreciate you have a common
sits in this matter Mr state
engineer I really do there is a
problem and it worries me
whenever we are digitizing.
Whenever I was
Needed to get my driver's
license renewed.
I had to get a very important
documents from the courthouse in
Travis county they had gone
through there many years ago did
just has everything that one
important document I was needing
was not there they could not
find it anywhere said don't tell
state place but I might be
driving around illegally.
Of.
But I do appreciate you
discussing this matter with
people that are affected the
most with these records we are
making a move now to have those.
Documents copied.
Did digitized and the rituals
brought back is that correct Mr
madam chair and senator pirtle
we are.
In talks right now to have
those.
Original document stored at the
PVA CD office with the water
suppression system and climate
control in there so they are
safe safeguarded and I did like
I said I I can't tell you how
much everybody in our area.
Was to thank you Mr state
engineer that's all madam chair.
Thank you thank you
Representative the the
Representative Matthew subject.
Thank you madam chair yes if you
have a question I was just
looking at the analysis from the
general's office.
Which talked about the watershed
along county lines.
Maybe instances where the county
clerk's office is not located
within the same watershed so
basically the statute maybe
conflict with current
regulations create confusion as
to where the original copy is to
be at.
I was curious.
Senator and.
The state engineer is are the
the step when they're being
copied for the region's calf.
Is already early part of the
materials there cap in the water
district offices.
And our coffee stand also
available in county clerk
offices.
This is so Madam chair
representative the the copies
that we're we're talking about
relates specifically to the
Water Rights of documents
themselves which are to be held
at the state engineers district
office so I'm not really sure
where the county league which
came from but it does cross
county jurisdictions but this is
really specifically to the water
rights that are already being
held at the district office we
just want when they're done
copying them to bring bring back
all okay.
Madam chair Senator thank you.
So the roof this really isn't
the county clerk doesn't play a
role in these kinds of documents
that I see this stage here no.
And madam chair representative I
appreciate that I don't know
where that came from a wind
ended up in there but it doesn't
timely now all to to what we're
discussing okay and and then my
madam chair Senator my other
question is
I'm surprised if this the cost
of this.
the amount of labor it takes I
assume that these are voluminous
files.
And the that's why it's so
expensive.
And the Madam chair
representative yeah we're kind
of going from our ability to.
Electric cars at this point and
so it's gonna take a little bit
to do that but you know of it's
it's time that we do it and it's
unfortunate that it's taken this
long but that that's basically
what's happened to have
documents that they are the
additional documents right back
whenever used when you want to
copy someone came in hand wrote
the copy and going to now if
they're gonna be on the internet
so we're we are going from our
ability to to a Tesla at this
point okay have a chair Senators
so so actually the excess oil
from the internet get.
Through the state engineers
district office.
The director of.
The news is of it's called our
water system and so.
To.
Order and large files to get all
history of particular file and
are so helpful to
anybody that one research all
rights and so we're we're we've
done several across the state
already I.
Basins complete is and then of
really helpful to folks to be
able to have access to them
electronically.
chair Mister staging you Senator
I've I've never surcharged lots
of property records and so forth
that never reserves water
records but it certainly makes
me feel.
Good fifties are now face and
and read reserve for.
History if you will and easily
accessible to the public I think
that's a great service I do this
thank you that's all the
questions I.
Is there yes ma'am.
Thank you madam chair maybe half
a second.
We have
sent a second.
By Representative second by
Representative Armstrong.
To take real.
Representative Armstrong yes.
It's yes.
Representative Ezzell yes
Representative Lara yes
yes Representative Zamora
here's.
Representative Nelson yes
Representative a.
Yes Senator.
Share it I can do Senator Bob
this is built if you would like
or I can go to Judiciary he can
come to us whatever the
pleasures of the committee on or
if you want to do something else
in the audience I can certainly
this.
the.
What.
The
state for.
Well.
whether we go three fourteen yes
that is Senator so have you
know.
From project it's.
What approach three ninety one
as amended.
What you're talking about I can
do either one madam chair level
folders.
All I see.
We don't need Senator with.
Senator will just be a fourteen.
Yes we can do that when we do
that right now and market is
here and we can just set it so
when you do that hi I actually
don't.
Much debate on this past and.
So I'm going to the chairs just
can entertain that to pass on
this because this past do we
have a second is three ninety
one is amended no no through
this this goes on three fourteen
is someone we are past in this
community water project we
Senate on the situation in has a
Senate bill so that we're doing
all we talked about it is water
projects so we have a due pass
do I have the second as a second
by out as it's is no ask
unanimous in last time you have
a bill.
I do think we should make the
news Russell an honorary members
committee.
Always here and see and stated.
Not both number.
And I just I just don't want
people waiting around they don't
and and and if we're not going
to hear three thirty seven don't
have the minority and Alice's
today that was not delivered and
you just put it out last night
and is hoping to move as quickly
as I can to help everybody get
their bill through so that's
really what I'm striving but if
you want to have to wait until
we have the minority and now
this is we can we can put it off
if you're comfortable setting
having the hearing now I'm
putting the boat up to later I
will I will I will.
One no that's a three thirty
seven and madam chair of two
bills that I have folders for
for me of the reporting that we
just passed and I also have
Senate bill three ninety one
exactly and I'm talking about
right now I'm talking about the
thirty seven the water security
planning okay forward into the
Senate minority an ounce.
Well I don't know why we handle
the other bills I don't.
I would.
We will probably be the meeting
is that correct.
Hi I would like to have the
house now sits on.
Else.
One hundred thirty seven of one
seventy six.
We have five people here the
state engineers office so I
don't want to keep them here if
we're talking here three thirty
seven I don't think it's fair to
them and I told him we'd be
first on the agenda because this
was coming over and it's
remember when we have the of.
The weather task force
recommendations this is kind of
the number one recommendation we
passed an amendment to patients
so.
And
so just so everybody six if
we're not here the thirty seven
I'm gonna let the state engineer
and his staff they're very busy.
On the other PSS stuff I don't
want to keep you here.
Okay and we'll get that analysis
down.
RT and see how quickly we.
And.
Okay all right Senator Pirtle
after all that I just don't want
people waiting as they don't
have to.
Madam chair in.
Appreciated by Saturday right we
forget that Saturday because.
No
Sir okay have you put.
It's the three ninety one on the
table three ninety one eight the
water trust board members and.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee officially Senate
bill three ninety one immense
the water project finance act
regarding the water trust board
it reduces over the border from
sixteen to fifteen remove the
executive director New Mexico's
finance authority and director
of the parking and fish from the
board as focus on public members
of the board and it also
increases the number of
appointed public members from
five to six requirements both
members appointed provided
council.
Owners Senate confirmation and
these six appointed members
represent six communities listed
specifically and subsection
eight.
I. eight environmental community
your nation or Conservancy
district agricultural community
acequia water users soil water
conservation district and the
newly added water associations
organized under sanitary
projects act
so it it takes a little bit give
a little bit of authority back
to the legislature bring in a
little bit of consistency on our
part and it was amended in a
Senate rules I believe I was
there that day and we added in
some geographic diversity was
important if we're going to have
this opportunity not that we
want people from all around the
state because every
water user the state or even
every.
Irrigation district of the state
is different where my area we
talk a lot of artesian where in
other areas say an overview.
They rely quite a bit on surface
water so we want people from all
over the state and with that'll
stand for questions.
Thank you senator Senator
ability in the audience and I
supported this.
Anybody opposed to the bill.
The online so this to the
committee.
Any questions from the
committee.
The.
Go ahead.
At.
I guess.
Thank you madam chair is it.
I guess I just haven't.
Maybe I just don't remember it
but.
It's strange that the
Legislative Council.
People.
It madam chair if I may I've
I've been on rules for ten years
we deal with all of the
different appointments and
things and and there are certain
boards and commissions that
throughout throughout time we've
as a legislature wanted to
maintain some say.
it's with regard to the state
investment council we just did
our appointment all of the
Legislative Council point the
other day
and so it is customary at
certain point of commissions to
to do exactly that let's council
we have leisure ship from the
house and the Senate
representation from the majority
and minority come together and
try to find a good fit that the
legislature will carry the of
the voice for the whatever
boarding Commission and so it
was thought that it support with
with the water trusted not the
all the water stuff that we do
with the financing funding that
we had representation from from
Legislative Council from the
legislature.
Thank you senator you madam
chair hi I was just curious
about that sure Representative
founded questions madam chair
thank you very much senator line
looking at the house Republican
analysis on that that that was
taken in the San.
And I noticed that there were
three.
No votes on this particular bill
can you tell me fine.
I'm assuming I was one of those
those yes yes Sir.
The.
Share.
Of.
My main objection to it was that
the check the change from your
nation Conservancy district and
of groundwater but.
Ninety five percent approval
still approval and
but sometimes on the Senate
floor I object and
it's okay to still passes still
think it's majority of it's a
good bill but
Still supported mostly of it so
what happens quite often okay
and madam chair.
Senator Pirtle on the page to
the particular bill it calls for
new education or Conservancy
district and then the next slide
via states agricultural
community thank you water users
users and solar water
conservation district.
So what does that take care of
the concerns that you have.
Madam chair representative of.
In those committee it was
mentioned because we're changing
over to last council the goal is
to have more consistency we're
not gonna have maybe some of
these political appointees at
the alleged council's going to
go a little deeper ensure that
the people that are put on truly
do represent agricultural those
some of the questions that I had
that we were gonna have somebody
with a five acres of tomatoes
and they were somehow going to
be the representative of that
exactly because let's councils
should be doing this graph one
consistency because the
legislature though we do get you
members every couple years
consistency seems to prevail as
opposed to every a getting a new
governors come and want to
change everything up and so that
that's why some of it was
change for that let's count to
be able to do a better job of
ensuring that we're getting high
qualified people.
You madam chair I certainly do
agree that for every
disappointment I in the governor
sometimes or solitary muddy some
place that up like that
madam chair but if we're having.
The diversity that is nine did
all of these positions now I
really do like that so madam
chair that's all the questions I
had thank you senator.
Representative.
Madam chair C. senator so the
mob Department wonderfully us
already has somebody presented
his bill the voted against it.
Last year.
There's a pretty good question
have.
Incisor goes with for eight
years so I appreciate the mac
you very much.
Insurance is you know
Representative also I can tell
you is that the wonderful thing
about being legislature
sometimes we learn things and
then we change our attitudes.
I appreciate you letting Senator
Pirtle come off of the Senate
Judiciary Committee what he's
been missing from maple flowers
to do this bill so I appreciate
I'm sure is a fine job I just
to to summarize this this board
at times controls hundreds of
millions of dollars for water
projects and historically all
that money to a to make projects
used to go to the and the Gallup
project we try to make this a
little more accessible rules
smaller communities like that
Representative rock bottom I
represent many since that was
the goal behind this it's also
recognize that the views Water
as I heard you already talked
should should get beyond
partisanship should not sway
with some of the winners of the
political environment in so I'm
I'm very pleased to have my
Republican friend here who's I
have sounds like you to the
great job I should probably
shut.
Texas I can I can even look like
you are looking.
It's good to have you senator I
I have one question about the
bill I was curious why you took
off the director of the NMFA I
thought I thought that was I get
when you went from sixteen to
fifty now it's good to have a
hot number on a boating board
but I am very curious because
there is such an integral part
of this so in life that.
And madam chair that that that
you management point is that
such an integral part we really
want to staff the Alice's.
Ministration applications
process in the papers I think
that puts them into stronger
position on the sorry I began at
this effort years ago because
frankly the state engineer was
one controllers for signature
would chair the boards engineer
would really determine where the
money went and the state so all
of prior to this competition is
all for executive branch when
you look at the majority of the
members the governor's
appointees and those that are
cabinet secretaries the board
was dominated by a vote of the
executive branch in that have
state engineer Cherry if there
was that there was a rubber
stamp for this initial.
The goal here is to try and run
a little bit and I think that
and NMFA's does incredible job
market and I've been working
really hard on this all of these
efforts for many years now but I
think having them more staff by
reposition is is a better place
than to have a voting member of
the board because evidently
they'll have adjustments not any
disrespect we all but I think
that's the answer your questions
I I see the more role of very
frankly I'm trying to get the
state engineer use that idea to
think the state engineer should
be more of a resource all New
Mexicans less of a warrior for
and against certain parts of the
state and certain of New
Mexicans and that that's where I
see the stages days is that they
they got their favorites and
that that'll help those are
their favorites.
Thank you Senator I and I I
really did look at that of
course without Marquita she
enough of this navigate this
water systems so and there are
plenty of so I I understand that
I didn't set chair of the board
my lord asked me if I wanted to
be the exit owning them before
and I said no I think I think
it's good for me to be back a
little I do I can't control up
to speed the executive director
organization so I understand.
From a Representative thank you
madam chair thank you so bring
this what happens in my County a
few years ago was the local
authority was taken away and
sent to the water transport and
so on on the.
Sixty million dollars that they
fought over for a year percent
blah blah blah but having a more
diverse board I think it's
probably a really good thing and
and I appreciate that and I I
see in the FIR madam chair in
senators that you know that.
There's a in NMFA expressed
concerns and so that the office
of the state engineer but I
think personally having a more
diverse board is actually going
to be better for New Mexicans as
a whole and especially in rural
New Mexico madam chair thank
you.
Representative.
Madam chairman of the due
process second we have a deep
yes Representative is a second
by Representative Armstrong off
is there any opposition to the
sale of.
Thank you very much thank you.
Your water projects I hope
Iglesias.
Well the bills.
Okay.
Four o'clock in the.
Representative wasn't this
official newspaper.
Members of the committee I I.
Kind of going online and Senator
Campos is here too and we don't
have.
Now because everybody because he
came in and.
You know nine thirty class
inequalities yes Representative
every.
Or or something like that
so we could hear the bill this
is very simple hi I know you
well.
I would like to have them
explain it so we can have them
explain it and then if you
wanted to hold your votes
because of the COVID to later
the I mean.
I'm not sure I think that the
fire is very in depth and I'm
comfortable after.
Can do you have your Democrat
analysis bill.
Yes
Later.
If not we'll vote.
You hear the Senator or is it to
have you want to the committee
thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much members of
the committee.
Thank you very much for taking
the time with at least a let us
express a personal movie in
terms of what we're going
through and as we know
throughout the years are always
been if you will.
Wildfires floods issues that
continue to devastate you will
our sectors process some people
problem is second issues.
This or whatever then but the
whole issue is that as a of
political subdivisions in
essence what we're trying to do
is to ensure that we can restore
these and this is on going it's
an ongoing process with that if
I may madam chair members of the
committee deferred to of all of
our State of course who is
directly with the secretary of
state so.
The New Mexico revenue and the
course will be available.
Good morning.
The committee meeting the
project's unique and the
executive director of the New
Mexico association we represent
seconds across the state of New
Mexico there are nearly seven
hundred a second twenty three
different counties across New
Mexico and this time that we're
looking at was created in
statute twenty nineteen but it
was based on longstanding
programs at the Interstate
Stream Commission to support us
seconds with respect to projects
one of the important things
about this program is catching
right now is that it provides
for planning design and
construction so it's it's a well
rounded program that provides
support to state his throughout
the process of developing a
project and funding project what
is the issues that we work like
to address this bill it faster
recovery.
in the past this fund was not
used for disaster recovery and
it hasn't yet but we anticipate
that it will be needed for
disaster recovery in the kitchen
Interstate Stream Commission has
has taken some initiative with
doing disaster response in
twenty twenty two using a
special appropriation they got
the legislature last year and
they use that for doing damage
assessments in different
disasters across the state
primarily the black fire which
affected grant and the dog will
counties and they have done
those damage assessments so that
those executives have numbers to
apply for disaster programs in
the case of the black fire it
with homeland security disaster
assistance program
when they do the work in they
haven't started yet but
impairments people are going to
be using damage assessment to
apply for FEMA so this program
is evolving to address needs as
they arrived so disaster
recoveries in the purpose that
we're trying to cut to the
purpose of the fund for future
years the other thing that to
this bill seeks to do is to
explicitly and expressly state
that can be used for state and
federal cost share this is for
both the after coming on
disaster purposes there's
several federal programs that
require a state match is
perfectly positioned to provide
that that the match and the
third thing that this this
legislation does that it states
that know culture would be
required for us is representing
the program
there any of the current statute
does not require but stated
please I S. C. has
instituted at a ten percent cost
share funds projects the
feedback that we've gotten from
the sentences that that has been
burdensome the typical project
for the full version is about
two hundred thousand so ten
percent that's about one
thousand.
And four milliseconds especially
volunteers
who don't have time to forty who
really are.
L. from their volunteer general
fund tax of the very big amount
to deal with so that's where
that's the rational for that and
that those are the three
purposes disaster recovery of
federal state.
Hi chairmanship's also request
thank you madam chair review
questions thank you Senator
to Paula and the are there
any members in the audience who
would like to speak the purpose.
In the system.
In terms of the ideas see none.
Present Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator this is the amendments
this bill removes requirements
of the state kia's or community
disciplines and specifications
would be reviewed prior to
funding project why we choose
remove there is.
The manager of free for fifty
eight that was the report of
request that was made hi
analysis that made the trip
Commission and we agreed with
them of the recent the rational
they deserve madam chair
representative cases that
the state the Interstate Stream
Commission does planning design
and construction so so they're
gonna be assisting in a secular
and Out planning face and using
the five for the funding bases
not going to have time to review
prior to signing so it was like
a chicken and egg type of
dynamic where they don't want to
limit themselves to only funding
the state has with plans because
part of the idea I is to make
available resources for that I
face and that plenty fees the
way to fund it is at the
discretion of the staff of the
scene so they they have a very
much sensibility and and how
these plans for that planning
phase and they don't want to be
limited to only
of funding projects after the
review of the application that
was made in it was suggested and
and we agreed to that and on the
Senate side as.
Thank you.
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
senator is this the policy seen
bill that we heard and
appropriations Madam chair
representative Armstrong yes
okay and is this money in the
budget.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong the
The original language in the
bill that would have increased
the appropriation from two point
five to five million was was
remove in the Senate finance
committee amendment so there's
up the additional two point five
is not in the budget the there's
two point five million recurring
as in the playoff race but but
that was in this bill was
written okay thank you madam
chair thank you so much for all
of.
I think this is the one that I
suggested we put a sunset clause
on a chair from the.
Okay.
I I understand the the problem
madam chair and senator Paula
but I really
I really wish that there was a
sunset falls on it just so we
could go back and look at it
make sure something's working or
if it's not working or to re
analyze it because just opening
it up it just makes me a little
bit nervous
For that I completely understand
why you're doing it but I I
would still.
Madam chair Senators like to see
some set clocks but on this just
so we can go back and and look
again to make sure it's doing
what.
You all wanted to do and not
sort of just a free for all with
no match and and lots of money
and.
Maybe you know two point five
million is a lot of money may
not be for the water projects
areas but it's still a lot of
money madam chair and and that
would be my suggestion madam
chair and I would love to hear
Senator Campos thank you very
much chair thank you very much
Representative Armstrong I I
feel comfortable in doing
something like at but a couple
of things that come to mind
number one as we move forward
as.
Most of the resources already in
the fund are somebody come in
and obligated and so within that
with a minimal amount to have
available if resources that
hopefully be able to secure in
coming years I think
With the sensex lost we may not
have of those resources there
and we may not be able to go
ahead and continue with the
funding last if future years we
were able to go ahead and
improve the revenue stream so
this point given the the nature
of the time and and session
I would respectfully ask that we
we not at the since closed this
week thank you madam chair and I
appreciate your honesty and
completely understand.
I just I just note that I will I
will be watching and asking for
a report to make sure that
everything's going smoothly
because I'm not that I'm against
the bill what so ever I just
want to make sure that
Okay thank you madam chair.
Representative said
thank you very much.
In the regional light rail
Senator Campos on page one slide
twenty four the state kids
community did infrastructure
fund this create and start
fresh.
And then it goes on to state
that the.
They can the fund itself an
interest accruing to the fund
states that that it there at the
end of that particular paragraph
it also states any an expanded
or unencumbered balance
remaining at in the fund at the
end of any fiscal year shall
revert to the New Mexico
irrigation works construction.
That I know that's original
language that's put in the bill
but it does rise raise questions
in my mind because in reading
the FIR this particular bill is
talking on the second page of
that fires talking that the
fiscal and implications.
And the.
The states this is coming from
the office of the state engineer
and the state's irrigation works
construction fund which is a
beneficiary of the State Land
tras.
They have provided an average of
eight point one million dollars
to the operations budget over
the last four years and that's
that's awful lot of money and I
I agree with Representative
Armstrong that we do need to
take a look at this to see what
is working and what is not
working that's my phone service
well madam chair thank you very
much thank you.
Last year House.
It may I don't seem to have a
copy of the bill itself.
I had.
That is.
Tend to
school and I.
Three from my.
It is.
Six to to to.
Okay.
Basis
for that.
Sorry to.
Senator.
Thank you have a question
Representative.
Representative some more and
then maybe come back to
Representative Zamora.
You madam chair Carlos no place
here that.
So madam chair and senator.
I believe there was there
something in the mail about
emergencies for seconds.
Is
there
you madam chair.
It's the purpose of making these
changes primarily because of
some of the strategies that have
occurred across the state.
Along with that too further
health to enhance if you will
some of the communication and
the responses to these questions
chair I can also called on the
state engineer for a brief
statement in terms of of some of
the issues that we argue that we
for directly to what
Representative Zamora is
referred to as well of course
thank you very much I
appreciate.
You madam chair thank you.
Sanchez Senator Campos on the on
the bill of we we supported in
the context of the the the the
proper use they are engaged
works construction.
Certainly no we have lots of
emergencies.
The two and we know it and now
Representative those are all
good enough and the F. I. R.
with sense we we currently are
still relying on your education
works construction fund for
our operating budget and one of
the commandments of the NMAA
through the work with the LFC
and and and the general for the
legislature that we're we're
supposed to be reading ourselves
off of that and we want to
general fund so that that that
that the corpus of the fund as
doesn't continue to run it by
us in the future for operating.
The security over from
from previous ministrations use
of the funds for that this is
all supposed to be temporary as
the number of a normal human
refresh this and so I think the
legislature and specifically the
LFC membership for recognizing
that and moving in that
direction
in relation to the other issues
on the FY are we you know my my
parts of the Energy Stream
Commission have experience
working on emergencies and we
fully support those being of a
hundred percent of.
Fund fonts but we also have a
great experience for.
Of
these four small portion of
pressure on the construction
this is the worst in the world
and there's more oversight in
the field.
We're not staff to the workgroup
and projects in the field so it
really helps when we have the
second amendment cells and their
consultants really managing
projects that's the only reason
why we made a comment that a
little bit of pressure is a real
benefit to the overall fiscal
responsibility components during
construction of the fully
understand that a hundred
percent of your posture of
these sponsor sciences is very
low so I just wanted there there
are more reasons.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and madam chair and
senator so.
This bill also allows a second
to use for for right.
Regular upkeep and maintenance
of this seconds my career madam
chair somebody or correct so
then madam chair and senator if
an emergency does arise like the
fire and and they need to do
something quick for that
emergency over ride the people
that are it's to be receiving
money or.
Madam chair representative amada
the the bottom line is if
someone has an application and
they're dealing directly with a
project
if there is an emergency that is
not going override what is
already in existence and of
whatever is contractual
Committee
thank you for that that's all my
questions in terms thank you.
Madam chair thank you very much
I do need to ask a question.
Because I just need to find out
for sure what this is what
constitutes a community did
which.
So madam chairman to go ahead
refers to the expert that deals
directly with the the ditches
and seconds thank you madam
chair and representative out of
the a second as a committee
digits are defined in statute in
chapter seventy two articles two
and three and in order to be a
secular community ditch a second
has to have a at least three
members and the like the
commission bylaws and Americal
so there's there's a pair of the
standard.
For the you said for the sake is
scheduled for.
Explained community did.
Okay madam chair and and
Representative Ezzell executive
community ditches the turn the
two terms are synonymous in
state statute so to begin the
second or community ditch the
the requirements are the same
that are the same county and
state law there are private
ditches that that may have fewer
than three people or the the
operate not just local
government as a private ditch
and and they might have just
very few people on it so that
that this is the way that we
look at
legally what constitutes an
insecure or community that is
three members elected elections
with three commissioners more
than one pilots and the size of
a second varies greatly in New
Mexico there are some that are
small is the if you but most of
all have you know the typical
number is twenty five we also
think is that over six hundred
members of the ruling there.
Okay and madam chair
representative so if I may in
which is referring to are also
signatures just to make sure
that we understand that's
exactly what the question was
answered for.
And madam chair I need
clarification on that thank you
Mr apology for.
Explaining that to me so if
there's a community determine
psyche Association it does have
to have an elected board.
That's what I'm hearing is that
correct Madam chair
representative that's correct
okay.
And the reason I bring that up
madam chair.
In my particular area Woods
Honda river leaves the wide
right here for right for you get
taunted for the two rivers meet.
And there was the phantom this
is going to be
Two thousand three I think it
was there was the need to get
rid of so.
The corps of engineers army
corps of engineers at the time.
Maybe.
Our flood control leave the
gates open dances there is one
that is an offer pulled and the
other one is just.
And whenever that event did come
down during the middle of the
night it washed up to versions
all the way down the river.
And my
Repeated calls to get help from
the.
Quorum pensioners which I don't
like not.
They're not a budget that got to
more into.
they said how many people use
that ditch because there was did
try that came off of that that
was established back in.
Eighteen seventy four of believe
that was and I said there are
three people that you set ditch.
And well maybe we can do
something this is part of
million a problem madam chair.
Do any of that did you senator
have a Hispanic last name and us
that they do not we're sorry we
can't help you so I have no use
for the army corps of engineers.
And for us to be able to fix it
right now it's going to cost a
little over eighty thousand
dollars.
Madam chair I just need to get
that out there thank you very
much king.
Representative some money Madam
chair of the past I would like
to ask questions because.
Okay yes and representative
Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
In my district we have what we
call the farmers mutual
community this I think of those
have.
Representative very very aware
of.
we have a condition where.
K..
All of life and he's just for
folks are.
The of the last slides off.
So.
Money that we have for
treatments is concentrated in
use the cleaning up those into
this.
And we've been
other of canal that stand river
can we use some of this money
that's approach Interstate
Stream.
To apply for those forms and get
those the.
Down river from for the SLO and
madam chair representative
Allison of course I'm gonna
going to engineer because that
would be.
Question too.
Your of.
Chair of those
it's my understanding that are
residual is a.
As a board and the and the and
it's got its by laws and all of
those things in order.
The case and we were all
question it was this this
funding.
Okay of thank you madam chair
and.
Can we use additional funding.
Is this.
Of the bill canal to close the.
The area that has to slow offs
okay yes this is important to
maintain that this is that are
deteriorating number.
Of Madam chair of.
Mr Wilson.
I think we're certainly look at
that of the through the use of
this.
To leverage federal.
Have cations well off so usually
In order to hear of that purpose
of education.
Of the things that
The ritual good leverage thus
far in state maybe get a
permanent solution to us on that
stretch
of.
I.
In
pro our report there's because
this incentives and study of the
areas that they've incentive for
ever since I've been in the
office which is five years.
Maybe you can pro to start
working on.
Welcome.
The work of the group that
you're going to our.
And I shares.
This and cells is we we can
maybe slower sure are expensive.
Certainly in our experience I
with you by the the line of the
they have the expertise of
funding to the three for the
purpose of this something both
you all.
You and I just want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward
it's my understanding that from
two point five to five million
was cut but changing it so that
we speak and to really help an
emergency situations as as you
know another person that's in
the north that you know I'm not
telling the Senator anything we
have a sick yes yes the mall
with that you know the this is
twenty five miles downstream
from the river from the I
just came into Dixon tore
everything apart that water was
just tremendous I I you know it
between and my properties we
have a safety on this item.
On the north side rivers on the
south.
And when those huge.
Let's came the river was ready
to hello the esempio was ready
to over flow and we're right in
the middle I I would go from the
second look at that and then go
to the river and look at that as
well.
And we got lucky you know in a
log jam that the intake from the
river to the S..
So it stopped our second stop
letting everybody else who was
in that in that flood plain the
their second just was demolished
so I I know how important this
issue for bringing it forward
and
and I'm I'm glad that we're
expanding to build this with the
in the state engineers office of
that because it is a different
Water System equipment part of
our culture one system and is
part of New Mexico so very
grateful to both of you.
So I will I will now move back
to we have to pass on the madam
chair I do have a problem with
that particular motion I would
really like to have a look we've
discussed the bill and
everything else but I would like
to look at the Republican
analysis whenever those ready
and I hope that they would be
sent so we could get moving on
this but I would like to see
what that is to say just me
okay.
Not to that's yield.
I have one two passes hang in
there Sir Senator of second
but overall Representative
Lundstrom.
Yes.
Representative Kate yes
Representative Ezzell then
Representative lot of yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair would be proper to
roll the bill to proceed in
Alice's or we have to have a
vote now well we're we're in the
middle and I just roll.
We're in the middle of working
in in the middle of the.
Yes.
Yes Representative Allison yes
Representative out of yes and I
do appreciate the members of the
committee and
I will I I I thought this was
very simple there so.
The insurance industry we have
to pass.
Okay all almost no with the next
session so madam chair I I just
based I would really like to see
the sunset Senator and I I
appreciate your your.
But we also have this problem
and let's see County for the
since I've been a state
representative so completely
understand thank you madam chair
thank.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and and just
quickly with the Representative
Hernandez Armstrong and one of
the concerns that have been
raised intercourse
Very close to the second so
ciation so we can find the the
accountability in terms of what
you are asking.
And hopefully by this time next
year they'll be a better
understand of course of more of
the responsibility that so we're
asking for that we can provide
the information to you so I
appreciate that.
Thank you senator.
Thank.
Thank you for lunch madam chair.
The staff.
