Can you take the role, Nina,
before I forget.
Representative Beta.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, here.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya here.
Murphy?
It's represented in a cortes.
It was a small.
But sitting down.
McQueen.
Yeah.
OK, um, for the committee, uh,
just a reminder.
We're getting towards the end of
the session, uh, the 24 hour
rule starts to get a little
soft.
Um, so we, we currently don't,
uh, I currently am not planning
on a meeting Saturday.
Um, I was making plans, you
know, if we get referrals in the
next couple of days, then we
will meet on Saturday.
Um
So just, just keep that in mind.
Um, we'll give everyone as much
notice as we can, but, um, as,
as you know, the 24 hour rule
isn't actually a rule, and we
just uh we'll do the best we
can.
Any questions, comments,
announcements from the
committee?
Yes,
I'm taking the personal
privilege.
Sure. OK, thank you. Um,
Couple of things. Uh, one is,
uh, I want to congratulate you
and, and, uh, chair small on SBA
5 it's not a bill I can support,
but I know it's one that you
worked very, very hard on and uh
it passed the house yesterday
and I, I just, you got to be
congratulated on that. It's a,
it's a big victory and for you.
Um, the other thing too, uh, not
relating to anything on the
agenda necessarily, but um,
Um, I note, uh, as I was going
through my bill list, um.
Um, early this morning, that
there are some 23 bills uh that
could have a negative impact on
my industry, and that just seems
like an awful lot. And so, um,
as we go through the day, please
keep that in mind. Um, also, I
did some rough calculations and
trying to refine these, but
it'll give you a sense. Um, for
every $1 roughly it's about uh
the price of oil drops, it's
about $60 million to the state
and uh if we continue on this
trend will be short.
Some $600 million to a billion
dollars at this time next year,
unless uh we keep this industry
robust. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Sheer.
Thank you. Anything else?
OK. First up, we have uh sent
Billy pipeline Safety Act
violations,
civil
civil penalty, the senator
sources.
Whenever you're ready, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and first
I'd like to introduce my expert
if uh there are any questions
that come up, Miranda
Mescarenas, uh, but this
particular bill
What it does is the maximum
penalty for pipeline safety acts
currently in New Mexico is
$100,000 per day with a million
dollars total. What this does is
it moves it to the federal
maximum penalties of
$200,000 per day or 2 million
total the by moving it to the
federal level, we don't have to
constantly keep, uh, changing
the New Mexico one as things go
up and down, and this would move
it to where it just follows
whatever the federal maximum
penalties would be, uh, it also
is important. I don't know if in
your packets that you got a list
or got a letter, uh, but from
the US Department of
Transportation pipeline
hazardous Materials Safety
Administration, but also it's
important.
That we match the federal in
order to stay in line with their
certification processes for, uh,
Make sure I get this right, uh,
pipeline hazardous materials
Safety Administration Acts and
things of that sort. And with
that we're open for questions.
OK, before we go to the, we'll
go to the public, uh, who's here
in support of this bill just by
a show of hands. Is there anyone
here in opposition to this bill?
OK, if you would like to speak
in support, uh, please step
forward.
We'll take a maximum of 3.
And ultimate.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Melissa
Bernard and representing the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter,
or 35,000 members and
supporters. We support this
bill. It updates New Mexico
pipeline standards to federal
rules and regulations. Thank
you.
OK, we're taking public comment
in support, so if you're just
walking in on another bill.
OK, maybe that was the only one?
OK. Um, if you're online, they
would like to speak in support,
please raise your hand, Charles
Goodmacher.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Charles
Goodmacher speaking for Healthy
Climate New Mexico. Thank you
for this opportunity and thank
you to the sponsor for this
bill.
An industry that prides itself
as the cleanest in the world.
With embrace this bill.
Because it only, there's no
negative impacts unless somebody
actually violates the pipeline
safety and violating pipeline
safety means endangering their
own employees and their own
operations. So a clean industry
would embrace this bill, and I
hope that this committee
embraces this bill. Thank you.
OK, is there anyone else online
who would like to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition.
reassuring.
OK, sing Nan will go to the
committee, members of the
committee. Oh.
Yeah, yeah, it's good to me.
small
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
excited to support the bill, Mr.
Chair, I just want to know that
sort of I guess a point of
personal frustration with some
of the um I wanna know as we
welcome uh folks are free to
sort of say what they'll say in
public comment, sort of
clarifying their reasons why
something is good as opposed to
sort of
Speaking seemingly on behalf of
another industry.
gets super frustrating, and
that's what I just heard. Not a
Again, folks are very free to
say what they want to say in
public comment, but the reasons
why things are good should stand
on their own. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you it was a small, I
think that's a valid point.
Um
Other members of me.
Uh, Rosanne Murphy.
Famous chairman senator and
expert. Um, it was said that
this will basically brings a
state pipeline standards, uh, up
to federal levels.
And, but
Those aren't the state levels, I
mean, aren't the the pipeline
standards really the same, and,
and my understanding is, is that
Um, anyone that builds, uh,
these types of pipelines,
whether they're intra or
interstate, really, uh, adhere
to the same standards. Is that
not correct?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, this really isn't about the
pipeline standards. This is
about what the maximum penalty
would be for violations of that
and it just puts it at the
federal level.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, that's the way I see it
too, is, is that it really just
changed the fine, the fine
amounts and really has nothing
to do with the standards. Um,
I, uh
I'd like to
My understanding of the industry
is, is that we have federal, we
have federal uh fine levels
because at that level, it mainly
applies to interstate lines.
And those lines are typically
much larger than the lines that
are, you know, contained within
the state.
And so for um from my
experience, from a matter of
scale, when you're talking about
pipelines that come under the
under the federal standards,
they're crossing multiple state
lines.
And the sort of scale that we're
talking about here, pipelines
that you could literally drive a
Volkswagen through versus those
those maybe perhaps you can get
a bowling ball inside.
So, it, it doesn't surprise me
that the violations for
Um, the very large pipelines
were much higher than those in
the state.
And I'm wondering how we can
justify, uh, this level of, uh,
of, of penalties when the
circumstances are so much
different. If you could speak to
that, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, this doesn't indicate what
the, the fines will be. This is
just indicating what the maximum
fines could be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I appreciate that
explanation and um, but
normally, um, I
I haven't seen where where an
agency that can find, uh, will
find too little. Um,
Let's see the uh
I think my last uh
Question is, um,
What type of violations, uh, no,
excuse me. Um, I think I know
the answer to that one, excuse
me, chairing and Senator, um.
What had been the amounts?
Recently, 35 years that uh uh
the agency has had the fine
pipelines.
Mr. Chair representative, I'll
have my expert with the from the
PRC pipeline Safety division uh
can answer.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the last couple of years in
fiscal year 24, it was only
24,000, however, in fiscal year
23, it was 214,000. It's a very
volatile number, I believe in
fiscal year 22 is around 50,000
just depending on uh the
violations and when they get
submitted to the agency.
Famous sheriff, senator and
expert, I appreciate that, um,
sort of goes back to another
discussion we had in this
committee and on some weeks ago,
it seems like where we have a
situation where they're um finds
uh the the ability to find up to
in this case, up to a million
dollars. Um, is more than
enough. Um, I mean, by your own
numbers, we're looking at 200
and anywhere from 25 to $214,000
and yet you have
The ability to find up to a
million, so why does it need to
go up to uh 2.7, that would be
my question, Mr. Chairman and
Senator and expert. Mr. Chair
and Representative, uh, it does
two things. One, it makes it so
that if ever the level changes,
we don't have to come back in
and change state law to change
based on inflation or things of
that sort, but also uh due to
this uh requirement from the
federal level in order to and
I'll let my expert
It's more the details. Mr. Chair
Representative, the greatest
risk to the PRC is we run the
risk of decreased federal
funding when FEMA comes in and
assesses um what the state
With the allocation is for the
um the violation.
And they note that we not, are
not substantially the same as
the federal level. They will
dock us points and in essence,
it can dock our federal dollars
because we are not in compliance
with them.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
expert. That, that sounds like a
theoretical hypothetical
perhaps, um, have, has the
department or the state received
any such notice, uh, Mr. Chair
or expert that federal funding
is at risk.
Uh, Mr. Chair representative, we
have not received formal notice,
however, um, included in the,
the letter that you all have in
front of you notes, um, that
there could be potential
repercussions.
Thank you. Um, I'll read a
little bit different, um, Mr.
Chair, and, uh, expert, thank
you. Um, let's see, uh,
I think that concludes my
remarks. The, uh,
Well, perhaps not. 11 last
observation is, is that many
times,
There's reasons why um this
body, this legislature sets
things at a certain level, and
I'm always, um, as I, I learned
in my short time here, I'm sort
of reluctant to um um transfer
that legislative responsibility
to, to federal standard or or
anybody else. I think that's uh
probably of the legislature and
so I'd like to maintain that so
we'll have to respectfully uh
not support your bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Representative for
representative Montoya.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, um, and once again, I
didn't catch your expert's name.
Miranda Mascare.
OK, this question is for you,
Miranda. Um, I'm, I'm reading in
the second paragraph here of
this letter. It says the PRC
needs the authority to oppose
such civil penalties to satisfy
satisfy the requirements in the
PSA for obtaining a state
pipeline safety program
certification, is that due?
Is that sort of is a filing for
that program certification, is
that due or does that come up
periodically?
Uh, Mr. Chair representative
that certification comes up, uh,
I believe biannually.
Biannually, OK, and I said is is
that.
Coming up now.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
just went through a
certification this last fiscal
year, so it will be um in 2
years.
OK.
Um, so
is there any other reason?
To that we would need to to do
this at this time. I mean, I'm
hearing that it's according to
the letter, it's due to
certification requirements.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, we
believe that
It's important to come up with
federal uh come up to speed with
federal guidelines as soon as
possible. Um, and this piece of
legislation would enable us, uh,
the, the rate could change by
the feds, uh, at any given
moment given to, uh, due to
inflation. So this legislation
would allow that adjustment, so
if, uh, when they do our
certification and maybe with the
way inflation is going, the
substantially the same has gone
up to
Up to 3 million, we would be
significantly out of compliance
at that point in time. So thank
you, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, were
we out of compliance when we
received the certification.
Within a year.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
did not receive any findings on
compliant, uh, compliance
issues.
In this past certification. I
didn't ask that question where
we, where we at the map where we
at this federal level when we
applied.
In the year, it seems to me that
we if we're out of compliance
now or if we're not at that
level now.
It doesn't appear.
That we would have been when we
when it was filed for
certification, we were not
denied. I'm trying to figure
out.
That, that, that I'm just having
a hard time finding that as a
good reason if we're not, if we
weren't denied.
before.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
no.
OK. No, we were not in we were
not were not out of compliance.
We were not out of compliance,
so we were up to the federal
level, that the federal level
change?
We were not in compliance in
regards to our, is our rate
substantially the same, where
we, we were not given notice and
our um
Our federal funding was not
deducted at that point in time
for our last funding cycle. Um,
we will be submitting our grant
applications in the coming
months.
I would assume that they would
do an assessment at that point
in time as well.
So I guess what's what's
bringing the fear? I mean, if,
if it doesn't seem that those
numbers are quite a bit
different, almost 10 to 1.
I mean,
what is substantial if if it
wasn't substantial before.
Why, why would we not come up
halfway if we, if we've not been
held out of compliance before
Mr. Chair.
I'm just not finding.
Compelling that that's just
seemed like a compelling reason
if we've not been denied and,
and, and there has been no
notification of being out of
compliance up to this point.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
you had said 10 to 1, it's what
this is doing would be doubling
what the number of New Mexico,
not 10 to 1, uh, it would go
from 100,000 a day to 200,000 a
day and from a maximum of 1
million to 2 million, and so,
um, and what I think is one of
the most compelling pieces is we
don't have to keep adjusting
with the New Mexico rate is if
the Fed rate goes up, the New
Mexico rate is the, the same,
and if it
it could potentially even go
down this, the New Mexico would
stay the same, so we don't have
to constantly be having
legislation to update the rate,
uh, and then it's got the added
thing that being in substantial
compliance allows the PRC to be
eligible for grants and other
kinds of funding.
So thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
and senator, in my mind, why
would we not set it.
At half of the federal if it's
substantial. It doesn't say
equal.
a substantial compliance, and if
they've not
Held withheld funding or giving
us a notice, why would we not
have set it at half? because as,
as Mr. Chairman, as, as, uh, Mr.
Murphy, uh, representative
Murphy stated earlier.
The, the
Um
Volume
The, the, the scale of what an
interstate pipeline is versus
what an instate pipeline is is
is dramatically different, and
I, and I'm wondering if that's
why they're not considering a
substantially out of compliance
cause it's
We are talking about a much,
much bigger pipeline that goes,
that is an interstate pipeline
versus an intrastate pipeline.
It's just
I'm not hearing unless there's
some reason that the PRC wants
to start.
Filing larger
Violations. I, I'm, I'm
I'm having a hard time finding a
reason to support it at that
level.
That is a question, Mr. Senator
is, it is.
The scale.
Factor
And that we've not been held out
of compliance. Why would he not
set it at half.
Of the federal rate where it is
and just say that it tracks at
5.
Mr.
Jared representative, these are
the maximum penalties, as was
testified earlier, uh, they have
rarely or have ever been uh
fined at that particular level.
Uh, this just allows the
escalator, and I think it
doesn't make sense to try and
challenge them as to exactly
where the line is that they're
going to draw a being in or out
of compliance by having it the
same as what they are. We are
clearly in compliance and
there's no risk at that point.
And again, it
doesn't require that the state
charge higher penalties, it just
would allow that at the maximum.
OK, that's fine, Mr. Chair. I,
I, I understand the logic. I
don't know that I share the
logic. Um, matter of fact, I can
say I do not share the logic,
um, but to to point, Mr.
Chairman, to, to the statement
that was made prior to uh
committee starting by Mr.
Murphy, by Representative
Murphy.
we've seen senator is one bill
after another that just seems to
want to find a way to at least
have the opportunity to get more
money from oil and gas industry
when it's the one industry that
just seemed to be paying for
everything and, and it's, it's
it's almost 60 days, and it's
been pretty tiresome just to
watch the the the constant. So
I, I, I, I appreciate it. I
think I understand the logic.
Um, I can see where
Where there would be no
question.
Of being in a contradiction with
with the federal level, I just,
I don't share the logic. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Montoya Pitta.
Thank you, Chairman.
Welcome Senator Solis and would
you please remind me of your
name?
Miranda Miranda, thank you for
being here today. Um, I
understand that you're wanting
to uh change the daily and
maximum civil penalties for
individuals who are found to
have violated regulations.
Um, my question is,
What happens if
Our industry members who are
In this industry, excuse me,
what happens if they don't have
violations? How much do they
pay?
Mr. Charon represented him that
there's no violation, there's no
cost. Great, OK. And do you work
with them on
First violations to make sure
that they do become compliant.
Uh, Mr. Tay representative, I, I
think it depends on the severity
of the violation. OK, great. Um,
and what are the, um, what are
the environmental
prose if they don't.
Violate.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
I would, I, I don't have
specifics for you, um, but I
would assume that
Depending on what the violation
is, uh, if they hit a, uh, a
pipeline that is a significant
violation that, that causes
environmental damage. Uh, it
could vary on what that is
specifically.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
and Miranda.
So, um, this is a safeguard to
protect the environment and the
people.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I would say not just the
environment, um, but the
industry.
It is this um also protects
people's lives. Thank you.
That's important to me. That's
all my questions.
Thank you. Anything else from
the committee?
Um, Senators, I had a question,
uh,
I, I
Looked at the bill and I um I
just generally, I I think we try
to avoid referring to federal
law and state law.
Um, can you just sort of touch
on that?
Mr. Chair.
I think they still keeps it in
state law, but it just sets the
state law to match the finds of
the federal law, and so it
references as the federal law
changes, then the maximum
penalties in state law would
change with that.
OK, I guess I understand that's
the, the mechanism. I, I think,
um, you know, you're going to
have judiciary next. Um, it went
through cents here unanimously.
I understand, is that correct?
Um,
So I might ask that question
again in the House Judier.
Um, what's the pleasure of the
committee?
And
We have a motion for DuP Paz in
a second.
Um
Uh, Nina could take the vote.
represented a beta? Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Represented Henry? No.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? No
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Representative.
Mistress and Ian.
Chamer Queen.
Yes
Uh, so you have to pass.
Thank you very much.
I appreciate it.
Uh, next up, we have, uh,
Senator Stewart.
SB 83 innovation and State
Government Fund.
Whenever you're ready, sir.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
This bill deals with New Mexico
State agencies.
Uh, I believe they need to be
equipped to tackle the
challenges of our climate
changing, support clean energy
development protect our air land
and water.
To this bill, Senate Bill 83,
innovationist state Government
Act. Invest in the expertise
workforce resources needed to
ensure that our state's leading,
not lacking on climate
resilience and economic
innovation.
It's $10 million in funding, uh,
dispel strengthens the agency
capacity, modernizes
infrastructure planning creates
pathways for new sustainable
energy.
In.
So it sets up a grant process to
state agencies and the state
land Office, uh identifies
7 state agencies, 2 of them
would get $2.5 million M nerd
and New Mexico and the
Environment Department, 5 would
get a million Department of
Transportation Workforce
Solutions, economic development
department, PRC in the state
land Office.
The
Provisions in the bill.
Uh
Offer these funds so that the
state agencies can create master
plans if they haven't already.
All of these state agencies have
been under the executive order
for 6 years now.
That executive order laid out
that state agencies must work
together and must try to help
New Mexicans, uh, adapt or
mitigate climate change issues.
So, um, it requires them to
either achieve net zero,
implement sustainable economic
policies, provide technical
support to entities applying for
grants and other funding that
seek to address climate change,
or implement a
or reduce the barriers to
implementing change policy.
Uh, I'm gonna talk for a minute
on page 3, section D, uh this is
uh showing the accountability
and the requirements. So the TSA
will administer the fund, it
will be immediately dispersed
agencies, um, the way we have
created it. Um, the receiving
entity has to provide DFA with
annual report and budget showing
how funds will be expended or
have been expended.
Um, if the agency seeks to, so
if you look at uh number 1 and 2
under D, um, this requires him
to follow the accountability in
Government Act, that's number
one. And
Then if for number 2, this
references the growth program.
The government results and
opportunity program requires
them to also have that be part
of their report, um, and if they
want to change any aspect of
that program, and that's part of
the report. Um, that also goes
to the interim committees.
So Bill defines greenhouse
gasses, that's on page 3, line
21, a general all-encompassing
definition used by several other
states, uh, net 0 H41. It's a
simple definition, meeting the
requirements of the Paris
Accord. That's part of the
executive order and the
sustainable economic policies
that we've passed in the past.
So this is consistent with that
sustainable economy task force.
strategic plan.
So Mr. Chairman, I, I, I wish
we'd done this bill a number of
years ago, um, but certainly we
still have 2 more years of piece
agencies. Um,
All of the FIRs from the
agencies say uh they give more
um information about what they
might do with this funding.
And I have with me today Julia
Farnes, um, who is here to help
me answer questions that she
helped create these films over
the last year. We took a whole
year on 3 of my climate bills,
uh, two of which seemed to be
moving, knock on wood, uh, so I
don't know if she has any
comments.
All right, so we're ready for
the next order.
OK, um, thank you. Uh, just by a
show of we'll go to the public
just by show of hands who's here
in support.
Um, who is here in opposition?
OK, so if you would like to
speak in support, uh, we'll take
up to 3.
And you have 2 months.
Yeah.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Travis Kellerman. I'm with the
governor's office. I'm the
senior climate advisor.
And an important point to be
made with this bill is that it
supports climate-related job
creation.
This is something we initiated
last year with the executive
order.
That created thousands of
apprenticeships across the
state, related to a climate
ready workforce.
The executive order would focus
on projects like grid
modernization, EV
infrastructure, clean energy
projects, and that's exactly
what this bill does and what it
supports.
It unlocks new federal and
private investment in these
positions in these areas and for
these positions, and it sets us
up to be competitive to gain
this funding.
SB 83 builds the capacity needed
to execute old climate policies.
We already lead in our natural
and working lands management and
also clean energy generation in
this country.
So it's time to build more
economic resilience with the
agency resources and the
planning in this bill. I urge
your support. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Representatives. My name is Anna
Lindon Weller. I am the senior
policy advisor for clean energy
for Western Resource advocates
from here in support of SB 83.
Um, I want to briefly mention
that I have only had this job
for 6 months and for the
previous 4.5 years, I worked for
one of the agencies that's
funded by this bill.
Um, and nerd, uh, it was policy
director there and uh
SB 83 provides a really rare
thing, dedicated and flexible
funding for state agencies to
direct resources towards one of
the central challenges of the
century, mitigating, adapting
to, and reducing the effects of
climate change.
When I served the state at Ener,
I saw the agency's effort to
cobble together the necessary
resources and the right amount
of employee time to answer this
challenge from a lot of small
sources that the legislature
gave to us.
SB 83 centers the challenge in
the agency budget, and I believe
that budgets are policy
documents and therefore kind of
moral documents and that
therefore, the legislature and
the budget that you produced
should reflect and fund the
hardworking innovative, and
committed staff at these
agencies, and they'll find the
new right ways to approach this
generational challenge. Thank
you very much. I urge your
support.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Tarren Villa. I'm from the Pablo
of Hamas and I'm here with you
with Nim Native vote.
New Mexico is home to a diverse
multicultural community that has
been stewards of the land for
many, many generations. However,
mineral extraction has
devastated lands, devastated
those lands that farmers,
ranchers, and many other
communities to rely on in order
to preserve our cultural
heritage, SB 83, I mean this
bill looks to address this
problem specifically.
by developing strategic plans at
the executive level to ensure
that while we look towards
addressing climate change and
ensure that we meet net zero by
2050 that we preserve our
cultural heritage but also
understanding that there's a
need for clean sustainable jobs.
For those reasons and because we
know that you all love the
cultural heritage from Mexico.
We asked the Duless on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you for that. Um, we'll
take 2 online if you'd like to
speak in support, please raise
your hand.
James
James, let's go with James.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm James Poviwa.
I am the vice chair of the
sustainable Economy Task Force
and chair of its community
advisory council, the task force
and council were created by
legislation in 2021, with the
charge of creating a long term
plan for our state to transition
to a sustainable economy. The
task force is administratively
attached to the economic
development department.
As a state, we will not achieve
this important initiative unless
our state agencies have the
resources they need to
accomplish the task.
SB 83, the innovation and state
government fund will strengthen
state capacity, equipping
agencies with the resources and
expertise needed to support
clean energy initiatives, a key
element to laying the groundwork
for a sustainable economy in
which one in which all New
Mexicans thrive and our land and
water are protected. This
concludes my comments. Thank you
to the sponsors, Senator
Stewart, and I urge the
committee members to vote in
favor and do pass SP 83.
Thank you. We'll take one more
and Lynn.
Good morning, chair and
committee members. My name is
Alyn Hall, and I'm here to ask
your support of SB 83. I am the
CEO of Prosperity Works. We've
been engaged with state agencies
over the last several years on
the implementation of the
Community Energy efficiency
block grant, which passed by
this legislature in 2022. We
worked with two different
municipalities to apply for
these funds to bring much needed
energy efficiency into
disadvantaged households. The
first announcement on awards
from this fund were made last
March. It took
Almost a year from award
announcements to get contracts
out. And the critical work that
the legislature authorized in
2022 hasn't yet started.
Our state agencies need support
like what is offered in SB 83 to
get critical work out started
and completed. They are
understaffed and
under-resourced, and they really
need help. I urge your support
of this bill and thank the
sponsors for all their work on
this bill. Thank you.
OK. Thank you for that. And is
there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition, if
there is, please raise your
hand.
OK, then, um, going back to the
sponsor, anything to add before
we go to the committee.
I don't think so, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Representative Murphy.
Hey, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
and Julie Barnes. Did I get that
right, Ms. Barnes?
Um, good morning.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, Ms.
Barnes, um,
$10 million divided up amongst
the various state agencies, get
that, um, is it, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, uh, is, is
this in the budget?
Mr. Chairman, uh representative,
yes it is. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Senator. I appreciate
that explanation. Um, I note
that, um, and I think I'll get
this right, is that um the funds
are appropriated state agencies
to achieve net zero emissions,
implement sustainable economic
policies, provide technical
support for grant applications,
addressing climate change,
implement or reduce barriers to
climate change policies. I think
that's a fair summary. Would you
agree, uh, Mr. Chair Mr.
Chairman, yes.
Thank you very much. Um,
My question is, aren't these,
um, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
aren't the state agencies
already doing this and I'll just
ask it this way, what is you,
what, what is new and unique
about about this.
Mr. Chairman and Representative.
I think what's new and unique is
actually us helping state
agencies to do the work that
they have to do.
Yes, they've certainly been on
under the executive order for 6
years, and as you heard from
James Poviwa, um, they're
working together on a
sustainable economy task force.
Uh, so, um,
I don't think we've, we've
funded them adequately for many
years for this particular work
that they're doing.
So, that's really the purpose of
it is to try to kick start some
more in the last two years of
this administration. Um,
there's, um,
Now there's communities that
want help and all of these
agencies try to work with that.
Um, they have a grants that they
give out, they could use this
funding for that.
Um. People need grant writing
assistance, um, they could use
it for that. So, technical
assistance to our communities is
always asked for. This will help
fund that.
So it's just a way to help them
continue their work for the next
several years, and it's a 2
year, it's over a 2-year period,
these funds.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator.
I appreciate that explanation.
Um, I would note, I think I'm
fairly close on these numbers
that some 5 years ago, I think
the state budget was somewhere
around 5 or $6 billion and now
it's almost twice that. I assume
that the state agencies' budgets
have probably gone up quite a
bit as well and, and just a
short time I've been here, I've,
I've, uh, I've seen that, um,
they've gone through a budget
process and um do you
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, do
you feel, do you feel like they
really have the bandwidth um to
take on um the additional work.
I know, um, FTE shortfalls and
and many agencies, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, um, you know,
can they really effectively
deploy these resources. Do you
believe that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, absolutely,
and all you have to do is read
the FIRs from every agency
saying what they're gonna do and
how important this funding is
and how they'll use it, so, um,
I think this will extend their
bandwidth.
and helped them do the work that
they're under the executive
order to do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator. Um, I, I draw your
attention to page 4 of the bill.
Um, lines 5 through 7, the
addition of new jobs statewide
and replacement of jobs that
rely on the extraction or
development of natural
resources, and I note that the
most recent numbers, I think,
put direct oil and gas industry
jobs and necessarily extractive
jobs because that could include
mining and other things, but
somewhere around 35,000 and
another 100,000 plus that are
supportive of that, and
I've, I've yet to see in my life
here in the state where
That level of employment and can
be replaced. Um, I note, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, uh, the
state's done an awful lot to
attract industry or done a lot
to attract, you know, companies
and, and sometimes those jobs
are in the, in the few
thousands. And so, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um,
I, I view this as a, as a, as a
very high lift and trying to
replace those jobs and Mr.
Chairman, Senator, could you
kind of walk me through how you
see we can replace 35,000 jobs.
Mr. Chairman, this bill is not
to replace those 35,000 jobs.
There is a need to have more
people that can work in the
clean energy fields, um, there's
a request uh for those uh uh
from San Juan, uh, they want $7
million to set up a uh
technician program, the
technical program to work in the
clean energy field, so we, we've
got, we've got lots of people in
this state, uh, that
we need to have jobs for, I
mean, our unemployment rate is
started to go up. This doesn't
replace any of those jobs. It
does say, uh, let's certainly
have the ability to train people
in jobs that are not in the
extractive industry. Uh, that's
what this does. We have
community colleges all over the
state that are offering programs
like that, but certainly our
state agencies, uh try to ensure
that those jobs, uh, job
training.
are up and running, and so
that's what this tries to do,
help state agencies with those
jobs that they want to help
produce.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator. I'll just, um, I'll
just conclude with this. It, it
does say the replacement of jobs
um in the bill. And uh to me
that just, um, when you wanna
replace the job, it's, it, it
sounds like, you know, valued uh
uh not you, um, Mr. Chairman
Senator, um, I mean, generally,
uh, sort of sends the message
that perhaps those jobs aren't
very welcome in the first place.
I'll conclude with that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and Senator.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, um, the chairman and
Welcome, uh, Madam Prote.
Um
Me wrote to him uh
On um
Page 2
912.
provide technical support to the
7 entities.
Ali for grants.
How is that?
Um, technical support, how does
it unfold?
How does that happen?
So Mr. Chairman, this is the
task for the state agencies to
provide technical support to
people who want this funding.
Uh, so, um,
Right now, all of these agencies
have granting programs, uh where
Communities, industries, uh, can
seek funding that we put in into
the bill into the budget.
So, some of them have enough
grant writers and technical
support others don't have
enough. You look through the
FIRs uh state land office is
looking for a grant writing
position to assist in bringing
funds to the SOO um economic
development department has one
FT assigned uh to support
interagency efforts, uh, they
would like another one, so this
is to help the agencies give
technical support.
for that grant process.
Casey.
Mr. Chair Representative, I just
wanted to add when we went out
into the community to look at
the need for this and the sister
bills that the Protem has
brought one of the major things
the community said is that
Uh, a lot of entities don't even
apply for grants because they
don't have the support to do the
entire grant application. There
was a very serious need to
support those that are
interested in doing the change.
So this was specifically put in
at the uh I think the prote
always supported it, but at the
request of um a lot of the rural
communities and a lot of the
communities you often speak in
in support of and and support.
Um, to allow them access to a
lot of the opportunities that um
that maybe the major cities have
the ability to do so it was
really an equity piece.
Thank you for that, um.
her chair and let her prote, um,
and I, um.
On the same page.
Line 15.
Implement and they.
Or reduce.
The barriers
implementing climate change
policy.
However, we reducing.
the barriers
With this legislation in
relationship to the Department
of Transportation.
Mr. Jack.
So Mr. Chairman, I, I do have
one example of that. Uh
You know, the Department of
Transportation is part of the
governor's uh economic order,
and they have been trying to
look at these issues, so
One example is that
In the dimming, where 10 goes
through stemming in the southern
part of the state, Interstate
10.
Um, they have a very high of
pollution rate.
And what the Department of
Transportation is considering
doing is changing the exits and
entrances to highway 10, um, in
that area.
They would need a plan. They
would need funding, etc. for it.
Um, so that's, that's just one
example of how a community is
saying, you know, we don't like
these pollution levels. People
are getting sick, kids are
getting asthma, etc. and the
Department of Transportation is
trying to see how they're
involved in it, so thinking more
clearly about
What transportation does around
the state where the pollution
levels are high because of that,
uh, is, is their task. So I'm,
I'm looking forward to what all
of these agencies do with this
funding, but that's one that the
Department of Transportation is
actually told us about.
Well, thank you for that
specific example, Mr. Chair
Madame Protem.
How would that apply to one.
In terms of reducing the
barriers to the environment
department.
chair.
So, Mr. Chairman, the reducing
the barriers to adaptation or
mitigation. It's kind of the
overall charge for the state
agencies. Uh, so they just do
that in different ways. The
environment department is tasked
with the job more than any of
the other agencies, but they're
really tasked with monitoring
and attempting to lower methane
emissions in the Permian Basin
and in the.
northwest part of the state.
That's where that methane is the
worst. Now we've, we've, we've
been able to do methane rules
that have tremendously helped
and I think the oil and gas
industry is proud of that
reduction, and so is the state,
uh, but we're, we're not there
yet. We still have very high
percentage of that thing that's
being released, and so, um,
The environment department is uh
Trying to work with communities,
uh, to, uh, to look at how else
they can uh reduce those
greenhouse gas emissions.
Thank you for that.
Mr. Chairmen and.
Lastly, um,
Item C, page 2.
You kind of explained that in
layman's terms.
Yes.
Mr. Chairman, so this, this
part.
I,
um
I put in its remark governmental
accountability Act.
And it basically says,
If we have a downturn.
Significant downturn.
And we don't have money for uh
what we've appropriated. This
could be part of the funds that
say, uh, we will pull that back
and use it, uh, you know, if the
federal government does as much
to the state as we're worried
about, uh, we will have to pull
back on numerous funds, and we
wanna be prepared with that. So,
uh it's the finance committee
folks that put this in the bill.
And I support
Thank you for that, uh, madam.
him, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Presentative Henrich.
Thank you, Mr. Jarre. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you expert. Uh,
I'm, I'm gonna expand a little
bit on representative Murphy
said, cause I'm gonna, I'm just
basically gonna stay on page 4.
And I know the last time we, I,
I, I'm guessing it's a sister
build to this that we heard a
couple of weeks ago, basically,
um,
Is that right? So Mr. Chairman,
so Bill you heard before was
Funding for communities. This is
funding for state agencies, but
it's, it's very similar because
these are the requirements that
are on our agencies right now,
uh, both from the governor's
executive order and from the
bills that we've passed, the
sustainable economy task force
that's been set up.
So all of those are integrated
in these two films. So Mr. Tay,
Senator and expert, uh.
I, I do agree with what
Representative Murphy said, and
I asked the question on the last
bill that we heard, and I was
told it wasn't a job creator as
well.
But when I read a, the addition
of new jobs statewide and the
replacement of jobs that rely on
the extraction or development of
natural resources.
So that's in the bill.
That tells me that this is
supposed to create new jobs
statewide and the replacement of
jobs.
So to his question, I had the
number of 30, but it's between
300 to 35,000 for the oil and
gas industry, and I've got the
same numbers I had last time.
Solar has anywhere from 2000 to,
we'll call it 3500 is what their
guess is for jobs, permanent
jobs in the state. Wind has
1,192 permanent jobs. These are
as of 2023, so I'm sure there's
some fluctuation.
If this says these jobs are
going to be replaced the jobs of
the extraction or development.
How is that?
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator. Mr.
Chairman and Representative.
We're not gonna replace 35,000
oil and gas jobs. It's not the
purpose of the belt.
We certainly have heard from
committees of communities that
want better jobs outside of oil
and gas.
Um, so that's what this is, uh,
to try to promote uh jobs that
are outside of oil and gas, that
are in energy uh renewable,
renewable energy, uh, so, and if
you read the FIRs, they are
requesting money for Cop growth.
Uh, so this is not a replace all
the oil and gas jobs. It is
trying.
To expand beyond that, uh,
I keep going back to that San
Juan request, $7 million so they
can stand up and technical
expert a program for the
renewable industry. Uh, so we're
getting requests from people
around the state who are
concerned about, let's have
better jobs in the renewable
industry.
That's part of it. It certainly
work for solutions, they are
focusing on trying to recruit
and retain firefighters.
Uh, which we need desperately,
especially since it looks like
the federal government is
cutting federal funding for
firefighters. So this is kind of
an all hands on deck.
Or trying to create jobs and new
industries outside of oil and
gas.
So Mister Chairman and Senator,
so maybe the language on that
should be to create new jobs in
the renewable energy, because as
it says right now.
The word that y'all chose for
this bill was replacement.
Of jobs.
So I, I'm just reading, reading
the legislation in front of me
and letter A says.
I, I could get, I could
understand it if it said the
addition of new jobs statewide
in the renewable energy field,
but that's not what this says.
This has replacement.
So I was just, I'm, I'm a little
confused on that, how we keep
saying it's not to replace the
jobs when that's the word that
was chose, um, and I have
learned very clearly in this
committee, which I never paid
that much attention to, so I am
very thankful for, for some of
the discussions we've had with
Maize and shells and bees and
that replacement means
replacement to me. And so I'm
just interested in that of, of
how that is. The other thing
I'm, I'm a little interested in
is, you know, the greenhouse
gas, the
zero emissions. I know where
we're trying to get to. I heard
in the testimony or or some of
the the folks that spoke, um,
when we're trying to go net zero
and replace the the extraction
industry. Do we know what it
would take to complete the.
Replace the energy that was
created in New Mexico, let's say
this last year.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I'm
not interested in doing that.
That's not what this bill does.
We're gonna have oil and gas for
many years, and I one am
grateful for the revenue that's
been raised to help public
schools in particular, and other
industries in our state.
This isn't a get rid of 35,000
jobs. It's, let's help create
other jobs besides those, so I,
I don't have that information,
Julia.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
can just expand on that, so.
Um, to get to net zero emissions
does not put oil and gas out the
business. The um major oil and
gas companies, many of which are
here in the state. I've already
committed to reach net zero, and
they're not committing to it by
going out of business. They're
committing to it by reducing
greenhouse gasses, which is when
the methane is typically
accidentally released, there's a
leak in the pipeline and there's
a or something's not as
efficient as it can be, and it's
actually
Um, quite.
Uh, amazing to look at all their
sustainability plans and their
commitments. They have thousands
of pages. So it's not putting
them out of business, it's
asking everybody to everyone in
the state to step up.
Um
The bill itself, I think as we
discussed previously, has an
ability to help oil and gas and
many others through our state
agencies to achieve that. So
I'll give you one example, which
is the state land office is
getting many, many requests to
look at large um transmission
lines which could help electrify
the oil and gas pads. When we do
that, it's going to help those
companies that have already
stepped up with those
commitments.
To reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions.
So I just wanted to provide you
with an example where I
At least in my opinion, I
believe the protes.
It actually will assist oil and
gas to do what they've said that
they've done, and many of these
companies
have been great partners in this
state in Colorado elsewhere.
Mr. Chairman, uh, senator and
expert. No, I, I hear what
you're saying. I guess my
question still is, is not the
replacement of oil and gas. Do
we know what it would take to
replace the energy they created.
If we were to go solar or go
wind or things like that.
Um
to to get quicker to this
emissions and, and as we heard
earlier, there's been quite a
few bills on both sides on
renewable energies, and we have
to go this direction because
it's the only way we're going to
get to net zero,
to greenhouse, uh, gas, all
those things. What would it
fully take?
For us to get there.
Mr. Chairman, that's not the
purpose of this bill.
And I don't, I can't answer
that.
I mean, I want more jobs in the
renewable industry,
uh, and people want to be
trained in those jobs and
communities want money to train
people. That's the purpose of
the bill, Mister Cha Senator and
expert. I appreciate that. I
guess it's, it's interesting to
me when I, when I keep hearing
these bills over and over, uh,
it's, there's been quite a few
in this section, um, and, and,
and I understand most, we keep
saying we're not trying to
replace oil and gas, uh, that is
here.
Um,
Uh, the point I'm getting to,
because I hear it in testimony
over and over and over, not, not
from the two of you this
morning, but some of the things
we've heard, is how farmers, you
know, and oil and gas, it kind
of felt like they didn't think
we're working together type of
deal.
The numbers I find interesting,
you would take 1.25 million
acres.
of the solar panels.
To create the same energy that
oil and gas did this last year.
It would take almost 71 million
acres.
of wind, some turbines to create
the same energy. I just think
that's important as we're
looking at this type of stuff.
I, I understand what you're
doing because I think there's
other bills, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, we've heard this year
that, that are interesting, uh,
we're trying to get solar panels
to schools. I think that's a
state agency. I mean, there's a
number of things that, that we
have done to try to move in
that, and I get that, uh, you
know, I think of a small town
wants to try to put solar on
their buildings, um, that would
be interesting. But
The way this is is written and,
and the way I'm reading it on
page 4, I just keep seeing this
replacement, um, and so that's
why I'm interested in it, Mr.
Chairman, Senator. That's all I
have. Thank you.
Thank you, Representatives
represent Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and Senator, um,
A little confused with the kind
of logic behind this bill from
the standpoint, Mr. Chair and
senator.
Um, we've been under the
governor's executive order,
right, for 6 years.
The governor has had all of her
agencies bring forth budgets,
budget requests.
Every
Every year
We've seen the budget.
Expand dramatically in 6 years.
And so, I mean, to to to be 6
years into this governor's
administration and to say,
That
We've not funded this.
That just doesn't make sense to
me.
I, I did serve on appropriations
for a couple of years, so I have
seen the budgets, and I've seen
uh some of the reasons for, for
it, so I'm
So just, just, just it's more of
a statement than a question. I,
I just
I, I don't understand the
governor would put forth an
executive order and for 6 years
wouldn't try to get money.
for that purpose.
Um, but Mr. Speaker, and Mr.
Chairman and gentle lady.
Um
I am a little interested in why
there is grant language.
In this bill, who would be
receiving
On the receiving end, provide
technical support to entities
applying for grants and other
funding that seek to address
climate change. Who could apply
for that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we have uh
entities all over the state that
apply for this kind of funding
every year. I mean, our state
agencies have grants proposals
that they accept.
Uh, for fun.
This would enable them to do
more of that. And certainly, you
know, we can, we can argue about
the budgets every day, um.
We, I don't think we ever use
the governor's budget.
You know, we, we have a deep
dive through LFC and then we
have our own budget. So uh I
don't think that we have fully
funded the request from state
agencies.
Probably ever in my time up
here. Uh so I think this is
appropriate now. I don't think
it's very much money, and I
think it will help these
agencies work together for the
next several years.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and and
Senator.
Um.
Respectfully, I know that the
governor brings her requests and
LFC comes back with a request
and we meet generally somewhere
in the middle.
But it can't be argued that the
budget has
Nearly doubled
Uh, during that time frame. And
so it's not for a lack of
funding going to agencies, it's
not for lack of the ability of
state agencies to also uh use
money within their budgets and
move things around through bar
requests and and other things.
Um, but
Just to go back to this uh
entities applying for grants,
entities, those are
State agencies who, who would be
applying to state agencies for
that because Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady in this, uh, Mr.
Chairman, gentle lady, gentle,
I'm now I'm not like debating on
the floor here, no, Mr. Chairman
and Senator
Matoprote.
The the other bill that you
brought before us about a week
ago, SB 48, has the exact same
language as far as entities
being a technical assistance for
agencies.
To be able to apply for grants.
Which, what entities are we
talking non-governmental agent
uh uh entities who can apply for
these grants?
You know, in every agency has
rules around that. Uh, so I
can't really answer that for
aggencies, but in general, it's
state, it's cities, it's
counties.
It's the rural areas, the rural
areas apply for money constantly
for our state agencies. So it's
the, it's the people that always
apply for that. So San Juan
Community College has tried to
apply for money for that program
that I talked about, uh, so, um,
it's, you know, tribes and
nations. I mean it doesn't
restrict it and Julia can
answer.
Um,
Mister Chairman, Representative.
The
Grant funds that we talked about
the last time, for example, the
grid modernization grant fund is
energy, minerals and natural
resources. They would assist
anyone that needed that help in
the grid modernization grant
fund, the community energy
efficiency Development block
grant, which is called Seed, is
it energy minerals. There are
huge numbers of communities that
can apply for their low income,
um.
And housing and affordable
housing, um, efforts. DOT is
gonna get money for EV
infrastructure and pedestrian
infrastructure, those are gonna
be grant funds, so those are
typically as, as this committee
pointed out, the last time.
These funds are standing up
existing grant funds, so yes, if
he, there's gonna be a grant
fund for school buses to apply
for that. So,
There's many sectors in in
addressing climate change that
are supported already by this
legislature having stood up
grant funds.
They already have had some
funding and then with the
protime is also seeking to do is
to add more money to that. So
those are the grant funds
examples of grant funds,
although there's more if you'd
like me to give you some more
examples. Uh, no, Mr. Chairman
and, and, um.
Uh, Senator and Julia.
No, it just seems like those are
the same people under the
community.
Benefit fund who can apply.
That's why I was asking. I don't
see a distinction here. It seems
like
The community benefit fund was
was already directed it's almost
to me it's the same
presentation.
But it's a different bill, and I
don't see a distinction between
who can apply it seems like
If I were the and and Mr.
Chairman and and Senator, you've
mentioned
San Juan, the San Juan request,
which I'm surprised you're
requesting that, because we, we
did, uh, try that. We had a
program in San Juan County, but
there are no jobs came of the uh
solar technician.
Uh, uh, program. They had a
program that that was uh over I
believe about 18 months before
they did away with the program
because
They weren't that they weren't,
it was kind of unnecessary.
There were no jobs associated
with it.
But
It seems to me that San Juan
Community College can apply
under
The community benefit fund.
Or under this fund. It just
seems like it's a, it's a
duplicate fund for the same
purpose.
So Mr. Chairman, this, this bill
helps state agencies stand up
the community benefit fund, and
other films that we have passed.
So this is to help state
agencies that deal with requests
from all over the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Uh, question I asked, uh,
concerning Senate Bill 48, I'm
gonna ask it concerning this and
is there a reporting mechanism,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, yes, there's a, uh, Mr.
Chairman, there is a well laid
out reporting program. It's on
page 3. every year they have to
report to the DFA.
I have to uh follow the counter
billing Government Act, number
12, they have to talk about
their uh grow program fund, if
there's any changes to it, what
they've done with it, uh, so
this is what we do with state
agencies when we get the money
we require them to submit
reports to show how they're
spending the funds, uh, uh, to,
uh, see if they if there are any
change.
Government results in
opportunity program and um to uh
follow the accountability in
Government Act.
So, thank you Mr. Chair and
Senator, so they're gonna report
to DFA, but is there a report
that comes back to the
legislature, or is it just their
regular report that they give
when they come seeking requests
or during L during uh
legislative finance interim
committee of their overall, I,
I'm just wondering if for this
particular fund, is there a
specific
Report, or is it just part of
their general reporting that
they would do.
When they give an account of
their agency.
And Mr. Chairman, this, this is
a requirement for this specific
report.
So, these agencies all have to
come before the LFC in the
interim, but that's when they
talk about the work they're
doing, um, they will be
reporting on this consistently,
if we pass it, um, because
that's the requirement laid down
on page 3, section D. So that'll
be before LFC, they have to do a
formal report to DSA, which LFC
will get, and then in the
interim, they can talk more
about it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Senator. I, I, to me, I don't
see this as a different report.
It seems to me it's part of that
same report. I, I don't see a
specific report of
How were the funds dollars
distributed.
How would these fun dollars
spent.
I see it as being just rolled
into their.
report.
I, I appreciate it. I understand
why you're, what you're trying
to do. I see we're trying to get
more money for this purpose, but
Mister Speaker and, and, and uh
uh gentle lady I just or um Mr.
Chairman and man, we have spent
a lot of hours on the floor
because that's becoming
automatic. Um, um, Mr. Chairman
and and Senator, I appreciate
this. I know this is a passion
of yours, um, it just seems to
me that there's a duplication of
dollars here, duplication of.
For and
And I, and to me, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and, and, and senator
with respect, this has been the
governor's priority for 6 years.
It has been reflected in her
budgets, um, this just seems
like, uh,
I should say icing on the cake.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It was in girl.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and thank you.
Yeah
Thank you.
Um, I've been listening to the,
um, debate discussions your
questions and I just wanna make
sure that I uh follow correctly.
Um, this replace language and
somebody just mentioned this to
share like the example of San
Juan, uh United station, uh,
well, um, was this replaced
language is about helping
workers like this and Juan
station find jobs, Mr. Cher.
Mr. Chairman, in part,
I mean, you know, I keep the
referencing that San Juan
request because it's still
active. They're still trying to
do that. So, a workforce
solutions is uh is laser focused
on firefighters and emergency
responders, recruiting,
training, retaining. So that's
part of this. Um, there's lots
of other activities that the
state agencies are doing now and
want to continue.
Around adaptation or mitigation
of climate change issues. Uh, so
Jos is part of that, but it's
not the primary focus. The
primary focus is to really work
and give up.
Funding to our communities that
need it.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Sir.
Yeah, that one came to my mind
because I know not everything
has been taken care of that even
though we have well legislation
try, but you know.
People still
Having the consequences of that
impact. So I was thinking this
fun could actually assist in
whatever the parts have not been
taken care of. It seems to me
that, so I just wanted to make
sure that this situations like
this that this is where this
could be applied, um.
Thank you, Mr. Sher. Thank you,
bye.
Thank you, Representative uh for
questions from me before I ask a
couple.
Um
Senator, um,
Unfortunately, he lives in
Montoya left. Uh, I wanted to
follow up on, on his comment on
page 2,
The language providing technical
support to entities applying for
grants, um.
We've seen the the term entities
and other bills, uh, and have it
meant.
Uh, either for profit or
nonprofit companies.
Um, and I, I've been concerned
that we've been passing bills
that say we can provide grants
to nonprofits, and I don't
believe that's the case, uh,
unless it falls under one of
the, you know, specific
exceptions to the anti-donation
clause.
And at least one of the, the Ey
bills, they said.
Oh, don't worry about that
language. Uh, we'll take care of
it at the agency level.
And like I
I do worry about that language.
um, I
Just sort of this is a comment,
not really a question. I would
rather see language like
political subdivisions or
You know, uh, you know.
Other things that might not
qualify as political
subdivisions, but are still
public entities, you know,
listed as eligible grant
recipients.
Uh, just to keep us on the
straight and narrow. So that's
just my two cents, um.
In center you reference the uh
The allocations to different
agencies, um, that language is,
is stricken in the bill, is that
in the budget allocation, those
allocations,
yes. OK. Great.
Uh, thank you for that.
Uh, Representative Garcia.
Mr try moving past's
recommendation onenate Bill 83
as amended.
I said.
Um, you, if you take the book.
of a beta.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia, yes.
Representative Girola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representatives? No.
Representative.
Viana.
returned the Queen.
Yes.
So you have to pass 5 to 2.
Um, thank you, uh, that does it
for today. Uh, we may or may not
meet Saturday. I'll let you
know. We are returned.
