Roll call is closed. We have
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Currola.
Senor
stro cucharalos de mas.
Con.
Yeah, you know.
The Creator, give us willingness
to give the best of ourselves.
An openness to listening to
others.
May we have wisdom in discerning
what truly serves the needs of
the people of our state.
May we continue to believe that
we can make a difference. Amen.
Gentlemen from current debaca
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, San Miguel
Representative Zamora, lead us
in the Pledge of Allegiance.
And the gentleman from Berlin
represent de la Cruz with the
pledge to the New Mexico flag.
We
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Good afternoon to you
too gentle lady from Santa Fe.
see no objection. It is so
ordered.
Good afternoon members.
Good afternoon Representative
Block.
Welcome to Legislative Day 16.
34 more to go.
Lots of 3rd reading to get
through today.
Announcements
Miscellaneous, the gentleman
from Cru de Baca Guadalupe
Roosevelt San Miguel
representative Samora with
miscellaneous business.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'm here today to deliver some
bad news.
That we heard coming out of
Clovis.
There were 3 kids involved in an
altercation by the high school.
And
One of the kids wound up getting
shot.
As far as I know, Mr. Speaker.
And people of this chambers,
the, the kids survived. I hope
he's doing well.
But this is another tragic
example of juvenile crime.
And things that are going on in
our communities.
We just have to ask ourselves
time and time again if we're
failing our kids.
And what we can do to prevent
these things from happening.
We don't want any more New
Mexico families to suffer.
In going through what this
family is going through today
and so much that we've heard in
the past.
Of juvenile crime.
Mr. Speaker, we just pray for
the family. We hope that, that
everybody's doing well and
And hopefully that
We
As representatives of our
communities can can come
together.
And, and do some bipartisan work
where
We can
Help change the course of the,
of what's going on in our
communities today.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
All my friends and people that
we work here in this chambers
with.
Thank you for hearing our
message.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Announcements generated from
Valencia Representative Mirabal
Moya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, and
members of the, of the
legislature, um, I rise today as
a witness in uh to the slow
motion collapse of healthcare in
New Mexico, uh, what I'm about
to share is not my experience,
it is the reality um of New
Mexicans living across the
state. This is uh the a doctor's
perspective, so, um, he says,
we're losing doctors, we are
losing specialists, we are
losing our ability to care for
patients. Every day I hear my
fellow physicians, nurse.
practitioners and hospital
staff. The stories are the same
no matter where they practice.
UNMGI oncology has stopped
accepting new patients, even
those within the system.
One of their 3 oncologists is
going on maternity leave and the
other is leaving permanently.
There is no one to replace them.
UNM rheumatology has been closed
for new patients for months.
They cannot recruit. They cannot
hire. Southwest GI has stopped
taking referrals, more than 2000
are in limbo, waiting for
appointments that don't exist.
Women specialists of New Mexico
has stopped covering
Presbyterian after 50 to 60
years of service.
UNM's pediatric specialty
clinics are overwhelmed, a 3
year waiting list for autism
evaluations. 1600 pending
referrals for pediatric
cardiology.
Uh, limits on accepting
referrals for infants under 44
months old, 4 months old.
The last independent surgeon in
New Mexico is leaving in April.
Physicians are burning out
entire specialties are
disappearing. Families are being
forced to cross state lines for
care.
So this is happening right now,
so Mr. Speaker, we have patience
in peril. We are not talking
about hypothetical risks. This
is not a warning about the
future. This is happening now.
We are watching the Mexico
doctors walk away from their
careers, not because they want
to, but because they cannot
sustain the fight against the
system that is failing. And when
doctors leave,
New Mexico's patients suffer. We
are at capacity. We are
overwhelmed, and if we do not
act now, there will be no system
left to save. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady, gentlemen
from
Chavez, Representative Murphy.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. um, good
afternoon. Um, we normally in
the day, uh, with a joke, and I
thought that, uh, we might start
the day with a point.
And so, uh, I'll give it a go
here.
The Kelly sins and a bit bites
in and we watch the table
turning free as a tricone
reaches down and down for an
ancient buried sea.
The roughneck sweats and bitches
black as he drops the steel down
the hole and then driller grins
and fogs it in to reach the
liquid gold.
The old man works and worries
hard and does his 24 hour day
and says it's only 4.
That sometime rich thick pay.
But we all know who played the
game in the Republic of oil. The
money alone will not repay the
devilish double toil.
Now there's something more than
the dollar score, and though we
may break and die. We produced
the blood of peace and war and
that price is not too high.
My father wrote that in 1961. I
was maybe 18 months old, um, I'd
also note that uh.
Um, by my count, I think there's
some 23 bills moving at various
places through the chamber that
impact the oil and gas industry.
I'd also note that, uh, it's
been about 2 months, just shy of
2 months since we came in and,
and, uh, the price of oil was
$80 a barrel. It's about 67 now.
It has big implications for our
state. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Announcements, gentlemen from Re
Riva Sandoval, San Juan,
Representative Linte.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon
members. I, I rise today and I
contemplated whether or not I
wanted to even speak up, but.
If you go outside today, it's
gonna be windy. It's forecast to
be windy and windier as the, as
the day goes by and
Where I come from, the people
say that when the wind comes
like that, it's good because it
blows all the bad things away
from your community, from your
family, from yourself.
Great.
But the reason I, I rise today
is because uh there are a number
of protests going on in and
around my district in relation
to Tesla.
We recognize that that that
Tesla's a a manufacturer of a
vehicle and the person that owns
it is in this case today, a
polarizing figure in the world.
And it's unfortunate that I find
that now that um,
We have 2 Teslas in this state,
both on tribal lands. One is on
the Dambe, uh, Pueblo and the
other one is on the Santa Ana
Pueblo and both of them were
lauded by expanding their
economic development just 23
years ago, accepting by
everybody saying oh how great
this is gonna be for the
environment and everything else.
And today this afternoon,
there's gonna be another
protest, uh, by a group of
individuals.
That
Um
As I understand it, are a part
of a progressive movement.
And I say this because while I'm
a member of the Democratic
Party, there are things as as a
democrat, I don't stand for and
that is one when people feel
like they have the autonomy and
the authority to stand on.
Indigenous land aboriginal
indigenous land to protest an
indigenous business that is
doing well and thriving for
their communities and I say this
because we have been as
Democrats one of the staunchest,
most loyal people to the
Democratic Party.
And simply by association to
this business, these people have
become
More
Violent
More defacing in regards to
their attempts to burn cars,
deface buildings, and that's not
OK on tribal lands. That's not
OK.
So I would be complicit if I
don't stand up to say something
and I don't say this in a manner
to say, OK, Democrats go run to
be a Republican or Democrats
stay with us.
That's not what I'm saying. What
I'm saying to my tribal people
in this chamber, in this
building, watching on television
in the state around the country
is that.
We take care of ourselves as
tribal people we take care of
ourselves, we take care of our
lands, we take care of our
families. We don't need a
Democratic Party to take care of
us. We don't need a Republican
Party to take care of us. We
take care of ourselves. So when
this stuff happens, I have no
choice but to push back and say,
I hope the wind blows today hard
enough, so all those people go
back home. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Members take note. Thank you,
gentlemen. Any other
announcements?
Hey, gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 124 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker, we are an adoption
of favorable committee report
for House Bill 124. All those in
favor signified by say not.
All the supposed name, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212.
Has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for Health,
Energy, Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212 do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move.
Have to take a deep breath for
this one.
We are on an unfavorable report
for House Judicict Committee
substitute for House Energy and
Natural Resources Com substitute
for house with 212, but a
favorable committee report for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
energy, environment, and natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212.
And should I actually say the
title of the bill?
Her and polyfloy protection Act.
All those in favor by saying I.
I suppose me.
If you say no, you're gonna have
to say the title 10 times in a
row. The ISI that committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 242 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker, we
are adoption of favorable
committee report for House Bill
242. All those in favor of 59.
Of both the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 259 as amended, has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker.
We're in adoption a favor
committee report for house with
259 as amended. All those in
favor and if I say aye.
I suppose
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
commit to him has been referred
House Bill 354 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move it report for house with
354. All those in favor if I say
I.
I suppose,
the ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 361 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move it.
We adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
361. All those in favor
signifyinna.
Of the supposed name.
yes report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 417 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr. Speaker, movement option.
We're an adoption of favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
417. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose nay.
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance Committee to has been
referred House Bill 195 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Speaker, adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
195 as amended. All those in
favor signified to say aye.
I suppose, nay.
You guys have a committee report
adopted. You're not supposed to
vote on your own bill,
gentlemen.
Decorum please.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 394.
Has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house energy, environment,
Natural Resources Committee
substitute for OA 394. All those
in favor signified by CNI.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, I have be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 199
has had it under consideration
reports same as recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr.
Speaker, adoption report for
Senate Bill 199. All those in
favor, say I.
All those opposed name.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
team has been referred Senate
Bill 112 has headed under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Wa
Gallego's chair.
Mr. Speaker, we adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
committee report for
Senate Bill 112. All those in
favor say no.
All the supposed nay, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to him has been referred Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 119 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y Gallego's chair. a
option.
For adoption of a Fall committee
report for Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 119 as amended. All those
in favor signified by C 9.
All those opposed name. The ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic Development Committee
team has been referred Senate
Bill 158 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y Gallego's chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption report
for Senate Bill 158. All those
in favor C5 but say 9.
All those opposes name,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to has been referred Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 169 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Dorian Y Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption
committee report for Senate Tax,
Business, and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 as amended.
All those in favor by saying I.
followspo name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred Senate
Bill 179 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
report presented by 179. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
All the supposed nay.
I have it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred Senate Bill 9 as
amended, has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen, chair.
We are an adoption of a
favorable community report for
Senate Bill 9 as amended. All
those in favor signify by say I.
All the supposed name
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 83 as
amended, has had it under
consideration, reports Samon's
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen's chair.
We adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
83 as amended. All those in
favor signified by say 9.
on the supposed name.
Yeah, I saw it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
seki and water resources
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 37 as amended has
had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass and then referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Cristina Ortez's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 37 as amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
All the supposed name
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick. He has some water
resources committed to him has
been referred Senate Bill 100
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Cristina Ortez chair.
Move adoption. We are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
100. All those in favor send up
say I.
All the supposed.
Yeah Sait report adopted.
gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business messages.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 357 as
amended. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 434 as amended and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson, a chief clerk.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
click to read.
Senate Bill 52 introduced by
Senator Souls, an act relating
to public officers, adjusting
the reimbursement rates for
travel by privately owned
automobile and privately owned
airplane. Senate Bill 52.
Send 52 have been read to us by
title is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267,
an act relating to housing
requiring owners to provide
notice to dwelling unit
applicants of fees related to
applicant screening, requiring
owners to return an applicant
screening fee in certain
circumstances requiring owners
to provide notice of fee
increases, reducing the limit on
late fees, expanding private
remedies, declaring an unfair or
deceptive trade practice. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute.
for Senate Bill 267.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill
2667267 haven't been read twice
by title is ordered print, it's
not order printed, it's just
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee Senate Bill 267, House
Judiciary Committee.
Set up Bill 302 introduced by
Senator Paul, an act relating to
gaming, requiring a background
investigation of contractors
seeking unescorted access to
facilities of the Gaming Control
Board, amending applications and
renewal renewal requirements for
gaming licenses, certifications
of finding sustainability and
work permits, providing for
background investigations of
applicants for a license or
permit issued pursuant to the
New Mexico bingo and Raffle Act,
Senate Bill 30.
Senate Bill 302 haven't been
read twice by title.
I referred to the House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 303 as amended,
introduced by Senator Paul, an
act relating to gaming,
requiring that gaming machines
meet the standards and
specifications of state laws and
rules. Senate Bill 303 as
amended.
Senate Bill 3003 as amended
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 166,
self and harm to others in the
mental health and developmental
disabilities code and the
assisted outpatient Treatment
Act, Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 166
haven't been read to as my title
is referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 219
as amended, an act relating to
health care, enacting the
medical psilocybin Act, allowing
the use of psilocybin in an
approved setting to treat
qualified medical conditions,
creating an advisory board,
providing powers and duties,
amending the Controlled
Substances Act to remove
psilocybin and silicin from the
schedule for purposes of
qualified medical treatment,
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for medical
psilocybin.
Prescribing a penalty. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 219 as amended
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 219 as amended
have been written by title is
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate Bill 357 as amended,
introduced by Senator Hamblin,
an act relating to utilities,
creating the essential services
Development Act to allow state
support for infrastructure
projects that allow access to
Internet, energy, water, and
wastewater services primarily
for residential purposes. Senate
Bill 357 as amended, introduced
by Senator Hamblin. 357 is
amended, having been read to us
by title is referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 434
as amended, an act relating to
public schools requiring
academic support, intervention,
and high impact tutoring for
students with a mathematics or
reading deficiency, establishing
requirements for high impact
tutoring, Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 434 as amended.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 434
as amended having been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Education Committee.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered. The gentle
lady from Bern Leo
representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker and members of the
chamber. I'm excited about our
special guests that are on the
rostrum today. We are
celebrating film and media day
here at the house, and we have
some exciting guests. Are you
all ready? So here we go. So if
you have been watching Dark
winds, we have two of the stars
of that program right here with
us in the chambers. First we
have Ryan Begay. Ryan, would you
send
up
Welcome to the house.
We also have Diana Allison.
Diana.
Welcome to the house.
And we have another special
guest we have with us.
Body
Raiders? I'm sorry, I missed his
name there and he also stars in
Dark Winds and American ride, so
he's joining us today and then
we have with us the film and
media coordinator Paul Baca. So
Paul, would you please stand?
Welcome to the house.
And then we have Diego Romero
and he starred in a number of
films including, including
gunslinger, Primo ballet, and uh
Busto. Let me get this right.
It's called um
Ballad of Buster Scrubs. So
there we go.
Welcome to the house. So thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We are in the
guest of the film and media
giants.
Thank you. The Screen Actors
Guild American Federation of
Television and Radio Artists.
Welcome to the house. We are
glad that you're here. We are
honored that this industry
continues to provide jobs and
opportunities, particularly for
young people and uh keep doing
what you're doing. Thank you.
Welcome to the house. Earlier
today in the gallery, they are
gone now, but we had the wild
friends. These folks were
students from Low Wallace
Elementary School in downtown
Albuquerque. I did give him a
shout out during roll call, uh,
I went up there and said hi to
them, but they are gone now.
They're hopefully eating pizza
at Upper Crust.
Uh, but if they watch the
webcast later because I'm sure
they're gonna get home and this
is the first thing that we're
gonna do is go watch the web uh
cast archive. Let's give them a
big round of applause Hockmany
Hill.
Lew Wallace Elementary School.
Welcome to the house.
I know that's the first thing
they'll do.
Mom, can you put on the webcast?
I wanna see the House of
Representatives.
do its thing.
Any other announcements before?
Any other announcements going
once, going twice.
Journal lady from Santa. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business 3rd reading of
legislation.
It is.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo
representative Anaya, are you
ready on item 24 on the regular
calendar.
Yes, I am, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that a
replacing House Bill 518 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, with
House Bill 518, we are simply
asking for a day of observance
for LGBTQ folks, uh, right
alongside African American Day,
Hispanic Culture Day, API Native
Hawaiian Day. It's a chance to
celebrate what we have and who
we have while we have them. And
with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for questions. There is
gentlemen from Monteroenter
block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind, gentle lady from
Bernna Leo, please yield. Mr.
Speaker, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So, oh my gosh, I almost
missed this bill. I'm the only
one on the board, so I had to
run in here before you guys like
rapidly passed 10 or 7 or 25
bills. So, Mr. Speaker, General
Lee, I'm a little out of breath,
but I did want to ask a few
questions about this bill, and
I, I asked a few in committee,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
first of all, I was reading the
bill. Can you tell me a little
bit about
What this means is, is this like
a state holiday? Is this a paid
day off for state workers, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, no, it
is not.
OK, cool.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
that people wouldn't like get
the day off, for example, if
this bill passed, is that
correct?
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we do not.
Good, I'm glad. All right, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then I was reading the bill
and I, I know I brought this up
in committee and I know that we
talked about it a little bit,
but
We talk about LGBTQ.
And so I did kind of have a
problem with, I, well, I see it
as a pejorative, as a slur. It's
like calling someone the F word
in my opinion. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm just wondering
why we included that in this
bill when we're trying to honor
certain people and certain
people in this community do not
like to be called.
The key word.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I really appreciate
this question. I am queer, um, I
do not see it as a pejorative,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
throughout history, even the
word gay has been used as a
slur, and we use it currently
today.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, I guess it's like
tomato, tomato, maybe
potentially cause, cause I'm gay
and I, I'm OK with being called
gay, and I guess you are OK with
being called the keyword, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
not OK with.
Well, it, it does have a really
long history because back in the
day,
And I, I won't go into it too
much, but
People have been called this
word as, as a slur to try to
Kick some people down. So for
example,
A certain senator with a certain
committee back in the 19.
50s
actually just use this as a
criteria to go after people
claiming they were communists,
even though not every gay person
is a communist, right? So, Mr.
Speaker, general lady.
I, they did use this word in
that context, which I did find
Kind of bad, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also think when
it comes to putting it in state
statute, that's a little
different in my opinion, uh,
putting that Q word in state
statute. So, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, can you just tell
me a little bit about that?
Sure, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I'll refer to
what I just said, um, Gay has
also been used as a slur
throughout the years and we have
that in state statute multiple
places, um, I also identify as
queer, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and I would like to
see myself represented in the
legislation that I pass.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I guess it's,
that's nice, and I agree with
you on that when it comes to.
You wanting to feel represented
in the legislation that you
passed, but when we pass
legislation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it is for the 30 30,000
people in each of our districts
and the people across our whole
state, over 2 million people.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I guess I just, I do have some
still have some concerns about
that with that word and I'm, I'm
sorry to keep belaboring that
point in every committee that
this comes to which all seem to
be the committees that I sit on
for some reason, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I, I
do think that I, I do have some
more questions. I will just let
that slide for now. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I did see
the word.
Expansive.
It says Q word or expansive have
made to New Mexico. So Mr.
Speaker, generally, can you tell
me what contributions someone
who is expansive have made to in
Mexico?
I don't know if, I don't know
anyone who actually identifies
as an expansive.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there are many people throughout
the state of New Mexico who
identify as gender expansive,
um, but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, you know, we spoke about
this before in the government
committee. Part of the reason
this was included is because uh
when you are drafting, you
cannot uh include any symbols or
acronyms. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, we wanted to name
this LGBTQ plus day, um, but we
were not able to add the plus.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so.
And I, I get that, but we
couldn't put like PLUS instead
of a plus sign.
Uh, Mr. Speaker Dulan, I'm
afraid that would feel a bit out
of context and uh probably uh
grammatically incorrect.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
you know, I, I love grammar.
We do too, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you
Mr. Speak a comma.
I do, I do love a good comma and
a good.
A good
AN instead of an A in front of
an employee things like that.
Mr. Speaker, so, OK, I, I get
it. And, and so.
I guess I, I don't really have
too many other questions other
than I do.
Have some reservations about
this, but many reservations
about this bill, especially with
that Q word because in the 1960s
and in the 1800s, I mean, it
was.
Pretty much like the worst one
of the worst words you could
use, and it's also, it's a
history, for example, like the
word gay, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it used to mean happy,
content.
High-spirited.
Right? And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the word
historically the word.
The Q word
I'm not gonna say because I feel
it is a slur. It was used a lot
of the time to be meaning
strange, unusual, abnormal. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
just, I just don't see how we
can conflate.
The word gay versus the word the
Q word.
And, and say, yeah, we, we're
reclaiming it.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because then that would also
mean that people could use the F
word against us and we would
start reclaiming that too. So
why don't we use that word as
well.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
said before, I would like to see
myself reflected in the
legislation that I pass, and I
am a proud queer person.
OK, well, fair enough.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I guess I don't really
have any other key questions
about that on this, but I did
wanna just share my concerns
with the body just to tell
people why I am voting against
this bill. One of the reasons,
and also just to say that it's
important that
In New Mexico, I don't believe
we don't, I don't believe it's
good to put slurs in state
statute. And so that's why I
cannot support this. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
There's there's further debate,
young lady.
gentleman from San Juan Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady yield? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I do.
Yes, um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I know there's another.
Bill, and I'm just gonna briefly
reference it. That's gonna be on
the, that's on the sitting on
the house floor.
Uh, that we, I believe we're
going to hear soon.
And it's, it's, uh, House Bill
169, which is uh.
Public protection.
Public expression protection
Act.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um
When it comes to, to, to, to
freedom of speech.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we generally
Don't compel speech.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the reason I'm bringing this up
is in your
In your bill, um, on the first
page.
On a on line 18.
It basically says the 4th
Tuesday of January, each odd
number a year.
Shall
Be known and celebrated.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think that's, I think the
problem I have with this is that
That we shall.
It it's basically says New
Mexicans shall celebrate and Mr.
Speaker and generally, the
problem I have with this is that
this appears to be compelled
speech.
And I, I, I don't believe Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
That in general
People who would describe
themselves as
Uh, LGBTQ plus generally would
like uh for speech to be
compelled, um, because sometimes
that compelled speech might not
favor.
Uh, the folks who identify, um,
in that, in that list. So Mr.
Speaker and generally, this is
more of a statement.
Rather than
A question
And that is, I don't believe
that we should be, we should be
in the business of compelling
speech.
Uh, where we have done that in
the past where it's been um
Uh, even
Uh, sang the national anthem or
singing the national anthem or
saying the Pledge of allegiance.
Um
There has been a lot of
discussion as to whether you can
compel that.
And so Miss Speaker in in in
gentle lady.
I'm not gonna do it here. I was
gonna bring an amendment to
change shall.
To me
But I would hope that that would
be friendly, um, at some point
as this makes it through and I
see this is a house bill, so as
to go over to the Senate.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I would just, especially I know
we're gonna have debate on House
Bill 160 69 uh here in the, in
the near future.
And
Um, I would just like to state
that.
Free speech
We're really going to believe in
free speech is not compelled and
Mr. Speaker, and generally, that
is the problem I have with this.
Uh, Bill, and I will not be
supporting it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker from Santa Feerrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gen gentle person from uh
Bernna Leo Yil. I do yield to
the general person from Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle person. I
appreciate you bringing this
forward today. I have not heard
this in committee before, so I
was interested in seeing this.
This seems to particularly
affect um the chamber and, and
the building itself. Is that
correct, gentle person and
speaker? Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle person, yes.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, our gentle person,
and I, I wanted to go back to,
um, some of the conversation
about how language changes and
how, you know, new terms are
adopted. It kind of reminds me
of the term Chicano, which I
embrace for myself. The history
of the word Chicano originated
in, uh, an essay about the
chicanery of uh of Mexican
American people and uh and our
access to rights and over time
the Chicano movement became a
big piece of our history and it
it is recognized in a number of
pieces of what we do in this
building, uh, Mr. Speaker,
General Person, um, and I am
curious because you
You did bring up, you know, the,
the, the, the amazing um uh
contributions of our LGBTQ
communities and I'm curious, uh,
gentle person, Mr. Speaker, can
you offer some examples of what
they have the contributions from
the LGBT community from New
Mexico.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and general person from Santa
Fe, um, there is a whole slew of
history within this building
itself. Um, I actually think
about some of my LGBTQ elders,
uh, who are actually in, uh, the
other chamber, and Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentle person from Santa Fe,
um, if we wouldn't have a day
like this, there wouldn't be a
way to celebrate and uh be seen.
Um, and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
person, um, that is just one of
the many contributions, uh, that
folks have made to not just the
body but the state of New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle person, and I,
I do want to acknowledge that we
do have days dedicated to other
folks, um, you know, we had
Asian American Day here that was
fantastic, you know, uh,
wonderful, uh, these lion
dancers that came out. Um, we
did have a, you know, Hispanic,
um, cultural day here also at
the chamber as well, um, you
know, the way I see some of
these days are giving our uh our
folks, our families.
you know, our, our working
families, uh, examples of what
they can celebrate every single
day about being New Mexican and
how, how, however they may
identify every single day. Um,
it's my hope, uh, Mr. Speaker
General Person that um that this
opportunity will allow our GTP
oh my God, LGBTQ families to uh
celebrate as well, all that they
have achieved over time. Um,
it's, what else do you
anticipate may come out of
having this as an official day.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle person,
um, there are a few things. I
think one of the most important
things is uh being able to bring
the LGBTQ community together to
figure out what is important
both historically and presently,
um, in terms of our community,
one of the things that I know we
talk about, um, when we're
talking about the LGBTQ
community is that our life spans
actually aren't as long as
non-LGBTQ persons and so Mr.
Speaker and gentle person I
think about all of the lives
that we can celebrate today, uh,
while we have them alive.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle person. I, I
appreciate that perspective. I
know a lot of times when we,
when we look at our, our debates
and we discuss, you know, what
may, what else can we do in our
legislation? What else can we
bring forward? I really do
believe this is an opportunity
to celebrate, um, what our
communities are doing every day
and not really look at how we
can help our communities thrive.
To your point, while they're
here and what we can do. So
thank you for bringing this
forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle person.
Seeing no debate, gentle person
to close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that House Bill 518 do non
pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 518.
The vote is now open.
Vo is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 43 in the affirmative, 11 in
the negative, House Bill 518 has
passed this house.
Uh,
now, um,
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on item number 46. I
am, Mr. Speaker, will you get me
to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill 346 with the
emergency clause has been taken
and is now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The,
this, um, updates our finished
hemp products, um, statute by
ensuring that we outli outlaw
synthetic cannabinoids, um, from
further use in New Mexico. These
have been harmful, unfortunately
to many people and go
unregulated in the marketplace
we update that as well as a lot
of the rulemaking within the can
or excuse me, the hemp um laws
to ensure that um we have
oversight over the process and
with that
that all stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Otero, Representative
Block.
Hello, Mr. Speaker. I knew Mr.
Speaker we have, uh, with the
general lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. I will.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. First
question I had, can you tell me
what synthetic cannabinoids.
Uh, which ones are we trying to
ban and then are there some that
we are allowing to stay.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids are defined in the
bill, um, and so that would be
specific to what we are banning.
If you'd like me to read it to
you, I can. And brief moment uh
there's been a request to remove
jackets, seeing no objection.
Uh, you may remove your jackets.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
leader. Well, this never came to
my committee, so I'm still
reading your bill, but if you
would be so inclined to read, I
would love to hear it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so some
semi-synthetic cannabinoids mean
a substance that's created by
chemical reaction that converts
one cannabinoid distracted from
cannabis sativa L directly into
different cannabinoid, provided
that semi-synthetic cannabinoid
does not include cannabinoid
produced by a decarbon dear,
decarbo oxalation or natural
occurring acetic forms of
cannabinoids such as tetrahydroc
cannabinolic acid into the
corresponding neutral
cannabinoids such as THC through
the.
use of heat, light, or without
the use of chemical reagents or
catalysts that results in no
other chem chemical change, um,
synthetic cannabinoid means a
cannabinoid-like compound that
was produced using chemical
synthesis, chemical modification
or chemical conversion provided
that synthetic cannabinoid does
not also include a compound
through the dear decarbo
oxalization of naturally
occurring cannabinoids from
their acetic forms or
semi-synthetic cannabinoid.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Very big words in
there. So I guess I'm just gonna
ask you to define some of those
very big words since they were
very, very quickly.
Shall I pull up my dictionary,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, or what
kind of definition are you
inclined. I would love that.
Thank you so much. But Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I guess my
first one would be regarding.
I believe you said.
During that definition.
Tetrahydrocannabinoid acid. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you tell me a little more about
what this acid does, where it
comes from, and why it's bad.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
tetrahydrocannabinolic acid
refers to delta 8, delta 9,
those that are commonly used,
um, in the marketplace that are,
um, unfortunately quite harmful
because they're unregulated in
the current, um, usage of this
cannabinoic tetrahydroc
cannabinolic acid. Um, it goes
unregulated, untested, and is
psychoactive and right now what
we're trying to do with this
bill is ensure that those who
are, um, typically being.
advertise for that, which we're
seeing across the state for
children. It's in convenience
stores, gas stations, etc. This
is not regulated by the Cannabis
Act. This is, um, a use of, uh,
this type of psychoactive
compound that we're trying to
outlaw here and when we use the
semi synthetic cannabinoid and
synthetic cannabinoid
definitions what we're trying to
do here is ensure that those
products are no longer
available. OK, thank you so much
for that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and so.
When we did legalize cannabis in
the state.
Did it also legalize these kinds
of synthetics as well.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, this
closes a loophole that hemp
derived cannabis is being
allowed for right now, um, which
we're trying to close, um, right
now within the Hemp Act, this is
the area of law that we're
discussing for this bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, this was
never intended and so
psychoactive compounds that are
unregulated is what we're trying
to do here.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady from
Santa Fe. So when we're talking
about psychoactive compounds,
how did these vary from
Traditional, I, I don't know if
it's called traditional, but
cannabis in general.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so THC
that's derived through this uh
process. Again, requires
synthetic compounds to be added
to them. So, um, it's a, it's a
highly concentrated THC that can
be hemp derived that we're, that
again requires a lot of
different compounds, um, that
when we're talking about
synthetics is included in this
bill is, is outlawed, um,
they're, what we understand is
that they require a lot of, um,
Foreign, um, elements that
aren't again, naturally derived
that go into these types of
products, Delta 8, Delta 9, and
everything else, tetrahydroc
cannot have like cannabinolic
acid, um.
In that same sort of category,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
we're trying to essentially
remove from commerce.
Thank you. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you, and I, I
give you props actually for
being able to pronounce that a
bunch of times because I barely
pronounced it one time. So, Mr.
Speaker, generally, when we're
talking about these can
cannabinoid.
Sorry, it's so hard to say
cannabinoid like substances,
Mister Speaker, gentle lady, can
these be like shipped into this
state. How do people get access
to them? And are they legal
other places? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so we are outlawing
the manufacturer and sale of
this currently, um, in Colorado,
uh, they are allowing the
manufacturer for this, but they
don't actually allow the sale.
So we know that there are at
least an opportunity for out of
state companies right now taking
advantage of this.
loophole selling this product
that goes unregulated to New
Mexicans, which we don't know if
it's safe or not. We know that
they can advertise to children
again, it's not falling under
our Cannabis Act. It falls under
the Hemp Act for this, um.
This, uh, unnaturally derived
THC derivative, um, this
semi-synthetic cannabinoid Mr.
or and synthetic cannabinoid,
um, is being allowed for
purchase. We know of about at
least one, probably only one
manufacturer that we have
learned, um, that's producing
this um type of cannabinoid in
New Mexico at this time, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and we
talked a little bit about
children being, being the target
of some of these advertisements.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe we said in Colorado, it,
it's legal to produce but not
sell. And so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is there kind of like a, a
pipeline from Colorado or is it
mostly some stuff that is
currently in New Mexico being
made here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we only know of one
manufacturer in New Mexico, um,
the.
We've learned through the
process of, um, this
legislation, uh, most of it we
think is coming from Arizona,
Colorado, um, we don't know a
lot about where these
manufacturers are coming from.
Again, this is not the area of
uh psychoactive uh THC that we
regulate in the state of New
Mexico. We'd want that
completely if you have a THC
product, we want it to come from
New Mexico. Not only that, it's
illegal for it to come from
anywhere else but New Mexico and
so this is why this bill is.
so important.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then when we're
talking about the hemp Act, can
you tell me a little more about
that because I, because I own a
lot of, a lot of things that are
hemp. I know this is not
technically like making fabrics
and stuff with this. This is a
little more hardcore. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to the hemp Act.
Why is it under this act instead
of like cannabis because I
believe hemp.
Mainly is not really used in
this way, but I'm sure I could
be wrong in that regard, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so in 2019,
we enacted our, um, hemp Act for
manufacturer specifically. We
are expanding the oversight for
this to retail now understanding
um how lucrative, of course, um
um products can be, we've seen
everything from CBD oils and
other things that are commonly
understood, um, so we want to be
able to understand what.
that looks like, um, how we
regulate it and what it is that
we, the oversight over hemp
looks like, and that's what
we're expanding our oversight to
become through this spill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and uh
thanks for the information about
the hemp Act because I had no
idea that we passed it in 2019.
Well, not me, but all of you.
So, good job, guys. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, so I
believe when we're talking about
the bill,
We in one place I think I saw
it, it was D carboxylation, I
believe and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering how
did we decide that this
Which I believe is a
straightforward thermal reaction
should fall outside of
semi-synthetic classification.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, so
that the decarboxylation of
naturally occurring acetic forms
of cannabinoids, um, would be
excluded, um, from this process.
OK, so
That falls outside. And I'm, I'm
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what was based, how do we
make that decision? Was it based
upon scientific consensus,
industry feedback, or some other
standard that it was not
included, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, precisely that, um,
both and uh that this is a
common use in the sense of this
is a naturally derived process.
What we're trying to outlaw here
is the synthetic and
semi-synthetic process. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that, that did help me on
that one because I was
wondering.
And uh
Kudos to you for being able to
actually pronounce it. So, uh,
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, I'm
wondering what
What practical methods will
regulators use to confirm?
That it cannabinoid was produced
solely by dear dearboxylation,
which I need to learn how to
say, say that 10 times fast.
Rather than by like a catalyst
driven or chemical regent based
conversion.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
through this law and through the
manufacturing process generally,
um, the manufacturer would
provide sort of the ingredients
list, the how it's made, um, the
background on, on how these
products are derived so that we
know that it meets the
regulatory standard and that
what's being done isn't, um,
outlawed through this law.
Or any other previous law
promulgated.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So this would would
this require them to know
specifically how it's made when
it comes to
Step by step, and is that
similar to like cannabis
products, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so again, this is in
the hemp Act, but yes, we have a
rigorous testing process and
lab, um.
Oversight as far as how these
products are made to ensure that
it's safety for the safe, safely
consumed for the consumer, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And then when it comes to the
actual.
Chemical compounds of this
cannabinoid, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
The way that we define what is
synthetic and not synthetic,
does it have to have some kind
of chemical involved in it, like
what, what if it's just like a
genetically modified in some
way. How, how would that work?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, these are additive
chemical compounds, what we're
talking about are those things
that are typically added to the
process. It's not naturally
derived, so we would know if
there was any sort of, um,
compound that would be added to
it.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then what if
they said, let's just say you
see some products, they said,
oh, it's not using any kind of
synthetic.
Compound and so or maybe they
just change some kind of
compound in, in it. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering how does the state
Figure that out. If they tell
you a a mistruth, they tell you
a lie. Do you have to
specifically get chemists to
look at the product and then see
the compound within it. If you
do have some kind of case where,
where there is some ambiguity as
to what's inside. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so again, the
manufacturer provides that sort
of recipe list and how to make
it, um, and then they're through
rigorous lab testing, we would
know if there was any, um,
disparity between what was being
said.
Or purported to be um within
that product and then what was
actually in that product through
that lab test. So then whatever
discrepancy may come up, that's
when the regulators get
involved, um, to ensure that the
product is safe, that what's in
it is what's being, um, listed
in those, uh, formats that the
regulator receives and then
ensures that that product is
exactly what, um, the
manufacturer said it was.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that does help me,
and then we talked about lab
tests rigorous lab testing. Do
we know how many labs we have in
the state that will test these
products.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
currently there are 2.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and where are they located?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
understand that one's in
Albuquerque and one is in Las
Cruces.
OK, got it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and are
these state run labs or does it
have to be privately contracted
out. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they are private laboratories.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then when let's just say there's
a situation where you do see
some, some cannabinoids that are
potentially
Synthetic
In that instance, do you, does,
do you have to force the person
to cease selling them while
they're tested if they said, oh,
they're just regular cannabis,
something like that. Would you
have to cease them actually
selling those products while you
get it tested, or how does that
work in practice with this, the
changes in your bill. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, should this
legislation be passed, the, the
manufacturer or seller of the
synthetic or semi synthetic
cannabinoid would no longer be
able to sell that product in New
Mexico.
ago.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And then
do we know how many of these
products originate from outside
of not just the surrounding
states, but the rest of the
country.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
we, we don't have that data.
That's why we're here today to
try to understand and grapple
with the fact that we know it's
being sold across the state. We
know it's coming from out of
state. We know of at least one
manufacturer in state and we no
longer want this, um, product on
shelves due to the safety, um,
component that we know is, is
right now dangerous for folks.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady so that.
is interesting. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, does this have a
requirement to actually
Track how much comes from out of
state when it does indeed become
law? Is there some kind of
reporting because we said that
we don't have any data, so how
will we get that data to see if
there are a lot coming in or
just a few.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
precisely with this law is how
we would be able to enforce the
fact that if this is being
found, um, in a, on a retail, in
a retailer, um, facility that
this would be able to be
impounded and would no longer be
available. The regulators would
get involved in essentially
remove those, um, unsafe
products from shelves.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then a
majority of these products.
These delta.
8 and 9. How is it, how did they
begin? Is it cannabis where it
starts, or is it a hemp?
like a hemp plant, which, which
kind? Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
we're looking at hemp through
this law. So we're only talking
about hemp plants.
OK, so in no way, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady could cannabis be
synthetically or changed to be
synthetic in any way, is that
correct? Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we only allow, um, natural
cannabis that's on the a
separate side and then again
this would be essentially
outlying any synthetic hemp as
well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And this also, does
this ban synthetic cannabinoids,
like, like cannabis.
Sativa.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't want to confuse the body.
This is just talking about hemp.
And this is just talking about
THC derived hemp that must have,
um, synthetic cannabinoids
attached to it in order for it
to be, um, psychoactive in the
way that it works in the human
body, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So
we're, we're outlawing that
entire process of THC derived,
um hemp through this bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just wondering if because if
we're talking about just hemp,
What if we ban the hemp.
Uh, what is it? Delta 8 and 9
synthetic products could these
manufacturers then attempt to
genetically modify.
The cannabis.
plant
In order to achieve a certain
goal that's similar to the hemp
plant that's kind of I know it's
so confusing, but that's the
question. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm sure there's
gonna be some process to figure
something out, this definition
for everything we understand to
be in the marketplace right now
regarding hemp is ensuring that
these products, these
psychoactive THC products that
are semi-synthetic or
synthetically derived are no
longer available on the hemp
side. We want all.
psychoactive compounds within
the cannabis, uh, realm to be in
the Cannabis Act. We don't want
folks to confuse it with hemp.
We don't want these products to
be convoluted together and we
don't want any crazy
hypotheticals to come about when
it comes to how we regulate
hemp, and so this is why we're
here today, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Totally. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And I guess that's
kind of why I'm asking these
questions so people understand
there is a difference between
hemp and cannabis, absolutely.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's why I just, I don't
want, you know, sometimes when
we are are lawmakers and we
think about who we're trying to
regulate. We also have to
psychoanalyze the bill and who
it actually is intended to focus
on. So sometimes, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you have to think
from the perspective of somebody
who would want to
Not follow the law and say, OK,
well, if I can't do this, then
let's try this. And I guess
that's kind of why, why I asked
that question. Well, if it
doesn't work with hemp products,
they could just try to
synthetically alter cannabis
products, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it seems like that
is closely regulated, so I'll,
I'll continue on this line of
questioning, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're talking
about
Thresholds, is, is there any
kind of threshold for a THC
product.
That has to be below a certain
delta 9 threshold, is that?
Something that we regulate
currently.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so THC
and hemp products cannot exceed
concentration for more than
3/10% and that's current law,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
what are these, these synthetic
products, what is their
threshold usually at? Is it more
higher than 10, 3/10 of a
percent.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, when we've been trying to
figure out and grapple with
these products that are on
shelves, we understand that some
of these products synthetically
derived can be 0.89 to 0.94. So
very high, uh, rate of THC and,
um, certainly beyond the
confines of what's current law.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So I'm wondering
when it comes to
That so 0.94. So I guess you
would just need to take 3.
Of the one that's 0.3, just to
get.
To that threshold, correct? So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do we
have amounts that we regulate as
well?
Mr. Speaker, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so,
so you can't buy more than
One
Every time you buy it, I mean,
I'm just wondering how do we
regulate it amount wise? How
many amounts can I, if I wanted
to go buy some hemp product that
did some, some of this THC
derived.
Whatever it does.
I don't know what it does, but
if I did,
Buy it, what amount would I be
capped at? Would it be 10
products, 11 products, how many
products, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there's no cap for
purchasing hemp products
currently.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then I'm wondering when it
comes to these synthetic
cannabinoids that are hemp.
Derived
What kind of reactions do they
have when it comes to them
versus the traditional hemp
product that has THC in it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
part of the problem, right, with
all of these synthetic compounds
inside of it that psychoactive
effect could differ. There's no
regulated testing. There's no
understanding of concentrations
and consistency with these
products, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's why we're just
trying to keep anything
psychoactive and higher, um,
concentrations of THC within the
realm of the Cannabis Act. We do
not want hemp derived THC to
confuse consumers and whatever
psychoactive
effect it may have, uh, we just
don't want to be in that, that
area, um, within the hemp realm,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. OK, so I get, I get
that. I do, and I don't want to
confuse anybody with them, but I
do kind of want to understand it
just from a really basic level
for people. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so when this goes
into effect, what would I still
be able to sell in the state
that's a hemp product with THC
in it. What would I be able to
sell?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, first, I
did not introduce my expert,
John Roderick, um.
From the New Mexico, um.
Environment department.
who is an expert in hemp.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
when we're, can you repeat your
question? I want to make sure I
answer it properly. Sure, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, so what
would you still be able to sell
in the state.
After this is enacted, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so all we're
outlined here is the manufacture
and sell of semi-synthetic and
synthetic cannabinoids, so delta
8, delta 9 is commonly known.
All of the other hempteride
products that folks know and
love, such as CBD and other, um,
products that folks are using in
the open market, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, none of that is
touched by this bill.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then does the
law make any distinctions
between
For like THC.
A
Levels in hemp.
Uh, versus the THCA levels in
Other products.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
derivatives you're talking about
are not specified in the bill,
no.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you. And then I, so when
we're talking about these, the
actual definition of
semi-synthetic. I know we went
over it rapid speed, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, could it
theoretically be somebody who is
Not just using chemicals, but
something that's also a
naturally derived substance that
they're trying to
To work into the
The hemp product.
Would that be something that
could be banned as well if it is
two different naturally derived
substances that come together.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so this
requires chemical synthesis for
both synthetic and
semi-synthetic, so the process
you're discussing has to have
had, um, some sort of synthetic
process to have been combined
with whatever you're talking
about.
OK, and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the way I read it is it
says it's a chemical reaction
that converts one cannabinoid
extracted from Cannabis sativa L
directly into a different
cannabinoid, provided that
semi-synthetic does not include
a cannabinoid produced via
decarboxylation of naturally
occurring acidic forms. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so a a
chemical reaction I'm, I believe
in my understanding.
is that you can have a chemical
reaction with two naturally.
Derived ingredients, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, in
the field of chemistry, you can
have 2.
Naturally derived compounds
together for a chemical
reaction.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
would that be synthetic then?
Because I know that, yeah, it's
a very basic chemistry, but
would it be synthetic if these
were two different naturally
derived substances that have a
chemical reaction.
Would that then make anything
that you had a chemical reaction
relating to the hemp product or
the cannabis sativa L, would
that
qualify as synthetic.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so if
you look at what is, it does not
include for synthetic
cannabinoid, it does not include
a compound produced through the
car decarbon oxylation of
naturally occurring cannabinoids
from the hirsitic forms or
semi-synthetic cannabinoid. So
we exclude those processes, if
it is two compounds that do not
meet that definition, then in
fact, it would be allowed.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So then continuing
on the definition though it says
also the use of heat or light
without the use of chemical
regents or catalysts.
That results in no other
chemical change. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Would that be
How would that work
Within a chemical reaction that
we're talking about here.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we would
love to invite you to a
laboratory to see all of this
take place so that you can
understand exactly the type of
extracts that work without
really showing you how this
operates in real time. It's, it
would just be looking at a a
variety of, um,
Both hypotheticals and what's
currently happening in the
industry to help you understand
that, but for the body's sake,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I assure
you that these definitions of
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoid or what we
understand to be um what we're
trying to outlaw today, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's being
derived, um, and what we
understand is incredibly unsafe
again untested, etc. um, but as
far as the process goes, um,
would love to take you to the
lab.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, if the speaker would
like, we can adjourn and go
visit the lab. That would be
fun. Maybe I'll send it to you
to go uh visit the lab and we'll
continue with 3rd reading. OK,
well then I guess I have to stay
here, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
if that's OK.
Worth a try though, Mr. Speaker,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, all right, let's talk about
the lab. Let's go into the lab.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Are there site visits of
production facilities and like
pla places they plant these
products and are the random
visits when it comes to the
environment department, which is
not RLD which oversees cannabis,
which is interesting, which I'll
get to later. But Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how do they, how
are we regulating this, uh, when
it comes to site visits and
actually seeing these products,
or is it more reactive where if
we see a product that we, we
find suspicious, then we
counts on it versus proactive
where we have these random
visits.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so if
you do grow hemp in the state of
New Mexico, you need a permit
for that through the
agricultural department for the
regulation of hemp, um, that
falls under the purview of the
environment department right now
all we regulate is the
manufacturer. This is why we
want to be sure that hemp
derived products that are safe,
we want to keep, we also want to
regulate them well under the
purview of the Environment
department as well, um, that's
what this bill gives us
permission to do, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Um, but I'm sure they're
friendly hemp growers around the
state that would love to look
at, love to invite you to their
operations. I know there are a
few in my district.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, John
Lady, and I, I think that's a
great, that's great. I, I've
actually toured, it wasn't, it
wasn't hemp, it was a cannabis.
Uh, plant in my district, but
yeah, if you have a list, I
would, I would love to see it
because I find it very
interesting, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're talking
about.
The department. Let's, let's go
back to the environment
department. Why did we choose to
put this under the environment
department rather than RLD,
which does indeed regulate
cannabis. Why did we choose
that? Because the Environment
department, they, they do a lot
of other stuff, well, as well as
RLD, but they do a lot of stuff
really relating to environmental
issues, hazards, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
hemp itself and these products
that could be THC derived, but
their hemp. How did we choose
them? Since it is, I mean,
honestly, it is a very
Scientifically and chemically
similar.
Plant. So I'm just wondering why
we chose an entirely different
State Department to oversee it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so first
and foremost, it's an
agricultural product, um, and
hemp can be used in a number of
different industries, um, as
everything from paper to
hempcrete, which is the concrete
substitute to CBD, etc. um, so
when we look at the regulatory
framework for what we're trying
to do here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the environment
department is very much the
appropriate regulator.
Um, when it comes to
psychoactive compounds,
medicine, etc. the, in the way
that we've regulated it through
RLD through the cannabis Control
Division on the cannabis side,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
actually are talking about
completely different plants. We
are talking about completely
different regulatory frameworks,
um, and certainly the end result
of what that plant, um,
produces, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally, so
I.
I kind of understand, but we
talked about it's agricultural,
of course, then why didn't we
put it just entirely under the
Department of Agriculture.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so as
you know, the agricultural
department as well as the
Environment department work
extremely well together. And
when it comes to an agricultural
product such as hemp. This is a
great sort of, uh, synergy
between both departments.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then could you then tell me when
it comes to the environment
department, since they do keep
track of this, how many
products.
That are just hemp derived. I'm
not even gonna say.
That are these Delta 9 Delta 8
just hemp derived are produced
in the state every year. Do they
have a figure on that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So there are about 20 different
hemp manufacturers in the state
of New Mexico, um, that are
regulated, uh, currently they
have everything from 15 to 120
different hemp derived products,
um, that are current that we
currently know about, uh, for
sale in the state of New Mexico.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that, that
did help me. And then when it
comes to the actual like
ingestible products such as
these that we're trying to talk
about how, like what percentage
of that 100 and
120
Derived products maybe.
Are there
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are you
speaking specifically about the
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoid.
Mr. Speaker, general lady, yes,
so THC A.
Everyone, I don't wanna say that
full word, so I'm just gonna say
that Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
we only know of one manufacturer
in the state that's doing the
Delta 8 delta 9 compound at this
time. OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so is this.
Manufactured an issue that we
have that we're trying to
address in this current bill.
Forgive me, Mr. Speaker, will
you repeat the question? Sure,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
one manufacturer is this
manufacturer someone who is
currently producing synthetic.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, and
once the state realized this was
happening, um, again, this not
being part of our ability to,
uh, regulate that manufacturing
process, those products are no
longer available.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I mean, I guess
they would not be technically
available legally though, right?
So I just, I don't wanna create
like a new black market for
something that we don't need to.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
there any kinds of
Taxes when it comes to excise
taxes on these products
currently? No, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then when we do ban this.
There would still be no excise
taxes on things like CBD, right?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we like
a number of other states would
be essentially combining efforts
to outlaw this type of substance
in, um, general commerce and so
yes, there would be no framework
for taxation. We just don't want
it on shelves any longer.
Got it. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I had
so many other questions because
THCA is very interesting and
some of these words are quite,
quite long and hard to say, but
I would love for our spelling
bee friend from the other day to
actually try to, try to actually
spell that because I probably
couldn't, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I, I do want to just understand.
So can THCA be produced.
From cannabis and be produced
from hemp? Can they both produce
this.
Specific substance. I'm just
trying to figure that out
chemically, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then currently
in the cannabis Control Act or
whatever we called it, did that
act ban these kinds of products
in that.
The the cannabis ones.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, we re highly regulate the
levels of THC within the
cannabis control division and,
and that act specifically what's
happening here is that you can
concentrate THC up to a point
where it is psychoactive and you
have a THC effect with the hemp
side and that's what again is
confusing everybody as to what
we want to be allowed to be
derived from the hemp process,
and that's why we're trying to
outlaw it.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I, I guess I asked that
because is the hemp product more
powerful than a cannabis product
when it comes to psychoactive
effect.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
depends.
On the product.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what if there was a synthetic
cannabis product that was
That was changed chemically in
the exact same form, fashion,
and way that a he hemp derived
product was, would it have the
exact same effect when it came
to potency.
Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
then I guess I'm just wondering
why we're regulating them
differently.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
they're completely different
plants and processes and because
we're looking at essentially
taking away the ability for this
synthetically derived THC
product to be allowed to have
that psychoactive effect of THC
and leave it in the realm of the
cannabis control division to
regulate and license THC
products.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, generally, I
guess I'm just gonna ask it
maybe a different way. Currently
in the state of New Mexico, do
we ban synthetically derived
cannabis products in any way on
a band like this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
would be a question for the
cannabis control division, um,
on the types of synthetics that
are allowed or disallowed under
the Cannabis Control Act.
Mr. Speaker, General Liddy,
thank you for that, and I know
that you're very
Closely following this issue
because you have bills like
this, so could you tell me?
If we do that or not, when it
comes to rulemaking or the law
that you sponsored regarding
this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I understand that,
again, they're possible, uh,
synthetics on the cannabis
control side, but again, highly
regulated that would have to be
disclosed to consumers and the
process would have to be allowed
by law.
by rule, Mister Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I guess that's kind of my,
my problem with the bill. Is it
Takes way different approaches
for things that are, and we said
they're totally different
plants, but they are very
similar plants that can
similarly be synthetically
altered. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in one way we're saying
one is heavily regulated through
RLD.
Which is cannabis, but one,
we're just gonna completely ban
totally in every single
instance, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is, did we do the total
ban when it came to hemp just
based upon the resources and the
appropriations that the
Environment department has or
what was the, the impetus for
this because I know that you can
get psychoactive effects from
the exact same.
Chemical alteration of cannabis
that you can with chemical
alteration of hemp. So why is it
that we're taking completely
different approaches to, to, to
these two plants that do seem to
me very similar.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
talked about excise taxes,
number one, when it comes to be
able to regulate the cannabis
industry. We know that the
people of New Mexico benefit
from that regulation. Number 2,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
never intended within the hemp
Act to allow for these
psychoactive THC compounds to be
allowed in the open market
unregulated and being pushed
even to children marketed in
packaging that is unregulated,
um, looking like different
substances.
that relate to cannabis but are
not cannabis. And so in this
unregulated space, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the consumer is very
confused. They can go online and
buy it at any time, whether or
not they're over the age of 21,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I was
never intended for us to have
this framework for folks to
basically go around the cannabis
law and provide a cannabis-like
product that was unregulated, so
we'd like to keep that all in
the cannabis division and we'd
like hemp.
To be all of these other great
derivatives that are in the open
market today, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that are safe and
easy and folk folks know exactly
what's in these different
products that aren't THC, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's the
purpose of this bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so.
I guess when we were
contemplating the 2019 hemp Act,
we did not in any way think that
someone could derive THC from
hemp in any way?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
2024, and we know what's
happening in the open market
today. We are here to regulate
the products that are unsafe for
folks and the confusion that it
has with current cannabis
products in the market that are
unregulated.
So we want to make sure that
consumers are safe when they
look at this, and right now
that's why we need updates to
this law, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So then
why didn't we go with the
approach like with cannabis and
just have an excise tax and a
regulatory oversight of these
types of products.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if you'd
like to try that bill another
year, have at it. This bill is
about getting rid of those
products today, um, for us to
ensure that consumers are safe
and knowing what's happening in
the open market, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Well,
unfortunately, if this bill
passes and gets signed, I would
have to.
Make it not illegal to sell
these and then I would have to
levy an excise tax on it, and if
we did that, it might be like, I
think right now it's almost
nearing almost 30% with GRT
excise tax, everything, so.
Currently, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the cannabis.
Industry, there is still a very
healthy.
Black market for cannabis
products. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when this is just a total
ban on these hemp-derived
products, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would see this as
potentially allowing for a black
market for these products
because it's just not available
at all, not taxed or anything.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I guess I understand
kind of the reason that you've
put this bill forward, but I
don't think it.
Treats these two substances
equally.
I do think that when we're
talking about the actual product
itself and the way it's derived,
the way it's created, I think
that they're.
is a loophole for cannabis, but
not a loophole for hemp. And so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I like
to be a little more equitable
when it comes to legislating,
and I don't find this bill to be
very equitable. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker. There is further
debate, lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentle lady from Santa
Fe, please yield. I will yield
to the kind gentle lady.
Thank you very much. And well,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I really care about my
community, my constituents, and,
um, especially about children.
So this, I think it was last
summer I attended a seminar
about uh children obtaining.
Substances that we really don't
want them to have.
And um I, I had my eyes open,
Mr. Speaker, to the extent of
this problem, it's pervasive.
And as it stands right now, any
child.
Any person actually that any
child as well can go into
certain uh businesses and
purchase.
Delta 8 delta 9 things like that
and it is a problem because.
These are just
not good things they're um
highly addictive for most
children.
And they're affordable and
available and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, need about 5 or $6
is all to go in and buy
something and it's called um.
Gas station uh.
You know, well, uh, can,
whatever they call it Delta 8
delta 9.
And so
Hm.
My, my hope is that your bill
will do something to keep these
substances from being sold to
children. Is there anything in
your bill?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that
would do that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so again, once we can
get a tamp down on the
manufacturers, the one that we
have identified, um, in New
Mexico that is actually creating
the substance, number one, we're
able to put a stop to any more
creation of this product in the
state. Number 2, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it allows for us to
outlaw any other state
manufacturer that may be
bringing these products in into
New Mexico that currently,
again, like you said.
with no permit, no, um,
Testing, no packaging
requirements, can now just go
into stores and be on every
possible shelf across New Mexico
confusing folks with a very
highly regulated product like
cannabis, um, that we have had
since 2021. So what we do have
in this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, gentle lady, um, are
some penalties for those who
break the law, for those who,
uh, would be trying to skirt the
rules that we would be
promulgating here and ensure
that both manufacturers and
retailers have to adhere.
to these standards, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
I know that school nurses in
many places have been forewarned
that there may be a lot of
students presenting at the
nurse's office who were having
epileptic seizures or whatever
seizures, uh many times caused
by these kinds of, of substances
and um I, I, I think the word
needs to go out statewide that
we need to really get a handle
on this, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I was told at the time I
believe that there's something
in the federal farm bill that
kind of
um, created the loophole for the
sale uh manufacturing sale of
some of these synthetics. Is
that, do you know anything about
that, Mrs gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes, it
created the loophole for these
types of products to be allowed
federally.
Thank you. And, and I've heard
you say, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, that we're really just
dealing with the hemp hemp
manufacturing Act, the focus of
this bill is him, but I noted in
the bill title that, um, and I
hope I'm reading this right, Mr.
Speaker, um, on page or page 1
line 13 is providing regulatory
authority over hemp, finished
products at retail and
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids banning the receipt
possession, advertising,
marketing, or sale.
Of semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids in New Mexico, uh.
And then I noticed, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that, um, further
along in the bill.
Uh, you actually provide
definitions that don't currently
exist in the Hemp Act and I'm
looking in particular at page.
4
There is a definition for
semi-synthetic cannabinoid and
then also a definition for
synthetic cannabinoid.
Uh, gentle lady, I'm just
curious, and I think this is
probably a good thing and will
be useful, but is there a reason
that's in this hemp Act.
Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So those
definitions, um, are essentially
the umbrella terms for delta 8
and delta 9. This is how the
process for which these products
are currently derived, and
that's why they're defined here
in this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
So gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, I
actually, uh, came to this
session this year asking for a
bill to keep these things out of
the reach of children.
And um in talking with the
drafter, um, came to the
impression that this is very
complicated and that if you say
one thing someone can change a
molecule and turn it into
something that wouldn't be
covered, so I ended up with a
memorial asking for a study on
this issue so we can really,
really fix the problem.
So, um, your bill may uh take us
a certain degree forward um in
the direction we need to go, um,
so I will.
I think just have another
question, um.
It says here in one of the
analyses, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm looking at that
says that this bill would bring
the states hemp industry into
line with federal law.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that, is that accurate?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this does get us in line with um
the Food Act and our ability to
essentially line up with what
the intention of that was, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and so
this would allow us to create
that framework and close the
loophole that's currently, um,
the one that you, uh, brought
up, Mr. Speaker Joli.
Thank you, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, I am.
I, I think we have a huge
problem with, with drugs in New
Mexico and I, I just think we
have to safeguard our children
and do everything we can to help
them have a good and healthy
life.
Uh, so this might be, uh, I
think, uh, something we need. I,
I remember, gentle lady in um
House Egg and Water Committee
some years ago hearing a
presentation about hemp, there
was an effort to launch that
industry in the state.
And um I learned some things,
uh, for example, hemp was used
to manufacture dashboards for
airplanes in World War II.
There are a lot of good uses for
hemp.
Um, and generally, I just, out
of curiosity, Mr. Speaker, I
have one last question. You may
or may not know the answer, but
it's kind of stuck in my memory.
I heard someone say, Mr.
Speaker, that if you have two
fields and one of them you're
growing hemp, and then the other
one you're growing uh marijuana
plants, cannabis, that they
would somehow that that would
cancel out uh some of the THC,
um, do you happen to know if
that's accurate, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I've,
I've never heard that before.
Um, that's a new one for sure.
OK, well, uh, kind of cogitate
on that a little bit more than.
Thank you very much for your
answers, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
very much. Thank you, gentle
lady.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Uh thank you, Mr. Speaker, does
the gentle lady from Santa Fe. I
yield, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, um, questions I have are
very similar to those that were
brought up by Representative
Brown concerning the uh
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids.
Um, um,
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and
gentle lady, I know that there
are, there are smoke shops
across the state. A lot of them
in, uh, unincorporated areas, so
they're not, they kind of get
around local municipality.
restrictions, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, would this
Restrict or or is this an
attempt to try and restrict.
Products such as the street name
Bath salts or
Um
Uh, synthetic pot.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if they
fall under the, uh, definition
of semi-synthetic or synthetic,
yes, indeed.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I hope it does, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the,
uh, I tried to bring a bill.
Uh several years ago as well,
and I ran to the same.
Problems trying to draft a bill
that uh that Representative
Brown did, um, and so I tried to
do an end around and.
Um
Go after the labeling of these
products.
And I tried to go after it, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady under
the, uh, uh, unfair practices
Act.
To have something substantially
labeled differently.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, when
you see those packages.
They're packaged to children.
Um, cartoon characters.
Uh, video game, pictures, um,
they obviously marketing to an
underage group and since it's
not listed.
Uh, as a.
Any class of drug, um.
It it
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
that we were having um
Traumatic tremendous psychotic
episodes.
With children and and
particularly young men, uh,
under the age between the ages
of 18 and 25 there for a while
in San Juan County where it was
just devastating. We had a
gentleman that
Went in and tried to attack a
group of people with a, with a
knife and then got in a
situation with cops and
eventually tried to attack one
of the cops and and died right
there and it was a it was this,
it's just a chemical reaction in
the brain that.
And, and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady where we we run into
trouble with this was
That a
A, uh, I guess at the federal
level, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, the
They would change one chemical.
Uh, in the, in the makeup of the
overall product and then it
would all of a sudden no longer
be illegal, so I, I hope this
does what.
What it, what you're trying to
make it do.
I hope so too, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Speaker and gentle
lady, just a question. I did get
my bill over to the Senate side.
And then I ran into opposition
there.
Um, I, I hope that this is, I
hope this is, uh, I hope you
prepared the way for it because
this is very, I think this is
very important. It's dangerous
that the medical workers don't
even know what they're dealing
with.
What they don't even know how to
treat this because they have no
idea what chemicals are in that
person's body when they get
there. So, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I, I wholeheartedly
support this if it even does a
fraction of what you're trying
to make it do. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
See you for the debate. I now
move that consumer and
I don't know that actually. Can
you help me out, Mr. Speaker,
please? We are on final passage
of House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 346 with an
emergency clause. The vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 54 in the affirmative, 7 in
the negative. How's commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill 346.
With an emergency clause has
duly passed this house.
Gentlemen from Dona Anna
represented small. Are you ready
on item number 44. Mr. Speaker,
would you get me to that point?
The record reflect that all
action is necessary for placing
House Bill 219 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill
219 as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the biller
House Bill 219 provides for the
development and designation of
Slot Canyon Riverland State Park
in Donana County. With that, I
stand for questions.
There is it from Sandoval,
Representative Collin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen from Donana, do you
yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from Sandoval.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen, could, um, we heard
this bill in.
Uh, rural development several
times, the first time you came
in, it was kind of a a split
decision 3-3 on this one.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this had to do with.
The feasibility study and the um
option two or option 3.
And um gentlemen, you went with
option 3, which is the more
expensive version for this state
park, correct? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, yes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, when I kind of asked you
guys why you had done that, um,
the senator had said that you
guys wanted the Cadillac version
is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't recall exactly what uh uh
my co-sponsor said, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, going with sort
of the more development to to uh
create more tourism and more
opportunities for recreation,
uh, is, was the option 3 and
that's the one that we selected.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so, you know, and whenever I
look at bills, I kind of look at
the um the cost of what we're
looking at for our taxpayers and
so we certainly want to be
fiscally responsible, so after
that committee meeting, I pulled
the feasibility study and I
reviewed all 90 some odd pages
of it, Mr. Speaker, and kind
gentlemen.
And, um, you know, so I went
through why they had recommended
option 2 and option 3 as well of
all the costs with that and
staffing that it would require.
And Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, um, you had come to
Representative Mason and myself
and before the 2nd meeting, yes,
kind of what would, why, how you
can get it to work to get it to
pass, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and so in good faith.
Representative Mason and myself
told you if you went with option
2, we could support your bill.
Mr. Gentleman and kind I mean
sorry, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman, so I am here to.
Uh, when, when you had said that
you presented the amendment to
our committee and then within
hours it was removed from
committee. So Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I do have an
amendment.
And I would like a roll call.
You can work.
Will you kindly bring the
amendment to the clerk.
who for the amendment to come
down, the official lobo score
Lobo's up 42, 33 with 12 minutes
left.
Over San Jose State, should we
just put the game on the screen
here? Forget third reading.
All those in favor if I was
saying a.
I'll suppose nay.
The nays have it.
All right, gentle lady, uh, can
you please.
Give me the number on the bottom
left.
OK, Mr. Speaker, it is
0.231933.1
and post it online, and then
we'll come back to you to
explain the amendment.
The gentle lady too.
Explain.
The
Amendment.
Mr. Speaker, the amendment is on
page one, line 25, strike 3rd
and insert in lieu thereof, 2.
So, Mr. Speaker, this would, um,
change it to go to the option 2
versus the option 3.
Gettleman from Donana's is a
friendly amendment, Mr. Speaker,
it'll be unfriendly, and I have
a couple of quick questions to
illustrate why.
Go ahead. I thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, uh, gentle
lady, would you agree that we
would want to have the most
tourism possible for our state
parks.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
sure, yeah, it would be great.
We have a lot of state parks and
it would be great to have a lot
of tourists in there. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I agree
as well, and I think that's the
reason why, uh, respectfully,
the amendment is unfriendly in
the feasibility study, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, the
opportunities for camping and
full-time staff that are part of
option 3, combined with the
area, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that the state park is in is
forecast to drive a great
of increased tourism visitation
and economic impact for the
area, for our area. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, we
have the funding, uh, we wanna
get the most economic impact in
tourism, which is why I
respectfully, it's an unfriendly
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Right, there is a
debate on the amendments
generated from Berle and
Torrens, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Sandoval
County, please yield.
Yes, I will.
Mr. Speaker Deli, you have to
talk a little bit louder. I'm
severely hard of hearing.
Yes, kind lady, I'll yield.
Thank you, because I was that
close to you. I couldn't hear
you through the microphone. OK,
so I was in that role committee
that um Bill came through the
first time and what was the
amount on that? Was it, um, a
big, it was 9 million, correct?
The first time it came through.
Yes, it was 9 million. OK, and
Mr. Speaker Dela, it came
through our rural and it was not
moved forward because it didn't
have the votes. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, and young lady?
Well, gentle lady, let's, we
don't need to talk about
procedures in uh committee
please stick to the amendment
and gentle lady, so it, it did
not pass and then it was brought
back a second time and you guys
had tried to work out some sort
of deal it was not there for
that, Mr. Speaker General, for a
lesser amount and that's where
you came up with this amendment,
is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, yes.
So Mr. Speaker John Laney, uh,
I guess what I
is Mr. McG Delaney, is part of
that reasoning that when you're
talking about this, isn't there
another state park just right
down the street from where this
one they want to put in?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
yes, within 7 miles is the
Leesburg Dam State Park.
So Mr. Spinelli, they already
have a park that's pretty
extensive, like 7 miles down the
road, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, yes.
We're speaking only the, the
reason I voted no on the the
bill itself is because I can't
go back to my district and try
to explain why I gave $9 million
for a park when we have dirt
roads. I have potholes. I have a
lack of infrastructure we have,
uh, don't have enough law for
it. We have so many issues
already in my district, and I
will continue to say no on this
bill. I appreciate that you did
try to break it to a lower
amount. That's a little bit more
palatable, but I can't vote for
that because I can't go back to
my district and say yes, I.
voted for $9 million to a park
in a district that has nothing
to do with us when we have so
many other issues, but thank you
for bringing it forward, Mr.
Speaker gently debate on the
amendment?
Representative Mason on the
amendment or on the bill?
Go ahead, sir.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, gentle lady, uh.
What was the name of the park
that's close, that has the
campgrounds already, gentle
lady. Yes, that is, um, Mr.
Speaker, kind and gentlemen, um,
that is the Leesburg Dam, and it
is a state park.
It is within 7 miles.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, do you
know the occupancy right,
writing on, on that part.
Uh, Mr. Gentleman, um, I'm
sorry, uh, speaker and
gentlemen, so the
Just on part of their estimates
they do talk about on the high
end camping visitation may go up
to 77%.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
is the cost of auction option
two?
OK, Miss, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so option 2.
Option two would be
approximately $3.4 million but
then if you add in because there
is a house that is on the
property, so depends on if you
renovate the house or you um
demolish it and put a visitor
center, um, it can go from 4.8
to about 5.9 million for option
two.
Thank you, gentle lady. uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
Uh
I agree also with you that we,
we all like state parks and we
like.
And the citizens of New Mexico
to have nice parts that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
But I, I agree with you too that
uh
At some point in time, we need
to be physically responsible,
uh, what was the first option on
the study given by the
By this
state parks.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen at the
option was, was to do nothing.
Uh, thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh
Why was it the first option? Do
you recall?
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, so,
well, after they had looked at
the different parcels of the
land that that is owned that um
you could just decide not to
develop it or go with option 2,
which is half the cost of what
was proposed and then option 3,
which provides the campsite.
Thank you, gentle lady. uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
Do you remember?
What the state in the, in the
survey and I have it here in
front of me.
The study from the.
The parks
Uh, you know what percent of
Occupancy they.
Mhm
Uh, like to generate or their
goal is to generate with them.
Mr. Gentleman, uh, excuse me,
Speaker, Mr. Gillen, are you
talking about how much of the
rate of return that they would
like for what?
is paid into by people visiting
and what they would hope to
get to operating cost that they
want to get back from operating
apeaker, gentlemen, they would
like 75%, but it's not even
close to what these parks
actually generate an income.
Thank you gentle lady. Yes, uh,
according to
study which I'm looking at the
option 2.
was actually between
And see if this, if you recall
this same that was from 10 to
15% were and option 3 was
higher, 12 to 19%.
So
You know, option one, the
nothing would have been the
most.
Physically responsible.
Option to take in this scenario.
Do you agree, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen,
it would be yeah, fiscally it
would be better just to not do
anything and you wouldn't be
paying out any taxpayer funds on
it.
Thank you, gentle lady. No, and
I agree that I'm not, I'm not
trying to promote not having
either one of them, but I like
you, gentle lady.
and like representative Lord.
spoke earlier, I have to go back
to 80, Eddie Chavis and Lee
County and explained why I spend
their money the way I do.
Uh
5 million.
It's still a lot of money.
isn't it, gentle lady, it is to
me.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, it is, it is a lot of
money, um, but option two would
be about half the cost of what
they had proposed to do, and
there is a a campsite that's
really 7 miles down, um, option
two allows you to grow, if so,
if you get enough visitors and
over time you see that you might
be able to want to expand, it
gives you that option, but uh to
go right into option 3, it is,
uh, to me a little bit uh.
specifically irresponsible to
do.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh,
Just kind of sum it up, uh, you
know.
And I'm gonna read a little bit
if I can from the study itself
preferred alternative, which is
Alternative to.
Uh
was recommended.
At the New Mexico Energy
minerals and natural resource
departments state parks division
pursue the development of the
study area based on alternative
to.
And develop a value park.
With that, I yield the floor.
Thank you.
Gentle lady from
So of it.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 219 as amended.
We're on a motion to table house
floor member number 12.
House Bill 219 as amended. I
wanna be as the amendment would
have been tabled a vote no,
we're back on the amendment 30
seconds we'll clock.
The vote is now open.
No running in the chambers.
What about to close?
The boy is not closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative, 24, in
the negative House for amendment
number 1 to House Bill 219 as
amended has been tabled.
Gentle lady from Sandoval, you
see on the floor. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Yes, um.
Yeah, you know, it did fail, but
uh let me just say that with
reading over the feasibility
study, we have the
recommendations and feasible
feasibility studies run about
750 to $100,000 and.
Personally, I don't know why we
don't, why we pay this kind of
money out of taxpayer funds if
we're not gonna actually uh
review and just go with the
recommendations and be able to
grow.
go with the state park and grow
it as, as we see fit versus um
going all in or Mr. Speaker
doing the Cadillac version as
was stated in the community in
the committee personally um.
You know, we have people that
are having a problem putting
food on their table, so, um,
going a Cadillac version for um
a state park. I don't think it's
timely right now. Thank you, and
I yield.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will my
friend yield, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to my friend from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, uh,
you know, I, I think all of us
love parks.
We absolutely do. Can you tell
me what um the um rate is for
full-time employees at our
parks.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't have that uh information
at the tip of my fingers, um,
the state parks and, and their
director, uh Toby Velasquez, uh,
stood up and supported this, and
I'll get you that information,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I can
say that in our committee, uh,
together, we dedicated, uh,
about 3 new employees, uh, for
our state park system and I
think there's a lot of support
to do even more.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. How many state parks
do we have in the state?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
my colleague and expert, uh, it
says we have 35 currently. This
will be number 36.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and that's my concern
right there. We, we have 3 new
employees, FTEs.
For 36 you said?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
36, this would make 36 parks. Of
course this would take a couple
of years to develop, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I hope we get those
employees, um, you know, parks
need them our parks. I've, I've
been to some of our parks and,
and it's uh it's a shame what
I've seen at those parks.
And so I hope this isn't one of
those that I go to and I'd love
to go to it. It sounds like it's
a wonderful part of the state,
but I hope I don't go to it in 5
years and go this is a shame, so
I hope hope it works out
wonderful for you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 219 as amended
do now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 219 as
amended. The vote is now open.
The vote
It's about
To close.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 48 in the affirmative, 16 in
the negative. House Bill 219 has
amended, has duly passed this
house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval and
Santa Fe, ready an item number.
39 Mr. Speaker, would you get me
to the point?
necessary for placing House Bill
21 on final passage has been
taken, and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill Mr. Speaker 21
makes two minor adjustments to
the existing land grant
assistance fund to make that
fund work better.
So you know debate, gentlemen,
close
that House Bill 21 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 21. The vote is now open.
Theo's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 54 in the affirmative, 10 in
the negative. House Bill 21 has
duly passed this House.
General lady from Berli
representative Patricia, uh,
Real Caballero, are you ready on
supplemental calendar item
number one.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point? Let the record
reflect that all action has
served for placing House Bill
182 on final passage has been
taken, and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 182 provides incentives for
attracting and retaining judges
by increasing excuse me, their
retirement benefits.
It will reduce the vesting
period for judges who became
members on or after July 1, 2014
from eight years to 5 years.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions. There is a
debate. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Hall the
2nd.
Mr. Speaker, as the gentle lady
yield?
Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to yield
to the gentleman, Miss uh
Representative Hall the 2nd.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I have
an amendment.
For this bill.
Have you delivered the amendment
down there? It has been
delivered. Yes, sir. What is the
number on the bottom?
The number is 0.231926.3.
Let's get that passed out. We'll
post it online and then we'll
have you explain the amendment.
I don't know why they're making
fun of you over there. Stop, uh,
stop harassing my friend.
Sorry, sorry, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, hold on, hold on,
we'll get it passed out first.
Mr. Speaker, may I have a roll
call vote on this as well,
please.
You have a roll call
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker,
Order in the chambers please.
Hopefully this is a friendly
amendment, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Also, I have an expert witness
here, Mr. Montoya.
From PERA, um, the amendment to
House Bill 182, this amendment
does not change any substance of
the bill but removes a few items
to prevent legal questions in
the future.
One, it ensures that the term
service credit in section 3 is
used throughout.
2, it clarifies the dates for
the opening of the new tier and
the closing of the old tier for
judges and 3, it clarifies that
any that any increases benefited
are not retroactive. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Let's go
back to the bill's sponsor. Is
this a friendly amendment?
Uh, Mr. Speaker.
I actually I'm gonna make um
history because this is the
first time that I can um.
In my 13 years that I've
accepted.
An amendment as being friendly
amendment, so yes it is, it's a
friendly amendment.
You made history today,
gentlemen from San Juan. Is
there
Objection to adopting the
amendment.
Should we do it by roll call
vote?
See no objection to adopting the
amendment, you have an amended
bill.
Jennifer from San Juan, back to
you.
I yield the floor, sir.
There's further debate. The
other gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I just have one question
for you. Why are we taking it
from 8 years down to 5 years.
Give me one moment, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I should have known
the, the answer to this, uh,
being on IPAC but it matches the
uh it's an alignment with all
the others.
Uh, in retirement, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I just wondered 8
years probably would have been
the two terms and so I just
wondered why it didn't coincide
with that. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady no
further debate, close.
Mr. Speaker, I now.
Uh, move House Bill 182 as
amended do now pass. We are a
final passage of House Bill 182
as amended. The vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The borders are closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 182 as
amended has really passed his
house, gentle lady from Berlin,
let's stay with you for item
number 2 on the supplemental
calendar. Are you ready for that
one?
Mr. Speaker, yes, will you take
me to this point replacing House
Bill 183 on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate. Amendment or
substitution that generated to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 183.
Is uh meant to increase and
retain the pool of magistrate
judges by making their
retirement benefits much more
lucrative.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand with for questions.
There is a debate, gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Hall.
Mr. Speaker, it is the gentle
lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, um, I will yield
only if we're gonna make history
again.
To the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, we're going to make
history again. I have an
amendment on this.
Uh, very similar to the last
one.
To and this just deals with the
magistrates, uh, so we'll get
that passed out, sir.
Gentlemen, to read the 202
number.
22 number is 0.231927.2. All
right, we'll get that pass out.
We'll get it posted online while
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is
basically mirrors the last one
and I'll, I'll go over it just
correcting the language under
the retirement for PEA for
magistrate judges. So HP 183,
similar to the last bill, the
amendment does not change any
substance of the bill but
removes a few items to prevent
legal questions in the future.
One, it ensures the term service
credit in section 3 is used
throughout to it clarifies that
any increases benefited are not
retroactory retroactive and
clarifies that any increases, I
have that on there, so it
increases are not retroactive,
Mr. Speaker.
Young ladies is a friendly
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, before I answer, I
need to introduce the two,
Experts that are here today, uh,
out of respect I have uh Carl
Restack, who's the director of
the administrative office of the
courts and Mr. Greg Trujillo,
who's the director of PERA and.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
gentlemen, you have made.
History once again this is a
friendly uh amendment.
It's a history making day for
Representative Bill Hall the
2nd.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment?
See, no you have amend the bill.
Gentlemen, back to you.
I yield the floor. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Your, your work here is done,
huh?
See no further debate you'll
leave it close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move House Bill 183 as amended
do now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 183 as
amended. The vote is now open.
Boat's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 in the affirmative, 5 in
the negative. House Bill 183 as
amended has duly passed this
house.
A gentleman from Berli said de
la Cruz are, you're ready on
item 48?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point, please?
reflect that all action
necessary for placing house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
government election in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
housing 444 on final passage has
been taken and it is subject to
debate, amendment, or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. HB 444.
Uh, is he is.
Is a bill related to the New
Mexico Athletic Commission. It's
outdated and operating under a
framework that no longer meets
the needs of today's combat
sports industry.
This bill modernizes the
commission by placing it under
the regulation and licensing
department ensuring stronger
oversight and more effective
regulation.
By expanding membership of the
board, it will bring expertise
that is necessary to protect our
athletes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move that
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 444 do now pass. We are on
final passage of appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 444.
The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. How appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for housing 444, has
duly passed this house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, are you
ready on item 45. Reserved
Martinez.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, can you
get me to that point that all
action necessary for replacing
House Bill 336 on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendments or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill. Mr. Speaker.
This bill
Would, uh bring um the Livestock
Board agents into the return to
work bill that was passed last
year. With that, I stand for
question.
See no debate, gentlemen, close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 336 do now pass. We final
passage of House Bill 336. The
vote is now open.
What's about to close?
Lindstrom.
And you wish to vote, gentle
lady?
The vote's now closed by a vote
of 59 affirmative, 1 in the
negative.
House Bill 336 has duly passed
this house.
Final score, 63, 52, Lobos win
up against the winner of San
Diego State and Boise State.
Congratulations to the lobos.
And to our fearless.
Sports reporter representative
Josh Hernandez for the live
tweets.
lady from Berbs said Thompson,
are you ready on item 43.
I am Mr. Speaker, but you stole
my thunder. I was gonna announce
the global game.
But will you get me to that
point?
That the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House with 131 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker so this
shifts the responsibility for
overseeing caregiver background
checks from the Department of
Health to the Healthcare
Authority and adds to the list
of dis disqualifying conditions
for caregivers with that I stand
for questions. Representative
Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady, please yield, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady from Torrance San
Bernardino.
Mr. Speaker and General Lady, so
I wanna make sure I'm looking at
the right number because this is
a.
Substitute is it number
230751.4. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that's what I have.
Mr. Speaker and young lady, can
you please define caretaker
because I don't see a definition
in there at all.
Give me one second, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, it's any
non-licensed healthcare
personnel.
And it's in other places in
statute.
Submissions for generally, it's
not in here, so where would I
find this definite because I'm
trying to go through bill and I
want to know what caregiver
means, so where would I find
that, Mr. Speaker and young
lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, let
me see.
I'm sorry, I got, I lost track.
Where, where are we? We're
waiting for us to find where
something is, Mr. Mr. and Mr.
Speaker, we're waiting. I was
asking for a definition
caregiver since it's not in the
bill and I was waiting to get
where I would find that
definition of caregiver
anywhere, Mr.
Speer, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if you look on page one
line um.
Let me see, I lost it, um,
outline 19, it would be section
29-17-5.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you want to look that up for me
and give me the brief definition
then of what a caretaker is,
please.
caregiver.
And while I'm waiting, Mr.
Speaker, I will introduce my
expert. It's Dan.
When um
Linari I almost said Lanier,
who's from the health care
authority.
Mr Speaker Delaney, while you're
looking for that, do you want me
to continue asking questions or
would you like to wait go ahead
my experts looking OK.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
When we go through this, when I
go to page 3.
On lane 14.
So it looks like we already have
definitions the following felony
convictions disqualifying
applicant. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it does not mean
completely disqualify or will be
taken into consideration, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
does mean disqualified, but
there is a process for
reconsideration.
OK, Mr. Speaker, I saw that
later on. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so somebody was
convicted.
Uh homicide.
Trafficking and controlled
substance.
Kidnapping, false imprisonment,
aggravated assault, or
aggravated battery.
Including aggravated batter of a
household member.
rape
Criminal sexual penetration.
Criminal section uh contact
incest.
indecent exposure other related
sexual offenses.
Crimes including adult abuse,
negligent, and neglect financial
expectation crimes against
children, robbery, larceny,
attempt to solicitation
conspiracy involvement felonies
in the subsect.
Which is human trafficking,
assault and a peace officer,
identity theft or cruelty to
animals. So anybody who has had
those.
Would be disqualified, but they
have a way to appeal is that
what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that's
right.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, what is
that appeal process look like?
Mr. Speaker, and if, and
generally if you look on page 5
line 3.
It, it explains it.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally,
we'll get into that. Hold on one
second.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so let's move on to
On page 4.
So we went through all these
things.
That you could have done,
including rape, incest.
Etc.
Then it goes on on page 4, it
says may disqualify an
applicant, caregiver, or
hospital caregiver from
employment as a caregiver is the
applicant care hospital
caregiver poses unreasonable
risk.
Mr. Speaker Dela, can you define
to me what matrix that you use
or what matrix that they use to
define unreasonable risk.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
again on page 4, if you look at
19.
Um, line 19, 2 or more
convictions related to abuse,
neglect, or explanation
exploitation within the past 10
years regardless of the degree
of the crime or be a single
conviction or pending charges
regardless of degree of the
crime. If the crime is related
to abuse, neglect, or
exportation.
Exploitation of a car care
recipient human trafficking
criminal sexual penetration or
related sexual offenses, battery
of a household member or child
abuse. OK, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so we're saying,
I want to make sure that I
understand this, so we're saying
if somebody has 2 more
convictions related to abuse in
the past 10 years.
That they cannot
Be eligible for reconsideration,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
that's not, that's not.
Correct.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can you ask your expert, Mr.
Spinelli, what exact matrix.
There's tons of different
matrixes to use to prove
unreasonable risk in the
scientific method. So can you
tell me what unreasonable risks
matrix that you use to use a
probability.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's, it's based on the
preponderance of evidence.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, so
there is somebody.
That is in.
This authority
That can make that decision.
Based on the preponderance of
evidence, Mr. Speaker Dell, how
many years of training does that
person have to decide because
it's almost like something you
would need a legal degree to try
to figure out because there's
quite a bit of information that
you're going through, how do
they come up with this
preponderance of evidence, Mr.
Speaker and young lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
based on a national background
check check with fingerprints.
Right, but Mr. Speed, generally,
I, I'm talking about for the
person who's sitting down
looking at all of this
information because you talk
about looking everything in its
totality when they're looking at
all of this stuff, how do they
make this unreasonable risk.
Assessment because you're saying
the.
So the proponents of evidence,
how were they making that
decision? What are the criteria
that they're looking at? That's
what I'm trying to get at, not
just a background check, but
they're looking at multitude of
things. What are they looking
at? Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they're looking at the
convictions.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
when they're looking at the
convictions that you're saying.
But then they can be they can
have reconsideration for the
process of applicants. So how
does that work? Because now it's
saying there's another
unreasonable risk for the
preponderance of evidence, what
are they using for the
reconsideration process, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, it
would be rehabilitation, um,
it's a way for the applicant to
bring in evidence that didn't
show up on the background check.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
let me see if I understand this.
I just want to make sure, so I
have somebody who
OK, so you're saying when
somebody applies for this,
they're gonna look at all the
things. There's nothing that
necessarily disqualifies him
except for this list of things,
but then they can come back.
And they may have raped a child
or an adult, and they can come
back and say that they're now
rehabilitated, would they
actually be I mean they
seriously be reconsidered for a
position as caretaker,
it's it's hard to talk about any
specific occurrence, it will be
reviewed by the department.
Richard Spe dealing and that's
what I keep going back to how
are they reviewing and what are
they looking at because it seems
very egregious that if somebody
raped somebody that may have is
disabled or a child, can you
explain to me how they would
say, well, these specific people
are not included. Like, there's
no way we're not crossing this
line, it's a line in the sand,
they can never be considered,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Well, I'm sure I'm gonna stop
right there. I'm sure that there
are rules that are promulgated
by the departments to ensure
that those folks are not in
those.
Rolls and I think it's gonna be
very difficult with this
hypothetical for the sponsor of
the bill to go through every
single possible, uh, situation.
So I, I, I think that the good
folks at the department would.
have
The ability to keep
Um, anyone who shouldn't be a
caregiver from being a
caregiver. Proceed with your
questioning, please.
Mr. Speaker, I, I agree, but on,
on the same note, what I was
trying to get at is they're
making the rules. I was just
trying to find out if there was
a specific matrix that they use
because I wouldn't want Mr.
Speaker and De lady, someone to
come in who has different values
or different beliefs in another
person. So if you're not doing
it the same way with every
person that works there, then
that becomes a problem. If
you're not using a very specific
matrix, this many accounts, this
severity, it comes up with an X
equals this or.
Sorry, I should say a P value
because you're looking at
probability, then I, I, that's,
that's where I'm having a big
hang up that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
So I asked my questions about.
About this and again it goes
back to.
It looks like
If I'm understanding this
correctly,
That these people are all
disqualified, which I think they
should forever be disqualified,
uh, even the cruelty to animals,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because oftentimes those ends up
being sociopaths. Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies, so those
people actually can get denied,
but then they can. I want to
make sure I understand this.
They can come back and say,
well, I have evidence that I've
been rehabilitated and then that
goes back in and then there is a
decision made whether they can
be a caregiver or not. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, does
this apply to
Everyone is this applied to um
anybody who's in that caregiver
position, be it a child or an
adult.
Gentle lady, just and Mr.
Speaker, give me one second.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
could you repeat your question?
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I was asking does because I
don't see.
Since I don't have that
definition of career, I also
don't have the
Explanation of what ages we're
talking about is this apply to
children.
Or does this apply to somebody
who's an adult who can't care
for themselves, who would have a
caretaker.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's folks under the DD waiver
home health care and hospital.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, that
could be a child. Is that
correct, Miss Dela, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, yes.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, if a
child
is in a bad situation and
removed and put into CYFD.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Is this all going to be
applicable to the child? Are we
going to do?
All this background check or
would it supersede what CYFD is
going to do, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady Speaker and gentle
lady at CYFD does their own
background check.
Uh, but Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
When I brought up a bill.
See WifeD was there who said
they don't always do a
background check, and they do
not do a background check all of
the time, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they do not do a
background check right before
they release that child back to
any caregiver. So Mr. Speaker
and young lady with that, I have
an amendment.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
deliver the amendment to the
chief clerk. Mr. Speaker, while
we're waiting, the caregiver
definition is, is that 8.370.51.
deal, can you repeat that one
more time? 8. 8.370.51.
Thank you. Oh, I'm sorry, 0.5.1.
lady, can you read the number on
the bottom left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is
231-931.2. All right, we'll get
this passed out and posted
online.
Meanwhile, Representative
Hernandez will give us more
scores of the Mountain West
tournament.
Or Mr. Speaker, he can sing.
Can he, though?
Mr. Speaker, the next mountain
West game probably hasn't
started yet.
What's the other game?
Mr. Speaker
What's the other game? I'm not
sure. I only care about the
lobos.
Very well.
General lady to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. This is
an amended version of I had
before which is to protect our
most vulnerable children, Mr.
Speaker Delaney, um,
It goes over here if you look at
the FIR, the healthcare
authority supports HB 131 as it
reduce the risk of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation in New
Mexico's most vulnerable
populations, adding to the
screening criteria of caregivers
and hospital caregivers will
protect.
People with potential harm as a
result of abuse and neglect and
exploitation.
The use of the unreasonable risk
standards. Well, OK, I'm not
gonna go on, but without these
changes in statutes anticipated
the increased trend of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what I saw was a gap.
In your bill
We're trying to make sure that
we protect our most vulnerable.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when I had my bill up before and
from dealing with COFD, they
don't always do a background
check. It's not mandatory.
So Mr. Speaker, Delaney, when
you go through my amendment,
Section, uh, the first couple
pages are ready.
In law, Section 32846, but what
we're adding in here.
is if a child in your situation
has been removed from a
household where there is abuse,
and they're now in CYFD if we're
trying to protect these
children, Mr. Speaker Delaney.
We're asking that provide the
child that has been taken into
custody, pursuit of section and
the section because evidence
that a child has been subject to
abuse or neglect.
Before the child is released
back to any other person, uh, be
it a grandma, back to parents,
back to anyone that's gonna be a
caretaker to or caregiver,
sorry, to this child.
Including the child's parents,
guardian, etc. the person shall
submit to a criminal background
check provided the department
use a standard departmental
procedures and the department
shall conduct a search in the
department of the Public Safety
Central Registry of sex
offenders so that we're making
sure we're not, um, we're making
sure that no caretaker, anyone
who's overseeing the child will
be on a registered sex offender
list.
And provide further that the
department shall determine the
released child based on the
results of this background
check, and I use your exact
wording in your bill, Mr.
Speaker and gen lady.
Things that should be exempted
would be kidnapping, false
imprisonment, aggravated
assault. We're looking for
anybody who may have beaten a
household member. We're looking
for rape, criminal sexual
penetration, criminal sexual
contact, incest, indecent
exposure, other related sexual
offenses to a minor and crimes
involving child abuse, neglect,
or exploitation, and that's
basically the change. We're just
saying.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
we're trying to make sure that
our children are cared for and
if a child that is in a
household that needs a caretaker
or an adult, anybody who needs a
caretaker.
We want to make sure that even
in that situation, these
children that it now becomes.
A mandate now.
That the healthcare authority
will do those checks before the
COFD will do those checks before
that child is placed back into a
dangerous situation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
General ladies is a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker, this is
not a friendly amendment because
this is a uh health care
authority bill, not a CYFD bill
and in addition the this I
believe exact language was in a
bill that was heard in front of
Health and Human Services and
was tabled.
Is there a debate on the
amendment? The gentle lady from
earlier said of her eye out.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bertolleo and
Torrance Sealed.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, in that exact
bill was not tabled in reference
to the last comment. Yes, I do.
Let's move on.
lady from Berlin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady for yielding
the floor, um, you know, I read
through this and I also um had
sort of flashbacks to the um to
the bill that was in our
committee as well, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I raised a
couple of questions when I came
through the committee then that
I think are pertinent to the
conversation now as well, um,
and so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, what we learned from
CYFD that day is that they do
conduct background checks and I
think Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the point of your bill, uh.
Um, that came through committee
and this language as well is to
make sure that before someone is
released back that they get
another background check, is
that correct, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Yes, thank you,
uh, Mr. Speaker Deli absolutely
was and it's also when the COFD
was there and even in their own
report, they don't always do it.
It has done certain situations,
it's not done every time, even
initially, and it's never done
right before we return the
child.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and you know, I actually
left, um, committee thinking
about this in particular and
something that I thought about
after I left, um, committee, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady is
actually the logistics of it,
um, I know, uh, the CYFD said
sometimes there's 24 or 48 hours
between, you know, taking a
child out of their house or
someone out of their house and
then re-releasing them back to
parents, family, whatever that
may be, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I
don't think it's logistically
possible for someone to
reoffend, go to court, be tried,
be found guilty before you can
do another background check, in
which case, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I don't really, um.
See the logistics of this
working out, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and um the other
thing that we talked about when
this language came through our
committee was the fact that um
we, we had really stressed the
need to do a particular type of
background check, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, one that
requires fingerprints, and I
know that is a part of the
original bill.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, we talked about the need for
this because there are a lot of
folks, um, who have a lot of the
same name, uh, here in the state
we want to be sure that no one
is mistaken for anyone else and
also Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that when you do a
background check, all court
cases are considered, in which
case you might have someone who
is uh a victim of domestic
violence and uh a background
check gets um uh pulled up and
this person might.
still be considered living in a
dangerous place, even if that
victim of domestic violence has
uh since moved to a different
place and does not live with
that abuser any longer. And so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
with sweeping language like
this, um, I urge the body to
vote against this amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. debate
on the amendment, the gentleman
from Montero, Representative
Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
With my general, my friend, the
gentle lady from Torrance and
Berna, Bernna Leo, please yield.
Maybe yes, Mr. Speaker and
general gentlemen, I yield my
time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. You know what? You
didn't even have that many
counties, so I don't know why
that was so hard. But Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I do have
some questions about your, your
amendment actually, first of
all, I really think this
amendment is very interesting
and very good because I feel
like this protects children, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is this
amendment aiming to protect
kids.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
what this is all about. I don't
care if it takes 2 years to
figure out how to do a
background check. I don't think
we should be putting kids back
into a household where they're
What started this whole thing,
Mr. Speaker Dea I already talked
about this before was when I was
in the healthcare committee in
the interim, and there was
somebody on a panel who said.
That we had a child that went
home to their father, who nobody
bothered to do a background
check on and that kid was raped
for the entire weekend.
And that's what started this.
I'm like, why are we giving
children back into a household
because we see it over and over
and over again and CYFD we see
that children go back in the
households where they end up
being raped, tortured, gentle
lady, I'm gonna, you know, it's,
it's, it gets a little troubling
to hear certain words over and
over and over again. I think
you've made the point, and I
think we understand the intent
of your amendment, but to repeat
these words over and over and
over again gratuitously.
Is,
uh, getting a little difficult
for me to take. So I'm gonna ask
you to please refrain Mr.
Speaker, for you, I will do
that. um I appreciate that. So
Mr. Speaker and and gentlemen,
there's a lot of cases where
children are abused to death.
I'll put it that way. We see it
in the news all the time with
CFD. We sit all the time in the
state. We have some of the
highest rates of abuse and
neglect and what I'm trying to
do, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, we're trying to make sure
that we're doing that we're
saying you have
to do a check before you place a
child into a dangerous
situation. So yes, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, it is all about
protecting our children at all
costs because Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's what this bill
is for.
This bill is to protect people
who can't take care of
themselves just like children
who cannot take care of
themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I share your concerns.
I, I mean, it's horrifying to me
to think that there would be a
possibility of a child.
With disabilities being able to
be put in or any child, but
specifically with this bill
regarding folks with
disabilities being put into a
scenario where they could be
abused by someone who could be a
sexual predator. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I actually
think this amendment makes this
bill 1000 times better. I might
actually vote for this bill if
this passes, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering, Mr.
Speaker, generally, so.
When it comes to a child with
disabilities, let's just say
there was a call from
I don't know, someone, a
neighbor called for a wel
welfare check or something and
the kid was being abused or
something or someone in the
house is being abused, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady with.
That be CYFD called then if that
happened?
Yeah, Mr. Speaker, and um.
gentleman, I'm gonna try to
explain this without being
graphic.
So Mr. Speaker, we hear all the
time that CYFD does not do
enough due diligence and they
put children back in the
households.
And because I, we heard so much
about that in the health
committee, it is rather
traumatizing.
And
It's just very sad that I'm
standing up here trying to just
protect our damn children in
this state.
And I can't make that happen
refrain.
From using language.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
gonna ask you again, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, it's very
frustrating that we have got
children. Imagine a disabled
child.
They're removed from the house.
We put them
In CYFD.
And then we put them back into a
situation where they're
re-traumatized all over again.
That is what I'm trying to
prevent Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I
Believe that
The thought process behind this
amendment is something that's
from a heart of wanting to
protect these kids and so
I agree with you on that. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I do read in your amendment
because there
I mean, I don't know how you
don't get graphic when it comes
to
Some of the horrific stuff.
That isn't
These bills and some of the
things that happened to these
kids, and especially what we're
trying to close the loop on,
right? So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
So my question, my next question
would be, Mr. Speaker, you might
not even know this, but when it
comes to the, the kids that
would be subject, the kids who
would be subject to this bill.
How many of those?
Our kids versus adults when it
comes to these.
folks, I don't know if you may
know that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm not quite
understanding what you're asking
me. Sure, Mr. Speaker, lady, I'm
just wondering how many of the
population of the people who
would be affected by the bill
are kids.
Mr. Speaker, John me talk about
this original bill that we're
discussing right now where the
on the what are you discussing?
I,
I guess it's, I'm trying to
stick on the amendment because I
want to know from the amendment,
how many people we're going to
protect.
From the original bill because
we have this amendment now.
Mr. Speaker, Dylan Medford
protects one life, that's all
that matters.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I agree with you. I
think that's super important to
protect kids. I don't know who's
against.
kids in this body at least, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I do
want to understand, so this
requirement then, would it just
be a check by CYFD.
For just the sex offender
registry or would there be a
full blown background check on
the individual.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that,
that is an interesting question
because in the original bill,
you could kill somebody and then
you could go back.
An appeal and actually win that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and what
I'm asking is that these
following the kidnapping, the.
Second one, and the crimes
involving child abuse.
He at least looked at, I mean,
the bare minimum, and I'm
talking about conviction, I'm
talking about.
Somebody has a child that's
removed and in that time they
may have now this, the original
bill says even if a case is
pending,
Even if there's a case pending.
They are not, they haven't even
been found guilty in the
original bill. Mr. Speaker,
don't mind saying an actual
conviction, and the conviction
can happen right away if, for
example, that that person had
previous charges because I had
that before and that was a
problem that some people had
with my previous bill was that
they said they didn't like it,
that someone was just being
charged, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
because I didn't give them a
fair shake. But now, Mr.
Speaker, I'm looking, and
gentlemen, I'm looking at a bill
that says pending.
Right there on page 4 line 22
pending charges.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
Lydia, that's quite, that's
quite an interesting.
Change in opinion over a very
short amount of time, in my
opinion, for somebody to say
that and then.
put this in the bill. So, hm,
that's weird, very weird. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
amendment, I'll stick to your
amendment. I really will try.
So,
I know that we're trying to well
some people are obsessed, I feel
like with with reunification of
families. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, some people are just
obsessed.
With reunification instead of,
oh well, what if the person were
giving this kid to is a
pedophile, right?
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Instead of
Prioritizing obsessively
reunification, does this put the
child and their safety above the
obsession of reunification only.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
gonna answer this question in
saying it's always a child
first, however, I do understand
wanting to keep the child within
their culture, in their family,
in their neighborhood. I do
completely understand that part.
All I'm saying is, can we just
take one more step to make sure
we're not putting that child
into a dangerous situation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, and I, I, I agree.
But when it comes to a family, I
want to make sure it's safe
first, right? So instead of
unification only, reunification
only.
Yeah, that's great. We want to
keep them in their same
community, of course we do, but
we don't want to be giving them
to a sexual predator. That's,
that's my big thing. I'm like,
let's not put kids in houses
that have pedophiles living in
them, or the guardian of that
kid being a registered sex
offender, I would think that's
higher on the totem pole for me,
right? It's like,
Maybe don't put them with a
really aggressive psychopath or
some kind of sex offender, and
then under that is reunification
because I'm like, oh, let's make
sure the kid is safe. So Mr.
Speaker,
gentle lady
I'm wondering, so if a relative
who wishes to take a child has a
criminal record but is deemed
low risk, like they don't have
sexual.
History when it comes to crime.
Uh, are they, are they, are
there support services available
to help them meet eligibility
criteria when it comes to
something that's not violent,
something that is not in this
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
there was actually something
that brought up numerous times,
mine did not address if somebody
did a petty crime if they did a
petty crime that is not
necessarily a reason to not put
a child back in the household.
What I'm looking at is the most
serious crimes, um, that I have
listed here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen on pay on the.
Page 5.
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, so I guess that
argument can't even be made
then, right? And I'm not making
it, but some people I've seen
them do it in committee. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so this is
only targeting people who are
the worst of the worst.
That is correct, Mr. Speaker.
What we want is we don't want to
put children into a household
that puts them at extreme risk.
We want to look at how that
person, the grandma, the
grandpa, the uncle, the kin,
whoever's gonna take that child
doesn't matter who, have they
ever beaten a household member,
because that's more indicative
of there being further violence
in the household.
How they.
committed an egregious crime
against a child.
Are they on the sex offender
registry.
Have they ever been, have they
ever abused a child? Those are
some really solid reasons to
never ever, ever put a child
into that household and Mr.
Speaker Delaney, the biggest
problem I have on this bill is
that with this bill.
There is a reconsideration
process and there is no such
thing as rehabilitation for any
sex offender ever in this entire
lifetime ever.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Lydia. Yes, I've seen the
statistics and I mean, some of
these people you can't fix.
You just can't. And so, Mr.
Speaker, Generalliti, I think
this amendment is very
Although it's nuanced to a
specific section of the
population we're trying to
protect, it does indeed protect
them.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when we're talking about.
Child welfare in this state,
wanting kids to be protected,
especially regarding this bill,
disabled kids.
people who need caregivers, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I want to
make sure that these kids.
Have a good life in New Mexico.
I want every kid to have a good
life in New Mexico. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
think that you could have a good
life if you're
Continually being
Abused by somebody who could
potentially kill you, who's
registered sex offender, someone
who's killed somebody before,
someone who has a crazy rap
sheet of all this crazy stuff
that you've put in here, like
kidnapping, false imprisonment,
rape.
Criminal sexual penetration. I
mean these, these are horrific
crimes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I guess if you're
right, if we can save one life
by putting this amendment on
this bill to protect somebody, I
don't see a problem with it and
I don't see why anyone should
have a problem with it because
we're protecting kids. You
protect kids, you vote for this.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, did you have anything to
add to that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
I am just trying to keep
children from going into a
horrific situation. I've seen
too many times, read too many
reports, seeing too many
children. I have too many
friends in our law enforcement
officers who've told me about
the horrific things that they
walk into.
And it's not easy for them
either, so I can't imagine.
kind of the slap in the face to
our law enforcement officers who
remove a child out of a
situation where something
horrible is happening to them
and they get a call back a week
later for the same thing
happening. It doesn't matter how
long it takes to do this
background check. It does not
matter what matters is that
child comes first at all times,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I think you hit
the nail on the head there,
because we don't want to
revolving door when it comes to
this.
The systems that we have created
unfortunately, which is a
revolving door, and I think this
would would close some of that,
at least for the people that are
affected by this in the bill and
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
really appreciate it and I, I
thank you so much for this and
I, I think if you protect kids,
then this is an amendment for
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
Santa Fe.
Generally from under
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131.
We are on a tabling motion to
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131.
What we ask the amendments
tabled vote of now we're back in
the amendment 32nd vote clock.
The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative House floor
amendment number 1 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House 131 has been tabled.
You from Berlio Torrance, you
have the floor.
OK, sorry. I'm sorry I missed
that part for some for, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so the
biggest problem I see with your
bill.
Is that if any child.
Goes through your system that
you have laid out.
There's gonna be no background
check for those children.
See what I'm not, I'm not
finished.
Mr. Speaker, and there wasn't a
question.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I have
tried repeatedly for 5 years.
To make changes to protect our
children.
And I see this is going to be
yet another time where we had
the opportunity and it has
failed.
And we're going to take a child
who may be disabled.
And you're gonna begin to see
YFD and not make sure that they
do at least the basic checks
before you put that child back
in, which includes sex offender
registry track before that child
goes back into the house.
So Mr. Speaker, the other
problem with your bill is I
don't think.
ever in humanity that there
should be any reassessment for
homicide.
Or crimes involving abuse or
Crimes that involve sexual
penetration of a child, they
should in no way ever in this
lifetime ever be considered to
be a caretaker of anybody,
especially a child, and that's
all I have, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, just to
bring us back a little bit this
is a bill that talks about
background checks for
caregivers. It has nothing to do
with CYFD. That's a totally
different part of the law and
with that, Mr. Speaker, I move
that House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131 do
now pass.
final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 131. The vote is now open.
Well it's about to close?
The vote's not closed by a vote
of 48 in the affirmative, 7 in
the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for Alvie 131 Hauli
passed this house.
Who is putting on supplemental
calendar item number 3.
And a lady from San Miguel and
Torres, Representative Gonzalez,
are you ready on that item?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
you get me to that point that
all action is necessary for
placing House Bill 433 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate, amendment or
substitution generated to
explain the bill.
Um, House Bill 433 as amended is
to conduct a comprehensive study
of the current and anticipated
future availability of CTE
education
courses in the salaries and
compensation packages of
different CTE instructors in the
state.
There is a debate. The gentle
lady from Catherine Sierracordo
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Well, the gentle lady
yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do
yield to um the gentle lady.
From all those wonderful
counties.
That's, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, um.
Oh
Can you tell me again what
they're gonna study, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady.
Um, so this study actually calls
for a partnership directing the
higher education higher
education department in
collaboration with the public
education department, the
Department of Workforce
Solutions and the legislative
education study Committee to
work together collaboratively to
fully evaluate um CTE
instruction. We have a lot of
programs right now currently
going on in our state. All of
these build your own programs,
um.
There's a lot of workforce that
needs to be filled in the
upcoming years and uh so this
study is looking at a multitude
of things. One, it is really
looking at how to meet the
demands, the anticipated demands
for future workforce needs.
For CTE, for our different
industries, um, and also another
main aspect is looking at
whether there is an opportunity
for industry to get involved
like if they're possible
incentives for industry to lend.
The experienced workers to the
CTE instructor pool, um, it is
also looking at an evaluation on
the in the salaries for CTE
instructors, um, right now at
the community college level that
education level is the lowest
paid tier out of all
educational, um, levels, whether
that be public education or
within higher education, and
right now we see a lot of those
CTE coursework, a lot of those
instructors.
at that mid-level point, so it's
looking at maybe an evaluation
of how we pay CT instructors and
how to support this upcoming
influx of individuals so that we
have an adequate workforce in
the future.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
kind lady, um, um, I, I like
this bill a lot. I just want to
make sure if we're talking to
industry that it is equal
industry information sometimes
we.
push one agenda or another and
I, I would really hope.
That it's a fair practice and um
I, I'll, I want to, I will be
watching and making sure that,
uh, we get as much information
as possible, of course, I'm all
for CTE. So thank you so much
for answering those questions.
uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate, gentle
lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Torrance
and San Miguel, please yield.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
yield to both my co-sponsor and
the lovely gentle lady.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
and, and gentle lady, I, as, as
you know, I fully support this,
um, we have been working so
hard, Mr. Speaker, these last
several sessions to try to plump
up the funding for career
technical education, uh, we know
that, um, this is, uh, the
toolbox generation that we have
right now and there's I think a
lot of student interest in this
type of learning and training
and certainly um with the reward
of a certificate at the end of
uh the needed training so Mr.
speaker and generally the idea
of just two questions.
Um
Will students be uh consulted as
part of this, uh, study, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
Right now the study calls for
work with higher education to
work in collaboration with all
those other entities that I did
mention. Um, part of that work
is also pulling in previous
studies that have been done, um,
there has been a lot of work
within public ed, um,
specifically looking at CTE
instruction within K through 12
that I do know at that point
students were consulted within
those studies that I'm that I'm
assuming they will pull data
from from a lot of these
collaborative efforts, um, so
yes, the study is looking
collectively at CT as a whole.
Um, but ultimately with that
main goal of really improving
that pipeline from public
education to higher education to
then hopefully uh workforce.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Thank you. It's um, it's a good
answer, Mr. Speaker. And then
finally on the topic of um
And we know we have a shortage
of teachers already, um, many
people assume if we expand the
CT offerings, we'll have a
shortage of teachers for those
types of programs and I just
wanna mention Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that in Hobbs, um,
where they have the career tech
program they thought that might
be a problem for them, and it
turned out it really wasn't.
They had people who were, had
been in the trades for decades
decide to leave that better pay
and actually go.
to the high school there to the
program and instruct the
students because it's very
rewarding to do that and I'm
hoping, gentle lady that we'll
see that trend, um, not just in
Hobbs, but, but elsewhere as we
uh improve this so thank you for
all of your work on this. I look
forward to the results of this
study. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, young lady. There's
further debate, gentlemen from
Lee, Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yes, I do
yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
you presented this in front of
House Appropriations the other
day and, um,
I put some thought into this.
I appreciate the the bill and
the attempt.
I do have some concerns that I
would like to share that maybe
Uh, can be addressed as the
study goes forward.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
the last several years we've
continually had to work hard to
get funding for CTE.
Into the budget.
And last year I believe uh we
started out with 13 million.
And we ended back up at 40
million and uh I actually put
about 30 schools USA kids in
front of House Appropriations.
To ask that question, what y'all
do with our 27 million. Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentle lady.
What I learned this year.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady is
when we look at CTE from a
funding side.
I
At some point in time last year,
PED decided or 2 years ago, PED
decided to distribute the
funding differently than just
for CTE.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they started funding CTSO
projects and programs.
All 7 that PED puts on their
website.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
there's some concern with that,
and I raised that concern during
appropriations that there wasn't
enough funding if we're applying
that money all across the board.
To all the different
organizations because they're
all different and they all have
a very unique aspect to what
they do.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what I would ask is that we make
sure that HED and PED not really
sure why workforce solutions is
even involved with this, but um,
Go through
very in depth.
The CTE pro pro process.
With that
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the, the point that our minority
leader brought up today.
With making sure we bring
industry in from all avenues.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
don't just need
The labor unions.
Guiding and directing.
We need private business, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady helping
and going through this process
as well.
And so,
When we look at the study, I
would be interested to see what
the study
Looks like before they start the
study.
I would like to see a
descriptive of a description
besides the bill.
Of, of what they're planned
intention is, what their goals
are, where they want to go, and
then, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, when we get that back on
October 1st, I'd like to be able
to compare, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
How that study did with the,
with the objectives.
And I would like to see Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
What
Industries were involved.
Who was involved and what their
level of expertise was with
respect to that.
Is that the end use people from
the welders and the oil and gas
industry or from industry, uh,
in Albuquerque or, uh, was it
the miners?
From Socorro and from Demming
and, and from Silver City, who
all was brought to the table to
do this and be part of this.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
look forward to the results that
come out of this.
But I would like to make sure
that it actually does have a
focus and isn't very
specifically designed towards
The CTE process this building a
labor union workforce. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady.
And let it close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, in
closing,
I would like to just maybe some
of those. It was a very loaded
statement in there. Well then,
in closing, I would like to say
that this study does a few
things and one thing is it does
not currently evaluate the
current level of CT funding or
CT instruction. It does have a
focus um on workforce
development, which is the
intention of why workforce
solutions was included in this
state in this study. It does
anticipate that we are that we
have an intention to build up a
workforce and how do
we get them there and how do we
adequately prepare to build a
future workforce here for our
state. So, uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
I do encourage those all, this
is, um.
A future need for our state and
hopefully future needs to build
out our workforce for our
students in New Mexico. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
I now move that House Bill 433
as amended do pass. Thank you.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 433 as amended, the vote is
now open.
The vote's about to close.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 53 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's Bill?
433 as amended as duly passed
this House.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent, are you
ready on item number 36.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
you give me that point? that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 553 as amended on
final passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The goal
of the House Bill 533 is to
allow residential construction.
The option of using locally
produced lumber, vegas, and
beams, New Mexico has 18
sawmills in 3 facilities
producing beam vegas and latias.
They are located across the
state such as in Chama, Taos,
Ratton, Las Vegas, Hamas Pueblo,
Milan, Tula Rosa, and reserve.
Many of the facilities are
multi-generational.
Family run and some are tribally
owned, Mr. Speaker, and
operated.
They are small independent
operations that operate on the
edge of profitability.
HB 533 provides New Mexico with
the opportunity to solve 3
problems at once.
By allowing residential and
commercial construction to use
locally produced lumber, vegas,
and beams, we will improve the
markets for timber removed in
the thinning and post-fire
hazard removal.
Offset prices, increases,
increases as tariffs on imports
from Canada to drive up lumber
prices and generate a local
timber.
Supply to rebuild after
wildfires addressed the
statewide shortage of housing.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'll
stand for questions.
There is a bit gentleman from
Sandoval, Santa Fe,
Representative McQueen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, does a
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
yield. I feel like we were just
here.
So do I, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we meet again.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
just want to say this is a fine
bill and particularly pleased it
does not violate the
anti-Donation clause, and I
support your bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Is there
an amendment no further debate.
The gentleman.
To close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you for the kind remarks, Mr.
Speaker, I move that House Bill
533 as amended, do now pass.
533 as amended.
We are not on final passage of
5:33. We are on final passage of
House Bill 5.
53.
As amended
The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 48 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 5, 53
Representative Vincent, as
amended has duly passed this
house.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business committee
reports. Clerk Reed.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 580 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee we respectfully
submitted Art de la Cruz, chair.
Mr. Speaker.
We're on adoption of favorable
committee report for Housesville
580. All those in favor of say
9.
All those opposed. The ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker,
Your transportation, public
works, and capital improvements
committee.
To whom has been referred House
Memorial 38 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted.
Art de la Cruz chair.
with option.
We are an adoption of Fall
committee for House Memorial 38.
All those in favor signify by
saying a.
Hi.
poses.
The report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House
Memorial 41 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted art de la
Cruz chair.
New adoption speaker, please.
We are an adoption of favorable
committee report Vras Memorial
41. All those in favor,
signified by say aye.
All the supposed nay.
Yeah, I have it. Can we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House
Memorial 50 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted art de la Cruz chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption,
please adoption of favorable
committee report for House
Memorial 50. All those in favor,
85 and I.
I suppose,
the eyeabotit report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee.
To him has been referred Senate
Bill 123 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Art de la Cruz, chair.
adoption, Mister Speaker, please
adoption of a favorable report
for Senate Bill 123. All those
in favor say I.
All the supposed signified by
saying nay.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 42.
Senate Bill 327, Senate Bill 364
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Joint Memorial 3
and requests the concurrence of
the house.
Respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objection. It is so
ordered. Are there
announcements?
Are there basketball scores to
report? Is it a basketball score
or announcement?
gentle lady from Saga and
Torrance with a basketball
score. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
would just like to announce that
our West Las Vegas girls are
advancing to the ship, um, today
they are, um, they did have a
tough game with um Navajo Prep
and so tomorrow they're going to
the championship game and
tomorrow the Pecos Boys,
Robertson Boys and West Las
Vegas Boys are all in the
semifinals. Awesome,
congratulations, members take
note. round of applause. Come on
now.
Any other announcements?
General lady from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your consumer
and public affairs will not be
meeting today. Thank you.
Boo, yay, I don't know.
Either one, both
Gentle lady from Berlin.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs will be meeting 15
minutes after the floor session
today, today members signal,
your lady from Berlio. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will not be meeting
today. We will meet tomorrow.
Well, there goes my bill. I was
scheduled for today.
Any other announcements,
gentlemen from Bertillo, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Education Committee will meet at
8:30 tomorrow morning in room
309. no, gentle lady from Berli,
Mr. Speaker, how's Health and
Human Services Committee will
meet tomorrow at 8:30 and we
have a really long agenda, so I
beg you to be on time. note.
Any other announcements or
miscellaneous business.
Or just regular business.
Not today?
Gentlemen from San Juan with a
joke.
Yes, since my compadre is gone.
Mr. Speaker, what's the
legislator's favorite exercise?
What is it, gentlemen? Jumping
to conclusions and
Representative Duncan is out of
a job. All those in favor of
Xeno saying a.
Well I suppose nay.
The naves have it, motion fails.
That's 2 for 2. Good job, guys.
Last minute announcements going
once, going twice.
And lady from Santa Fe.
Oh wait, I have an announcement,
sorry.
Generic bill, House Bill 589.
To be removed from the House
rules and order Business
Committee, the number on the
bottom left is 0.231.
776.1. Again, how's Bill 589
generic bill removed from rules
in order of business committee
and referred to the Health Human
Services.
How's Health and Human Services
Committee?
House Bill 589 generic bill.
Number 0.231776.1, removed from
the house rules and Order
Business Committee and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee see no
objection. It is so ordered.
Gentle lady from.
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning. The
recess until 10:30 tomorrow
morning.
