Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
He's not here. I'm gonna call
somebody.
Led by the gentle lady from Taos
representative Ortiz.
Dear Lord,
Please give us the wisdom to
treat each other with kindness
and grace today and for
The rest of the session.
We look to you for
Love and guidance.
Bless this house and the other
side too.
Give us the strength to get
through the grueling days.
With wisdom
And love thank you Lord. gentle
lady.
You from earlier Nicole Chavez
with Pledge of Allegiance.
And your leader from Santa Fe
with a pledge to the New Mexico.
a lady from Santa Fe.
Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good afternoon, members.
Good afternoon members.
God bless the other side too.
Every once in a while.
Are there announcements?
Actually, before I go to you
guys for announcements, I do
have a special, uh, special
guest up in the gallery.
Lots of special guests up in the
gallery.
These are the children from
thrive Community School. We've
got the virus and lilacs. 2nd
graders, special shout out to
Alma Ibarra Representative
Serrato's daughter, please rise
to be recognized. Thrive
community school.
Alma, we know where your dad is
right now. He's at home watching
the Dodgers and Cubs playing on
TV.
That's where I would rather be
too, but I'm here. Go to work.
Announcements.
Gentle lady from.
No, no announcements, OK. I've
got a couple other special
guests with me today.
Folks, you all know.
The amazing Helen Maestas from
our speaker's office. She's
amazing. Round of applause for
Helen, for all of our amazing
work.
the last 56 days.
The floor is organized.
So well thanks to Helen,
notwithstanding my
disorganization, but she can
only do so much she's not a
miracle worker, uh, with her
today though are two very
special guests. We've got
Helen's mother, uh, Carmen
Maestas, who's visiting from
California and Helen's daughter,
a graduate from Valley High
School this spring, um,
actually, no, I, I'm sorry,
Amelia Dorado is your mother and
Carmen Maestas is your daughter.
Please rise to be recognized.
And Carmen, you are graduating
from Valley High School in this
spring, Valley Vikings, which
happens to be in House District
11, um, grade school, amazing
school, amazing community. I'm
glad you're here, um, and Ms.
Dorado, I'm glad you're here too
if you have anyone to blame for
my political career, it is your
daughter more than 25 years ago,
um.
Signed
A form that allowed me to run
for UNM student Senate.
Um
And I only survived one term,
surprise, surprise, didn't make
it, but it's because of Helen,
so thank you and thank you for
sharing your daughter with us.
Uh, she's amazing, amazing human
being. Welcome to the house.
Any other announcements from the
floor.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Senatorative Zapinski.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
clerk to read it.
Mr. Speaker, your labor veterans
and Military Affairs Committee
to has been referred to Senate
Bill 127 as amended has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted.
Patricia Rebel Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption committee report for
Senate Bill 127 as amended. All
those in favor say a.
All the suppose nay, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 37 as
amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption in favorable committee
report for Senate Bill 37 as
amended. All those in favors and
a.
All the supposed, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 45, as
amended, has headed under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Senate Bill 45 as
amended. All those in favor C5
to say a.
All the supposed, the IAI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee team has
been referred Senate Bill 48 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable report for Senate Bill
48 as amended. All those in
favor say aye.
I suppose nay, the I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 83 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move a option of
favorable report for Senate Bill
83 as amended. All those in
favor say aye.
All the supposed a, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee team has
been referred Senate Bill 88 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
Run adoption a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
88 as amended. All those in
favor sitting up and say aye.
I suppose,
yes, have it.
The, the I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, the appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 201 as
amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
Senate Bill 201 as amended. All
those in favor of 75 to 9.
All Bosna, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Memorial
61 has had it under
consideration report
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
community report for House
Memorial 61. All those in favor
of seeing see 9.
All those supposed, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 78 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report for Senate
Bill 78. All those in favor 759.
All the supposed nay, the ISIA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 120
as amended.
Has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair. Move adoption. We are
adoption of favor for Senate
Health.
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 120
as amended. All those in favor
of 25 9.
All the supposed name.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Bill
122 as amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair with adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
122 as amended. All those in
favor sitting up and say aye.
All the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred to Senate tax,
Business, and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 278 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair, move adoption.
We are adoption of a favorable
report for Senate tax, business,
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 278.
All those in favor signified by
say 9.
All those Bos name,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 443 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption.
We are adoption of a favorable
report for Senate tax, Business,
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee sub
substitute for Senate Bill 443,
all those in favor of signing 5.
time.
Also supposed name the eyes have
it be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 60 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair, Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of
committee report on House
Memorial 60, all those in favor
of seeing and I.
All the supposed,
yeah have it reported adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 52 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and the
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair? Mr. Speaker,
move adoption for Senate Bill
52. All those in favor of 759.
Well the supposed name.
Wait, can I vote too?
I don't know if I can vote.
That's uncharted territory.
Nay,
The I it can be reported
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480
has headed under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair, Mr. Speaker, move
adoption for Education Committee
substitute for Senate about 480
of those in favor of 75 but say
9.
I suppose
Yes, I can report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 450 has
had it under consideration,
reports with recommendation that
it do not pass, but that house
taxation and Revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450 do
pass, respectfully submitted,
Derek J. Lin the chair.
Move adoption, Mr. Speaker. We
adoption favorable profile 450,
but a favorable committee report
for Senate Tauss and
Transportation. Well, wait a
minute.
That's not gonna work. Stand by.
We're adoption of an unfavorable
community profile with 450, but
a favorable committee report for
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for housing 450. All
those in favor see up say 9.
All those boys name.
The IS have it we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee team has been
referred Senate Tax, Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Derek J led the chair.
Mr. Speaker, move it to option,
please adoption favorable report
for Senate Tax, Business
Transportation Committee
substitute for about 383 as
amended. All those in favor of 5
and a.
I suppose, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling in
a grossing committee to has been
referred House Bill 65 with
emergency clause has had it
under consideration reports that
same has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory to designing
by the officers of the house,
respectfully submitted. Anita
Gonzalez chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We adoption of favor committee
report on how on House Bill 65
with an emergency clause. All
those in favor of 59.
I supposed, the ISF report
adopted.
That the record reflect that the
duly enrolled in girls copies of
House Bill 165 with university
class. That's what I said, 65.
No, said 65.
have been signed by the officers
of the House in open session.
by memory.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling in
engrossing committee to has been
referred House Bill 192 as
amended. House Bill 323 as
amended House Bill 357 has had
them under consideration in
reports the same have been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the house respectfully
submitted Mariana and I are
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are we are an
adoption in favor of committee
reports on House Bill 192 is
amended. House Bill 323 as
amended House Bill 357. All
those in favor of 59.
Boney.
Yeah, how productive.
The direct reflected the duly
enrolled in Gross copies of
House Bill 192 as amended. House
Bill 323 as amended in House
Bill 357 were signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
Some memory.
General Lee from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business last chance for
announcements before we go to
3rd reading.
We will be breaking in between
3rd reading and doing some
messages and intro, um, but for
now we're gonna go to 3rd
reading, uh, Happy Cowboy Boot
Wednesday. I hope you all wore
your cowboy boots.
No.
Am I the only one?
OK, that makes two of us.
Free lunch for the two of us.
33 free lunches to the house
floor right now. Any other
announcements before we begin?
And lady from Berlin.
Mr. Speaker, I will go to that
order of business. 3rd reading
of legislation.
Gentle lady from Taos, are you
ready on item number 27. I am,
Mr. Speaker. Can you get me to
that point? in Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 21 and 22 as a man did on
final passage has been taken and
it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, this
bill takes some important steps
to put, um, our state, uh, on
the right track to control our
own water resources in the
state, uh, it does it in a
couple of different ways. First,
we create a new state law to lay
the groundwork for uh the
environment department to
implement the federal Clean
Water Act. Secondly, uh, we
amend the our own state Water
Quality Act to protect New
Mexico's waters that are no
longer protected, um.
Under the Federal Clean Water
Act or the Super Fund law. Uh
3rd, we set up a program, um, to
hold polluters accountable and
to uh clean up neglected and
contaminated sites, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and body, um, before we
get into the details of this
bill, I want to tell you a
little bit about um how we got
to where we are today, uh, for
the.
Last 3 years this body has
appropriated money to the Mexico
Environment Department to begin
standing up our own surface
water permitting program.
Um, we've done that, uh,
through, uh, 3 different
appropriations. The last one was
$7.6 million in 2024, so that we
can uh do establish that
program, um.
Also last year, the environment
department, uh, set up
stakeholder meetings with 50
different stakeholders, some of
whom are in this room right now,
uh, to kind of hash out the
details of what a state surface
water permitting program would
look like, uh, that took place
over 6 different meetings, 50
people, 26 different
organizations, uh, were involved
in that effort.
Uh, and that really came up, I
mean, that helped us come up
with a draft of this bill, um,
when it was introduced in the
Senate leader Wirth, uh,
introduced it in, put it into 3
different committees, uh, to
really work out some of those
details, conservation,
judiciary, and uh Senate
Finance, and it changed a lot uh
along the way. Uh, so what you
see now in the very, very long
and colorful amendments in
context is the result of lots of
negotiation and conversation
about how to make this program
work for.
everyone in the state of New
Mexico.
So now I'd like to talk a little
bit about uh the framework of
the bill and framework for
everybody who's playing bingo
right now, uh, you can cross
that, uh, cross that box, um,
I'll, I'll talk first about the
surface water, uh, provisions.
We are only one of 3 states in
the entire United States that uh
asked the EPA to regulate our
surface water permitting so they
determined the federal
government determines who can
discharge into our surface
waters.
This is this is um a process
through um that the EPA started
through the um national
pollution discharge elimination
System, which is called uh
NIPTIs.
The EPA is the lead agency, uh,
and we kind of, you know, manage
the program here, uh, working
with the EPA, uh, again, we're
one of only 3 states, 47 states
have their own, uh, program,
this bill is the path that gets
us to developing our own
program. It's what we call
primacy so that we can have our
own uh state surface water
permitting program.
Again, we've already directed
NMED to um to begin working on
this program.
Um, the
What this bill does is that we
um require the water quality
control commission to set up
rules that implements implements
the federal Clean water program.
Um, after we've done that
rulemaking in New Mexico
Environment Department will
apply to the EPA for
authorization.
The second part of this bill
relates to a 2023 Supreme Court
decision called the second
decision. Um, what that did was
deregulate 95% of the surface
waters in the state of New
Mexico. These are arroyos,
ephemeral streams, intermittent
streams, uh, waters, waterways
that are really important
important to our way of life.
They, uh, the Supreme Court
reinterpreted the Clean Water
Act to take these uh kinds of
waterways out of protection so
what this bill does, it, it is
that it fills the gap of that
left these waterways unprotected
by amending the Water Quality
Act to require permits uh for
surface water discharges that
are no longer covered by federal
law. um, I want to let the body
know that for 50 years we have
seen protections of these
waterways.
So this is really just a return
to the status quo.
Um, the bill, like the Clean
Water Act that exists right now
at the federal level authorizes
general permits to cover a
variety of discharges,
stormwater runoff from
industrial or oil and gas sites,
pesticide applications, things
like that, um, these are done
through the general permits, uh,
which are really a lot easier
than individual permits. There's
simplified uh application,
quicker processing times, and
consistency and such, um.
The bill like the Clean Water
Act, um, amends our water
quality Act to ensure that
downstream, uh, state and tribal
water quality standards continue
to be protected. That's so
important and the NMED, uh, it
is allowed to deny the
application, um, a permit
application if that discharge
would exceed another
jurisdiction's standards that's
really important for tribal
water quality standards, uh, we,
the bill deals with dredge and
fill operations, uh, anti.
degradation and mitigation.
The third part of this bill is
related to groundwater. Uh, we
provide authority uh to NED to
hold polluters responsible for
pollution that may threaten
groundwater that does not rise
to the level of um the federal
law to support the clean up, uh,
we established rulemaking
authority. We clarify cleanup
and financial liability
language, uh, and we align our
law with the Superfund laws, uh,
liability provisions and
protections, um.
This is a really important
aspect of this legislation.
There are hundreds of uh
contaminated and neglected sites
all around the state from dry
cleaners, from mining
operations, um, other
operations.
So we, with this bill
established a fund to clean up
those sites so they don't
further uh continue to uh
contaminate groundwater
resources and many of these
cases, uh, the polluter is long
gone and the communities are
left holding the bag, so this
bill sets up a non-reverting
fund, uh, to clean up these
sites, um, and some of that, um,
that fund is already seeded with
uh $50 million in
appropriations.
So to sum it up, we this bill
establishes a state service
water permitting program again
we'll be we'll join 48 other
states that that have that will
continue to protect the arroyos
and waterways and important,
important rivers in the state
that have been protected for 50
years will protect our
groundwater resources and we'll
clean up decades of neglected
and contaminated sites and with
that, Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
There is a debate, gentleman
from Montero Representative
Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would my friend from Taos please
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so.
This is a really big bill. First
of all, I just want to start,
preface that.
74 pages, I believe so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I will try
to be as brief as I can be, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
gonna start with the first.
Few pages.
I'm not going to get into the
title, but I'm just gonna start
in section one. I know that we
stripped a lot of these
definitions and we added them
back, I believe, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, starting on page 2,
I'm on the amendments in
context. I'm just gonna go down
to page 8, where we reinserted
gray water.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, did
this definition in any way
change from the original.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, it
did not.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee. Instead of going
down all the definitions, can
you tell me which ones did
change regarding the definition.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's gonna take a minute.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I will walk you through it, um.
Abatement costs was added
aquatic resources was added
barrier was added, compensatory
mitigation dredged material.
facility film material general
permit.
General permit coverage.
Pathogen
Point source.
Responsible party.
Surface water discharge and
water.
Pardon me, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, water was already um
part of the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I was assuming so, but I'm
glad we're clarifying that. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we're
talking about, I believe we said
pathogens, how are we
So we're adding a new definition
or are we?
Expanding or changing the
current definition of pathogens.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that,
that is new, uh, but the Water
Quality Act, uh, allows for the
regulation of contaminants,
which does not include any
microorganisms known to cause
harm to humans.
So we're adding, we're, I'm
sorry, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're adding the authority for
the, uh, water quality, um, for
the Water Quality Act to
regulate these, um.
Organisms.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, organism sounds
very interesting. What kind of
organisms would be included in
that there's, I think we were
talking, Mr. Speaker, we're
talking about bacteria, viruses,
yardia, things like that.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. All right,
so the viruses is bacteria. How
would, because I know that
essentially the gist of the bill
from my understanding is we're
taking it in a way from the EPA
on the federal level.
And then we're absorbing it on
the state level with I believe
50 new FTEs to oversee this. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we're talking about the
regulation of these organisms,
how would this language in the
bill change how it's currently
regulated on the federal level.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
pathogens, uh, are, they're,
they're discharged, so there's
no change in how, uh how they're
regulated.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so then I'm also
wondering why is it that we're
trying to put it on the state
level now instead of keeping it
at the federal level because it
would require more FTEs that
would require probably a new
office to be opened. So can you
tell me a little more about the
thought process behind that and
the purpose of that.
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think there are a
lot of reasons to, to bring it
in state, you know, most other
states have done this already,
um, it allows for more
flexibility, uh, quicker
processing times, we know uh
what's in our water and what our
waterways look like and so
giving uh the state primacy over
the Clean Water Act is, is
something that we've been trying
to do for, for several years now
and the appropriations that we
made have really allowed us to
learn about how we can make
that program really happen, uh,
for, for the state, especially
with last year's appropriation,
uh, we added new staff and it'll
take some time to ramp up to the
50, uh, that, that you're
speaking of, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. All right, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, General Lee. And
then I'm wondering when it comes
to this new office, how much
would it be appropriated that we
would need annually to run the
office.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
don't really know yet, uh, the
NMEDs, NMED knows that it'll
cost somewhere around $8 million
but we don't exactly know how
it's going to be funded, uh,
almost every state has a hybrid
fee structure where they do, you
know, general preparations, you
know, from the general fund to
to the program and then they um,
they charge fees for, uh, for
polluters, you know, for the
discharges, uh, that's how most
of the states, uh, go some
states don't have any fee at.
All, um, that might be the way
we go and that's the kind of
thing that will be higher, um,
sort of ironed out in the
rulemaking process to determine,
you know, how it's going to work
for our state.
Cool. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So when it
comes to the actual fee, can you
tell me what other states are
doing regarding fees.
I can, Mr. Speaker. Most states
have uh like a 30 to 70% split
with state funds and uh permit
fees. I'm gonna give you the the
states that have um.
that charged no fee.
Oh
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
North Dakota and Mississippi
that charge no fee.
Um, others have this, you know,
this hybridge, this hybrid
approach.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Nebraska, um.
Has a fee for livestock
operations.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. That's good to know what
other states are doing. So, but
in, in totality when it comes to
this office, we have no idea
what it will cost other than an
estimate when it comes to the $8
million annually, I guess.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I may
have misspoken. I, we do have a
pretty good idea that it's going
to be around $8 million and
that'll cover the um the
employees that are needed not
only for, you know, running the
permit program, but also for
enforce.
ment
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then did this
bill get vetted throughout the
interim and the natural
Resources Committee by chance,
and was it, was this, uh,
something that was endorsed by
that committee?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, it's
been vetted by Natural
Resources, the Natural Resources
Committee, I think for like the
last 3 years, we've been talking
about um setting up a program,
uh, I.
I don't know if it was endorsed.
I don't believe that um we went
through the endorsement process
for.
For this bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I only ask that
because it's one of the few
interim committees I don't sit
on, so I just wanted to make
sure that I wasn't missing
something in my other
committees, but if it was
through natural resources, it's
good that there's been some
discussion. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe I saw,
I'm gonna keep going back and
forth throughout the bill. I
apologize, it's very long, but
I'm just gonna go on page 8.
Stay there.
And I believe there is an
amendment in one of the
committees, I believe it was in
maybe judiciary or somewhere
like that where we change the
definition or we added it
regarding film material and what
that means, and could you tell
me what that change means for
the legislation.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
this, um, this definition was an
amendment that was on the Senate
floor actually, um, with leader
share. I mean it really just
clarifies, you know, what we
would be permitting with regard
to film material.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General
Lee, and do we know if this
language mirrors federal
guidelines. Speaker, gentlemen,
it does mirror federal
guidelines and I would say most
of the language in here, almost
all of it mirrors the clean
Water Act guidelines and other
federal guidelines, uh, CERCLA
and other federal laws.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General, and I'm, I'm trying to
understand this portion of it
because I know that when it
comes to some things people like
to recycle different kinds of
materials to help with water
resources, for example, so when
we talk about film material, it
says in the, I believe in the
definition, it says it does not
include trash, garbage, or
incidental fallback resulting
from excavation activities when
small volumes of material fall
back to substantially.
The same place as the initial
removal. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm wondering what does
that mean when it comes to these
building materials and how can
we continue to use things that
are recycled as materials to
ensure that that is not
precluded from the bill.
Um, Mr. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
this is related to the uh dredge
and fill sort of process when
you're working in a stream bed
or, you know, or in a wetland,
so that's really what, what this
is about there. So you know, you
move, you move material dirt,
and it kind of can fall back in
like you're playing in a
sandbox.
I'm not equating the sandbox to,
you know, our important reverse
and streams, but it's like that.
It sounds like a good analogy
though, so I'll take it, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So I'm
just wondering, so this means
when they're, they're doing
that, there's already trash in
there, is that what it's talking
about? Because it says it
doesn't include trash, garbage,
or incidental fallback. So I'm
just wondering how, how trash
falls into that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you, you
just can't use trash to fill up
the sandbox again, again.
It's not that there's trash in
the stream bed, you just can't
use those kinds of materials
that are excluded in this
definition to refill the stream
bed.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what if it was recycled trash
that was.
I don't know, melted down, for
example, as a barrier that was
created with synthetic blocks
of, let's just say some kind of
polymer. Is that included if
it's been recycled or are we
just saying it's the trash
substance that can't be just
like bottles and cans and
whatever it is to protect our
wetlands, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So we're, we don't
want to use recycled trash to
put back into our wetlands,
which are important, uh, bodies
for keeping our water clean
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, so I, I agree with
you.
I, I think that's important. I
was just wondering how that
falls into this because the
definition says trash, and I
just wanted to make sure that we
were not.
In some way allowing some kind
of
Way to skirt it, so that that
helps me regarding that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I see
that we've, I think a lot of
these have been taken out from
the first the, the definitions
taken out from the first few
pages and put in here. So I
believe that we went over what
was changed definition wise, I
believe we also said we changed
the definition for aquatic, I
believe.
And I may have written that down
wrong. It was very quickly said,
so I just want to make sure I
got that right. What is that
definition say now?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, aquatic resources refers to
wetland streams, lakes, rivers,
and other bodies of water
riparian habitats and the
organisms that live in them.
And the ecological functions.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General leader. So these
riparian habitats, are they
mostly, I, I guess that's by
definition, it's next to a
river, is that correct?
Oh yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Waterway. Got it. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady that
helped me on that one.
Appreciate you there. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think,
did we make some changes
regarding the words responsible
party in the bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
did.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, General
lady, and did we redefine it or
did we add a new definition or
how, because I believe from what
I'm reading, there's not a
reference to CERCLA's legal
framework.
Which could create discrepancies
with federal enforcement
standards. I'm wondering how we
match our definition to that one
to make sure it's compliant.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, it
is, uh, a new definition, um,
and we have this definition in
here so that we can clarify the
cleanup and financial liability
for the contamination of of
groundwater. It does align with
circle, um.
And
Which the uh which the
groundwater uh quality uh board
always already does what's in
its remedy remediation oversight
section, site assessments and
abatement requirements. Um, we
broaden the definition from
hazardous uh substances to water
contaminants.
And that includes all hazardous
substances, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so.
So we're saying today that this
in no way changes the definition
from the federal definition of
responsible party, so in circle.
It is verbatim the same, is that
what I understand?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is
not word for word.
It's pretty similar.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess I just, that just was
flagged in one of my analyses
that it wasn't completely
similar, so it could create
discrepancies and then I was
wondering how my, the removal of
these circular linked
definitions and the
statespecific liability rules
like in Section 9, how could
they, could they potentially
result in weaker or inconsistent
liability enforcement compared
to federal models.
And I'll give you a second to
get to section 9 because I know
it's somewhere in the bill,
somewhere.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
so in this section we, we deal
with liability, um, this, uh,
this bill aligns with CERCA with
Circla, um.
And it's not going to be weaker
than federal laws.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
we're we're allowed to make it
stronger than federal laws
though, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you are
correct. OK. Got it. So then,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I'm gonna go to section.
3
And I'm wondering on section 3,
why did, why the bill would
permit the while, I'm sorry,
water quality control
commission, the WQCC to grant
permits based on site-specific
conditions.
Potentially allowing
inconsistent regulatory
standards between regions. Could
you address that for me when it
comes to the water quality
control commission and their
permitting.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
point me to where you're, what
you're talking about we're in
section 3.
Where exactly?
Let me get to a page number.
Pardon me. So,
Let me see water quality
I believe, Mister Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm starting on
section.
3 on page 24, and I, I read this
late last night, so I'm sorry,
but this also says that the
commission will grant permits
based on site specific
conditions.
And so when it comes to those
site specific conditions, can
you address that potential
conflict that I saw with.
Inconsistent regulatory
standards between different
regions.
I believe I found it. I believe
it's page 25. It's midway down
the amendments and context page.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, you
know, there are different
contaminants. There are
different um discharges for
different streams and uh based
on water flow, there are
different standards for those
pollutants. So that's what this
is in reference to, not, you
know, every pollutants the same,
not every stream is the same.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think what's important to know
here is that it's already
existing law.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker
Generaletti, and I, I do see
that, but we also changed some
of the the vernacular or the
wording with regulation, we
change it to rules on that page
and then at the end of the page
it says or request for general
permit coverage. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how does
that change with that site
specific condition would be
currently in the legislation
because we would need a request
now for general permit coverage,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
changing from.
Rules to reg was something that
the Legislative council service,
um, they made that request and
with regard to the site
specific.
Um, they're just different,
different pollutants in
different areas and, and that's
actually, I think, really
important for, um, the water
quality control commission to,
to know, and that's why we
really want to bring this in,
in-house because uh the feds
don't know the details of our
waterways, uh, as well as we do.
All right, Mr. Speaker,
Generalliti, are there any
instances in the recent past
when the federal oversight has
failed.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, that
that has happened, uh, the
bishop's lodge case is, is one
of them that was the permitting
of a wastewater, uh, pollutant.
Into the Tasukee River.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
that's, that's also really sort
of important to note that the
the permittee didn't notify the
downstream, the EPA didn't
notify the, uh, downstream uh
parties which was tosuque
pueblo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. And then how would this
change that.
When it's the state that's
overseeing it, how would that
loophole be closed on the state
level, and can you tell me where
the notification portion is when
it comes to a situation similar
to that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
think we would, we would know.
As a state and we would notify
uh the tribal entities and
whoever is downstream from where
a pollutant is discharged, we
would have pretty, pretty clear
knowledge of what is happening
and when.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Liddy, but don't they currently
have people on the ground from
the federal government now
overseeing any of these at all?
I mean, do they ever come out to
see, have a, have a site visit
of their own at all ever? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they're in
Dallas. They do not, they're not
here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, it's only a 10-hour
drive to Dallas to Santa Fe,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, sure, or
they can fly, but they don't.
And that's why we need this
program Mr. Speaker, generally,
I'm just trying to figure out
because I, I am very hesitant
when it comes to putting more
departments in our state because
there's already barely enough
funding as it is for many of
these departments, and I know
we're in an oil boom currently,
but
You never know. I, I don't have
a crystal ball. It would be
great if I did. I would love
that, but
I don't. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I just want to make sure
that we can absorb this, this
cost on the state level with a
recurring amount for these FTEs
because I don't want to have to
lay off employees once we put
them on and everything. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if there
is an instance where we do have
a financial hit to our general
fund in some way. Let's just say
oil and gas decides to not.
Not come to this state anymore
or they are overly regulated.
They, they feel and they leave
and let's just say there's other
sources that everyone loses all
their money and they can't pay
income taxes and we lose a lot
of revenue. So if that's the
case, is there any kind of
parachute for this office to
continue its work.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, um.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about how this program ramps up,
you know, it's gonna take us a
few years to get to the point
where we apply to the EPA for,
for primacy, um, we'll do the
rules by 2026 and 202027 will
apply for primacy, um, so we'll
have a really functioning
program by 2028 that gives us a
lot of time to kind of figure
out what the mechanism will look
like for how we fund it again,
we could fund it entirely with
general fund appropriations, um,
or we can join.
Most of the other states by
having some kind of hybrid
approach, uh, which could
include fees, so it, it could be
that should there be.
You know, I don't want to deal
in in speculations, but should
there be an issue with general
fund money, um, we could, we
could look at fees.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
currently in the bill, I think
there are currently criminal
violations that we've, that
we've put in there. I don't know
if this is new, it may be
current, but I believe what I
read it was 20,000 bucks a day,
and I'm wondering if that would
that go toward the general fund
or where does that go when it
comes to the fees, or I'm sorry,
the criminal violations, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen, that's,
uh, that's Clean Water Act fees
and that those are fees that we
will bring into penalties for
criminal activity, um, and that
will go into the general fund.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So does this bill in any
way change the number, the
dollar amount on that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it does
not.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally, that did help me
there.
Let me see where, what other
questions I have cause I mean,
there, there's like full blown
pages that are just like
totally.
uh deleted. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're, I'm
gonna go to page 39.
When it talks about exceptions
from surface water discharge
permits.
What did we change on this one
because I see on you.
It says the only exception from
this word I'm sorry, from
Surface water discharge permits
for point resources are return
flows composed entirely from
irrigated agriculture and then a
few other things that I, I won't
read because it's such a long
paragraph. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what is this do to
change the current regulatory
framework in the state.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
first with regard to exemptions,
we are marrying exemptions from
the clean Water Act, uh, into,
uh, we're bringing those
exemptions into this bill almost
fully. Now we also separate the
point source.
From the nonpoint source charges
discharges from the dredge and
fill, so dredge and fills a
little bit different, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So these are just
mirroring what's currently in
there. So I saw something that
popped out at me was was
prescribed burning.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how does that fall into this
portion?
I believe I'm on page I'm on
page 40 now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I do
apologize for these amendments
in context, it's not my fault.
But they're, they're, they're
hard to work with, um, that is,
uh, in the Clean Water Act right
now at the federal level, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. OK, perfect.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thanks for clearing that
up for me. So I believe probably
these large blue sections that
are just copy pasted mostly are
just following the federal.
verbiage, is that kind of my
understanding of that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, and
they're part of the Senate floor
amendments.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and then I believe I'm
gonna go down to page 42
amendments in context and it
talks about water quality
management fund creation, uh,
well,
I believe it's current statute,
but it says it is a
non-reverting fund. Was it
reverting previously?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, from my
understanding is that it wasn't
very clear, so we're clarifying
that.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I think we
also changed in one of the
amendments may have been the
floor amendments. We said all
fees.
Was changed.
On page 42, we added all fees
collected pursuant to Section
74-6-4. So,
What does that do? How does that
change the statue, Mr. Speaker,
it doesn't at all. It just is
putting that language back in
when we changed it.
Just if you can go up a couple
lines, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, you'll see of
environment all fees crossed
out.
We're adding it back in.
OK, got it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I really
appreciate that.
Sorry to
be looking at these. I wish they
would just do a floor
substitute. Wouldn't that be
great if they just did that, but
I guess I.
I don't see that. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just going to continue on
here. I have some more questions
that are not related to that
actual language of the bill and
I'm just gonna go into the
analyses that I read because
that was helpful for me. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I believe
the fiscal impact report.
Says there's a potential of 37.6
million in annual fees
collected.
And I'm just wondering how will
small and rural municipalities
bear some of that financial
burden, if it, if at all with
any of them be subject to this?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
haven't set the fee structure,
that's something that's going to
be done via the rulemaking
process, but um I think
everybody really appreciates
what small municipalities in
rural New Mexicans, uh, have to
deal with and the, you know,
inability to sometimes get
enough tax funding to.
To make those um communities
thrive, so we wanna, we don't
want to harm them, and I think
that's something that's going to
come out in the rulemaking, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I believe
in the FIR they just try to get
an understanding of how much it
would cost, so they did the
Colorado model, I believe,
because they're probably the
closest to us because they're
right there. And I believe
there's, I just wanna make sure,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Will the rulemaking process be
looking at other states
adjoining our state, or will
they be looking at states like
you talked about earlier with
North Dakota and Mississippi,
and Nebraska as
I mean, I just want to know what
are we looking at? Is it more
regional when it comes to this
water thing, or are we making
these rules based upon
specifically nationwide trends.
How are we going to find a
balance?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, the rulemaking process for
um water the water quality
control mission, uh, commission
is pretty robust, um, and
they're, you know, they're
looking at a lot of things and
they're especially looking at
the stakeholders that are
participate in that rulemaking
and listening to what they have
to say as well. I imagine
they'll be listening to looking
at what other states are doing
as well, particularly around the
fees, um, but we're, we're sort
of bound by some federal
standards as well, um, with
regards.
rulemaking with, you know, by
the uh Clean Water Act, Civil
Rights Act, all, you know,
federal, um.
Federal acts which kind of
determine how we do our will
making process.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee, and then I'm gonna
continue looking at the fur, and
I believe it said on page 3.
I believe it was
Enemy, they said that the state
will need an additional 3.3
million for remediation
contracts when these activities
have traditionally been
addressed under EPA as well as
that 7.1 million in recurring
costs for 50 new FTEs that they
estimate. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, do we have, I
mean, do we, let's just say, is
this in the budget? Is this all
in the budget, 3 million bucks
plus 7 million bucks plus
whatever we would need to set up
the office as well.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, the,
the money to set up the program,
uh, has been appropriated to New
Mexico Environment Department
already and they're, you know,
they've been working on this for
3 years. So that part's in the
budget and then we'll just
continue working.
To determine what those numbers
are, um, as the rulemaking
process goes along. Now with
regard to the contaminated
sites, um, that money is in the
budget as it stands. There's $50
million for neglected and
contaminated sites.
I think there's less than that,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It
was $50 million Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when it went over to
to the other side. Good to know.
OK. Well, let's see if it
changes because I haven't seen
the budget myself since it's
been changed. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I'm just wondering, so my, my
concern is that if our fee
structure is something that is
similar to Colorado's according
to the municipal League.
They um, they are.
Concerned that without.
passing these costs on to the
consumer, how would they absorb
the fees. That's what the
municipal league's analysis
said. So can you address that
for me?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, NED has
already done a little bit of
work on what that, what that fee
structure could look like if we
do impose a fee, um, if we're
looking at uh 50/50 fee where
general fund 50%, uh, fees 50%,
um, that the fee for those
permits will be, you know, paid
by a variety of people, but if
we're talking about like a
municipality, um, and there in
their permitting process for the
release of wastewater, um, it
could cost, uh, a 50/50 model.
would cost the average
Albuquerque household.
3 cents a month. So
I think that is a price that we
can bear for ensuring that water
quality is, um, up to the
standards that we set.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this theoretically though could
increase costs for
Every day New Mexicans, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
really depends on how we decide
as a legislature to pay for this
program.
But I will say that um.
The costs of cleanup when a
pollution when pollution is
discharged into our waterways is
far greater than preventing that
pollution in the first place.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I, I agree with you on
that, but when it comes to like
a smaller county or a smaller
municipality that they have a
water system and it's a very
expensive fix to that water
system to ensure quality
standards, etc. and then they
have to.
Give that to the consumer and
maybe there are not many people,
many ratepayers who live in that
area, is there anything that
will help these local
communities that are small rural
and frontier communities, is
there any kind of fund that
would help them absorb those
costs, they don't have to put
that on the taxpayer. Mr.
Speaker, the, the general fund
would help those communities
absorb those costs. What we put
in, but if we're looking at, um,
I have.
Uh, a document here that gives
me a sort of an example of what
it might cost households, you
know, sort of from smallest to
largest cities and you know,
we're looking at.
$2 a month.
If it's a 100% fee structure or
50/50 rather, I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you know,
potentially $3 a month, 40 cents
a month, 58 cents a month. So
it's not onerous.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it's
not onerous that we project
though, correct? I don't think
we know specific like what like
in Colorado.
Do we have data on how much the
payers or the ratepayers,
taxpayers are paying per
household.
Because I just don't want to
have another kind of increase in
costs, especially for lower
income people across our state
who are already barely paying
for groceries and gas. I want to
make sure that those people, 3
bucks matters to these people
and so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just want to make sure that
that doesn't have to go to those
individuals.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I, I
understand that perfectly. I, I
completely do and there are
other mechanisms within the
state that allow for uh
municipalities to tap into
funding water trust, uh, fund,
that kind of, uh, that kind of
funding that already exists at
the state level for, um, you
know, for various entities,
municipalities in particular to
to reduce the cost to the
ratepayer.
And this is just a scenario we
we these are the kinds of things
that the water quality control
commission will be looking at in
the rulemaking. This is what
stakeholders need to, you know,
when they, they need to
participate in that rulemaking
to make sure that there isn't an
undue cost, uh, a burden on
ratepayers.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
generally, and that's kind of my
concern with your bill because
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't want it to have to go to
those ratepayers and I would
love if we were explicit in the
bill, we would say specifically
this is going from general fund
and it is not in any way, shape,
or form going to directly come
from the consumer via the, the
taxes paid locally.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um.
Not every, um, not every state
requires folks to, you know, to
pay fees for their permits.
There are a number of states
that exempt um municipal water
wastewater treatment plants from
um from that permit fee there's
seats that uh exempt state
agencies there are states like
Illinois exempts, individual
homeowners, we could do
something like that too, that's
again something that's gonna
come out in the rulemaking and
it's really important that we
let that process play out.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I would be super.
I would be way more comfortable
if that's what we put in the law
instead of the rulemaking,
because I want to make sure that
we say this does not go to the
individual homeowners or
renters, this is something that
we as a state will absorb from
the general fund. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, why didn't
we put a provision like that in
Illinois in here.
Mr. Speaker, um, all these
states, the states that I
mentioned went through their own
rulemaking process and this is
what they came up with.
And that's, I think that's a
pretty robust process.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
cannot speak for other states,
but what I can say for New
Mexico when it comes to
rulemaking, it takes a very long
time and there are things that
get lost, you know, I, it's hard
to track bills during the
legislature, much less in
rulemaking processes where we
don't even know which websites
these are gonna be posted on,
when will the, the commission
actually talk about it. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is it your
intention then?
That this does not go back to
the ratepayer.
is that the intention behind
this. We hope that the rules
will say it doesn't go to the
ratepayer. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the intention with
this bill is to protect our
water quality resources and to
bring this in-house so that we
can manage this program for us.
We can decide as a legislature,
um, if there's going to be a fee
or not, um, we're not making
that decision right now. That's
something that's going to be
made in rulemaking.
So my intention with this bill,
our intention with this bill is
to make sure that we're
protecting our waterways that
we're ensuring that um that our
rivers and streams receive the
same protection that they have
for 50 years and that we can and
that we manage that program in
the state of New Mexico just as
other, you know, 47 other states
do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee, uh, I, I get it. I
understand. I also think that
when it comes to putting
something on the state level,
yeah, we may have a little more
oversight, but also it's more.
cost as well. And so the cost
would have to be absorbed
somehow, and I just wouldn't
want the ratepayers, taxpayers
to be the ones on, on the hook
for that. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'll continue on
with my questions. I'm gonna ask
about
The PS related enforcement. So
when it comes to PFOS,
I'm just wondering how will that
work on the state level now and
we're in the bill. Can you tell
me where that'll be managed.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there's
uh POS is not mentioned in this
bill, but it could be, uh, one
of the contaminants that the
water quality control, uh,
commission is looking at when it
comes to permitting.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle Liddy, and I bring that
up because I believe I was on
the health department's analysis
and on their analysis page 2,
it, it just wanted to make sure
that we ensure that there is not
a shift from EPA to NED
regarding these PFAS situations
and there is not less rigorous
enforcement since it is on the
state level and we have fewer
resources, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when we uh apply for
primacy, we cannot have less
stringent laws in the federal
government.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I get that, but
when it also comes to the state
doing all the
The testing and things. Do we
have the resources to do that
kind of testing in-house on the
state level when it comes to
Phos.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we will.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so we
currently don't, but we will in
the future or we currently do
and we'll just continue.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
understand the permittees will
be required to test and analyze
and monitor those pollutants as
well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, General
Liddy, so the permittees, can
you tell me how that works when
it comes to them monitoring it.
Do they have to send it to a lab
out of state. Do we have a lab
in state to, to search that? How
do we do that when it comes to
these permittees and their
requirements which have changed
from federal to state.
Um, I don't think there's gonna
be a big change of the Permits,
uh, get the.
Get the sample sent to the DOA.
DOH scientific lab where it's
tested.
And that won't, that won't
change.
but they cannot, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they can also use
any, you know, um,
lab that can test those kinds of
things, but it is on the
permittees to do this.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. How do we
independently verify that their
information is correct and on
the state level. Do we have our
own PFOS lab in the state that
we can lean on to independently
verify what they're saying to us
is correct.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
the DOH analysis lab.
The state DOH here in New
Mexico. Is that correct Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Yes, you are
correct.
Got it. And then, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how, how many new
individuals would the DOH have
to hire to run the lab since I'm
sure there would be more
instances of needing to test.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
requirement already exists, so I
don't believe they'll have to
increase, um, we're, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we're not
increasing the, the number of
permittees that's gonna probably
stay the same.
Um, we're just
Um, requiring we're, we're just
developing the program.
In state
It's not going to increase the
number of permits, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I appreciate
that and I hope that's the case.
I don't want to have to create
more new FTEs if we don't have
to, so that does make sense. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I did
have in my analysis, I believe
Texas's program.
The
Which supplements this primacy,
it limited fee burdens through
state subsidies, now I would
just recommend in the rulemaking
to maybe look at Texas because
they're a neighbor, they're in
the same region, and we
definitely want to limit those
fees specifically when it comes
to giving it to the, the
individual ratepayers, and I
hate to like beat that dead
horse. It's dead, but I'm gonna
keep kicking it because I feel
like it's important. I don't
want the ratepayers to be the
ones who have to eat this. So
also, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I am, I'm looking at other
states.
there's, I think Minnesota has
an approach to balance
regulatory compliance with
affordability.
And then I also believe from
what I'm reading, uh, North
Carolina.
Their fees have been blamed for
financial strain on small
utilities, so I would not look
at North Carolina for them. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and I,
I just wanna look at that also
California they have a model,
uh, general permit process
provides more streamlined and
cost-effective permitting for
agricultural and small rural
discharges, I think that might
also be something to look at
when it comes to rural
individuals and those
individuals who have.
Farms
So just a point to, to keep in
mind when we're talking about
rule making, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also wanna make
sure that this doesn't
exacerbate rural urban
disparities by imposing uh
permitting fees on both large
urban utilities and small ones.
So is there anything in the bill
that will help balance the two
between.
How they're regulated.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they're, they're gonna be
regulated the same way based on
the, um, the water quality
control commission's standards,
um, that are, you know, really
the Clean Water Act standards
that were implementing here in
the state, the federal Clean
Water standards, but I hear you,
um, on the fees and I invite you
to participate in the rulemaking
to make sure that we're not
overburdening our
municipalities, and we don't
need to we can fund this whole
thing with general fund. Is that
something that you, we decide as
a legislature.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I would love to be
part of that. Do we know when
rulemaking will happen if this
bill passed theoretically it's,
it's on our, our house floor. I
don't know if we've made, we've
made amendments on this side.
When can we expect rulemaking to
begin.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
we expect rulemaking to begin at
the end of the calendar year of
this year. It'll probably take
about a year to do and once that
rulemaking is finished, probably
in late 2026, then we will, and
that includes, you know, all the
regulations.
put forth by the Water Quality
Control commission, then we can
apply for primacy from the EPA.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's good to hear. So I
will keep an eye out on my inbox
to see when that happens, and I
hope it's quicker than not
quicker because we wouldn't want
it to be really slow, but I know
government, unfortunately moves
slowly, right? So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm also wondering,
uh, how would
Downstream tribes or other
entities.
Be protected with this since we
have supremacy of, of um
sovereignty and things like
that. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how would this work with
those tribes to continue to
protect their waterways since
the waterway can go from
non-tribal land to tribal land
and then back out. So, uh, what
is this do regarding that?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
this bill doesn't change how um
how we manage tribal water
quality standards or how, how
those uh water quality standards
are managed from tribe to tribe,
um, right now, uh, under the
Clean Water Act, um, they can
deny the EPA can deny deny
permits, um, if a polluter, if a
discharge violates uh those
tribal water quality standards.
It, it exists right now in the
Clean Water Act that is not
going to change at all.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I'm just
wondering that because what if
the
The tribe
They have stricter requirements
than the state's requirements
would individual municipalities
and and individual water
systems, would they have to then
be in compliance with the more
strict rules that have been
applied by that tribe that is
indeed through the waterway or
how, how would that work, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, they,
the, the more strict standards,
trouble water quality standards
are in place as they are right
now. They will continue to be
recognized as such.
There are permits already that
um you know, that have to
regulate their discharges based
on, um, downstream.
Water quality standards by a
tribe that are are much
stricter, um, especially in the
Albuquerque area with discharges
into the Rio Grande that's
already happening.
And we want to ensure that that
continues to happen with, with
this bill.
Cool. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lay, and then I'm also
wondering.
When it comes to other
implications with this. I know
that.
tribal governments, they can do
their own standards, but this
would then create even more
strict standards for
municipalities if they just
follow the state guidelines. So
would there be any penalty on
the state level if they failed
to do the harsher or the more
strict standards that were
applied by the tribal entity and
they were just following state
entity guidelines from the
state, is there going to be a
penalty in that regard if that
was the case.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
state water the state uh service
order permitting program would
not issue a permit if that were
the case.
So you know there wouldn't be a
penalty so much as just.
No permit would be issued.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady that helped on that
and so I, I'm I'm sure I have.
2 more hours' worth of questions
and I, I would be so happy to
ask those, but I guess for me, I
find this to be not very
prescriptive and like a lot of
bills, unfortunately this
session. I feel like that those
words I keep on saying because
everything's in rulemaking all
the time, and it does
Not sit well with me when we're
giving a department all this
authority to create rules that
we don't know what they are and
how they will affect our
constituents because I can't
vote for this. And so that's
also something that someone's
bingo, so sorry, I can't vote, I
can't support this bill, uh, but
Mr. Speaker, generally, uh, I
just find it to be something
that we don't know much about
when it comes to the rules. We
don't know how we're going to do
the fee structures and for me, I
will definitely work with you in
consultation with the commission
and everybody.
who are doing the rulemaking,
but I wanna make crystal clear
that I hope.
And pray that this will not
trickle down to my.
Voters who would have to pay for
this out of their pocket with
and $3 a month matters to my
constituents and it matters to
me. And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would just certainly
Say that and hope that they're
listening after they get
everything approved by the
federal government because I
don't think that the taxpayer
should be the ones who have to
eat this because the
legislature's the one who chose
to remove it from the federal
government. We didn't
specifically choose it on a vote
on the ballot to do that. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
want to make sure that the
voters understand that if this
does increase their fees locally
because there are fees.
I didn't vote for this and I
wasn't part of this. So thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. There is further
debate, the gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The, the
gentle lady from Tarahi, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gently
from Santa Fe. Thank you.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
what we have in front of us of
this piece of legislation is, as
you mentioned, um.
Be derived from from many
concerns, uh, particularly with
the, um.
The sack,
The sack,
uh, decision, um, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee, can you, can you,
um, maybe elaborate a little bit
about that decision and why this
is so.
Uh, critical to us getting this
passed, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
absolutely, um, the Clean Water
Act, which has been in place for
more than 50 years, um, protects
the waters of the United States
and in 2023, the Supreme Court
threw its second decision, um,
essentially.
Said that um it wouldn't with
the waters of the United States
were um
Traditional navigable waters and
not all waters and what that in
effect did for New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that it
removed more than 95% of our
waterways, um, from that.
Clean water protection that they
had um enjoyed for 50 years or
more, um, you know, many of our
streams are in intermittent and
ephemeral, but that doesn't mean
that they're not important, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they
provide, um, they provide water
to farmers, uh, drinking water
for communities, uh, not to
mention, uh, Arroyos, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady that,
um, serve a a hugely important
function in, you know, getting
that stormwater runoff to the
various tributaries and other um
other waterways in, in New
Mexico, so what we do with this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
is make sure that we, you know,
go back to protecting the
waterways that are so important
to our state.
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for
that. It's 90 95% of our
waterways have lost those
protections under
Under the act, um, that that
that's, that's devastating, um,
to think of what could come if
we didn't do something to to
To um
enforce or to pass this
legislation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I have been a member for
for um in water and natural
resources since I started, um,
as a legislator and this has
come before us and um.
Just the, the, the severity of
what could happen and the
outcomes that could, that could
really affect our state, our
economic status and and so
forth, um.
can be horrendous, um, so with
that man, what?
What economic benefits does the
bill provide to New Mexico
agriculture sector by
protecting.
This water our water resources.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, thank
you gentle lady, um, well, let
me first say that um.
We're not changing at all the
way, um, agricultural or
ranching is done, uh, in the
state, um, so that's not quite
your ques not quite your your
question, but it's important to
know that the exemptions that
agriculture and ranching and
many other operations have known
for a long time and have
operated under for a long time
are in this bill so there's not
gonna be any change, uh,
financially to those entities,
they're gonna operate the same
way as they have under the
federal.
Clean Water Act, um, but what we
do is ensure that, um, you know,
by protecting our waterways by
regulating the discharges into
those waterways, uh, as you
know, we've done for as the EPA
has done for, for a long time
now, but by bringing this into
the state, uh, we can ensure
that um you know, that that
water is clean, um, that is full
it's, it's free from most
pollutants, uh, and that our
farmers and ranchers can
continue to operate as they
have.
Mr. Speaker generally that that
and and and thanks, thank you
for that that preface of of um
mentioning that this has no
economic um
Uh, degradation for our
agricultural sector, but in fact
protects it and enhances, if you
will, because we'll continue
those water resources, uh,
availability of those water
resources to them.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, general
Leader, how, how would you
describe or address any concerns
about water scarcity and long
term, um, sustainability in our
state in regards to maybe not
passing.
This legislation.
If if it weren't to pass, Mr.
Speaker, gently.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
um, while this bill doesn't deal
with water quantity it
absolutely deals with water
quality and as we have less
water and, and I think that's
something that we see in our
future, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, it's really important
that the water quality is um is
good enough for for our state
and it's something that we've
been able to, to protect, uh,
for a long time, um, if water is
polluted, um.
It's not usable and that could
result in less um less water
availability for, uh, for all
the ways in which the state uses
water.
Speaker General Lee, thank you
so much. I, I, um, I have a few
other questions just to, you
know, to go through to to to
really emphasize the importance
of this, um, legislation.
What, what could we, what can
we, how or how can we build the
partnerships between our state,
our state agencies, and our, our
local communities in regards to
this legislation, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, you know, I think there,
there will be strong
partnerships that, you know,
that they're already exist, but
you know by uh bringing this
program into our state, uh, NED
water quality Control commission
will be working with those
municipalities, um, you know, I
think especially as we go
through that rulemaking process
with regard to the, to the fees,
and again I'm gonna say that it
could be that there are no fees
that are charged at all, and I
think that's something that's up
to this legislature. So I think
that, um, you know, we'll, we'll
be working together to develop a
fee structure with those
municipalities and other
entities, um, with, you know,
with regard to the general
permitting and other permitting
of discharges.
Mr. Speaker, generally, that's,
that's right. I, and I see it
that way, especially when I see
other pieces of legislation that
are very supportive of, you
know, um, infrastructure and um
having our budget uh set up the
way it is and, you know, I think
that this is, this is so um so
important again, um, just a few
more questions just to to show
that, um, a question about how
will the bill align with the New
Mexico's broader climate change
and environmental goals.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, um,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
you know, I think it's
important.
To
To be able to have the control
over, um, what we pollute, uh,
and what we discharge into our,
um,
Into our surface waters, uh, of
the state, you know, it's, it's
so critical, um.
That we're able to manage that
process, uh, in-house and I
think one of the ways that we
can be thinking about this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is, um, is
sort of the, the administrative
efficiency that this bill
provides Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady for, you know, for NMED to
regulate, uh, regulate the
general permits, um, that really
speeds up, um, you know, speeds
up the process, uh, really
takes, you know, takes just a
few weeks. I think it
It keeps uh NMED and other
agencies sort of focused on, on
the other things that we need to
manage, um, but by bringing this
process in-house, um, we can
make it more efficiency,
efficient for, for everyone, um,
and kind of free up time for the
other, for those other things.
Speaker, I agree with you. Um,
that's, that's how I understand,
uh, some of the benefits of, of
what this bill does.
And does this bill have some um
Positive impacts and in other
industries perhaps for oil and
gas and if it does and how would
it balance um the economic
development aspect there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
there, there aren't a lot of
changes really, you know, from
the exemptions that oil and gas
and a ranching and other
industries, um, you know,
already are sort of used to, so
there's some regulatory, uh,
certainty there, um, the bill
does change um some of the or
it, it takes on responsibilities
that the EPA has already been uh
performing with regard to uh
discharges under the um under
the Clean Water.
Iraq for oil and gas. So I think
that's um that's something that
NMED will be will be doing now
instead of the EPA regulating
some of those discharges that
exist right now that's not
changing the discharges, it's
just
Um, bringing it, bringing it
into the state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, I think this is what
you, I think you might have said
is, is a streamlined approach,
and I think through that
streamlined approach, it creates
transparency
if.
It creates um more involvement
with our quality uh of um
Decision making through our
community involvement in our
local government, um, um,
involvement as well I think that
this is, this is how we, um, we
really
We really change how we are
looking at water law and policy
and that streamline uh gives us
more assurances and it's um.
It makes it, it makes our
states, uh, a better place, uh,
for those that are really
looking to, to come here and,
and maybe have issues with some
of our our water issues and how
we in our policies and how we
deal with them, um, madam, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
heard from individuals that they
were concerned about our water
in our state and maybe that was
uh that was somewhat of a reason
why they didn't choose to to
want to.
To stay here or come here, but
when we take it upon ourselves
to put in this type of policy
for our state. It shows that it
shows those folks that we are
committed and we understand our
climate, we understand, um, our
water needs and we're going to
um put forward our best fruit,
if you will, to, to into
practice to make sure that we're
going to have a sustainable
future that we are going to have
better practices for that for
for sustainability with our
water usage and uh.
be principled about that, uh, I
take concern with the sacket
decision because I don't think
they really looked at our
climates in our state and our
the scarcity of the water that
and the issues that we have
here, uh, and I, I assume, uh,
of course the other states are
having to implement uh like
policy and I think you may have
spoken to that. Can you remind
me about the states that are
already that are actively
looking at uh like legislation,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
well, 47 other states already
have their own surface water
permitting program and gonna ask
about other states that are
doing something similar with
deregulated waters from the SACA
decision.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, we
know that Arizona and Colorado
are looking at legislation to
protect waters that are no
longer regulated, um, after the
SACA decision. Speaker General
Lady, um.
I think that that that is
essential, um, when we are
trying to preserve and can, you
know, have those controls in
place and, and really have the
sustainability of water for um
our, our type of climate in the
state. This is essential. This
is, this is the type of policy
that we, I would encourage all
of us here to, to vote for
because without this we're we're
gonna be in in severe trouble,
um, to our members, uh,
This is um
This is how we protect our
state. This is how we protect
our water and our resources for
our state.
And you did a comment a little
bit about the contamination. I
think there's a question about
the the POS and uh in regards to
this bill and I just wanna say
thank you again this is all
encompassing and how we act.
In the best um.
The best way for all of our um
taxpayers of New Mexico to
ensure them that we are doing
our job here in in the
legislature. This is the type of
a policy that we can be we can
take home and say this is what
we've done and this is some of
the most important legislation I
think in front of us this
session, so thank you for
bringing it forward. Thank you
to our sponsors and all that
work on, on this and um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, let's
get this passed. Thank you.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Taoshield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend from San Juan.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
generally, I don't have many
questions, but I, I, I, um,
heard this bill in committee, so
there are questions.
Um, about how this might be
implemented in New Mexico so
I'm, I'm just gonna kind of
repeat those questions and.
Uh, it shouldn't, shouldn't take
more than an hour or two, Mr.
Speaker.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
so we have left so it works out.
Uh,
gentle lady, um,
Uh, Concerning the, the, the
provision in there uh that uh
that.
Either a state or tribal entity
downstream could establish their
own uh uh water quality
standards. How are we going to
make sure that
That this works to where one
entity can't.
Stop
Uh, something from happening
that's needed downstream. How,
how are we gonna make sure that
there's some sort of cohesion.
Um
To make, I think I, I like the
idea of state primacy, but want
to make sure that we don't have
uh have it such patchwork that
that it could be stopped by one
entity. How, how are we going to
handle that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I,
I, I understand what you're
asking there, but I, I will say
that um.
The Clean Water Act.
Right now at the federal level,
um.
Allows for uh for the EPA and in
this case it would be for the
state to deny a permit, you
know, for, um,
For pollution, um, if it's an
excess of a downstream state or
tribal water quality standards.
So we're not changing anything
about that. Um, we're not, um.
We're not increasing or
decreasing the, the, you know,
The stringency with regard to
tribal water quality Act, we're
recognized as the sovereignty of
our tribal tribal, um, nations
that we work with all the time.
That's not changing at all with
this bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, no, I understand that,
that, that provision's been in
place, but I believe that the
bill that this bill reads that
also uh down street downstream
estate entity potentially could
also uh do this. So I'm, I'm
just wondering.
Um, are we expanding that from
what is currently under the
federal jurisdiction whenever we
do it in state or is it, is it
matching exactly word for word,
what's in the, uh, federal, uh,
regulations.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I don't know if we're matching
it word for word, but right now
the EPA can deny a permit, um,
if.
If that discharge is, uh, in
excess of the downstream state
and went by state I mean Texas.
In New Mexico.
That those those kinds of
states, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you. I, I was just, I
believe the the the specific
language said state or tribal
entity.
Maybe it means a state.
Or a tribal entity, I'm not sure
if that's how it reads.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, it
reads a state like New Mexico,
Texas.
Colorado, that that's not really
the way it'll work with the
permits because.
State or tribal, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Um
There was a concern from farming
and ranching folks as to the,
the definition, and I believe I
know the answer to this already,
but I think for the body, I
think it's important, uh, uh,
for it to be reiterated, but um.
Under the uh agricultural
practices, there's a term there
that says, uh, normal farming.
Practices
Um, so I'm Speaker and gentle
lady, uh.
Is there, what what would be
included under normal farming
practices.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen
normal farming that's taken from
the existing Federal Clean Water
Act. I know it sounds kind of
Funky, um, but that includes
plowing seeding.
Cultivating, um, some drainage
harvesting, um, in upland soil
and water conservation practices
that's taken directly, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, from the
Clean Water Act.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Yes, that was, that was my
understanding of it as well,
just wanted once again to have
clarity for the body, um,
speaker and gentle lady.
Um, also, under general permit
coverage. How are we going to
Um
Ensure, since we'll be standing
up.
Uh, a new department within the
agency, how are we gonna be able
to ensure that
Those who currently are able to
get a general uh uh permit.
How are we going to be able to
ensure that that practice will
remain the same since we don't
currently, we're not currently
regulating this.
OK.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we're
not really growing a new
department. Um, there's a
department that exists already,
the surface water bureau,
Quality bureau, um, that exists
already in NMED, um, so we're
just, um, bringing in what EPA
is regulating through their what
what EPA is permitting.
Into into the state to do that,
um, and I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I didn't really catch
the rest of your question.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that the question is, since
we've not been doing this
before, how are we going to make
sure that there's some level of
consistency or some level of a
surety that folks who have been
uh able to uh get a general
permit.
That that practice won't stop.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
we will, uh, we will be working
with the EPA to stand up this
program, enemyD with this, the
existing um program, the surface
water quality program they they
work with EPA to um to really
kind of get those permits in
place, so they have a very good
understanding. They've increased
their, their staffing, um, over
the last year or two to bring in
more expertise and as the
program um is developed over the
next 3 years.
through the rulemaking and
eventually through the primacy
application, uh, we will have
established a program in New
Mexico that has uh the experts.
In New Mexico and the
enforcement mechanism in New
Mexico as well, so um the there
the EPA and NED talks a lot
about this, you know, when
they're giving out permits,
they, they have conversations,
they engage with each other.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, so you kind of uh
swerved into my next next uh
question and that is, uh, this
expertise, although we've been
interacting with them, we've not
been issuing these permits, so,
uh, where are we gonna be able
to
Get these experts, are they
available? Because, and I would
imagine we don't have to bring
them all on at once. I heard you
say over the next 3 years, but
are we able to
Uh, to have we identified and
are we able to go get these
folks, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I often do that where
I answer a question that you,
you haven't yet asked, so we
just have a way with each other,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
You can finish my thoughts.
And sentences
um in this way too long it's
5058, right?
508
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
feel pretty confident that we're
gonna be able to find the people
that we need. We're already
finding them, are, uh, our
higher ed department, uh, has
incredible, we have incredible
universities here that have
watershed management programs
that have wastewater uh
treatment, uh, training
programs, so we have the people
in.
already and MED has made good
use of the funding that we have
provided with, uh, provided them
over the last few years and uh
really minimizing that vacancy
rate, you know, they, um, they
pay good money to people to do
the good work. And so as we ramp
up this program, um, we, uh, we
will lean on our universities,
um, both in state and and in our
neighbors to get the talent that
we need to um to staff up this
program and of course they're
always federal.
Um, employees that are probably
available.
Right now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so yes, I would
imagine we uh as usual, I
believe we can, we can grow our
own in the state, but I also
know that since uh as to the
point I was making earlier about
consistency, I think we're gonna
need to be able to take folks
and, and if Ms. Speaker and
gentle lady, if, if currently
Uh, the folks who are doing this
work for New Mexico, if we're
gonna start, if we're gonna take
that away, I would imagine many
of them are going to be looking
for work, so, uh, at least, uh,
enough folks to, to bring over
and the speaker and gentle lady,
um, I tried to finish your
sandwich earlier today, but uh
you kind of drew the line right
there.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I really
don't know what he's talking
about.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, um, and
gentle lady, uh, the, there are
a couple of landowner questions
I have, uh, that and also Ms.
Speaker and gentle lady,
concerning.
If we have
Um
A fire, uh, there, there's,
there's certain things that are
gonna happen. I understand that
there's a waiver process, uh,
for when it has to do with an
emergency, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
Concerning uh.
A developer or a builder.
Um
That, that's, that would fall
under a general.
Uh
A general permit correct? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you are
correct. Yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because
Um, I know in committee the, the
question came up about
What, what is a discharge?
And I understand, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, loose sediment.
would be considered a discharge,
um, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if it's
related to dredge and fill, then
yes.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, just I think these
are the last, my last couple of
questions here. Um, but
Uh, concerning
With
If we have a fire, we've we've
had a lot of fires lately and
then we've had floods.
Uh, following fires. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
there's a lot of Dozer work that
goes in whenever there's a a
potential fire to either make a
fire line and then after a fire
has taken place. There's dirt
work that takes place as well,
uh, to hopefully keep uh
flooding from.
Uh, from turning into the next
disaster. So I'm a speaker and
gentle lady, uh, those folks
that would be doing that work,
that they would be able to do
the work and then apply for a
Permit
Retroactively, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, in
an emergency, both of those
situations exist. Um, there are,
um, special processing
procedures to really get, um,
get that permit issued very,
very quickly, um.
We can also use general permits
to um to expedite uh that
permitting in the case of an
emergency.
Especially Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, for, for wildfires
and for flooding that might
occur.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, so, um,
Since we're gonna be standing
this up new.
People who have been used to
filing.
Uh, with the federal government
for a permit.
Um, how are we going to inform
them that we are now taking this
over and I mean, uh, we don't
want them to get in trouble for
sending in.
Uh, a request and then uh
waiting for a request and not
knowing that they should have
filed with the state. How are we
going to handle that and how,
uh, lenient.
Are we going to be whenever it's
truly just a mistake and they
were unaware.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
If you have a general permit or
an individual permit, that's
going to transfer automatically
over to the state permitting
program if you have that permit
already from the EPA so that
won't change, um, and then, you
know, we've got some time to
stand up this program, right?
The rulemaking, rulemaking will
begin in December or so. It'll
take about a year. We'll be
applying in 2027 for that
primacy, uh, from the EPA, so,
um, there is a lot of time to uh
to notify those current
permittees and again those
permits will just
transfer over.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, there is, there
is some concern about this. I, I
know that this bill changed
quite a bit.
Um, over the last couple of
years and then this year it
changed uh fairly dramatically,
uh, I appreciate, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, the sponsors, uh,
willingness to, to make.
Uh, some of those changes, uh, I
do, I'm gonna withhold my
support today because I've
already voted for one of your
bills and I don't want to get a
reputation.
Um, Mr. Speaker and generally,
no, I'm, I'm gonna withhold my
support just because I'm, I am
concerned, there are concerns
from folks that, that, that the
consistency.
In the transfer won't take place
and I just wanna make sure I
don't want to make it look like
Everybody is 1,000% on board
with this.
And then people start having
some problems.
And complaints and those
complaints flow downhill to
someone like me as a legislator
downstream, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
downstream.
Pun intended. OK, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I, I support
the general idea of this bill
and maybe if you would allow me
to eat the other half of your
sandwich, I would be supporting
it today.
I was gonna make that joke but
you took it from me. Thanks a
lot, gentlemen from San Juan.
Gentlemen from Chaves Eddie and
Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady you.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I did
not hear this in committee, so I
don't know a lot about it, uh,
but there's several things that
trouble me.
The first thing when I look at
these bills that I don't know
anything about.
And as John Locke said, uh,
I think of my constituents in
my, my district.
Uh, I don't see where any of the
Farm and ranch groups are
categories by the ladder.
Endorsing this legislation, do
you know anything why they are
not endorsing it?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
understand it, initially when
this bill was first drafted, the
cattle growers were opposed, but
we worked with lots of
Uh, constituencies including the
cattle growers um over the
course of the, the, you know,
the Senate committee process and
address their concerns and they
are now neutral, uh, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, nothing
has changed for farmers and
ranchers with regard to the
agriculture exemptions that
they've enjoyed under the Clean
Water Act that will, that will
continue, uh, that's that
language is almost.
Exactly word for word in the
federal um
You know, the federal laws in in
this bill right here.
Uh, thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
heard, heard you say that, but,
uh, then I've also heard that we
haven't made the rules. So how
can we have assurances that
When it gets to the rulemaking
that they some of these
regulations do not change in the
rulemaking.
Uh
I did notice.
New Mexico Foreign Bureau was in
the opposition list to this.
It may have changed also, but
according to the
What I'm looking at here on the
analysis they are.
They are in opposition cattle
growers are not on either one
either list.
You know why the Farm Bureau
would be in in opposition.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
don't know exactly why they're
in opposition, but it could be
because we haven't um
delineately delineated the fee
structure that fee structure is
uh going to be, you know, um,
really hashed out in the
rulemaking process, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I do want to
respond to something that you
talked about before, um, this
some of the uncertainty that you
think the farmers and ranchers
might be experiencing. We have
in.
This bill, uh, all the
exceptions, so that is not good
for farming and ranching, that's
not going to change in the
rulemaking process at all. We
have, those are the guardrails
that are in the bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Oh good. I'm
glad to hear that. I like I
said, I don't know a lot about
the bill. I didn't hear it in
committee, just what I've heard
today and what little I've had
time to read, uh.
What
I guess one phrase that kind of
bothered, I didn't see an answer
for what are, what is the
definition of surface waters.
What all does that include?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
you're looking for the
definition of surface water.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Yes,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, in the bill itself,
surface water discharge is, um.
Is defined and surface waters of
the state are defined in the
water quality act in the in the
regulations.
Of the water quality.
OK, thank you gentle lady, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it,
does it include the
There's someone had mentioned to
me that may include all the dry
washes and madma channels and
And
storm drain
range channels.
Or are they considered to be
part of the surface water.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the surface waters of the state,
uh, which is, uh, defined in the
administrative code, uh, means
all surface waters including
lakes, rivers, perennial,
intermittent, and ephemeral
streams, wetlands, adjacent
wetlands, Playa Lakes
reservoirs.
Natural ponds and tributaries of
these waters. These are already,
uh, defined in water quality
regulation.
Thank you, uh
In lady, Mr. Speaker, uh,
I guess about the only other
thing that came to my mind on
this, uh, you know, as the
farmers.
Uh, you know, they use chemicals
and spraying their crops and.
And all of these, and then when
we have the rain those wash into
our.
What would be classed as
waterways.
Is there any protection?
For the agricultural producers.
In that scenario.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, if there are, um, discharges
of uh biological or chemical
pesticides, um, that.
They may need a farmers may need
a general permit for that, um,
but rainwater, uh, hitting the
landscape is not regulated, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. OK. So if
the if the contamination is due
to rainwater coming off of
their.
Crops and unforeseen like the
floods that we've had some of
these like the all the
contaminants that came during
the.
The floods we've experienced in
the last 2 or 3 years here the.
Contaminants used by the
firefighters and all of those,
they won't, uh,
I mean, we don't have time to
get permits when we have a
wildfire discharge something, so
they will, they won't be.
Adverse.
Effects of that kind of thing
whether gentle lady, Mr. Speaker
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, they
will have already applied for
that general permit and we'll
have that permit coverage for
something like that, like
rainwater.
Flooding.
Hm
Thank you gentle lady. Like I
said, the main thing from my
standpoint was the lack of
support from some of the groups
in my area. Well, thank you.
That's all. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills 21
and 22 as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitutes for Senate bills.
21 and send a bill 22.
As amended.
The vault is now open.
The boys are closed by order of
43 in the affirmative, 25 in the
negative. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bills 21 and 22 as amended.
Have duly passed, has duly
passed this house.
Members, we are going to pass
out supplemental calendar.
For our next, we are gonna pass
out.
Our supplemental calendar.
For
House Bill
450
We'll get that passed out.
And it's gonna get posted
online.
Alright, folks, these are going
to calendar has been passed out
and it is posted online.
Gentlemen from Rio Aribas
Sandoval San Juante ready on
item number one on the
supplemental calendar.
Mr. Speaker, yes, sir. Would you
please get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
actions are replacing house
taxation revenue Committee
substitute for house before 50
with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken and
it is a subject to debate
amendment of substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon. This bill, the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450
appropriates $1.2 billion to
more than 1400 capital outlay
projects statewide.
Of that $1.2 billion the
breakdown includes
$799.8 million in general fund
spending $292 million in
severance tax bonds.
And finally, $133 million in
other state funds.
Nearly 600 million in general
fund in the bill is appropriated
to projects that have been
prioritized by House and Senate
members and the governor.
That means that number includes
those projects that all of us in
this chamber put towards our
respective districts as well as
the Senate, as well as the
governor.
The remainder of the appropriate
appropriate dollars go towards
state agency, judicial and
higher education projects.
That have been prioritized by
state agencies for the benefit
of the state and for the benefit
in some cases of local entities.
Additionally, this year I want
to recognize those members from
this chamber that helped us to
negotiate this package I wanna
recognize our majority whip Da
Hoffman v. Hill. I want to
recognize Chairwoman Gallegos. I
wanna also recognize, uh,
ranking member Duncan, uh, from
the minority side in regards to
how we negotiated this package.
This was weeks long of meeting
with the governor's office with
our counterparts in the Senate
that had the same type of makeup
as our team here on the house
side. We called ourselves a work
group. We worked well together.
It was a bicameral bipartisan,
uh, team that.
Eventually came up with this
capitality bill you see in front
of us.
As a part of that in years past
we have seen where we leave no
capacity for anyone in the
Senate or in the House to close
any projects or fully fund any
projects in our respective
districts, meaning that.
Whenever we've left upstairs in
any one year past, the governor
takes all the capacity.
This year was a little bit
different.
We actually were able to
negotiate retaining about $50
million between the house and
the Senate to which then that
same work group.
Disgust
Talked about studied and then
finally fully funded existing
projects in rural remote areas
of our state.
Meaning that over 90 projects in
this bill were completed.
With the funds that we were able
to negotiate.
This represents then.
In some cases, I'll give you
some examples, an additional $8
million was provided for water
line expansions in Curry County,
fully funding that project.
Another example is $2 million
for a skilled nursing facility
in Ria Riba County.
Which fully funds that project.
An additional $1.3 million for
an early childhood care facility
in Eunice, to Mexico, fully
funding that project.
An additional $1.1 million for
real-time crime center in Las
Cruces, an additional $1.6
million for water system
improvements in Maxwell.
An additional $975,000 for
housing infrastructure in
Harding County. This goes on and
on, but these projects would not
have happened had we just said,
OK.
Governor, here's the money you
create the priorities. In this
case, the legislature helped to
create the priorities and fully
fund and check those off of our
list in regards to our capital
outlay process that's something
I'm proud about.
And so before all of you today,
uh, that were handed out are
the.
Breakouts by county. So please
reference that, uh, I know that
for many cases, you're not even
listening to me because you're
looking at your lists, but the
fact remains is that I feel
confident in this package, um,
I'm ready for the debate and I
recognize there are some issues
related to um some of the recent
activities related to this bill,
but nonetheless.
I'm ready for uh questions and
comments, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. There is debate. The
gentleman from Otero
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
the kind gentleman from all
those counties please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I will be brief. I
know people don't hear that a
lot from me, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do have some
concerns when it comes to the
bill. I think it's page 242.
There's $10 million in the bill
for a reproductive.
Health clinic in northern New
Mexico, I believe, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Did I read that right?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
did read that correctly.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And then,
I, I know usually, and I know
the capital outlay process, but
usually we have to request.
Through the county's
municipalities, etc. specific
guidelines for specific
projects, usually they are,
they're shovel ready. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do we know
if this project is shovel ready?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we do
not know if it's shovel ready.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
so I guess that's one of my
problems with that if we don't
know it's shovel ready, how do
we know the money is actually
going to get spent because Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I know this
body a few years ago passed $10
million for a clinic down in Las
Cruces, and I don't believe
they've even begun construction
of that one, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I
We always talk about fiscal
responsibility. We always talk
about wanting to spend money
that we've appropriated. So how
can we ensure that this money
will indeed be be given out for
this purpose.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you,
you bring up a great point. And
to be quite honest with you is
that any one of us
Oftentimes, and I've been guilty
of this as well, provide to uh a
project in my respective
district that isn't shovel ready
and that creates the problem of
backlog to which probably this
year we will have about $7
billion in unspent capital that
just continues to go to new
projects that are not ready to
be funded.
And so this being the case for
this one here.
Not here to because I'm an
expert on, on, on this project,
nor am I here to defend that
project. I'm here to simply talk
about the package in total and
from what my understanding is of
this project is that it is
Not shovel ready.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
appreciate that answer and, and
I don't expect you to know every
single project and every detail.
So, uh, that's not your job or
any of our jobs except maybe the
governor who put this in the the
bill. So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
can you tell me northern New
Mexico, where in northern New
Mexico will this be?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's the problem, uh,
according to information from my
staff, it is not categorized in
any one county if you reference
your chart, uh, it says multiple
counties, right? And so it's not
referenced there there's no
reference to a town or a city in
New Mexico. All it simply states
is northern New Mexico. So Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
for us in this body, it, it
keeps us all guessing at this
point.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I appreciate that
answer. And so,
I, that just concerns me and I
don't even know what
reproductive health clinic
means. Do we know, has the
governor's office in any way
given us information on
reproductive health clinics and
what services would be there.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
because I know that there's that
definition has been used to talk
about abortion as well, so I
don't know if that will include
abortion, and so because it's so
vague, because we don't know
what county it's in. I do have
concerns and I will
unfortunately have to vote
against this bill, which is a
good bill and
majority of the projects, but
because I don't know what the
reproductive health clinic
means. I don't know if that
includes abortion. I can't go
back to my voters and say I
voted for this, and then they
say, oh, you voted for abortion.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
also have concerns that we don't
know if it's shovel ready, and
we don't even know what county
it's going to be in prior, we
did know what county that the
previous reproductive health
clinic would be in Donna County.
This one we don't know at all
where it could be in northern
New Mexico, and why would it be
servicing northern New Mexico if
potentially I, I know.
Colorado, they have similar laws
regarding abortion to the city
of New Mexico, so why would we
be needing to have to service
them versus I know in southern
New Mexico, Texas is very, I
think they have a, uh, I forget
what the restrictions are, the
protections for women are, but I
just do have some large concerns
with that, and I'll leave it
there, but that is why I cannot
support this because I cannot
support a dime of our taxpayer
money, uh, going to fund
abortions. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you so much,
General, gentlemen. Thank you
for the hard work on this. I
know how hard you all worked on
this, so.
Thank you again.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Sandoval Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, I too.
Uh
I just have a couple of
questions about that particular
item, uh, Mister Speaker and
gentlemen, and.
Um
I first of all, Mr. Speaker, I
want to thank the chairman for
bringing
Uh, what is a good bill?
And it's something that we all
generally support. All of us
have input. This is the one.
Bill
That every member of the
legislature gets to have input
on.
And and I appreciate that uh the
folks back home.
Uh, in our communities, uh, very
much appreciate the fact that
they can come to their
legislators and we can.
Uh
Have
Input on local projects that
need to take place, and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, you, you
know that there are a lot of
projects across the state that
we just have to overlook.
There's just so many things, Mr.
Speaker, that are, uh,
communities come to us for help
with funding, and I, I would
say.
Less than
Uh, a third of all the projects
that could be funded.
We
are unable to fund.
And so with that, Mr. Speaker,
I, I, I would say.
It's, it's disappointing that
Even though we know this is not.
Uh, from the, from the
standpoint of, of the people
that we all represent. this is
not.
unanimously.
Something that our that our
constituents agree with and so
Mr. Speaker, I, I, I do have a
problem.
With the with with kind of at
the last second, the governor
springing this.
In her appropriation.
portion of this bill
And um
I, I really don't want to.
To uh there's nothing bad I can
say generally about, about
capital outlay.
The process, Mr. Speaker, I
think that, that we have all
talked about how the capital
outlay process could be better.
Obviously some of our local of
our smaller communities, more
rural rural communities have
bigger projects that don't go
funded and then maybe more in
the metropolitan areas.
I wouldn't say less important,
but things that are not big
projects, a lot of times get
funded, so other than that.
Um
I, I really don't have too much
to complain about the, the way
that we handled capital outlay
this year.
But Mr. Speaker,
On page
242 of this bill lines 89, and
10.
I'm going to reiterate what
Representative Block just talked
about, and that is, uh, in the
governor's section of the
appropriation.
There is $10 million to plan,
design, construct, equip, and
furnish.
A reproductive health care
clinic in northern New Mexico.
Um
This is a fairly divisive issue
in New Mexico and I truly
appreciate, um, Mr. Speaker and
Chairman, that when you became
aware of this, you notified the
ranking member of
Uh, transportation.
I'm sorry, transportation of tax
and revenue sorry distracted
there, uh, our ranking member
that this was in there so that
we would not
Accidentally maybe vote for
something that we didn't agree
with and then have to have a
debate on the floor and maybe
accusations fly and all of that.
I, I really appreciate the way
you handled it. I think you, uh,
Mr. Mr. Speaker and Chairman, I
think you handle your committee
very well and I, I, I appreciate
that.
But because you were able to
inform us, we didn't have to
stall or any of that to get an
amendment or a committee sub
ready, but I, I did inform you
as well.
That I have an amendment, and
Mr. Speaker, uh.
And, and Chairman, it's going to
be specifically that language.
And only that language that has
changed in this committee sub.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
This is something that
I'm really doing for the members
of, of
Uh, the house.
Who want to vote.
For the capital outlay bill.
But are going to be unable to
vote for a capital outlay bill.
That
Has
Us
As a legislature.
Putting money towards what what
appears to be.
A an abortion clinic.
Somewhere near the Colorado
border to
Attract, I believe, as the
governor has said, abortion,
tourism.
I, I don't believe that's what.
We
As a body should be doing,
taking New Mexico taxpayer
dollars to cater to out of state
abortion seekers.
I don't believe that's what we
should be doing. I don't think,
I, I think even folks in New
Mexico who may support.
Uh, abortion.
Um
Do not believe that we should be
doing this to cater to out of
state.
Uh, abortion seekers. So Mr.
Speaker, uh, I and gentlemen, I
do have a, a committee
substitute.
As I stated,
The only thing that is, that,
that, that this committee
substitute does is remove
Uh, lines 89, and 10 from page
242, everything else is in
there, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, and, uh, Mr.
Speaker, as to something that,
that, that the speaker said in
in in uh in tax committee. I
appreciate that as well, and
that is there's a lot of things
in here.
That maybe I wouldn't support.
Anyway
But Mr. Speaker, because this is
the one area where every every
legislator gets to uh take the
priorities of their community
and put it in here whether I
agree with it or not or whether
you agree with something in here
that that.
Um, I.
Might have put in on my request
that other members don't believe
in. This is generally an area
where we
Agree to disagree and pass
something along that is good to
the, for the most part to the
benefit of our each of our
communities, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I, I guess the
best way to say this is.
Us using taxpayer dollars in New
Mexico.
To create
A state funded abortion clinic
that caters to out of state.
Abortion seekers is just
unfortunately for many of us,
it's just a pill that is too,
Hard to swallow.
So, Mr. Speaker, uh,
I do have a, I do have a
committee sub.
And Mr. Speaker, I would ask
that we have.
Uh, that we have a roll call
vote a roll call. You've got a
house floor substitute.
Um, you, you have moved that
house floor substitute. I
believe it's been passed out at
this point.
And it is posted online,
gentlemen, to explain the floor
substitute.
Uh, Mr. Speaker,
It it just removes the $10
million appropriation to plan
design, construct, equip, and
furnish a reproductive health
care clinic in northern New
Mexico.
Alright, uh, let's go back to
the bill sponsors is this a
friendly amendment?
Mr. Speaker, this is not a
friendly amendment, but if you
would allow me to expand on
that.
Reasoning.
gentleman from San Juan and
Bari.
We've been here before.
We've been here before as the
chair for House Taxation and
Revenue.
In 2023.
Uh, this was the same
predicament that uh we were put
in where
Well, not as experience back
then.
was much more in a
Of an uncomfortable situation
simply because I wasn't well
aware of.
What this process was all about.
And having just gone through
that process of negotiating the
tax, uh, the, the capital outlay
bill and bringing this to the
floor, uh, was feeling pretty
proud of, of the work that we
had done.
Uh
You make mention of that as soon
as I had found out from our
staff that this was an insert, a
late insert by the
administration. I was quick to
call our ranking member.
And I did so, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, only because that's
the right thing to do.
In this body, we should be able
to work.
Collaboratively, right?
Regardless of your party
affiliation irregardless of
where you come from in the
state.
That while I have a D.
In front of my name, not because
of Derek, but because I'm a
Democrat.
Well, I have a D in in in in
front of my name.
I just want to be fair. I just
want to be honest. I just want
to be transparent with whoever I
work with, and especially in my
committee with all of you that
have worked so well with me.
I had to extend that, that
opportunity to all of you. So
when I called Representative uh
ranking member Duncan. I did so
because I didn't want you all to
open this bill up.
And say, God, my, my project is
in there, cool.
I will vote this out of
committee and then come down
here only to, to, to have a
gotcha moment. That's not me.
That's not why we're here.
But for the same reasons that.
We pass these types of
initiatives for the same reasons
that in this chamber and even on
the other side, we were able to
identify projects that were
important or priorities in our
respective pro in in our
respective districts.
The governor had that same
capability, right?
And if this is important to her
administration.
I have no place to say that I
want to strike it the same way
that I expect.
That when this bill hopefully
passes and we can get these
projects funded, she will not
touch any one of our projects in
our respective districts with
her veto power.
To that point, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm not here to
defend the administration. I'm
not here to defend what's in
this bill.
I'm here to say that as a policy
perspective as a practice that
it is.
A bad practice if we begin to
say, OK, we're gonna veto line.
veto line item that initiative
only to find out then maybe she
will retaliate or they will
retaliate in a way where then we
will begin to find ourselves
missing projects in our
respective communities because
we worked far too hard for far
too long to have that happen.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Again, I see this is unfriendly,
not because I support this
initiative or I support the way
that she pushed this on the, in
the 11th hour.
But simply because I think it's
a bad practice to begin at this
point in time.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's why it's unfriendly and
that's why I am here to make
that statement. Thank you, sir.
All right, there is debate on
the floor, substitute.
Let's go first to the young lady
from Caine Sierracorto Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. We're
the gentleman from San Juan
yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yelled
to the gentle lady. I thank you,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, uh,
you know, we all have, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen,
projects that we have fought
for. We have fought for going
begging with our hand out.
To get money for our perspective
projects. Well, I just wanna
tell you a little bit, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, we're
that 10 million could have been
used in my district.
Uh, on a hospital.
The, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman that uh the governor
funded.
But she mandated in that
funding, she said, I will give
you the 50 million to build the
to build a hospital only.
Only a hospital.
Well, it came in
$18 million over budget, Mr.
Speaker.
They were kind enough that I see
it in here, $8.5 million. 66 8.5
million, so half, we got half.
We can't finish the project.
ground has been broken.
On the hospital a lot of blood,
sweat, and tears, and many years
of
Of funding of begging for
hospital. We're finally getting
it, but we don't have enough
money, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and every one of us
in this room have a project like
that.
And so I, I just stand to
commend you for offering this
amendment. I, I have had my
capital outlay vetoed in the
past.
Uh, a couple of years ago, mine
was the only one that was
vetoed. I don't know why, but
whatever.
OK, I am standing to tell and
remind people that we are all
here to support our districts,
Mr. Speaker, and kind gentlemen,
and, and that there's unfinished
projects and that there's $6
billion.
In unfinished capital outlay
projects across New Mexico.
And we're starting more
projects.
And we do our best in my
district to keep funding the
same projects and we encourage,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, we
encourage our county commissions
and our little municipalities
and our little tiny towns like
Magdalena to say.
Let's finish a project before we
start another one.
And we do our darnedest.
To do that
Well, I'm not in control. They,
they ask, Mr. Speaker, kind, and
I give as much as I can where I
can.
But to start a whole another
project when there's projects
out there that need to be
finished and especially the kind
of project it is. Some of us
don't agree with it, some of us
do, but there's projects that
are unfinished.
That the ground has been broken
on and so Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I just commend you
for bringing this. Uh, I just
want to point out some of the
areas where it could have an
exit, an exit in Los Lunas
that's partially funded with
federal, state, and local
dollars.
Uh, a hospital in Valencia
County, uh, and, and so we're
talking about healthcare
facility where in rural New
Mexico where we are lacking in
everybody in this room knows it.
And so I just commend you for
bringing that and, uh, um,
giving us an option of something
that we can vote for and all of
us in this room could use that
$10 million in our districts.
Uh, for projects that are
unfinished. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, kind
gentlemen. the debate, young
lady from Donana Sierra Socorro,
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I, I yield to
the gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, what, what percentage of the
population in northern New
Mexico is Native American?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I don't know what the percentage
is, but I know statewide that it
is about 9% of the population
and about 75% of that is, uh,
from the Navajo Nation.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it is
most about population located in
northern New Mexico.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, there is a, uh, small
portion of the Navajo Nation
that is around Magdalena, but
the, the
98% of the population, I would
say is in San Juan County or
McKinley County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen and, and it's New
Mexico's birth rate keeping up
with our population rate?
And no, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is not.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. Are you aware
that since the repeal of Roe
versus Wade, uh, Roe versus
Wade, that New Mexico has seen a
um
220% increase in abortions.
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I, I, I am aware of
that and Mr. Speaker, and
generally, I'm also aware that
those are mostly not New
Mexicans.
That are taking advantage of
that opportunity in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. Um,
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen,
Do you know what the status is
of the $10 million abortion
clinic that was funded in Las
Cruces a few years ago. Was that
open and operating?
I'm a Speaker and gentle lady is
my understanding that it is not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen.
Um, did you know that last, uh,
since 2017 during the 2017-19
period where we're able to get
national data. It's very hard to
get data on abortion
expenditures in New Mexico, that
New Mexico taxpayer dollars that
were spent on abortions was over
791,000.
$791 million.09 that's $50 even
though 59% of New Mexicans want
to see more restrictions on
elective abortions, not less.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, I
was unaware of that.
Um
And through Medicaid, that was
from the general fund, but
through Medicaid, there was over
a million dollars between $20.21
that was spent on taxpayer
funded abortions. Are you aware
of that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and General
Lady I am.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Did you know
that um
Uh, depending on the age,
parents are not notified or, or
even aware that their children
are receiving abortions are
being referred from our public
schools to receive abortions in
New Mexico.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker and gen
lady, I'm, I'm very aware of
that as a matter of fact, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I've
carried, uh, legislation almost
every year that I've been able
to introduce legislation to make
sure that parents are able to at
least talk.
With their uh
Underaged daughter, uh, to.
Just give them an opportunity,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, to,
to be involved with their health
care decisions and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady to.
Help
Uh, maybe even under uh uh uh
uncover.
Some predator
That got them pregnant and so a
speaker and generally, I'm, I'm
aware of that and I, I think
it's something that we should
not be shielding from
parents.stitute and, and the
proposed amendment. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. So $10 million in
return is what we're hearing.
It's going to be in rat and
perhaps to serve uh folks coming
in from Colorado, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, $10
million in return, uh, where the
average birth rate in the county
is 15 births a year.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, does
it seem like a $10 million
facility to perform abortions in
the community in a county where
there's 15 births a year makes
sense in a capital outlay
request.
Some speaker and general lady, I
don't think that makes sense
unless what we're doing is
targeting Coloradoans, but Mr.
Speaker and generally, my, my
concern as well is, and I, and I
believe that it was mentioned by
the, by the chairman of, of Tax
and Rev that we don't want to
get in the back and forth where
we go after, uh, governor's
priorities, and she goes after
ours, but Mr. Speaker,
generally, the truth is I, I
could be targeted.
Today
For, uh, just trying to remove
that one item that I just can't
support and since I've gotten
here, it's to this legislature.
It's been very clear that I just
do not support, um, abortion in,
in any fashion. I don't support
it personally. It's a belief.
But yet
My tax dollars have to go to it
and my concern is.
My, my community could be
punished for me just.
Not being able to support this
and trying to pull it out of
this bill.
But
Who knows if this abortion
clinic doesn't get put in my
community that doesn't want an
abortion clinic because there
are folks from Colorado right
across the border that, that
this might serve and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I, I just think
when we're talking about capital
outlay, particularly,
particularly in a statewide.
Bill that is supposed to be for
infrastructure projects.
That's what it's supposed to be
for.
Rhodes
Hospitals
And other buildings uh in our
communities that are needed
that.
Serve everyone
This is very limited.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is very limited to target.
One set of procedures.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it doesn't even appear as if
it's there for New Mexicans.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, in
your budget, um, in your
amendment, did you remove any of
the water wastewater projects or
any of the road projects, any of
the infrastructure projects that
were pre-approved by the
counties, the cities, the
municipalities, the political
subdivisions like Esea's
wastewater, um, the water
districts, any of those types of
projects were any of those
removed in your amendment?
Um, a speaker and gentle lady, I
did not remove.
Any other, any other item, not
even any other item that the
governor has, uh, without any
consultation with us, um, not to
say that she doesn't consult
with us on other items, but
there, there was not a a another
governor's priority that is
removed out of here, just this
one item, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, you know, if
you're districts like my
district, um, I, I have 3
counties and I received over
$300 million worth of capital
outlay requests, and these are
requests that.
were brought by the cities, the
counties, the um villages.
Asia's ditch associations, water
districts, soil water districts,
and you know, I had $2.5 million
to allocate for 300 million
worth of requests. What was
yours like, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that is the dollar amount
as well for projects in my
district that um that are that
folks in my community have been
asking for for years, uh, Mr.
Speaker and generally, you know
how this process works, uh, our
counties, our cities, our other
political subdivisions come to
us, make a request, and
sometimes they have to make the
request multiple years before we
can get around to it because we
have so many requests, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and yeah,
and when I even when I do, you
know, have the opportunity.
to fund a project, it usually
takes multiple years to get
there, several phases at a time.
We had to break those down in
small projects, especially in
rural New Mexico. I wonder when
the last time, you know, a
project, a big $10 million
project in northern New Mexico,
uh, was funded one shot at a
time, um, and, and how many of
those projects had to be
pre-approved in the ICIP they
were properly vetted and the
lawmakers discussed it with
their, with their districts and,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's the normal process that I
know. I have to stand up.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
As a teen who was the first in
my family to attend college,
graduate from college in my 3rd
semester when I found out I was
pregnant.
I had 2 bucks in the bank, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
I know what it's like to have an
unexpected pregnancy.
And I know the pressures that it
that you feel.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
And that's matter because we
hear folks talk about in New
Mexico that we want no
exceptions, no exceptions
whatsoever, even though rape
accounts for 4%.
Of of abortions
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
there's, is there anywhere in
New Mexico where um medically
necessary abortions are
restricted at any of the
hospitals, any of the OBGYNs, is
there anywhere in New Mexico
where medically necessary
abortions are restricted?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh even I who
have brought bills uh concerning
uh limiting some practices have
never tried to limit all
practice, and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that's, I don't
believe that's where most New
Mexicans are and and however
most New Mexicans also don't
believe that that their taxpayer
dollars should go to something
like this without their consent.
So Ms. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think the biggest problem that
I have with this being
the Capital Outlay bill as we
had, we didn't didn't, we're
having to debate this on the
floor rather than if this had
right now during capital outlay
discussions, which Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I think it's a
travesty, and Mr. Chairman, I
actually apologize because we
should be talking about all the
good things that are in here
because there's a lot of good
things in here.
And, and we should be talking
about this. This should have
been a standalone bill.
So that we could have actually
debated on behalf of our
constituents and folks who
support, uh, uh.
Uh, the creation of a women's
health care facility like this.
would be able to debate it as
well, but shoving it in here is
an unnecessary distraction from
all the good that happens in the
capital outlay bill, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, no,
to answer your question, there's
not a single hospital that uh
is, is restricting medically
necessary abortions and there
has never been even an attempt
to try and eliminate those.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I just wanna, uh,
just make one more comment, and
that is because
I see people who are standing
are probably going to speak
about this, um, 95.9% of New
Mexico's abortions are elective
and of a healthy baby by a
healthy mother. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and I will be
supporting your amendment.
There is lady from Liariba.
Santa Fe Towserrera.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the kind gentleman yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I yield to the kind gentle
lady. Thank you and I rise to
speak against your amendment,
uh, kind gentleman, and, and the
reason I do so is because this
house voted in 2019. We had a
standalone bill, and I remember
listening to that debate what
was it now? 7 years ago. I
remember sitting here listening
to that debate saying why are we
going through this? Why are we
debating this? because Roe
versus Wade will always stand.
I couldn't have been more wrong,
and I am so grateful to the
people in this body who could
see beyond that because I didn't
think we needed that debate at
the time and obviously we did
and, and I just wanna say I'm
very grateful for the work in
this in this uh in this
legislation and very grateful to
the chair of tax and to that
committee because they also help
fund a nursing home in in Ruba
County.
And we got another 6 million
between the House, the Senate,
and the governor, and that we
don't have a nursing home in the
north that's north of Santa Fe,
so we have people from Chama
driving, driving to see their
elders in Santa Fe, but I, I, I
wanna get back to your
amendment. I just want to
compliment the people who put
this bill together because I
think a lot of good work was
done as you do on many things
and I know we don't agree on on
pages on the lines 8.
9 and 10, and I, I just want to
say.
This is a very open debate in
every single election on this
floor of the house. People know
what this issue is. You could
ask any New Mexican and they
will tell you whether we ought
to have.
Uh, abortion rights in this
state or not that comes up in
every campaign. It's very much
out there and I have been very
vocal about that, and I've told
families in my district, it's
not about my decision. It's not
about my beliefs, it's about
really families being able to
make their own health care
decisions and, and I think
that's the most important thing
and I think the body of the
house reflects what New Mexico.
things about these rights, and
with that, uh, I will rest, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate, young
lady from Berley and Torrance
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman from
San Juan, please yield.
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, I, I yield
to the gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker, are you aware
that in my district I have
Torrance County. There's only a
little bit of overland there.
Did you know that we have a well
in Estancia that's pretty much
almost gone dry and they have to
turn water on and off every
other day depending on what the
water levels are and the usage.
Did you know that, Mr. Speaker?
No, Mr. Speaker, and generally,
I would assume that you've been
trying to get that funded.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
about $10 million.
And I have a really hard time
swallowing that pill. It doesn't
matter whether it's abortion
clin or not, honestly, at this
point, I mean it does to me
personally, but it, and the fact
that I've been trying to get
that fixed. It's $10 million Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen.
Are you wearing and Carneywell,
my land grant that they need
sewers?
Mr. Speaker and gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, in, in gen lady,
I'm aware that every one of us
have projects in our district
similar to those that need
funding.
Mr. Speaker, what's ironic it's
$10 million.
And then I look at this, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and it's
a slap in the face.
I can't vote for this.
Not only on the principle of
that, but I have got a majority
of people in my district who
rely on me to make sure that we
get the funding for, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, do you have
issues with dirt roads and
infrastructure in your district
like everybody else does.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I think that
Uh, even though myself, Mr.
Speaker, uh, that.
My myself and the other
legislators in my district get
together, um, every year, and we
sit down and look at the amount
of money that's there for us to
put infrastructure projects in
our community just like
everybody else does, and there
are, there's just project after
project after project that we
have to refuse and and the
speaker and, and, and, and
gentle lady, we have to go back
to them as well when some of the
folks in our community are maybe
a little slow on spending the
dollars, and we go back and
chide them and say,
You asked for this money
Um,
You haven't spent it.
These are dollars, these are
precious dollars we didn't give
to somebody else. You need to
make sure that project gets
finished and we always have
these reauthorizations that are
also included. So Ms. Speaker
and gentle lady, yes, I
understand how precious these
dollars are and
We all need them in our
community. I think every one of
us could use easily $10 million
to fund projects in our
community. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I've seen Democrat
and Republican work very hard
and take their capital outlay
very seriously. As a matter of
fact, I have 2 Democrats that
overlay. We work great together.
We fund projects. It's an
amazing process because it's the
one time where we pretty much
all come together and say, what
can you give? Let's give to this
project and at least with my,
uh, people that I
work with here in the house and
on the Senate side there never
is an issue with it's a great
agreement. It's a great working
project that how we all work
together on both sides of the
aisle to get her capital outlay.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you would say that we are very
serious on both sides of the
aisle about how we divvy out our
capital outlay. Is that correct?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and, and
gentle lady, it's a, it's the
one thing, even if we're in the
minority party. This is the one
thing that we have a lot of say
so in and, and, uh, Miss Speaker
and, and gen lady, I, I want to
reiterate again.
Uh
There is not a single other item
in here that I'm looking to
remove because I know how
important it is to everyone. I'm
not even looking at things that
the, that the governor.
put in place in here other than
this one item.
Uh, so
Every one of our communities
benefit from this, and I, and I
think it's a shame, Mr. Speaker,
and, and, and gentle lady that,
that we're even having to have
this debate because I think it
takes away from the good work
that everybody did here, uh, so,
so there's actually no qualms
with anything else in here. Just
that and Misspeaker and gentle
lady, the reality is.
There are folks who would even
consider themselves as, as
pro-choice.
But they don't necessarily want
their dollars to go to funding
this. They believe this is an
issue for a family to deal with,
and the Speaker and gentle lady,
we know this because we pulled
this.
New Mexicans really don't like
their idea of a facility like
this being put in place in New
Mexico to cater to people who do
not live in New Mexico. These
are New Mexico dollars, and they
should be spent on New Mexicans.
Abs, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and as you were talking about
that, I was saying, I was
thinking about what you said
earlier that this should have
been a standalone bill because.
Don't we think that the people
of the north where this is going
to affect should have a say so
in this with all this money is
going to, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I believe if, if this
facility is, is if we find out
it's going to be placed probably
in if it if the target.
Northern New Mexico where I live
there are a lot of folks who
don't believe in this. I, I
think this is gonna, this would
turn into a really ugly
situation with protesters and,
and all of that. And so I, I
think something like this that
is at the very least a sensitive
issue should have been debated
and and we should know where
it's going, not just in northern
New Mexico that is I I have
never seen a capital outlay
project ever stated to say
somewhere in the area.
I just, I, I believe this is a
first, at least the last time,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we knew it was going to Donana
County. We knew it was going to
Las Cruces, but this
Is a is is a is a.
Let's say a loaded shotgun
without a target, Mr. Speaker.
And Mr. Speaker told me that
that raises the other concern of
the exact wording in here we
have no idea. Nobody has any
idea and wherever it's going to
go, those people have had no say
so. The people have had no
input.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
if I understand there, this is,
uh, if I understand correctly,
the governor is the one who put
this in that this is her
initiative and now if you vote
against this.
It's because I mean there.
Let me reward this.
It's very frustrating to see all
the hard work they put in
capital outlay, Mr. Speaker
Deleman, and all of a sudden we
have this in here, the people of
the North have not had a say so.
It was not brought forward. It
was not properly debated. People
didn't get to come to the
roundhouse and have their say so
they didn't get to email their
their representatives. They
didn't get to make phone calls.
They had no say so whatsoever,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
that's probably one of the
biggest problems I have once you
agree that it's not fair to the
people in New Mexico that they
did not get a say so in this,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, and
generally I believe that is the
case. It's, it's not as if
abortion is not available in New
Mexico. It's not as if abortion
completely unrestricted hasn't
been available in New Mexico
since the early 2000s, so.
For this to be snuck in at the
last minute.
Uh, Miss Speaker, and generally,
I think it's just, it's unfair
to the process, and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, just just to
make it clear, the only reason
I'm bringing this substitute
forward is so that I have
something that I can vote for.
Because minus this, I can vote
for this.
In, in, in a happily.
Because I know that everybody
has had a say so in this.
And that everyone
Uh, everybody's projects and
their communities and their
concerns are dealt with, but
Put this in here like this is
just in my mind it's unfair to
those of us.
to morally just can't support
it.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I agree with you 100% of the
moral issue. I also am.
Fiscally concerned and I'm
concerned for the people, no
matter how you slice it, we come
up here correct to represent the
people, right, Mr. Speaker, we
come up here to represent our
district. We come up here to do
the best for our district. If
they said this was going in.
My district, I'd be furious. My
people didn't have a chance,
whether they want it or not or
to have any discussion or to
have anything to do with the
project and now those people are
no longer represented.
I'm gonna stop us right there
real quick. I just wanna clear
the record, um, the way the
Capitol outlay process works and
the negotiation works is house
and Senate teams as comprised by
uh members of this chamber and
members of the other chamber
meet over the course of several
weeks, and they also meet with
the executive, uh, the executive
is, um, at the same time we are
pulling our projects together,
pulling their projects together,
so, uh, I've heard the word
sneak and, and unfairness and
people didn't have a say, um,
and I just want to correct the
record.
I think that the process
followed was uh fine and it was
above board, um, and as soon as
our, uh, capital outlay
negotiating team saw the
projects, they shared them with
the rest of the negotiating team
and eventually the, the
chambers, so I would just stay
away from words like sneak or
like, you know, you didn't say
this word, but nothing here is
shady. Everything's above board,
uh, whether or not we agree with
the allocation, that's fine.
That's why we're having this
debate. But let's
stay away from those adjectives
if we can please thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Let me go back on that.
This capital outlay.
Was put together with a lot of
work and a lot of time we
started this a month ago or so
or longer, we put, we have
millions and millions of dollars
of requests and maybe people
don't understand that the people
who are listening, millions of
dollars come to us, at least,
and I think in all of our
districts, they say, hey, can
you please help us with this
project and it's a tough project
because we go through and we
have to decide based on our area
and based on working with our
our Democrat fellowship that
what is the best project to put
forward?
and we all make a decision and
gets reviewed and all that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, when did
this section here on page 242
number 26, lines 89, and 10.
When did that get added on to
the capital outlay, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, for
all I know it was in
The Capinoli
Side of the governor's.
Uh, or add-ons.
Some time ago, I have no idea. I
know the process we go through
which we had to uh submit all of
our requests weeks ago.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
We found out about it today.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we found only found out about
it.
Because, because we have an
upstanding chairman.
Who told us about it. It could
have been in here in a way.
You can't read 249 pages.
That
Gets compiled, you cannot read
that in a 3 hour committee
hearing, especially when you're
hearing 4 other bills.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh
Sneaked might not be a fair
adjective.
But surprised.
With this
Not informed of this in advance,
whereas everything that we're
doing, we have to put it out way
in advance.
So, uh, to, to say that that.
That this is in here.
We had no idea.
And we are all caught off guard.
Until the chairman.
Uh, informed us is is the way I
would describe that and I
believe it was, it was
intentional.
To avoid weeks.
Of folks having a say.
To have Mr. Speaker.
The the ability of folks who are
going to be in the north. I, I
can see, Mr. Speaker, if, if, if
they were aware of this.
Like when we had to put in all
of our requests.
Uh, I believe communities would
have been coming down saying,
wait a minute, you're not
looking at doing that in our
community, are you?
So, uh, from the standpoint of
the public.
It's not a fair process to them.
Everything else that is in here,
someone has requested and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we all
know what those projects are
because they're given a number,
they're assigned a number and
anybody who wants to put in a
project, they have to they have
to put it in ahead of time.
There is no number for this.
There is nothing, there is no
number that was uh placed in the
request of any community for
this.
So
This is not normal.
So I, I will not use the, the,
the, the word that the speaker
wants.
That he's wanting me to avoid,
but the reality is
This was added in a way.
So that
Anybody who might disagree with
it wouldn't have any opportunity
to come down here and say that
they disagree with it.
And I believe that.
is a is a.
Uh
Maluse of the process.
That is not fair to the people
of New Mexico to be surprised
like this.
On purpose.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and that's, that's a
great word to use, surprise,
because this is the first time I
had heard of this. I know with
our process, I was looking at
all the codes, so there's
specific codes that are given
and that's how we address these
projects. I don't see in here
this $10 million and I think Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the point
we're all trying to get to is
that because there was a
surprise. Nobody knew about it.
Our people in my district,
anybody's district in the North
didn't know about as far as I
know, because it was put on as a
surprise at the last minute.
They
did not get the opportunity to
see this or hear about this, we
would have put it out on social
media something where they say,
hey, wait a minute, we want to
know where this is going, we
want to know what district's
going in, we don't agree with
it. They didn't have time to
email they didn't have time to
make phone calls. They didn't
have time to do anything, so now
we have a situation where
there's $10 million which I
would much rather had for my
well or my sewer system on the
Langorant.
Then this
Then you add in the ethical
component, right? But I'm just
looking at from both sides.
There's an ethical and there's a
fiscal component of this is $10
million that was put in.
As a surprise because I didn't
know about it. Nobody knew about
it. The people did not get to
speak, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I agree with you.
It is a huge surprise.
And whether you believe that
it's ethical to you or not.
I don't think I could go home to
my district.
And say, wow, I know you needed
the sewer system.
But instead I opted to give it
to an abortion clinic in the
north somewhere.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
I support your memory because I
would vote for this in a
heartbeat. I planned on coming
in here. I already knew it was
kind of in here. I'd planned on
walking in here and voting for
this today, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but with this
surprise was something that is
so radical and polarizing and
incredibly polarizing topic, I
cannot go back and look at the
people in my district and say
sorry you didn't get your sewer,
sorry I didn't get you well,
sorry, law enforcement didn't
get all the things that they had
requested. I have 3. I've got
Moriarty.
I've got stante. I've got um I
got Oreo stancia mountain air
and
Albuquerque, I got Burling
County.
There's a lot of money that
could have been funded to law
enforcement.
Veterans issues, all kinds of
things this could have gone to
and I think it's a huge slap in
the face for us to get this at
the last minute and I think it's
absolutely worth it. I don't
care because the governor has
vetoed since she lined out to
vetoed my money for my food
bank.
So if she's gonna line item veto
have at it. It didn't help her
at all, didn't help anything. It
just, I'm just gonna stop there,
Mr. Speaker Dylan, thank you for
bringing this forward. There is
the debate on the substitute
young lady from Mas Alamo Santa
Fe and Sandoval Representative
Chandler thank you Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentlemen from
San Juan County yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Los Alamos.
Um, gentlemen, could you
describe for me what sort of
health care is provided, um.
By a reproductive healthcare
facility.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I don't think anyone in here can
can describe what's in there
because, uh, we did not debate
it. We did not see a bill. We
have no idea.
So I, I would hope.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that actual health care would
take place in there, but this
says specifically reproductive
health care which.
Has come to mean abortion.
Uh, services. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so it's your belief.
That this um reproductive
healthcare center is only going
to be just providing abortion
health care, is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Uh, yes, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I do
believe that's what it is, and
I'm basing that on, uh, when the
governor has talked about making
New Mexico an abortion
destination.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
well, in fact, Mr. Speaker,
abortion a reproductive health
care facility includes many um
health care options for, for
individuals including certainly
abortion care is part of it, um.
Contraception care is part of
it, um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
do you object to that as well,
and that includes things like
vasectomies and other, um.
We, uh, contraceptive care, do
you object to that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Speaker and gentle
lady, I do not object to that.
As a matter of fact, that is
available all across New Mexico
and every one of our communities
and in other uh health care
facilities all across New
Mexico, so this has nothing to
do with that, Mr. Speaker,
I believe I still have the let's
talk over each other, gentlemen
from San Juan. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that is not the
objection, and this, I don't
want this to be characterized as
being anti.
contraceptive anti in vitro
fertilization, anti, uh, uh,
family planning when it comes to
uh men or women who decide to go
to a doctor and make it to where
they don't have children again.
It has nothing and so I'm not
gonna stand here, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and let it be
mischaracterized. This is
specifically, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady about the very,
very, very hard topic of whether
or not New Mexican New Mexico
taxpayers want.
To, uh, to have their taxpaying
dollars go to provide health
care services for people who
don't even live in New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'll get to
the point about people living in
Mexico in a moment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So, um, so far I've
been only asking questions. I
haven't suggested anything, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Um, so, uh,
you don't have any issue with
providing contraceptive care,
um, glad to hear, Mr. Speaker.
gentlemen, that you don't have
Children through in vitro
fertilization and that's that
sort of assistance very good to
hear that because that is part
of reproductive health care, um,
are you aware, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen that reproductive
health care also includes
reproductive loss support, so
when I when a family loses a
child that there's there's the
ability to provide grief
counseling and the like, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, are you
aware that that is
also included in the topic of or
in the category of reproductive
healthcare, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I understand that
there, there are several things
in the general topic of
reproductive health care that
could include so many of those
things, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, but that has not been what
the governor, uh, at least in
the other health, uh,
reproductive healthcare facility
is talking about what we are
hearing from the governor's own
statements is that she wants New
Mexico.
To be a a an abortion
destination, so I, I, I, I.
I will, uh, capitulate, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady to the
fact that reproductive
healthcare in the definition.
could include so many things
that we all agree upon and that
are being provided all across
New Mexico and other facilities
including uh uh emergency uh
pregnancy centers that are all
across the state that don't
receive this kind of funding. So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
I don't have any problem with
that broad definition, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I do
not believe that that's what
this $10 million is that that is
the purpose of this because Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we have
heard from this governor.
About what her priorities are
concerning abortion care and
that is what I believe the vast
majority of this money is going
to and not for New Mexicans. If
it were, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, we'd know where this
healthcare facility was going we
would know what population of
New Mexicans would be receiving
this important facility, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we have
no idea.
And because of that, I think as
was stated earlier, this is not
only uh for some of us an
ethical issue or a moral issue,
but Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is a fiscal issue as well
because we have no idea where
this facility is going to be,
uh, uh, located or Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, what under the
potential possible definitions
of reproductive healthcare, what
we're even getting, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan, I believe you, I heard
you say you understood the
facility was going to be located
in Raton and that it was in uh.
OK, all right, so, um, I hear
you see you shaking your head,
so you've, you, um, suggest to
me you have not said that, so
you don't know where, but you
can tend that it is to support
people who wish to receive
abortions from out of state, is
that right, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, once again,
because of the, because of the
other facility that's being
located in southern New Mexico
that the governor has.
made those statements.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and I believe I heard you say
that um this was intended to
serve people from Colorado, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Uh, Miss Speaker and gentle
lady, that is my belief. I don't
know that it is, um, once again,
we have no idea where this is
being placed. However, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, once
again I'm going on the
governor's previous statements
about the facility that is on
the border in southern New
Mexico and we know Mr. Speaker,
it's going to be in northern New
Mexico because that's how it is
referenced in the um in the, in
the budget document that we
received, is that not right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Yes, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we have
no idea where.
OK
And um are you not aware, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that
abortion, health care is
available in Colorado, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, however, even Colorado has
restrictions, uh, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady in New
Mexico, uh, we have no
restrictions whatsoever on
abortion. We have in New Mexico,
uh, where an underaged girl can
go without her parents'
knowledge or consent. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, New
Mexico compared to Colorado when
it comes to abortion is the wild
wild west.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can
you identify specific
facilities, um, in northern New
Mexico that provide.
Let's see, emergency
contraception, uh, reproductive
loss support, prenatal care
classes pre postnatal care
classes including lactation
support and more hormonal
treatment, infidelity treatment,
preventative care, sexually
transmitted infection and cancer
screenings, miscarriage
management, adoption, education,
and resources and fundamental
sex education, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you identify a
facility?
in northern New Mexico that
provides those services, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Uh yes, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle Lady
Grace Place.
Uh, uh, women's, uh, uh, help
facility in New Mexico in
Farmington does that provides uh
most of those services to both
men and women, including helping
with uh identifying adoption
options, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, grief counseling,
um, Ms. Speaker and gentle lady,
but not just that all across the
north here in uh Santa Fe County
and in Espanola there is desert
rose,
uh, uh.
uh, health care facilities in in
New Mexico and in Albuquerque
CareNet facilities. So yes, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, these
services are provided, but it's
not.
Uh, being advertised, uh, that
our combined with abortion
procedures, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so we're in the
vicinity of uh raton and Rio
Reba County, not, not counting
Espanola where you claim there
is such support, uh, where can
individuals um receive such
treatment.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
sure if I were to go to Raton I
could find out if there's a
facility there. I just don't
know. You asked me if I knew of
a facility I named several, uh,
but not, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I appreciate where you're coming
from. What, how many, um,
patients, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do those facilities
serve?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
anyone who comes to them.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, would
you agree that there is a
shortage of healthcare providers
and facilities in the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Speaker and
gentle lady, I believe that is
the case, and Mr. Speaker, and
generally we've heard of those
that are not being funded that
uh I believe uh Representative
Armstrong brought up the fact
that, uh, facility uh that is
currently being built is not
fully funded in her community,
so Mr. Speaker, generally, this
is not about health care.
This is about reproductive
healthcare only which Miss
Speaker and gentle lady, the
governor has made it clear in
her mind reproductive health
care means availability of
abortion procedures.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, and
body, I think we all know and we
spent many hours in this during
this session talking about the
need to advance health care in
our community and expand on
health care and our community
and while I understand the
gentleman from San Juan believes
that this clinic is limited only
to abortion care, obviously that
is he chooses to make a very
narrow reading of what
reproductive.
health care is we need in this
state across the state and and
particularly Northern New Mexico
where there are many low income
individuals access to all sorts
of reproductive health care,
including contraception,
lactation support hormonal
treatment, infertility treatment
care sexually transmitted
infection care, cancer
screenings.
screenings, miscarriage
management, adoption, education,
and the like and what Mr.
Speaker, this amendment would do
would eliminate that as a
possibility for all of the
individuals living in northern
New Mexico who need that sort of
support, and I urged the body,
Mr. Speaker, to reject this
proposed amendment.
There is further debate, the
gentleman from Lee.
Sorry.
Instrument from Chavez, Eddie
and Leepresentative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
uh,
Gentleman yield
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will yield
in just a second, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um.
I, I do believe one of the items
that was uh brought up just
recently by the last.
Uh, debater, all of those
procedures are very important,
and Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh,
gentlemen, uh, most of those are
provided by OBGYNs who we have
put almost out of business in
this state with our medical
malpractice law that we passed,
which has made it to where
OBGYNs cannot even survive
outside of a hospital. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady to
gentlemen, to whatever degree we
have, uh, uh, cause there to be
a
of Pap screening, a Pap smears
and, and breast uh cancer
screening and, and every one of
those other things we did that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen by
harming doctors and making it to
where it's harder to be in
private practice. So, Mr.
Speaker, I do yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
gentlemen, that hit on part of
what I was gonna say, uh,
Gentlemen, if this bill, the 10
million had been.
Set aside for a health care
clinic in Northern New Mexico,
would we be having this debate
today.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
would not.
In particular, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if the, the community
in question where this facility
is going to be located or to
have come to us and asked for
it, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. gentlemen. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Speaker, that gets
into my next part, uh.
Mr. gentleman, uh,
I'm kind of new. This is my 3rd
session.
He
And I love Capital Outlay. I
appreciate the work that Lindy's
committee puts in on getting
this in all our cogs and
everybody there's been a
tremendous amount of work goes
into this capital LA project.
Would you agree to that, Mr.
Mhm. Yes, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I believe, as a
matter of fact, take one more
opportunity to say how much I
appreciate the hard work that
everybody has put into this.
With every other item that is in
here, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. gentleman, and,
and me, me also, uh.
It goes, I guess my.
take on this is in all the
other.
Captain Light projects that I've
been involved in.
We
had been in in in parts in the
uh in the past been asked by the
governor if there's big projects
in our districts that we would
like to be funded and had the uh
Opportunity to present them to
her. Is that true, Mr.
Gentleman?
Uh, yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh,
Not always directly with her,
but someone from her office.
Well, true, I don't know. I've
never talked to her yet.
Mr. gentlemen, but uh.
But my point is,
That the capital outlay projects
in my mind.
Are requested projects from
districts, the 33 counties in
the state of New Mexico. Is that
true?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you have to go through a process
to get a project on a, on the
list to even be considered for
capital outlay.
Uh, yes, yeah, mine have a
deadline. I can't remember it's
even before the session starts
that most of them.
We would like to have the
request in. Is that true,
gentlemen? Yes, Mr. Speaker, uh,
and gentlemen.
So, uh, I guess my take is.
I don't
This project was not asked for
by the residents of northern New
Mexico the way I see it. Is that
true?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
is my understanding. I don't
know that for sure. If if it's
going to be placed, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen in Raton,
I can't imagine that that small,
uh, area is asking for a $10
million facility just for
reproductive health care.
I agree, uh, gentlemen, I, I
agree they would would love to
have a health care clinic.
And their northern New Mexico,
any town would like another one.
Is that true?
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, as a matter
of fact, I have talked with
folks from uh the village of
Roton they're interested, Mr.
Speaker, and and gentlemen in
getting a an electric.
getting a public utility built
there, uh, because of uh uh the
electric utility that they're,
they're gonna have to start
purchasing because of agreements
that are going away. So I, I
know this is not the priority
because Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, they came to me and,
and asked me how to, how I could
help them get a a municipal
utility built in their area
because that is their priority,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, gentlemen, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I don't, I, I didn't
really want to get into the old.
Political part of of this
conversation, but I do have to
believe that uh
Why this was presented, she
She knows the beliefs of, of a
lot of us in this, in this house
and those.
And should know that we would
resent finding gonna
A clinic mainly for abortions.
You believe that to be the
truth?
I'm a speaker and gentleman, I
think that's why this uh 11th
hour surprises on us.
Mr. Speaker.
Uh, mentioned earlier about New
Mexico about
Being a, the abortion
destination for made me think to
look up.
You know what percentage of
Abortions occurring in New
Mexico now are to New Mexico
residents.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not, I, I believe Representative
Doo went over some of those
figures earlier.
But, I, uh, I looked it up 34%
of, of the abortions are in the
Mexico residents.
62% were from
Non-residents of the state.
And that at 4%, they didn't know
where they went, but uh
But anyway, uh,
I, I too I'm gonna get into the
weeds a little here. Not, not
bad, Mr. Speaker, but from my
district, which is a very
conservative district.
Which I think everybody here
would agree with.
I cannot go back and go to
church this coming Sunday.
And tell those ladies in my
church that I voted to build an
abortion clinic. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
debate on the floor, substitute
the lady from San Miguel and
Torrens, Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
the gentleman from San Juan
County yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I yield.
Um, thank you so much, um, can
you agree that with our capital
outlay allocations, we were all
given a specific amount to
determine need in our areas,
whatever that may be, whether
that be the state or the
executive branch or maybe per
our district per our legislative
allocation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and generally
that is the, that is the
process.
Um, and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are you
aware of the reproductive health
access in northeastern New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, speaker and gentle lady, I
have no idea.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, just
to fill you in just a little
bit, um, right now we're in a
maternal desert. Um, if you want
to have a baby North on I-25,
there is no options. You have
Santa Fe and you have Colorado.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
would argue that
Instead of people coming into
our state for abortion services,
I would beg to differ that in
fact our people are going out of
state to have access to these
services. Were you aware that
you are not able to deliver a
baby north of Santa Fe on the
I-25 corridor.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
am, and as a matter of fact, not
just there but across New Mexico
and the Speaker and gentle lady,
um, are you aware of the reason
that is is because we're putting
OBGYNs out of business all
across New Mexico and we have
refused to deal with medical
malpractice, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I don't believe
a, a reproductive healthcare
facility that that mirrors
possibly what is down south is
the answer to that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, it appears to
me that
For whatever reason
Abortion procedures are more
important than everything else
that you just described as a
priority to this governor.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, um,
is abortion listed and you are
specifically in the allocation
description.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that's
exactly the problem I have with
this. We have no idea what this
is. We only have the history of
what the governor has said in
recent statements concerning the
other facility for us to have to
surmise what this is, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
just to give you a little bit
more background information as a
resident of Northeastern New
Mexico.
Um, right now in the city of Las
Vegas we have one PA that does
any sort of any kind of OB
services, um, and that covers
all of San Miguel County and all
of Mora County.
So with Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, would you agree that there
is a need for medical care
within Northeastern New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
The Speaker and, and generally I
believe medical care is
desperate.
In that community and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I think
that true medical care.
Uh, would be supported by this
entire body, including every
member on this side.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
members on your side who in the
past have uh had a hard time
voting for and passing
legislation that is specifically
about abortion services, but
most Speaker and gentle lady.
Once again
We're left to surmise what this
is.
If, if it were all of those
things that were just stated,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
would not be bringing this, uh,
a substitute today, um, every
one of those items are, are
desperate, not just there in
Gallup, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, OBGY OBGYNs have been
run out of town, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady in my community, uh,
OBGYN doctors who have, who are
in private practice, could not
get malpractice insurance and
had to go.
and get under the umbrella of
the hospital. So Mr. Speaker and
general lady, if you don't have
a hospital, uh, a big hospital
in your community that offers
those services. I know they
don't exist, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I think it's
desperate, but until we deal
with medical malpractice in the
state, OBGYNs and every other
specialist.
That just can be sued out of
business by trial attorneys,
we're gonna have a greater and
greater and greater healthcare
desert all across New Mexico,
however, creating a, a, a
facility that only is
concentrating on abortions is
not the direction we should be
going.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, um,
I do hear your concerns, um, but
in closing, I would just like to
say this Capital LA is
determined based upon need and
need is relative and in my area
in northeastern New Mexico,
reproductive health services by
definition are extremely needed.
This was a choice made by the
executive branch by policy by
protocol.
They are respecting our autonomy
to make our choices for our
capital outlay.
I am not in support of your
amendment for the sole fact that
this was a mean determined by
our governor for our state that
reproductive health services are
important for Northern New
Mexico. We have no idea where
this is gonna be. We have no
idea what services are gonna be
offered, and I can hope that
some of those by definition
reproductive health services
will be provided in northern New
Mexico where they are needed
most because the harsh reality
is that this is a need just as
much as a water system, just as
much as, you know, um.
Another building, another
hospital because reproductive
health care is health care and
in northern New Mexico it is
very much needed and so with
that I do not support your
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
There is the debate on the floor
substitute the young lady from
Eddie and Lee, Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentleman from San Juan
County, please yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Eddy
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, New Mexico is
known as the land of
enchantment, um, I think we're
all kind of proud of that
designation.
Um
It is a beautiful state, uh.
And so, um, that's something we
celebrate and we advertise it as
well, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So last year, um.
The governor allocated $10
million for.
I'm not naive, you know, for an
abortion clinic in the southern
part of the state.
This year we see another $10
million for such a facility in
the northern part of the state.
And I wonder, Mr. Gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker.
If next time we come back, there
will be a $10 million allocation
for an abortion clinic in the
east and the next year after
that for one in the West.
Uh, so that's just, um, some
musing I'm doing, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
But what I see happening here is
we are developing a reputation.
Actually cementing a reputation
for being the state.
Where babies are sent to die,
and I don't think that's a good
label to have on us, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
So I am profoundly disappointed
to see this in the capital
outlay bill.
And Mr. Speaker, it is
foundational in our American
system of justice that innocence
shall not be punished for the
actions of other people.
So, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, um, I know you are a
very highly educated man, uh,
gentleman.
Um, I know that you have read
extensively and um best selling
book in the world, Mr. Speaker,
is the Bible. It's the
foundation of our, our system of
justice.
And it says there, and it's
pretty obvious we know we've
heard all, all of us have heard
the 10 commandments, one of
which is do not kill.
Yeah, we're gonna Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm gonna ask us to
just tone it down a little bit,
please, Mr. Speaker, I'll do my
best, I promise you.
But there's another verse in
scripture that says God hates
the shedding of innocent blood.
It's not that he dislikes it,
it's that he hates it. He truly
hates it.
And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
In good conscience, I cannot
vote for a capital outlay bill
that includes $10 million for
another abortion clinic.
And um I just will close by
saying that I fully support your
amendment, uh, your 4th
Amendment gentlemen from San
Juan and um I truly appreciate
you bringing this forward. Thank
you for the debate from Bernard
Leo Anaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield? Uh, yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, you
know, I sit on the health
committee and so I hear a lot of
these conversations come in
front of us, um, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, are you
aware that the OBGYNs that we've
been discussing, um, who
provide, um, you know, who
deliver babies who uh catch
cancer who give you your
checkups. Are you aware, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
those are the same healthcare
providers that provide
abortions.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
not all of them, uh, and I know
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady that
um most of them, at least in my
community, uh, didn't go into
business to provide abortion
care but did it to provide
health care to women to make
sure that women all across the
state don't, not just for
elective procedures in, in not
that all abortions are elective
procedures, but not just for
elective procedures but for
necessary health procedures.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I point this out
because here in New Mexico we're
doing a darn good job for lack
of not wanting to curse on the
floor, uh, attracting OBGYNs to
this state because we here in
New Mexico we allow OBGYNs to
practice to the full extent of
their training. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I will not debate the
merits of, um, is abortion
healthcare because it is
abortion is health care we as.
tic ian s made abortion
political.
Um, and so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I know you've
been talking a lot about the
location being secret. Are you
aware, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, why this might be
uh a possibility.
Uh, Miss Speaker and gentle
lady, because it's not popular
with everyone, Mr. Speaker, and
generally because uh it's easier
to put this into a, a budget, a
a a a capital outlay budget. I,
uh, rather than actually having
a discussion about it in the
open like we should do as
legislators when we're talking
about policy, but Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh,
That, that statement about
OBGYNs it is not the case. I
have a relative in San Juan
County that is a, or let's say
an outlaw, not exactly an
in-law, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that that is an OBGYN
provider. They've been nearly
put out of business in New
Mexico because of this. We
cannot attract OBGYNs to New
Mexico because of the medical
malpractice mess that we
created, they are not flocking
to New Mexico.
I do not agree with the
statement that you just made Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I just
wanna say that the data, uh,
that UNM has actually says the
contrary. It actually says that
medical providers, OBGYNs in
particular, um, are coming to
New Mexico because they want to
practice to the full extent of
their ability, um, and so, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I, I also
urged the body to not um use
individual stories as a complete
set of data.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
reason I asked that question is
because when these locations are
built, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, they are often.
Um, subject to bomb threats, uh,
harassment, threats of violence,
uh, threats of, um, uh, murder
and so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, there is a reason
that locations like this are not
disclosed. We've actually had
whole construction crews, um,
who have been harassed, um, when
a location is found and so, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
gonna keep moving on, um.
But Mr. Speaker, don't, I'm
actually really proud because
this is a homegrown clinic, and
what we hear, um, time after
time in the healthcare
committee.
Is that not just here in New
Mexico but across the nation,
multi-billion dollar
corporations are eating up our
small clinics, specifically
those in rural areas and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I also
know this because I used to work
with OBGYNs and when I worked
with OBGYNs, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, there were a
whole group of OBGYNs who left a
northern New Mexico hospital,
not because, Mr. Speaker, of
malpractice, but because Mr.
Speaker, they were being taken
over by a
corporate entity that had them
work outrageous hours and said
if you don't do this, then you
can leave. You can be replaced.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I'm really proud that we are
building our own homegrown
clinics, um.
There are actually a, a list of
projects in here that are not
fully funded, um, that are not
breaking ground and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I also want
to point out that we are not
debating any of those. Why?
Because we have not politicized
any of those yet. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I will just
end by saying abortion is health
care. We politicized abortion. I
am so glad that we are having
homegrown clinics here in our
state and Mr. Speaker, I hope
that we can move this
conversation on to all the other
amazing types of.
healthcare facilities and help
that we have in this bill. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate, the
gentleman from Travis Ain Otero
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from San Juan Gil.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Eddie County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I just have a couple
of quick questions because I'm a
little confused. I wanna make
sure I understand from debate,
uh, prior to me.
Are we saying that there is not
a healthcare facility.
North in the north part of our
state.
Uh, no, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I do not believe
that's what we're saying. I, I
believe there is a health care
facility actually in.
Uh, Ratton, I'm not sure you
maybe you have more information
on that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no,
that's absolutely right. I find
it interesting because I've
heard in debate that you can't
have a baby North, uh, uh, in
the northern part of the state.
I've heard about OBJYNs and all
those things. And yet in return.
Because of the magic of Google,
I was able to Google it and see
what was there and they do
happen to have a medical center
that has an OBGYN so everything
that was discussed earlier looks
like there's a service that's
already there providing it.
Um, it has a place with 4 rooms
for birth, which this let's be
clear, can a reproductive health
care clinic.
Perform can you give birth in a
reproductive health care clinic.
Uh, Ms. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, uh, if the facility
is catering to abortions, that
does not generally what they
offer, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. They may offer
contraception they potentially
may offer, uh, uh, breast cancer
screening potentially, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, most of
the abortion providers across
New Mexico don't offer those now
UNM does offer that, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, most
of the.
Uh, individual private
facilities don't offer any of
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
as a matter of fact, if you want
that care, you generally have to
go to a women's uh uh.
Uh
Clinic, uh, that like the one I
mentioned earlier, Gray's Place,
like Caett facilities that run
on, uh, donations, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, so, uh, yes, you
can get that. And Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, but the OBGYNs
are disappearing across our
state, but uh I didn't realize
you had a
personal story there that you
could point to that it actually
exists. I'm not sure we're
supposed to use personal
stories.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no,
it's not a personal story. I
just Googled what kind of
medical facilities are in the
north since I kept hearing from
debate that we were going to
only reason we needed a
reproductive healthcare clinic.
It was not for abortion, which I
would argue because then I
googled what is this? and the
top line that reproductive
health care clinics.
The first thing it says is
abortion. So it does feel like,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
let's not pretend a reproductive
health care clinic is an
abortion clinic. I don't think
it's fair for the body to say
that it adds all these other
facilities that aren't offered
in the North.
When I googled it, there's
actually a medical facility that
offers many of those services
that we just heard about that
are needed for reproductive
reproduction, it's already
offered there. So if it's
already offered there, what
would be the need for a $10
million reproductive healthcare
clinic in northern New Mexico
which were speculating where it
might go because that's pretty
vague, um.
But we've heard that is probably
possibly going to be offered in
or located in Raton if that is
already offered there as far as
if all we're worried about are
all these other medical, um,
procedures for, for women and
men for reproduction. Why would
we need another one in reton
when we just heard that there's
only 15 births a year there.
That feels like a lot for a
small area. There must be
something else that we're
looking to do with this
reproductive health care clinic.
Is that what you feel like, uh,
Mr. Speaker?
gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm, I'm, I'm left to have to
believe that's what it is in
part.
We were just told that because
It's likely it was surprised. We
were surprised by this today. I
believe it was just stated to me
is because
It likely is an abortion
facility and they're afraid, uh,
for protests and people to
disagree with it, who might, um,
uh, be unhappy with this, be
located, being located in their
area. I do not know of any other
healthcare across New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, for
the residents would be very
unhappy to have a healthcare
facility going into their
community and the speaker and
gentlemen, uh, earlier, uh,
Representative Brown mentioned
that for all we know next year
there'll be 2 more uh facilities
that will be thrown into.
this one on the east and one on
the west side of the state and
Miss Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
we know very well that on at
least on the east side of the
state and in other communities
there have been referendums
saying we don't want these
facilities in our area, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, once
again, this appears to be
something that we're doing to
New Mexicans and not for New
Mexicans, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
gonna close just real quickly,
um, I've been a part of, uh, the
Capitol Outlay on the other side
for quite a while now as a
former commissioner 8 years we
had discussion on the ICIP list
as a mayor, we've had discussion
of what has to go on that and
you're exactly right. There was
pri priorities.
And so in my opinion, when, when
we as legislators, uh, go to
the, I, I'm very lucky my
council of government is
amazing. We had a number of
meetings before I, I came up
here where our communities were
able to come to us and say, hey,
these are the needs of our
communities.
And then we do everything we can
as legislators to meet those
needs. It doesn't feel like if
we're keeping this a secret.
Nothing we did was secret. Not
only did we have, we talked to
communities about it my
community had to vote on our
ICIP before we send it up here
so the folks within my community
had a choice to come to that
meeting and say we don't agree
with your initiatives.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think it's very important when
we talk about these types of
things that we remember most of
the stuff that is in here,
absolutely incredible.
And I'm so thankful for it. I'm
thankful for the way the
chairman wrote it this year and
got us extra to help fund those
that weren't being funded.
But it's disappointing we're
having to have this debate
because I don't think this was
vetted through a community.
Mr. Speaker, with that I yield.
There is for the debate on the
floor substitute, the gentleman
from Berson of Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
appreciate the moment as the
gentleman yield.
Uh yes, Mr. San Juan, I yelled
to the gentleman from Berlio
County.
Thank you, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker.
It's called a speed of speed.
This is about abortion.
The debate
My friends from the other side
of the aisle, they are mincing
words, but this is about
abortion because they don't
believe that there ought to be
reproductive health.
In the northern part of New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, I'm a proud
Christian.
I am both of the Catholic faith.
And the LDF's faith was also a
known as Mormon.
I was brought up and studied
very, very much.
In the faith.
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker,
and gentlemen, the Bible is
often used to the benefit of any
given point, depending on when
it's convenient.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
Samuel 153-4.
This is what it says.
Go and attack Amalek.
And utterly destroy all that
they have and do not spare them.
But kill both men.
And woman
Infant
And nursing child ox.
And sheep
Camel and donkey.
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go
back a little further in the
Bible to Exodus.
That's 11 and 12.
And this is what it says, Mr.
Speaker.
God struck down the first born
of Egypt from the Pharaoh's son.
To the first born of livestock.
Mr. Speaker,
I'm not going to be labor.
But I often feel offended when
the book that I
Love and respect is used for
convenient political points.
This is about abortion. Let's
call it what it is, Mr. Speaker.
Let's end this debate. Thank
you.
There is for the debate, gentle
lady from Lee Representative
Senna Cortez. Thank you so much
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, does
the gentleman from San Juan
yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, in just a
second I will yield to the
gentle lady. I just so happens
that I know very much about the
stories of Emelik.
And Egypt, uh, and Pharaoh and
some speaker and gentle lady,
uh.
These were the mortal enemies.
Of God's chosen people.
And
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what happened in both of those
instances is they have been
mistreated, abused, killed, and
the Speaker and gentlemen gentle
lady in particular in the story
of Amalek, it was to repay in
kind for the way that they had
been killed and nearly
exterminated and the Speaker and
gentle lady, I know we kind of
swerved into this, but
Uh, and this is off topic, Mr.
Speaker.
And that is currently.
We're seeing a group of people
that are being targeted.
That
Uh, have a right to defend
themselves, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this was about
Them defending themselves, and
this was about God perpetuating
his chosen people, so that is
not a misuse.
When you talk about what in
general,
God talks about life, so I'm not
gonna sit here and, and, and,
and listen to a miscalculation
of God's word. Thank uh so Mr.
Speaker, with that, I yield to
the gentle lady.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I know there's been a
lot of topic on this
conversation and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I just wanna kind of
get back to the core of it, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you
support services for
contraception?
Miss Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, uh, yes, I believe in that
all of those uh um offerings.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
you support fertility services
and support fertility services.
Speaker, gentlemen, what about
infertility services, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do you
support pregnancy care.
Uh yes, ma'am.
I support pregnancy care. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you
support STI prevention and
treatment.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I do. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do you support family
planning.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, that's, uh, do you know
why I have, uh, 4 boys, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Because I did not want 5.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
you support postpartum care?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I do, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do you support
breastfeeding and lactation
support. Mr. Speaker, and
generally, yes, I do, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you
support fertility counseling and
education, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, I do, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, I
believe everyone uh on, on this
side of the aisle supports
virtually everything that you've
just been talking about, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. And
just, just a couple more, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you
support prevention education.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I do, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do you support cancer
services, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I do. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what is your big
issue in this piece in the
Capitol outlay.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The problem I have with this is
most New Mexicans do not want
their taxpayer dollars going to
provide these services in
particular, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, especially if we're
targeting out of state folks.
These are New Mexico dollars
that should be spent on New
Mexico citizens and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, every one of
those services that you were
just talking about should be
provided OBGYNs fertility
doctors, all of those
specialists.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we've made it hard for them to
practice in New Mexico and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you
believe this amendment stands up
and represents the voices of the
majority of New Mexicans.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe just taking this 1 $10
million appropriation out of
Out of this capital outlay.
Bill
It is just a drop in the bucket
compared to the whole bill. And
so yes, Mr. Speaker, and
generally, I, I support not just
the things that you just
described, but everything else
that is in this, this uh capital
outlay bill so what I've heard
from today, Speaker, gentlemen,
is that you respect and admire
the work and the investment that
has gone into the capital outlay
process, correct, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I believe
you've been listening to me
during the debate.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
one non-negotiable is abortion.
Is that what I'm hearing?
Miss Speaker and gentle lady at
the very least, it should be
debated and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this should be a
stand-alone bill where we would
have a chance to talk it out.
Uh, and then everyone across the
state who has representatives in
this building, in this room
would have had a chance to have
their views represented in a
debate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
also my perspective and I fully
support this amendment. Thank
you so much.
There is for the debate on the
floor substitute, the gentleman
from Katrin Grant and Hidalgo,
Representative Terazas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen,
please yield.
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the, to my friend, to the south.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know.
listener debate and you know
it's it it takes a lot to stand
up on, on these tough issues,
these tough issues to stand up
and say, you know, I, I support
this or I don't support that,
but you know, um.
There's a lot of hard work that
went into the Capital Oly
process.
And every single member here,
um, I think there was one member
because they weren't appointed
yet but the majority of us
worked very hard in trying to
find things that work for our
district and and to support our
our communities. The governor
gets the same opportunity to do
the same.
And, and so, you know, that's
the way the process is and I
understand it and Mr. Speaker,
it's, it's, it's not so much,
you know, um, that we're against
the process. No one's here, uh,
debating against sidewalks and
street lights and streets or um.
Any of the other water projects
or whatever.
It's just that one.
Situates that one there's 3
lines in there.
Of of the clinic that you know
the abortion clinic that
everyone feels uncomfortable.
Mr. Speaker, you know,
I mean
I'm Catholic
Have my faith
I have my values that I that
that that and we all have our
values, right?
Our pope has asked us to.
Not, you know, support abortion.
In our faith
And so it's something that's
that's important to all of us
and we have all each and every
one of us have have uh our life.
Um
What would happen in our lives
or our, our, our journey in our
life that gives us a certain
perspective.
And Mr. Speaker, for me,
My son was born very, very sick.
And as a funeral director.
I've dealt with a lot of deaths
in my, in my life.
Since I was a 15 year old boy.
And, and for me, and I've seen.
The aftermath of abortion.
I've had little babies in my
hand.
That just barely fit in my hand,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I've seen, I've been in the
neonatal intensive care and
watch the baby die right next to
me.
It's, it's devastating to me,
Mr. Speaker.
And so you know with as much
respect as I can say I can tell
you that.
The reason that I can't support
this because I, I promised.
The Lord that I in my faith, I
cannot do that.
And so
In, in good conscience I can.
But I appreciate all the hard
work that has gone into it. I
appreciate your amendment
because it allows me to support
every other the 99.99% of all
the other projects that everyone
has worked very hard and there's
been a lot of negotiations
there's been a lot of that.
But for me personally, because
I've made that commitment.
To the Lord and to my, into my
community that I would not do
that good conscience. I can't, I
can't, I can support your, your,
uh, substitute, uh, bill, but I
cannot support the the amendment
and it it is and I, I speak.
With caution and and kindness
and respect, but that's how I
feel, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Young lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move to table House
floor substitute for house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450.
We are on a motion to table
house floors substitute.
For house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 450 with an emergency
clause support of yes and the
substitute would have been
tabled that would have now we're
back on the substitute. 32nd
book clock.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative house floor
substitute 2, number 12.
House taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450
with an emergency clause has
been tabled.
gentleman from San Juan, back to
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
gentlemen, uh, I would just like
to say that I appreciate all the
work that went into this bill.
I appreciate
Virtually everything else.
Um, I wish we could have.
Had a completely clean bill come
through here that I could have
just voted for.
I presented this
For those of us who wanted to
say that we support everything
else.
But Mr. Speaker.
This is not even necessarily
about.
Full abortion care.
That's not the issue. The issue
is in New Mexico we are out of
touch with the rest of the
country. We're out of touch with
the rest of the world, um, our,
our laws in New Mexico are
closer to that of.
North Korea and China than
anywhere else in and we're out
of touch with all of Europe. We
are out of touch with Canada. We
have zero restrictions in New
Mexico. That is why many folks
can't support this, not because
there are a lot of folks, Mr.
Speaker, who would support
portions of what is is
considered a reproductive health
care and abortion. There are
some folks who are somewhere in
the middle, as a matter of fact,
Mr. Speaker and, and, and
gentlemen, most of New Mexico is
somewhere in the middle, but
we're nowhere near the middle in
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker. What we
have is we have.
Abortion without restriction.
For any reason and mostly for
elective services and, and Mr.
Speaker, that's just a pill too
hard to swallow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is
for the debate. The gentleman
from the other gentleman from
San Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
uh, my friend yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Chair. Um, I'd like to thank
Is Callie still with you over
there? I'd like to thank, um, I,
I can't see her, but I'd like to
thank Callie for, um, as we went
through this process. This is
the first time I've ever done
that.
And uh and as we went through
this process she was very
patient with me and explained a
whole lot to me as, as you were
yourself. So I, I'd like to talk
a little bit about some of the
good things we've heard, uh,
something that I think is, is
not, but let's talk about some
of the good things if, if we
could, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr. Chair, can you,
can you
um, delve a little deeper into
the 90 projects and, and, you
know, as we talked about this.
Mr. Speaker and Chair, we talked
about how we could impact almost
every county out there and how
if they had a project that they
had asked for 5 years ago and it
wasn't funded.
And if we could fund it, that's
what we're going to do. So can
you talk to us, uh, Mr. Speaker
and Mr. Chair, a little bit more
about those.
Good things that were done.
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen from San Juan and uh
I'd be remiss if I didn't also
introduce my expert witness who
is Kelly Carswell, who is the
legislative finance committee,
uh, capital outlay guru, and she
helps out with everything and
she's the one that put all the
numbers to the sheets that you
see in front of us and so we
thank her for all the work that
she's done in her time that
she's committed to, to this
initiative.
As we look at the 90 projects
that we uh were able to
completely complete, uh, we're
looking at projects related to.
Fire
Health.
Water.
etc. etc. And so when I'm
looking at my list now, I, I, I,
I identify, for instance, Curry
County waterline expansion.
It was, uh, it, it, it needed a
lot of help, right? And so, so
the governor was able to afford
$4 million to that, but $4
million to that was only gonna
cover uh less than half of that
project and so when our when our
group came together to talk
about, well, how can we look at
existing projects and how can we
complete those projects that we,
that's when we came through
utilizing that extra capacity
that we had and so we were able
to put $8 million.08 million
dollars.
To a project that likely
wouldn't have been fully funded
for years, if ever, to fully
fund a $12 million water line
there in Curry County. I further
expand on a, a couple of other
initiatives that I, I, I think
we can, we can look at, um,
There's a chichita chapter, Head
Start in daycare facility
construction in in McKinley
County.
There was a legislative
appropriation from either the
House or the Senate of $200,000.
to our initiative, we were able
to put another million towards
that to fully fund.
This heads this head start in
daycare. Those are the
initiatives, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that I think that
you're talking about in terms of
the things that we knew that
were existing that had been on
that list for years that with
appropriations that we receive
as a body would never have been
enough.
And to this day still aren't
enough, but with this extra
capacity and this closing fund
as I think that we would like to
consider it. We were able to
scratch these projects off the
list so that they're off of uh
any existing recurring uh line
item that we will have and we
will see so that they are fully
funded this year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
and, uh, Mr. Chair, can you tell
us the body, um, if, if you know
and maybe uh Calli can help you
out. um, how long some of these
had been on, I mean, did we go
back to 19.
You know, 2000 early 2000s.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
she's not quite sure in terms of
the time frame in terms of how
far we went back, but absolutely
we did work in fact from a list
of existing projects, so these
weren't projects that were
presented in 2025 to say let's
put a little bit towards this
project and let's see if we can
finish it off. No, these were
projects, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that were on this
list for maybe year after year
after year, then finally fully
funded with the appropriations
that we were able to have this
year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and would you say
that we were perfect in this,
that we got everything we
wanted.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no, sir, uh, the outstanding
balances in regards to these
initiatives, I mean, they would
total likely upwards of several
100 millions of dollars in
regards to still yet
outstanding, uh, opportunities
for us to fully fund projects,
so we're quite a ways away, but
we're making uh a little bit of
a dent here and there, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
would, uh, would I be safe when
I say that when as as a
committee that worked on this,
that when we, uh, that proposal
was made to keep some of that
back so that we could do
projects and finish uh our
projects within all of our or
is, is it safe to say that
perhaps the 4th floor was not
happy with us.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, that, that would be an
accurate statement, you know,
and, and, and this goes back to
in terms of negotiation tactics,
right? And this may never happen
again because they, we, we've,
we've shown our cards, but the
fact of the matter is that the
fact that we were able to do it
this year, uh, hope hopefully,
and I would, I would hope that
this sets a precedent,
especially with the 4th floor
that they recognize that
sometimes all of their
priorities aren't the priorities
of the communities that we
represent.
Recognizing that there were some
of these projects here, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
focused on fire on water, on
education.
The list can go on and on that
had we not
stood our ground. Have we not
made the move to say that this
is what our intention was going
to be, uh, that they would never
have been fully funded, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, I, I would say
that you negotiate like the
President of the United States
right now and I hope that's not
offensive when I make that
statement.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
can you talk about the, um, how
much money was left with the
STBs and are those long term,
short term sponge. Can you
explain to the body that.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen of the uh
capacity of the $292 million in
STPs again, mind you that
majority of those STBs did in
fact go towards those larger
costing projects, more so on the
statewide side of this, of this
capper Ali uh.
Package, but we did get close to
spending that capacity. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Um,
So
Now we have
to, um, we require a sense of
long term severance tax revenue
or more in the short term on
some of this stuff.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
uh all on ten-year debt.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I think that's
great. That's one of the things,
uh, as, as we looked at what
we've done in the past in in um
funding a lot of these capital
that drove me nuts and to be
able to pay for things and
actually finish them without
borrowing money to do that, I
think it's a much better way to
do this, and I'm extremely
pleased that uh.
That we were able to do that.
Um,
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I
recognize the um that the
governor has a third of this as
well and, and she can do with
it, uh, as she desires and as
she wants.
Um, but I wanted to, to just
stand up briefly and just tell
the body, um, that the amount of
work that we did on this, uh,
it, it was hard and, um, and,
uh, we fought hard for this body
and for, for everybody in the
state of New Mexico on this, um.
There are things in this bill
that I don't like, but Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Chair, I do again
want to publicly thank you for
giving me the phone call this
morning.
I appreciate that, um, because I
would hate to have voted for
this because I, in fact I was
going to vote for this, but I
would have hated to have voted
for it and only then gone to
read it and found out that this
was in there, so, Mr. Chair, I
love what we did.
Uh, on this, I, I loved working
on this and, and understanding
the process and working through
the process, um.
On this, and we, I think there's
so many good things in this
bill, but Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Chair.
I'm more concerned with how the
Lord feels about my vote than I
do the governor of this body and
so for this reason I will not be
able to vote for this bill.
Thank you.
Buddy, there's been a request
for the gentleman to remove
their jackets
seeing.
No objection, so.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Rio Riba Sandoval
and San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I've
watched this process for
Several years now and I do
appreciate the way this process
comes together. I appreciate the
effort and the work of the 13
member committee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate the work of all of
the cogs and individual, uh,
groups out there that work with
our legislative body.
To bring
The needs of the community to
their legislators and let the
legislators fight for that.
Mr. Speaker, during the debate
today,
You know, I, I
Heard a concern that that um
If we were to pull something
out.
of the governors, there may be
some.
Potential for retaliation.
And Mr. Speaker, and body.
Gentlemen
I, I
I'm of the opinion that that's
OK.
If the governor wants to
retaliate.
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and
gentlemen.
Um
From my position as a body as a
70 member body, we have the
ability.
It's, is there a line item
vetoes in this.
To come back to session. We have
the ability to do the same thing
the governor does.
And come back and fix capital
outlay.
What's the 75% vote.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen.
Had, had this item not been put
in here, I'm relatively
confident you had close to 100%
but.
Just based on the commentary
from people within my own side
of the aisle.
And, and so,
That kind of concerning for me
that we are concerned about one
person.
When as a body, we stand united
on something.
We have that ability to take.
Take that back.
Mr. Speaker, Mba had we dealt
with this bill two days ago,
we'd had the ability to do it
before the end of session.
We'd have been outside the 3
days. Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
I feel like the process we went
through was very transparent.
There were some things about it
that I didn't care for.
Because I've been watching this
bill.
And I look it up online.
And
Um, is current is starting this
debate. The only thing that
shows
Um, listed are 3 items, one for
Lunar count and one Luna County,
one for Bert Leon and somewhere
else. And Mr. Speaker and embody
and gentlemen just built
Even at the time, still isn't
even posted online for the
public to see.
Now that was at the start of the
debate. It may be on now.
But
that's a little too late for me.
And that's where I say we could
be a little bit better with
transparency
in this um in this process.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
We watched last year where we
lost House Bill Junior money.
And it turned into grow money.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
year.
We lost grow money.
Last August, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, magically, we
redefine the definition of new
money.
And move somewhere around $3.6
billion.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
magically reappears in section
5, section 6, Section 9, 10, and
11.
this year.
The same amount.
Mr. Speaker, embody and
gentleman inside of that.
Is Governor grow money.
No legislator
Body grow money.
But the governor has grown
money.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
governor has
30% of this.
Capital Alley
Once again,
Our body
And our ability to support our
communities taken away.
But the rest of it stays there,
and that's frustrating to me,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
You know, I, I, I listen to some
of the debate, and I wasn't
gonna bring.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, my
faith into this.
But that door was opened, so
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I don't know how many people
here, um,
Listen to the Pope.
in his
New Year's Day address.
He very firmly said, I ask for a
firm commitment to respect the
dignity of human life from
conception to natural death.
This is Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, what the Pope is
asking of his
Community.
The Catholic faith, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, he also used
terms like small-minded rules
and hiring a hit man to solve a
problem.
And I'm not gonna read the whole
thing.
But Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
We're having a 3 hour debate,
probably over something over $10
million that didn't have to be
in here.
And if it, if
pulling it out
Requires the governor to
retaliate on
70 members of the house and 42
members on the Senate. I say
bring it.
Let's come back.
Let's take, take it out, take
it, have 75% vote or better and
And reactivate it.
Not hard. Our rules are very
clear. Our constitution is very
clear.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
have a question for you.
And the list that we received.
On page 31.
It has a total of 1.224709-699.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, are
you aware?
This total?
It's not consistent with
The totals for each county and
multiple county lines.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
It should be
We've had several, uh,
Reviews of this in LCS as well
as LFC to make sure that these
numbers would equate to what the
total sum is.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if I
use the totals at the bottom of
every county.
And I put them into a
spreadsheet.
And then I take the ones that
have for multiple counties.
And and add those in.
The actual total
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
There's 1.234.
the exact separation of $10
million Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, can you explain that
to me?
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, staff
is telling me that we would have
to follow up in regards to that
discrepancy.
But again, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that I have full
faith in the ability of our
staff and their expertise and
professionalism that
The amount of the calculated are
are accurate.
And uh
Maybe we should double check
your math.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, trust
me, I triple checked it and
quadrupled checked it because I
have faith in our staff.
And so, I contend, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
That the reason that separation
is exactly $10 million.
It is because of page 242, lines
8 through 10.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
with that, I have an amendment
for you.
Mr. Speaker, I would like a roll
call vote, please.
You'll have a roll call vote.
Waiting on the amendment.
Mr. Speaker, when you're ready,
I'll read you your 232 number.
John, we'll wait to get that
distributed and online as well.
Gentlemen, if you could read
that 23 number for me, please.
Mr. Speaker's 232-092.1.
That's what we have.
Joma, the amendment has been
distributed and it is online.
The gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
this is very simple, friendly
amendment, I'm hoping because it
does fix a math problem.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, all
this does is on page 242 strike
lines 8 through 10 and renumber
the entire.
Since um
Following numbers accordingly.
gentleman from Rear Rivers on
the wall in San Juan, is this a
friendly amendment?
Mr. Speaker, I want to first
commend the gentleman from Lee
County, Lee County, right?
From Lee County for a conserving
paper and providing a one-page
document versus the gentleman
from San Juan that did a whole
committee substitute to do the
same exact thing and
The same exact thing means that
it's also unfriendly.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm,
I'm sorry to hear that. And
I
From my opinion, we, most of us.
In this body
Start this process, the capital
outlay process sometime.
In September.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
have meetings with all of our
community members. We go through
the whole process. We review it
not once, not twice, but 3 times
and then Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
We have meetings up here.
Just in case something changes,
and then as a community, our
members of the legislative
members of the community. We,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
We try and
And fund
The top priorities of every
community.
But the whole process is very
transparent.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe the original requirement
was that we had our capital
outlay.
Turned in by March 6th, and um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, y'all
graced us with the 4 additional
days to march the 10th to get
this done.
But that information, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen's been out
there.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
This item on page 242.
It's not been out there.
Now there may be a few members
that have known about this, but
it's wasn't public.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think that and this is something
that we can talk about through
the interim, but as we look at
capital outlay, I think that
stuff should be visible to
everybody.
Doesn't matter if it's me
individually.
Or anybody else of the 112 of
us.
But the governor as well.
And once it's finalized,
That that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, this document is able
to be reviewed by the public.
Before we debated on the floor.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
same with the individual project
list.
None of which was available
before we started debate on the
floor.
Online on the New Mexico legis.
Website
And
Definitely not.
The $10 million.
That we're talking about on 242.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I truly wanted this to be a
friendly amendment because I
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
feel like we're debating.
A project list
The is mathematically incorrect
right now.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
instead of
Asking the body and the bill
sponsor to roll the bill.
And correct the list and bring
it back for us to debate, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I put a
committee of of.
An amendment out there that
makes it mathematically correct.
And
We can be fully transparent to
The state of New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
love the thought on that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, sorry
I had my calculator out, um.
Can you repeat your question,
please?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
instead of asking you to roll.
A piece of legislation that's
worth $1.224 billion.
Because it's mathematically
wrong.
Therefore, not transparent.
And not having given our public
body.
The or the residents that we all
represent time to review this
document, both sets of
documents.
I came up with a simple
solution. Let's make the math
work.
And I made the math work, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, by taking
Lines 8 through 10 on page 242
out.
So my question to you is knowing
that this math is wrong.
How do we solve this any other
way other than rolling the bill,
fixing it, and bringing it back.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate your uh your concern,
uh, I, I don't, I don't believe
that the accusations that the
math is incorrect or are quite
fair. Again, I have, again, full
faith in regards to the staff,
the number of eyes that have
reviewed this time and time
again from the Legislative
council service to the
Legislative Finance Committee
that I put this bill together
meticulously over the past uh
several weeks at this point, but
in regards to wanting to.
the bill because we're finding
an error in, in, in your
addition perhaps, uh, I don't
see any reason to do that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Again, I
stand by the math and I stand by
the totals and the calculations
that have been done by a
respected staff.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. You know I'm
called a lot of things bad at
math is never one of them.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
Besides it being mathematically
wrong.
Just from
An overall standpoint.
Having this facility inside of
here.
Ducking it in with
infrastructure projects,
specific needs for fire and
water.
Transportation, you name it,
across the state.
112 legislators working their
butt off with their communities
to have something like this
thrown in here.
That
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
majority of the state.
Wimpo
Don't agree with what we're
doing, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, right now,
Last year I think we killed just
over 2,020,000 babies.
In the state of New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
We only had 21,000.
Now granted
As the numbers have been thrown
out, only 34% of that 20,000,
somewhere around 14,000, almost
15,000.
Uh, or less, I'm sorry, um.
We're New Mexicans, the
remainder.
That
came from out of state.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I'm
To say the least, heartbroken
that, that this isn't a friendly
amendment.
Uh, I think that we could all
stand strong and look in the
mirror.
And say, you know what, we did
what was right by by pulling
this from the.
From this document right here.
And we could all stand to our
communities.
And say we did the right thing.
And
I don't know how else to say it
other than that, I just really
had hoped
That the two items put together
would um.
would convince the bill sponsor,
Mr. Speaker, that um the right
thing to do would be to pull
that line out those line items
out.
Mr. Speaker, if there's anybody
else, if there's further debate,
I would be happy to take it.
There is a debate on the
amendment the gentleman from
Otero, Representative B block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would my friend from Lee County,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Lincoln and Otero IU.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm just
so tero, but my good friend
right next to me is Lincoln and
Otero. We share a good county.
We're very blessed to live
there. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so I guess I've just
heard.
In the debate, can you tell me a
little, a little more about the
math problem that we're trying
to solve. I know you said
there's a math problem. I wasn't
really following that too
closely. I know I, I got some
good grades in math in school,
but it's been a while. And so
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
tell me what the math problem is
that we're trying to solve by
striking this portion of the
legislation.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
you go to the chart by county.
Document that was handed out in
the first subtotal would be on
page 10 of 31.
The subtotal for Bernao County
is $293,606,000.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
can do that for every county out
there. And then there's 2
editions as you go through here
one for multiple counties.
And that would be.
Mm
On page 19.
There's two subsets there, one
for sound Santa Fe fire
training, um, uh, for 40 million
and then another subtotal
frommasa
to
You and him, um.
Items and then there's another
set of multiple counties, but
anyway, you add up all the
subtotals, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, the actual total is.
is 1.234 billion.
709.
$1,699.
Versus the 1.22 billion. That's
actually in the subtitle.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Now I understand the
math problem. OK, so this $10
million reduction that would put
it in line with the figures that
we've been told. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And so I also find
it, I, I kind of find it
hilarious actually that the, the
website, you can't read the
actual bill, but you can read
the committee or the floor
substitute, which probably would
give you more information than
what's currently there, so I
think that's actually really
good that we killed all those
trees. I'll put be on the record
for that one, that we did that
on the substitute because now
the public actually can see
what's in their sands, the $10
million for the abortion
facility.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, also
your amendment when we're
talking about what we're
striking through, I will get my
bill here just to make sure I'm
clear on what it says
specifically. So don't want to
misspeak. So $10 million to
plan, design, construct, equip,
and furnish a reproductive
health care clinic in northern
New Mexico. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I've been listening
to most of the debate, not all
of it, and so I'm trying to
understand, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what it is that.
What it is that we're talking
about when it comes to
furnishing.
Or designing and constructing
this versus just.
Building it. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I know it's
$10 million it's quite a lot of
money, in my opinion. And so I'm
just kind of understanding that
reproductive health care clinic,
we heard an earlier debate that
means abortion according to the
gentleman from Bernalillo, I
believe. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that your
understanding?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
is my exact understanding, and
it's not something that just I
pulled out of thin air, or uh
grabbed from my back, um.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Doesn't it that
That phrase
reproductive healthcare.
Clinic
was used 3 years ago.
By the governor
For one in Donana County.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that,
that
The following January she had to
come and request the executive
had to come and request that $10
million that she committed to 5
months earlier.
So, and that has been a
consistent phrase.
Used by the executive.
In lieu of an abortion clinic.
And there's plenty of newspaper
articles from
Las Cruces to Santa Fe to Hobbs
to Farmington, you name it, that
has quoted that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I agree with you.
I've seen some of those news
clippings from the previous one.
There are no news clippings on
this one because it was.
It was put in in a very delayed.
Fashion, I guess that would be
the right way to say it, to not
get gaveled down. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the way
that it was so very delayed.
I don't want to opine on the
governor's thought process on
that, but I do find it kind of
interesting in the approach of
open government and transparency
because the bill currently is
not on the website and I don't
know whose problem that is. It's
our problem, I suppose. We, you
do have a substitute for anyone
who actually wants to read the
bill, you can read the
substitute on the website minus
the $10 million that was voted
down on a party line vote. But
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
want to make sure that we
understand that this, we're just
trying to strike 11.
portion which just says, take
out the abortion facility.
That's all we're taking out and
we're doing it not only to
continue the correct math
equation, but also because
It would keep us from all of our
members being able to vote for
this bill, is that the reason I
understand this amendment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
would be my thoughts exactly. We
want to, we want to be able to
support this. I wanna be able to
support my colleagues in
Bernardino County, my colleagues
in Katherine County and all all
other 31 counties and my own. I
want to be able to support that.
But as the representative from
San Juan said earlier.
You know, at some point in time,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I,
um, I will answer for this vote.
And it, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it's not, uh, you
know.
Uh
Not a vote that I can, uh, I can
handle. I, I do enough things on
my own without trying. I don't
need to go make God mad.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I agree. I do not
want to make God mad either, and
I think that it's like for me
it's very personal.
I think especially when it comes
to my religion and my
background, I care very much
about women. I really care about
health care, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I care about
protecting the most vulnerable
people in our society. I think
those are tenets that I've tried
to live by, especially as a
legislator and before that, I've
worked as a pro-life uh uh uh
counselor for women to help them
find options that were not
abortions that would not be in
this facility.
I did that for years on a
sidewalk outside of a Planned
Parenthood facility and one of
the most busy facilities across
the country. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I completely agree
with you. I think that we need
to make sure that we protect
women, we protect our values,
and I find this to be something
that protects our values. My
values personally and also the
values of my district, which I
ran on and won on over an
incumbent two-time legislator,
because I was the very pro-life
candidate. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm wondering.
When it comes to this, do you
share my concern when it comes
to having to vote no on a bill
that is mostly good because for
me, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I was elated to be able to vote
last year for the bill that
would give these capital
projects. I was so happy because
it didn't have some kind of
poison pill in the bill like the
first time that I saw a bill
such as this, which was the Las
Cruces abortion facility, which
I disagreed with on many of the
reasons that we stated before,
but do you share my
Discontent with the process that
this has been.
put forward with because there
is one line, one tiny baby
amount of section probably a bad
word, very small section because
certainly that would not happen
with this portion, but are you,
are you angry or are you not
very content with this one
section.
26 on page 242 keeping you from
voting for a very, very good
bill in most other cases.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
and I find ourselves in that
position many times as the
single or 1 or 2 or 3 people
that vote no on things. In this
case, I'm voting no for $16.2
million to go to Lee County.
That's the way it's going to be
viewed by some.
By others, they're going to
understand the position, but at
the end of the day, I still have
to go back and answer for that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
The other side of that is
remember.
All we got was this.
Out of $3.6 billion in new
money.
All we got was this little bit.
To be able to take to our
communities, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, no grow money.
No junior money, no nada.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have to go back and answer for
that too, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do, I do too, and
it's not our fault, right? It's
not our fault we didn't create
the process, but we are members
of this.
Great chamber and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when it
comes to, like you said, your
county, my county, we have $10.8
million in projects that we're
trying to fund from members,
both Democratic and Republican
who have put money in this,
things like the, the new
facility for our Otero County
sheriff in Chaparral, things
like uh uh continued funding to
the Almogordo Zoo things that
are gonna help families, uh,
updates.
our cemetery in Alamogordo.
These are things that are really
important to people. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I also share
the vast concern with having to
vote no on a bill that I don't
know how many pages this thing
is, probably like 300 pages,
the big one.
The original one or whatever
the, the one that's not on the
website is.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, 249
pages.
249 pages. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it just
kills me inside to have to vote
against 123456789, 1011, 1213,
1415, 1617.
Like about 2021 words, 22 words
in a bill that is.
249 pages because there is
something that they put, not
they, but a certain individual
who
is an executive put this money
in here.
For something that she knew that
we couldn't vote for, and that's
what drives me up the wall
sometimes, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. We come here to Santa
Fe to protect our constituents,
to fight for our constituents,
and instead of being able to
fight for the values of our
districts, we may disagree.
That's totally fine. But I, but
a majority, a large majority can
just vote to table something and
that one sentence is all we're
asking for. We are not asking
shooting for the stars here. I'm
not asking for an act of
Congress or an act of this
legislature which is
cul ous I'm asking, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, for this body to just
listen to the minority and just
say, OK, we understand that your
concerns are valid. We also see
that this was put late in the
game. We don't know if this
project is shovel ready because
it's absolutely not shovel
ready. That's what was
established earlier in debate.
This has not been vetted
throughout the process. We
always talk about circumventing
the process
of circumventing the process is
putting this poison.
in this bill. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I am fervently in
support.
Of your amendment because this
is important to my district and
it's important to a majority of
New Mexicans who do not want
their money, their tax dollars
to fund abortions. Doesn't
matter if they agree with
abortions or not, a majority
don't want that. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I will vote
against.
This bill, if this is not
passed, and it's, it's
unfortunate because there's a
lot of good stuff there, but I
do think it's very important,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, to stand
up for our communities and the
way I'm standing up for my
communities.
is voting no on the bill or
voting yes on it when we pass
your amendment, which I sure
hope happens. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentlemen.
I don't know if you have
anything else to add to that.
Thank you gentlemen. No, I'm,
I'm good uh we're on the same,
we're on the same line right
now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That's
all I had.
Thank you gentlemen to the
friendly reminder to the body
that the bill is on the website,
uh, and I'd like to thank the
hardworking staff that was able
to do that for us. There is
further debate, the gentleman.
from Chavis Eddy and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
gentleman from Lee County Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my
uh my uh cellmate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I
To, uh, standing up in support
of your, of this of this
amendment as, as well as I stood
up.
For the same one.
An hour ago.
But, and I said most of my piece
of why that I
stood up in favor of both of
these. Well, so I won't labor
with going through.
The few sentences I've made
other than, you know, the
non-transparency.
is the main, well maybe not the
main issue, but you put it with
uh
An amount of money
tried to sneak in and goes
against all of my core values.
Yet, uh.
I, I think the speaker had
previously mentioned the the the
word
uh thank you
uh but I do stand in support of
your, your bail out in favor of
it and I too would like to again
commend the committee for the
hard work they did and you know,
it's a shame that I'm gonna
vote.
over 10 million out of 1
billion,300.
bill. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speak.
There is for the debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from
Indian Lee, Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um,
well, the gentleman from Lee,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend from Ed and Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
I'm, I'm really puzzled how
We could be off by $10 million
on the grand total here in in uh
this um House Bill 450 as uh we
we're dealing with the
substitute, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm just gonna throw
something out there, um, and see
if it's, we probably don't know
the answer but possibly this
listing that we have of capital
outlay projects, it's 31 pages
long.
And it was produced yesterday,
March 18th at 8:43 in the
morning and that's on the bottom
of the um of the sheet.
Uh, but today is Wednesday,
March 19th, and we're into the
late afternoon.
And I'm just wondering, um, we
heard earlier Mr. Speaker, that,
um,
The chairman of Taxation and
revenue Committee informed the
ranking member, uh, that there
was this new project in the bill
and I'm just wondering if that
was inserted after this sheet
had been produced and that might
explain the $10 million
difference if the project was
just inserted, but things were
not recalculated that could
explain it.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
remember being in a meeting many
years ago.
It was an annual meeting and the
treasurer of that organization
was off by 10 cents.
And it really drove her crazy
that she couldn't find a 10 cent
error.
For an annual, uh, report.
And someone stood up in the room
and reached into his pocket and
pulled out a dime and handed it
to her and said, here.
We'll solve it that way.
But this is $10 million Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think we
have a technical issue with the
bill, and I really do believe we
need to address that before we
do anything else with it. I
support your amendment. Thank
you.
Thank you.
There is further debate, the
gentle lady from Berno and
Torrance, Representative Lord.
Thank you
Mr. Speaker, well, the gentleman
from Lee County, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Torrance and
B.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. It's,
it's, it's very handy when
somebody just has the one
county, but
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
had to step out for just a
minute because I was reviewing
because, you know, this came at
the last minute, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So I was going in the
other room and talking to people
and going through things and
going through the list of what
got funded, what didn't get
funded.
And I think one of the hardest
things with this in the budget
is, you know, we get this.
At, you know, at the last minute
we get it, you know, there's
always gonna be changes. We're
waiting till the last minute to
read it. It's always very
frustrating as a person who
reads through the bills, right?
It takes some time, so I had to
go through it and Mr. Speaker
and, and gentlemen, I'd heard, I
believe I heard when I was in
there, going through everything
and double checking dotting I's.
There was an amount there the
numbers don't match up, is that
what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I'm not part of the tax
committee, but when I take the
summarized numbers from every
page, uh, I end up with $10
million more than the summary
number on page 31, yes.
Mr. Speaker, I wanna make sure
so when you take everything, you
summarize everything up and then
you come up with 10 million
more.
That we have allocate that's
we're supposed to be spending
but we don't, we're lacking that
10 million, is that what I'm
understanding
correct. I end up with 1.324
versus 1.224 billion.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen to.
I'm trying to think to make a
correction on that, wouldn't we
just
When it makes sense, are you
asking that we take some time to
make sure this is calibrated
correctly before we move forward
on the bill in its entirety, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I have um two problems with
the bill, obviously the fact
that there's an item in there
that I don't like, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I do
not think that we should pass
legislation where the grand
total.
I, in my opinion, not correct.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
this, if you, if this was in
One year committees at this came
through and there was a big
discrepancy, what would normally
happen? Wouldn't that be rolled
at that time, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, to make sure that
everything lines up.
Mr. Speaker and generally, and,
and how finance, um,
The chief of staff for house
finance and the chief of staff
for the DFA or whatever
department.
would have already agreed or and
if the numbers don't add up,
then they would.
It would get to a point of
concurrence and then change that
number, yes.
So Mr. Speaker and.
And Dillman, so because when
I've been in committees and
there's been issues like there's
no preparation or there there's
something that is wrong with
something.
In any bill, right, and this is
in the bill, right? HB 450 when
we find something that is not
correct, like represent Block
had one time there was an A or a
instead of an N. We come back
and we fix that, isn't that
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I would agree that we do
try and correct.
So Mr. Speaker Doleman, so what
you're saying is there is
A discrepancy of the number. So
what would, what is it that you
would like to have happen at
this time to fix this issue, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, I mean, perfect
answer and gentle lady, the
perfect answer for me is let's
pull the section out of um
The, the lines 8 through 10 out
of the page 242.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
to be honest with you, with all
these line items, I can't tell
you if that 1 $10 million items
in here and they missed another
10 million. I'm not gonna sit
here and say I know for a fact
that the reproductive center is
not on here.
But what I can say is
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this is a God
thing. We have
$10 million that's that's
missing.
So, and we have $10 million
that, um,
Is a problem.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
how long would that take? I
mean, that would take maybe just
a bunch of people sitting down.
For what, maybe 30 minutes max
to going through all that to add
it all up and see maybe where
the discrepancy is.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
would take about as long as it
takes to do a vote.
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm trying to
figure out because if there's
any worry about a delay,
I'm looking at, I've seen plenty
of times where things have
gotten pulled aside, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and they've
worked them out like made
friendly amendments on the side.
And Mr. Speaker Duman, that
doesn't take all that long.
That, that could be something
that could be completed today
before the end of our work day,
which.
I don't know how late that's
gonna be today, but there's
something that could be done
today, Mr. Speaker Dillon, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, I believe so.
As I said before, I'm not a
member of the tax committee. I
don't know how that whole
process works, but I wouldn't
think it would take that long to
figure out where the math
problems at.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I happen to know a bunch of
people in tax and they're very
efficient and very smart, and I
think that they could take this,
go through what you're saying,
take this amendment and say, OK,
let's double check before we
pass this because Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, what happens if
it gets passed and it's wrong.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
since this is a House bill, I'm
gonna assume they're gonna try
and fix it between here and the
Senate.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
wouldn't it be better though
that they.
Wouldn't it be better if they
tried to fix it here before they
sent it off to the other side.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
would, uh, be the correct place
to fix it because Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that's where
the problem was found.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh.
Other than the issue of there
being the discrepancy, uh, are
there any other issues that you
see in the bill or, or issues
for you, for your district and
the people that you represent,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
gonna have, if, if this
amendment is voted down.
I'm going to have to vote
against $16.2 million for my
district.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
say that one more time you voted
against how much? 16.2 million
just for Lee County if this
amendment is not accepted.
So Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
what you're saying is if you
voted for this and there's.
Well, there's a discrepancy and
there's also something that some
of us don't agree with, then Lee
County is out of $16 million
total of your requested capital
outlay. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
that's not what I'm saying. I'm
saying I have to vote against
the bill that has $16.2 million
in it for my district, and I
have to go back and, and, and
explain why I voted no for that
money.
And Mr. Speaker Delaman, what,
what would you think would be
the repercussions when you go
back to your district and say I
voted for this bill as is I
believe that there's a
discrepancy and I also voted
because there's something in
here. I don't think that you
people in my district would
appreciate. What do you think
would happen when you went back
to your constituents, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, and young lady, the
majority of the people that vote
for me will, will thank me for
standing on the principles on
why they sent me.
The other ones will find a
reason to uh not thank me.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand that because I have a
town hall when I finish and I do
get quite a bit of feedback.
People appreciate most things
and then some, there's a few
that they wanted me to do things
differently. Can't go back in
time, but I think on this one,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you have
the opportunity to right the
wrong or the discrepancy, you
also are standing of the moral
issue of, well, my district is
now left out just like 2. I, I
just looked to make sure and I
saw that one of the things I
brought up was funded, but the
problem is.
the well in Estancia was not and
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen I
understand for a couple of
reasons why you brought this
forward and uh thank you I yield
my time.
Thank you.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 450.
There's been a motion to table
House floor amendment number one
to house tax and the revenue
Committee substitute house 450
with the emergency clause, a
vote of yes.
And the and the and the
amendment will be tabled, a vote
or no, and we will continue
debate. The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative, 24 in
the negative.
House floor amendment number 1
to house tax taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House 450 with an emergency
clause has been tabled.
John, you still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen from Rio Reba.
Sandoval and San Juan. I do
appreciate the work of the
committee. I do appreciate the
tenacity in which you continue
to approach everything. And it's
really, truly, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, has nothing to do
with that effort.
And, and I, but I do thank you.
There's supposed to be a
gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman in my
Friend from So of Alri Aruba in
San Juan County yield.
Mr. Speaker, and I, I,
gentlemen, I, I yield to you, my
friend from Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I first want to
thank.
Not just you and the committee
who put in those long hours, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I want
to thank the staff, OK? As I say
many times, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they are truly the
unsung heroes of this process.
We may we may occupy these
chairs.
We may sit there and we may be
the ones who get our names in
the newspaper, good or bad, but
they're truly the ones.
That have done the work, so I, I
applaud them for that work.
Along those lines, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Who was the total number of
requests of capital outlay
projects statewide.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
statewide, the total number of
projects.
In, in, in number or in dollar
figure? Dollar, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, dollar amount,
please. Got you, Mr. Speaker and
gentleman, uh, $5.6 billion.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. The
gentlemen, so $5.6 billion Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, how, what
was the total amount of funds
that were available to try to
address these $5.6 billion.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it's the number we're talking
about today and that's 1.2.
Million dollars.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentlemen. So 1.2
billion, they've also talked
about the division or separation
about how much each body gets.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
heard different numbers, so my
question is the percentage of
the total 1.2 billion, is it 33%
for the house, 33% for the
Senate and 33% for the executive
or what is that number, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so on the local share the
The moneys that we received here
in the House and in the Senate
and the governor. It's a $525
million appropriation to which
we then split three ways, so the
governor gets 175, Senate gets
175, then we get 175.
You divide that because we have
more members, 2.5 per member.
Senate has less members and so
they get 4.2 per member.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, for that answer.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
How much money do we have as far
as in money that has already
capital projects that are
already in process and have not
yet been completed, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that number has grown at this
point in the first quarter of
2025, we're looking at about
$5.8 billion in unspent capital
outlay.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. I was actually as
a member of House
Appropriations, I was actually
assigned to the subcommittee.
To try to uh address the logjam
as it was referred to.
Of these capital projects that
were somewhere.
In the process of being
allocated, so I, I definitely
have seen the, the challenges
that we have in the the sheer
amount of money.
That this body has put out there
to our uh to these capital
projects.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, how many
of the projects
In this whole 1 point or 5.6
billion.
were $10 million or more.
How many projects, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
We at least $10 million or more.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, stand
by while we have Kelly. uh, look
that up for us.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
the number that Calli has
readily available are those
projects that are $1 million and
higher and the number that she
has, uh, total is 712 projects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. So 712 projects
that were 1 million.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I know
it's tough, and I know she's
sitting there and I'm watching
her. Is there a way to figure
out how many of those projects
were 10 million or more.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, she's
shaking her head, yes. So I
think she's a, she's on to
something.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
with a quick calculations, it
looks like there are 74 projects
that are $10 million plus.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Now I'm looking
to Callie again.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
tell me the types are broad
categories that those projects
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
what I, what we're looking at
now is that it's a repetitive
list that include uh education.
Ros, buildings.
Healthcare
And water emergency management,
etc. etc.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. That actually is
very, uh, representative of my
district.
As far as the amount of the
infrastructure and also the
support for schools and for our
first responders, police and
fire and other entities,
ambulances services, and
everything else.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Of those 74 requests that were
$10 million or more that are in
our counties.
How many of those projects, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we're funded
on through either the house side
or the Senate side.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, Kelly
is telling me roughly 20
projects were fully funded.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, uh,
that number 20.
Are you saying I I'm not talking
about funded through the
executive, but I'm talking about
you're talking about a
combination because Mr. Speaker,
Miss, uh,
Gentlemen from San Juan.
I, I want to know, and it may be
hard to see Kelly shaking her
head. Maybe it is difficult, but
is there a way to separate, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, about which
of these projects that were
turned in by us.
On March 10th or whenever
through the
Collaboration.
Of bipartisan.
Of house members and the Senate
members.
We're able to be funded, fully
funded.
At the $10 million mark.
Or more.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, while
Kelly is, uh, looking through
her computer, she did make
mention that she didn't have
that number, but I'm looking at
a list that I have in regards to
when we were able to utilize
that $50 million for a closing
fund, for instance, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and I'm looking
at this list and the total
appropriations from this
legislative session that will
fully fund projects over $10
million plus and quite honestly,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
only
see one. I, I see one at $12
million and it goes back to that
project I referenced earlier
which is in Curry County and
that's the water line expansion
coming in a close second would
be.
Uh, eastern New Mexico
University, uh, student academic
service building at $8 million
third perhaps is in uh Colfax
County. That's the completion of
a long term care facility at
$7.5 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. So my, my point
and thank you for that and thank
you for looking at that.
Is that for many of us in our
communities, it doesn't matter
from the Northeast.
To the southwest we face similar
challenges and many of us, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, have to make
very tough decisions.
In Valencia County with the
senators and representatives.
Our a total amount of money does
not equal the $10 million.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
We have the very arduous process
of trying to fund as many
projects as we can.
So, you know, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I
I think that, you know, when we,
when we look at this amount and
we look about the capital
process.
It's kind of alarming as you
said before, of the $10 million
mark through this process, only
one out of the hundreds that you
named before were actually
funded.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, as
it was said before, I thank you
for your work.
I thank you for the transparency
that has been brought before
this body.
Um
But as, as many have said
before, sir, um,
That the.
The, the fact that many of our
communities in my own district.
I need a fire station. I need a
water purification system. I
need roads, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, in Valencia County is
one of the fastest growing
counties in the state.
And we don't have money to
finish to complete a hospital
where there is no hospital.
We don't, we don't have, we need
to, we don't have the $40
million or $30 million to finish
a second exit.
When we have huge.
Industrial parks that house Mena
Amazon, and more that are
coming.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
thank you for that. I thank you
for your expert witness who was,
you know, very, uh, quickly
flipping through numbers, but.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't know if there's anything
else you want to share on that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I,
I do not, I understand where
you're coming from, and I, uh,
empathize.
With you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, this matter having
been under consideration for 3
hours, I moved to closed debate.
We are on a motion to debate.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
Poe's name.
Yeah, I have it. The debate is
not closed, gentlemen from Riba
Sandoval.
In San Juan to close.
Mr. Speaker, uh,
Body, I completely appreciate
the debate that we had this
afternoon.
This bill represents.
2 months of work that uh isn't
my own.
It's, it's, it's the work of our
work group that we had from both
chambers on both sides of the
aisle. It includes work,
numerous of hours from our staff
both in the legislative uh
council service as well as the
legislative finance committee,
uh.
And to those people that worked
on this from the staff level I
completely support the work that
you've done on this. I don't,
uh, question your math, and I
know that it's accurate.
But I do want to say,
That
I understand what.
The other side is talking about.
I was never, I didn't come here
with this bill to defend it.
Or or aspects of it. That's why
I was as transparent as I could
be with members of your
committee of of my committee
from the other side of the
aisle.
And I told, as I told Mr.
Speaker and body our ranking
member this morning is that no
one should ever judge you for
the votes you take in this
building, either here or in our
committee.
I don't, I don't judge anybody,
right?
Regarding your religious
beliefs.
Or otherwise
So how you vote is your own.
But the fact of the matter is,
is that
I want to appreciate once again.
Mm
The compassion that this body
holds the passion that this body
holds.
The vigor that this body holds
in regards to wanting to make
sure that they vote their
district as we all should and so
with that being said, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentle people
of this body, I respect each and
every one of you for the boat
you take on this bill, and I
will never question that because
that's not my place. That being
said, Mr. Speaker, I now move
that the
substitute.
That the house taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 450 do now pass. We
are on final passage of how
taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450
with an emergency clause. The
vote is not open.
Well, it's about to close.
The border is not closed by vote
of 41 in the affirmative 25 in
the negative, house taxation and
Revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 450 without an
emergency clause hasuli passed
his house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in engrossed copy of 7 Senate
Bill 73 has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Luhan, Senate chief clerk
entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engross copy of Senate Bill
17 as amended has been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate in open session
and request the signatures of
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Luhan's Senate chief clerk.
message will be entered from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled in
engrossed copies of House Bill
12.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 66.
House Bill 197, House Bill 214,
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 308
with emergency clause have been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in open
session and return same here
with respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson, chief clerk
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 318 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Mohan, Senate chief clerk.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 65 with the
emergency clause.
House Bill 155
House Bill 181.
House Bill 269 as amended by the
House. House Bill 298, House
Bill 368, House Bill 532, House
Bill 571 and return same
herewith, respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson and chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to, to
inform the House that the duly
enrolled and gross copy of House
Bill 65 with the emergency
clause has emergency clause has
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and return same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhans Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled and
engrossed copies of House Bill
192 as amended. House Bill 323
as amended. House Bill 357 have
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and return same
herewith, respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhans Senate chief
clerks will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 182 as amended
by the House. House Bill 183, as
amended by the House. House Bill
352 as amended by the House and
return same herewith
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson, a chief clerk will be
entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bills 2 and 3 as amended
by the Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
House executive message number
3. Honorable Speaker Martinez
and members of the House, I have
this day signed House Bill 175
enacted by the fifty-seventh
legislature, first session 2025,
respectfully yours, Michelle
Lujan Grisham, Governor.
Message will be entered
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to whom has
been referred, Senate Bill 112
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted, Derek J.
Lin, the chair.
Mr. Speaker, we adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
community report for Senate Bill
112. All those in favor of 5.
All those opposed? Yes, I have
that committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 13 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andresmo chair adoption of the
committee report. We are on
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
13. All those in favor 59.
I suppose,
yeah I saw that committee report
adopted.
lady from
For Leo
Mr. Speaker, I'm now move to go
to the next order of business.
Introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 58,
an act relating to early
childhood, exempting from the
procurement code procurements by
the early childhood education
and care department of childcare
for families eligible for
childcare assistance.
Amending sections of the
pre-kindergarten Act, adding
application requirements and
priorities for early
pre-kindergarten and
pre-kindergarten program
services solicited by their
early childhood education and
care department.
Updating definitions and
references in the early
childhood care Accountability
Act.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 58.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 58
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 401 as amended,
introduced by Senator Padilla,
an act relating to broadband,
amending the severance tax
bonding Act to provide for the
issuance of supplemental
severance tax bonds for
education technology
infrastructure.
Amending the Broadband Access
and expansion Act, adding
definitions, creating the
education technology
infrastructure fund providing
for rulemaking, authorizing
grants, transferring the public
school facilities authorities,
broadband deployment and
connectivity program and
statewide education network to
the Office of Broadband Access
and expansion, making an
appropriation. Senate Bill 401
as amended. 401 as amended have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House of
Oropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 495, introduced by
Senator Campos.
An act relating to state
educational institutions,
including appropriations for
educational radio by the higher
education department. Senate
Bill 495495 haven't been read to
us by title is referred to the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 315 introduced by
Senator Sanchez, an act relating
to state symbols, declaring a
state bread. Senate Bill 315.
Senate bill 315 have been read
to us by title.
I referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee. Better be a
tortilla. I haven't read the
bill.
Is it a tortilla?
It is OK.
Otherwise it gets 5 committee
referrals.
Senate Bill 146, introduced by
Senator Pope, an act relating to
military children, correcting a
reference to a United States
Code provision in the Interstate
Compact on educational
opportunity for military
children. Senate Bill 146. 146
have been read by title is
referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee.
Senate Bill 318 as amended,
introduced by Senator Cervantes,
an act relating to firearms,
including firearms and
destructive devices in the
unfair Practices Act, expanding
private remedies for unfair,
deceptive, and unconscionable
trade practices, making
technical changes. Senate Bill
318 as amended. 318 as amended
have been read twice by title is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 63 introduced by
representatives Lujan.
Ferrari
Brown
And Murphy
A memorial requesting the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department to study
the feasibility of creating a
nuclear energy commission and
other issues related to
continued development of
renewable energy industry in the
state. House Memorial 63.
Memorial 63 haven't been read
twice by title is.
Order printed and referred to
the House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and if we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
Generated from Valencia Socorro
Berlio McKinley, San Juan and
Cibola representative Abeta, are
you ready on item number 42 on
the regular calendar. Thank you,
Speaker. Would you please get me
to that point? for placing in
Senate Bill 41 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 41 establishes the
turquoise alert under the
state's existing missing persons
information and Reporting Act
specifically creating an alert
designed to help and locate
missing Native Americans in New
Mexico. The turquoise alert will
work like that, Amber and silver
alerts going through various
channels including radio
stations, print, and broadcast
media cellular service
companies, state and federal law
enforcement agencies and state
employees.
And that I stand for questions
speaker's a gentleman from
Korea, the Baca Guadalupe
Roosevelt to San Miguel,
representative of Samoa. Mr.
Speaker. Well, the gentle lady
yield.
Yes, Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so me and you had
some conversations earlier in
the session.
About the silver alerts and can
you kind of explain to us why
you would want a different one.
In that part of the state.
Gentle lady.
Thank you Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. Before I proceed, I'd
like to introduce my co-sponsor
or excuse me, Senator Angel
Charlie and my expert joining me
on the floor, cabinet Secretary
Joseph Monet of the Indian
Affairs department. Thank you
for that question, gentlemen.
The reason why we are asking for
a turquoise alert is because on
average there are approximately
200 missing Native Americans
across New Mexico.
Speaker, gentlemen, the highest
rates of missing and murdered
indigenous people are between
the ages of 30 to 49 years old
and speaker gentlemen, that's my
age category. That's my
husband's age category, and
that's most of the indigenous
members um who I work with here
in this legislator's age
category.
Thank you for that answer,
gentle lady and, and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, so how you're
aware that we have a silver
alert.
Already in the state of New
Mexico.
And how will the silver alert
and the turquoise alert work
with each other.
Because I don't think.
That
The silver, the people in, in,
in, in your.
On your lands.
I don't think they'll stay
within the boundaries of your
lands. They, they can go either
outside the those boundaries and
wind up in any other part of the
state. So how will those two
intermingle with one another.
When, when somebody goes
missing, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you Speaker and thank you
gentlemen. The two actually
complement each other in some
cases under the turquoise alert,
you may have an individual who
will also qualify under the
silver Alert status. They may
also qualify under the Amber
Alert status. The intent of this
bill is so that individuals who
qualify for turquoise alert,
which would be members of
federally recognized tribes are
eligible for.
Enrollment with a tribal, excuse
me, federally recognized tribe
would be able to
Report a person missing and the
alert would go out after a few,
um, initial inquiries are made.
So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
did the silver alert not allow
your people to use it or, or
what was the deal there?
Thank you Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. The silver alert is
accessible for Native American
people, however, it's only
accessible for Native American
people if they meet the age
criteria and the other criteria
set out in the silver alert
whereas the current turquoise
alert will be for individuals,
um, eligible under federal
Native American status.
Of all ages.
OK, and gentle lady and, and
sometimes we see a child
abduction.
Uh, alert on our phones and that
would not have covered the, the
silver alert part of the younger
people, uh, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. The Amber Alert
system currently only covers
individuals 18 years and under.
OK, so, so gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so what
I'm understanding from you is
that maybe
We could go back to the
representative that carried the
silver alert and maybe make it
better yet again.
Speaker and gentlemen, would you
please?
clarify that a little bit more
for me to understand. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I'll, I'll try to make it,
make it more clear.
Uh
So
The reason that you brought on
the turquoise alert is because
the silver alert has a gap in
there.
That didn't cover a certain age
group of people. Am I correct,
gentle lady?
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, that is
correct.
OK, and, and.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
instead of creating a whole new
bill, why didn't we tag.
The, the existing bill.
And just cover that cover that
area and then, then we would be
better.
Maybe be better as a whole in
the state of New Mexico to cover
missing people or or.
Or do you feel that that that
problem just exists on the
Indian nation, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies.
Thank you speaker and thank you
gentlemen. I think I'm getting a
better understanding of your
line of questioning and you,
where you're coming from with
that perspective. The reason why
we would not be able to
implement this under the silver
alert is because silver is
specifically designated for a
certain age category, whereas
turquoises you have to have a a
specific criteria which is a
member of a federally recognized
tribe or eligible for that and
there's no age category for that
speaker.
Gentlemen, thank you.
Thank you for that gentle lady,
and I think you just answered my
last question that I was gonna
ask, but I'm gonna ask it anyway
and make sure I'm clear on it.
So somebody.
In eastern New Mexico where I
live in the Clovis area will not
be able to use
The turquoise alert.
Even if I fear that somebody
might be lost.
In, in, uh, native country. Am I
correct in saying that, gentle
lady?
Speaker and gentleman, thank you
for that question. An individual
in your district, your area, who
is eligible under the turquoise
Alert criteria would be eligible
to use this service, uh,
regardless of their geographical
residential area, so long as
they are within the state of New
Mexico.
And, and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I look forward to
supporting.
Your bill
But sometimes.
Not once sometimes, but, but
there's been times here in the
legislature.
Where we create bills.
And it just pertains either to
natives.
Or
And not to people outside the
reservation.
You know, I, I think we ought to
get along in this, in this
chambers and in this capital.
And I think we ought to.
Make it a more level playing
field for all the people of the
state of New Mexico. I think
everybody in New Mexico would
have been appreciative.
If you would have included them
in, in the turquoise alert.
And, and intermingle the
turquoise alert and the silver
alert that we have and get all
people taken care of.
And, and work with each other.
I think it, it'd be a more.
Friendly way to do it.
Uh
I look forward to supporting
your bill. I want to support
your people.
I want to support people across
the state of New Mexico.
But I find it kind of sad.
That were singling out people
outside the, the reservation and
they have to meet a certain
criteria.
To be able to get this help.
Gentle lady, thank you for the
debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is really to be the
gentlemen from Lincoln and Otero
representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernalilloibola
McKinley, San Juan, and Valencia
yield.
Mr. Speaker, yes, I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
Will uh will law enforcement
agencies require additional
funding or personnel for this.
Particular alert.
Speaker and gentleman know they
will not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
When you were bringing this bill
forward, did you talk with
state, local, and federal
agencies and is the turquoise
alert like the civil, civil
silver alert system.
And how will, how will it be?
Applied
Thank you Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen, yes, all agencies
were consulted in the creation
of this bill and furthermore
it'll be the state entities that
will help implement this, uh,
additionally, there are 3 other
states that have a similar
system as the turquoise alert.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. And did you
ask the, the state, local,
And tribal agencies, would there
be any problem with
jurisdictional lines or how do
they respond?
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
gentlemen. they, this bill would
not impact or impede on any type
of tribal sovereignty or any
current existing policies that
tribes have in the location of
missing persons in their
communities.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle ladies. So when you,
when you put this turquoise
alert system together, is it
gonna go through dispatch? Will
it go through the Department of
Homeland Security Dispatch. How
does it work?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. It will go
through the Department of Public
Safety and the way you received
the alert could be in a variety
of ways. It could be through
text messaging. It could be
through radio or it could be
through the signage that you see
on a lot of our major
interstates. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. So will there
be additional training for law
enforcement? How will they know
that, um, I guess it'll come
from the tribal side, and then
they'll know to activate the
turquoise alert system, and if
it comes from the other side,
then it
It
It alerts the silver.
Thank you Speaker and thank you
gentlemen. The state law
enforcement agencies have
endorsed this bill, and they
will be the ones leading this
initiative, um, any state
citizen that is eligible under
this bill who also meets the
criteria for this will be
eligible for a turquoise alert
if needed.
This is not a mandate for tribal
police. This is a complete state
initiative on behalf of the
citizens who also qualify as
indigenous federally recognized
members of a tribe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. And the reason
I ask you these questions is I
will support your bill because I
don't want anyone to be lost and
I want them to be found, but I
just don't want to add confusion
to two different systems and as
long as, you know, they're
aligned and streamlined and we
get access to them, then, um, I
hope it works. Thank you for the
debate.
Seen over the debate generally
close.
Thank you Speaker and thank you
to my brother and brothers and
sisters in this chamber for
considering this important bill.
Communities like mine are all
too familiar with the crisis of
missing and murdered indigenous
people for years now we have
stepped up on our own to help
locate our missing brothers and
sisters through coordinated
coordinated local efforts on
social media establishing this
turquoise alert will allow the
state to help amplify these
community-led efforts to better
ensure the protection and safe
return of our loved ones.
I'm honored to co-sponsor this
with Senator Charlie,
Representative Little, and on
behalf of the citizens of New
Mexico to my body I urge you to
vote in favor of Senate Bill 41,
Mr. Speaker, I now move that
Senate Bill 41 do pass final
passage of Senate Bill 41 is as
amended. The vote is now open.
Well it's about the clothes.
The vote is not closed by order
of 60 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 41 is
twice amended as duly passed his
house.
Jody from Santa Fe of Saansky,
are you ready on item number one
on the supplemental calendar.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point? Wait a minute, is it
number 1 or 2?
Item number 2 on the
supplemental calendar.
That the direct reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Bill 48 as twice amended
on final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Senate Bill 48 establishes the
Community Benefit fund, uh, our
state is facing growing
challenges from extreme weather,
rising costs from increasing
natural disasters and aging
infrastructure, the community
benefit fund is a forward
thinking investment that puts
communities in the driver's
seat, um, this fund will give
communities the resources and
tools that they need to reduce
pollution, create high quality
family support.
ing jobs and modernize
infrastructure for a resilient
future, uh, Mr. Speaker, with
the $210 million in funding, uh,
this initiative prioritizes
locally driven solutions that
address real needs, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and body that will
include energy efficient
housing, strengthening our grid
reliability, investing in
outdoor recreation
infrastructure and more.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and members
Senate Bill 48 empowers our
communities to build a cleaner,
healthier, and more prosperous
future for generations to come.
And with that, I would stand for
debate.
There is a debate that you from
Catherine Cerraro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield.
I yield to the leader from all
those counties. Uh, thank you,
uh, Madam Leader. I, uh, am
curious, does this bill have
anything in it where it, um,
wants to, uh, expand our
electric grid and charging
stations across New Mexico.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, this includes
increases to the electric grid
capacity, resilience of the
grid, reliability of the grid,
all done through grid
modernization, um, and it also
includes uh electric vehicle
infrastructure as well as
bicycle and ped pedestrian
infrastructure.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
Madam Leader, um, and so, um,
it's, it's kind of saying we
don't really have the electric,
uh, charging station
infrastructure across New
Mexico, would you agree with
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
don't have a comprehensive
review of our charging, uh,
infrastructure, but I would say
anecdotally it could definitely
improve.
OK, thank you, um, um, Mr.
Speaker and kind lady, uh, with
that, Mr. Speaker, I have an
amendment.
lady, will you kindly bring it
to the rostrum.
And I would ask Mr. Speaker, for
a roll call vote.
You've got Rocco?
Gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left? Most certainly, Mr.
Speaker. It's 232103.1. Let us
pass this out to the chamber and
we'll post it online and we'll
come back to you too.
The amendment's been passed out
and it is posted online
generated to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, what
this amendment basically does in
section 2,
on, on page 6 between lines 20
and 21. I'd like to insert the
effective date of the provisions
of Section 1 of this Act is
contingent upon the repeal of
the environmental Improvement
Board of rules related to the
production and delivery for sale
of zero admission vehicles, uh,
basically, Mr. Speaker, uh,
there, the EIB had mandated, um.
All car dealerships in the state
of New Mexico to have a certain
percentage of electric vehicles
for sale on their, uh, car lot,
and it's really damaging our
auto dealers, Mr. Speaker, and
so what I'd like to do is repeal
this until we get the
infrastructure in place and it
says that when we do, um, then
we can reinsert this.
gentle lady, is this a friendly
moment.
Um
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, this is not a friendly
amendment, um.
In part because what this
legislation is trying to do is
set out uh a number of funding
opportunities um that go far
beyond.
Um, this.
Uh, simply electric vehicles,
um, and charging infrastructure,
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so, um, if I might ask you a
question about.
Your amendment.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so this would apply to
the entire
Bill
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this would apply to the
bill as far as electric vehicles
are concerned. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think I see that we're
inserting.
On page 6.
A new section 2.
And so the entire legislation
would be contingent on um the
actions of a board that.
We do not have any control over,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
the environmental improvement
board does not, uh, is not part
of the legislature and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, this
is an unfriendly amendment
because, uh, there's much in
this bill that would really
contribute to the communities
around New Mexico, um, that is
far beyond just simply electric
vehicle charging infrastructure
and so I would.
Uh, respectfully oppose the
amendment.
Right, is there a debate on the
amendment, the young lady from
Donana Sierra and
Socorro Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Will the gentle lady yield? Uh,
most certainly.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what did, why did you feel
compelled to bring this
amendment?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
have heard for far too long, uh,
that exactly um what the, the
kind lady that's carrying this
bill, um, talked about that the
EIB is not part of the
legislative body and not part
of um of making decisions in
this body, yet they have put a
rule into place that is
affecting negatively, uh, all of
our new auto dealers in the
state of New Mexico and this
bill is about the infrastructure
and the lack of infrastruc.
structure specifically charging
stations throughout New Mexico
and so I feel that it's
important that we support our
economic development and our the
people that bring jobs to the
state of New Mexico and uh um
that we should if we don't have
the infrastructure, why are we
mandating from a body to a body
to a legislature, to the state,
uh, to implement this. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you,
gentle lady. Um, when you talk
about
about this board, how many
members are on the board?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I
believe there's 7, but I'm not
100% sure. And Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, do you know how
many voted in the affirmative
for this law, this um, uh, the,
the law that you're trying to.
The rule, the rule.
Uh, no, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I don't recall that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I believe
it was some people walk, some
people were absent, and I've
been told that there were 3
people that voted on this. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, what's
the population of New Mexico?
A little over 2 million, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and does it
seem fair that 3 people,
unelected people, uh, would be
making a decision that impacts
over 2 million New Mexico
residents. Uh, no, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, uh, also, uh, the
auto dealers employ 15,000
people in New Mexico. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, on
the, on the auto dealers, um,
uh, does this inhibit, does this
bill this rule, does it prohibit
the purchase of combustible
engines like does it
Can you tag, can you go to
Texas, California, Arizona, or
any other state. Can you buy
Carfax online and have one of
these vehicles delivered in New
Mexico? Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, you can buy out of state
very easily, uh, what the rule
that that commission uh
implemented or was that they
have a certain percentage of
electric vehicles on their lot,
so they may not be able to have
the vehicles, which is mostly
F-150 trucks, uh, combustion
engine, um.
On their car lots, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, but it didn't
prohibit New Mexico from
citizens from continuing to buy
them, it's prohibited our auto
dealers from being able to sell
them at the demand. Uh, they,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, they
just don't have the capacity to
have the amount of electric
vehicles that they are paying,
have to pay for before they
receive them along with the
combustion combustible engine
vehicles that are actually in
demand so it lowered that, um,
that percentage of combustible
vehicles. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle.
units continuing to lower over
time, correct?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it, it raises every, uh, certain
percentage, it goes up.
to have to have more electric
cars available on their car
lots, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, what percentage of
vehicles in New Mexico right now
are electric.
Um, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I
believe it's 3%.
And Mr. Speaker and generally of
those 3%, what percentage are
government vehicles that were
purchased for taxpayer funds.
Actually, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I have a sheet that tells
me there's 63 vehicles, uh, that
have been, um.
Uh, purchased by the state
agencies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, gentle ladies. So
clearly, uh, in a free market
where we have supply and demand,
uh, folks would not generally
choose an electric vehicle. And
Mr. Speaker and Julani, I think
that's probably the case in my
district where the population
density is less than 5 people
per square mile. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what's the
population density in your
district?
Oh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I
don't know that I know I have
the largest house district in
the state and I can't even fit
it all on one map, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, your population
density is less than 2 people
per square mile. And how many
charging stations, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, are in your
district. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I don't believe
there's any right now in my
district.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, one
of the things that I noticed on
the bill that we're voting on
today is that they are
recommending $60 million to be
available for public schools and
the purpose says electric school
buses. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how much of that $60 million do
you think will go back to Catrin
Socorro, Sierra, I've been
forgetting your other counties.
How many, how many do you think
will want those electric
vehicles in their school
districts. Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, I doubt that many of
them would want that.
uh, I also doubt that, um,
What I, I really, what I don't
want to do is prohibit anyone
from buying a vehicle that they
want to buy. I'm all, if they
want to buy an electric vehicle,
there's some beautiful nice
vehicles out there, not real
sensible for rural New Mexico at
this time because of the lack of
the infrastructure, but we, the
EIB is mandating, uh, auto
dealers to carry a certain
percentage on their car lots.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. Um,
again, you know, do we have
these auto dealers in every
community
represented in this body.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
most of them are in urban New
Mexico. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you mean the the I know I
have auto dealers in my town.
Um, so not pretty rural. I mean,
Sierra County is pretty rural,
um, but, OK, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, when I think about
the auto dealers, I think the
people who are the booster club
hosts, I think about the jobs
that they have. I think about
the services they provide, they
pro, I mean, it's really
critical the maintenance and
repairs that they provide in our
community. I think about, you
know, our auto dealer is really
diverse.
ify ing to try to keep up with
this, they've become a motor
vehicle like an alternative for
motor vehicle since COVID, um,
when so many of the government
offices were closed, they
started filling the gap and they
were open as essential
providers, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. They give to our
local communities and um they're
really a part of our economic
drivers in our small
communities, but they've got to
be able to have the cars that
people want to buy, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, I really
appreciate your amendment and
look forward to supporting it.
There is for the debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Lee Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
minority leader, uh, you,
please. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you. I just have one.
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, do you know what the
biggest, one of the biggest
economic drivers in rural.
Uh, New Mexico is. I do not, Mr.
Speaker, enlighten me.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is the auto repair shop in
most small towns. One of the
biggest economic drivers in
small towns, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, there is no money
as we continue to look through
all the different budgets that
we get, all the expansion that
we want for EVs.
Um
There is no money for training
to convert those people.
You know, there, there is some
stuff in there from, from a
labor union standpoint, but how
many, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, how many, how many of your
small towns, um, have organized
labor.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen.
None in my really small
communities.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is one of the many problems
that we have with some of the EV
mandates, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I was, uh, to my knowledge
the only.
Legislature out of 112
legislators out of 112 that
spoke up and, and testified
during the EIB hearings on this
and um
This coupled with several other
pieces, parts of Senate Bill 48,
um, this is a good amendment.
This is something that would
help us and uh and ensure that
our auto dealers stayed in
business as well, but.
Without this repair and several
other repairs to Cinate Bill 48.
It's a
It's an electric bus bus crash.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. I know
that our, uh, caucus as a whole
wrote a letter opposing, uh, the
EIB decision and encourage them
not to so.
It was for the debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from
Eddie and Lee, Senator Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from District 49,
Katherine Sierra Socorro and
Valencia, please yield. I kindly
yield to my friend from Eddie
and Lee.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um,
I take it you have visited with
auto dealers about the issues
here regarding production and
delivery, um, for sale of zero
emission vehicles. Would that be
accurate? Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, I've sat on a panel
for the last 2 years, um, at
their conference and, um, Mr.
Speaker, they spoke, uh, and
kind lady, they spoke loud and
clear against this EIB mandate.
Thank you for that answer, um,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, I too
have been, I've not been on a
panel but I've been to meetings
with auto dealers and.
They very clearly they are
deeply concerned about this
situation and um gentle lady,
could you explain a little bit
more about how the auto dealers
are in a predicament.
Regarding these rules, uh,
certainly, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so the biggest, uh,
problem is they mandate a
certain percentage of their
stock be, uh, electric vehicles,
uh, and Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
what happens is they have to pay
for those vehicles, uh, before
they get them and so it is
about, um, you know, paying the
interest, paying everything
about them before they even have
them sold. The, the market is
not.
Uh, conducive to the sale of
electric vehicles, there's
plenty out there. Um, there's a
lot for sale, but what happens
is the, the, um, the, the stock
on the, on the, uh, auto
dealers, uh, lots are majority.
Uh, you know, take the EVs are
taking up a lot of space and so
they can't, they don't have room
for the ones that they actually
sell. So what's happening is a
lot of people are going out of
state to purchase or Carvana or
other, other entities that they
can buy from other than the
local and so it's creating a
deficit for our local dealers.
Thank you and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, have you been
hearing from auto dealers that
the time from the time uh
vehicle gets to their lot at the
time it sells, leaves a lot.
That the EVs are taking a whole
lot longer.
To clear if they do clear the
law. Is that accurate, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, that's
accurate.
So, Mr. Speaker, generally, I, I
like your amendment because
It's realistic, I think about um
the lack of um being able to
comply with these rules in the
time that's stated, uh, Mr.
Speaker General lady, I've heard
words like unrealistic and
unattainable.
And it really is harmful to the
dealers, um, they're trying to
sell electric vehicles, I
understand as much as, uh, they
would, uh, um, combustion engine
vehicle, but the consumers.
By and large, are not interested
in the electric vehicles and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe, um, not too long ago,
maybe a couple years ago, the
percentage of electric vehicles
in New Mexico was somewhere
under 1% and it's climbing a
little bit, but it's no higher
right now, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, than 4%. So obviously
the consumers are not convinced
that this is um the way to go
for them.
And, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I've mentioned before in
transportation committee that I
kind of like electric vehicles.
I, I don't like the fact that I
can't hear an engine.
Uh, I like to hear the purr of
the motor.
Uh, but, um, they're unrealistic
for me. I live in southeastern
New Mexico and when I come up
here to the state capitol, um, I
use my little Subaru because I
know it's gonna get me there,
but if I had an electric
vehicle, I could get from
Carlsbad to Laney is all and
then I'd have to walk the rest
of the way, so we need to trust
consumers, Mr. Speaker, to know
what kind of vehicle serves them
and their family and the needs
that they have.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
The charging infrastructure, uh,
could you just give us, if you
know.
How expensive it is to put in
these charging stations, and I
know there are various types,
Mr. Speaker. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, there are
various types, uh, a few years
ago I looked into putting one at
my gas station in Magdalena just
as a convenience for people
coming through, trying to
attract, you know, um, uh,
tourists or, or whatever
welcoming everyone to our town,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and it
was going to be around 50,000,
uh, to put it in and then, you
know, COVID happened.
and we decided we were gonna do
this big infrastructure across
the state of New Mexico, so I
decided not to invest the 50
thinking that possibly, uh, a
charging station would come to a
town near me. The closest one,
Mr. Speaker to the lady, we do
have a few in Socorro, uh, but
on Highway 60 all the way to
Arizona, uh, there is no
charging stations. And so I
don't know the exact cost. I
know they're different. If it's
a fast charge, uh, but I've,
I've kind of dropped, uh,
thinking about putting.
one in Magdalena personally.
So, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, if, um,
And I, I too, and I'll just say
I've seen a few charging
stations, um.
Now in my community, but not
very many, um, it's still not,
and I see a few electric
vehicles, but not, um, not in
the kinds of numbers that would
justify, I think, uh, this, this
rule and and basically and I'll
just close with this, uh, gentle
lady and Mr. Speaker, I'm not in
favor of forcing people to do
things, um, it just creates
resentment.
And um we you know we hear often
that this legislature is out of
touch.
With um
With a lot of the people in our
state and so I, I really do
appreciate your amendment. I
think it's realistic and I'll
just point out that we don't
often see contingent effective
dates, but they're legitimate
they're valid occasionally they
show up in our legislation. I
think this was very beautifully
mapped out and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I will support your
amendment
on the amendment from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
we'll, uh, the leader, um,
Relinquish your time for a
minute? I most certainly will,
Mr. uh, gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I was just
wondering, you know, as I walk
around the, uh, as I drive
around the parking garage,
there's a lot of people that are
plugged in down there and I was
wondering if Mr. Speaker, if you
could get us all our own plug-in
down there first off.
Um
an objection, it is ordered. All
right. Yes. Um,
so Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, in talking with car dealers
from Farmington area, San Juan
County, um, the number one thing
they use their electric vehicles
for because they can't sell
them. The on time is 7 months,
um, so the number one I think
number one thing they use those
for is for transporting people
back and forth as a cars come in
to get work done and they
transport them with these
electric fuels. That's it. They
can't.
sell them to save their souls
and so while I think that
there's a a place for these it's
not a place all over New Mexico.
I cannot see my friend from San
Juan County hooking on to a, um,
you know, uh, a trailer full of
cows and taking them anywhere.
Um, and I can't see myself doing
that either for that matter and
so there's a place for them and
there's places that they
shouldn't be and we shouldn't
force people to put vehicles.
On lots, number one, where they
can't sell them, and #2 where
they can't use them. So for
that, I'll gladly support your
amendment. Thank you.
And a lady from Berlin.
Mr. Speaker, I move the table
House floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended. We are on a motion to
table House floor amendment
number 1 to Senate Bill 48 is
twice amended, a vote of yes,
the amendment is tabled. They
would have known we're back in
the amendment.
32nd book clock.
The vote is now open.
Road it's about to close.
No running in the chamber.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 32 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 48 is amended has been
tabled.
lady back to you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, thank you for
allowing me to take the time. I
just think, uh, imposing
government mandates, uh, instead
of allowing the market to
determine what vehicles are best
suited for New Mexicans is
limiting choices and increasing
the cost to New Mexicans and um
it's really unfortunate that
we're killing business in New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on the
bill. The young lady from Donana
and Otero, Representatives.
Thank you, Mr.
Does the general lady yield?
I yield to the gentle lady from
Donana and Otero. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I really
appreciated hearing this bill
yesterday in appropriations, um,
I, um.
Got to read it and I really, and
I had some questions because
one, there was more money in the
budget for the spill, and can
you tell me the trajectory of
how you all ended at 210
million, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, there was a, uh,
originally, um, 340 million in
in the uh bill.
Uh, are allocated to the funds
in this bill, um, and there was
uh a bit of a reduction coming
out of the house and a bit of a
reduction in the appropriations
process in the Senate as well
and so now we are at 210 million
that is included in House Bill
2, for the community benefit
fund.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, and I know this, um,
this proposal and this piece of
legislation isn't supposed to
stop.
Climate change or all climate
catastrophes in New Mexico since
we're an interconnected
environment and, um, can you
talk about the how this bill
helps communities bounce back
from climate catastrophes, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, we've had for example, a
number of extremely uh
catastrophic fires in our state,
um, and one of the purposes
outlined in this legislation is
really it it really gets at uh
how we recover from that, um, it
also gets it how do, how we
prevent future disasters like
that. So for a community that's
already experienced a
catastrophic fire, um, they are
at high risk.
of another fire or floods, um,
and mudslides that may ensue
after that terrible event and
so, uh, some of the things in
terms of increasing grid
resilience, um, so that the grid
can withstand things like high
wind events like we had earlier
this week, um, and, uh, and
resilience and reliability, um,
so that we are ensuring that
when there is a, a natural
disaster that actually
Uh, the grid doesn't go down or
that we have some resilient uh
capacity. One of the pieces that
is alongside the community
benefit fund is, uh, increasing
the ability for local
governments to have solar
installed on on some of their
buildings along with storage so
that if the grid does go down,
there is a community center or
an emergency center in their
community that can be resilient
in those times of emergency or
serve as that emergency.
heating or cooling center, um,
and Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I can't stress the workforce
training enough because I think
when uh we do have uh some of
these catastrophic events, um,
you know, the economics of those
uh communities may change, you
know, there may be local
businesses that take a long time
to recover and some of those
employees may need to have
additional workforce.
training to pursue a different
career, um, depending on whether
that business is able to recover
to the level that they uh had
been previous to the disaster,
and so I think this gives
communities a lot of tools and
the final point I would just
make is that because there is a
community planning process
outlined in the bill,
communities are really in the
driver's seat, so this is not,
um, you know, the state deciding
what is best for the community.
This is the community deciding
what is best.
for the community.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I appreciate that run down
and what I'm hearing you say is
that part of helping communities
become resilient in the face of
changing, uh, ever changing and,
uh, ever increasing dangerous
climate is to help communities
become more agile. Agile in
their, uh, access to jobs and
workforce training so that they
can pivot, uh, agile to adjust
their home and housing needs or
their transportation.
needs and that they're helping
make those decisions on the
front end. I wanted to talk
about that agility, uh, a little
bit more because um, I asked
this in appropriations last
night, but I'm wondering, um,
If there was an estimate for
financial losses that New Mexico
has taken as a result of fire,
floods, high wind, and other
climate crisis emergencies.
What, what is the ballpark
financial estimate there, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Yes,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
do have some information on
that, so, um, in 2024/141
million dollars were uh uh
provided by the state for
emergency funding.
to address fires and floods, um,
and that went to counties and
tribes and agencies to address
the fires and floods just in the
year 2024, um, and then of
course we have the aftermath of
the Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon
Disastrous fires, um.
We have the FEMA has paid over
5500 claims totaling $99 million
and of course we still have many
families waiting to be whole
after uh those catastrophes and
so that's just for the fires and
the floods that occurred, flash
floods and mudslides that
occurred after those fires, um,
and then we also.
No, uh, some of the impact on
agriculture and ranching, um,
due to the impact of severe
weather.
So that would include water
shortages, uh, increased
salinity concentration.
Weakened crop resilience
because, uh, which may result in
greater impacts from pests and
diseases, uh, and then livestock
impacts because of extreme heat,
so, uh, reduce weight gain,
reproduction, milk production,
um, and the, the estimated
impact just of the severe
weather events is 73 million um
just on agriculture and
ranching, and then Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I don't have a
great estimate on the health
care impacts of climate.
Uh, an extreme weather, uh,
however, high heat, extreme
cold, extreme humidity, um,
exacerbated air pollution all
have impacts on asthma, uh, and,
uh, individuals who are hit hard
by the heat.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so you're saying
that there are about a billion
dollars of financial losses in
about a 12 month period for New
Mexico alone, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes.
OK, so a billion dollars and um
as someone who sits on
appropriations. I'm looking at
that and saying, well, we might
as well just appropriate a
billion dollars every year.
Into the budget knowing that
this is gonna be an expense to
our communities all across the
state, um, and I don't know
where we would find an
additional billion dollars, even
if that's the baseline, um, for
addressing the impacts of fire,
floods, high winds, and other
climate, uh, emergencies in the
state, um, what, what are your
thoughts about that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
can't imagine, uh, uh, I cannot.
Imagine the impact of having to
uh come up with as a state an
additional billion or $2 billion
if we needed to to recover from
more extreme events, um, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I defer to
you as well because you are on
the appropriations and Finance
Committee, um, but I, I think,
you know, preparation is the key
here and allowing communities to
really discern what their needs
are, understand their
vulnerabilities, um.
Jump on exciting projects with
the partners in their community
is driving, uh, will drive our
preparedness for some of these
events in the future.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, and just as you were
talking, I also think about that
this bill helps people be
proactive in their communities
so that they can plan ahead, um,
just this morning in committee
we were listening to a bill that
was actually creating more
bonding capacity for a community
because they're still fighting
the repairs that they had from
floods, um, and so that's a more
reactive approach and what I'm.
hearing in this bill, um, is, I
think, a good initiation of
helping communities become
proactive, uh, because not only
are we seeing uh damages upwards
of a billion dollars of losses,
um, our additional our
communities are looking for
additional funds and that's not
even accounted for in your
estimates. And so I'm wondering,
are there other financial
impacts that our community see
as a result of of this climate
crisis mis uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think there, there are also, um,
you know, we have closures, so
we've had closures, for example,
the San Juan Generating Station,
um, created a huge economic
impact in, uh, San Juan County
and the surrounding counties,
um, and really, uh, doubling
down on the workforce training
components and ensuring that
those are community driven is
critical, um, you know, there
are also you mentioned uh some
of the flooding.
there are also measures in this
legislation that really look at
the natural environment,
agricultural production land,
natural resources, and I can
think of, you know, when the
first floods hit up north, um,
the Ezakas were incredibly
impacted and I would love to
see, for example, in in northern
New Mexico some of this funding
going to the RSAA so that they
can plan and sort of harden that
infrastructure as much as they
possibly can to with.
some of that, um, and I think
we've all learned a lot about
that process and, and how we
could potentially address it
better, um, so that's another
piece, um, and you know, uh.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
just last month we had a uh
major producer in the state
announced that it's gonna reduce
up to 20% of its workforce, um,
and so these are all
opportunities for workforce
training for, for developing new
skills for ensuring that our
communities are taking advantage
of some of the incredible higher
education institutions and
workforce development programs
that we have so that they're
landing on their feet, um, and
really getting.
ahead of it and I, I feel um
we've gone through a couple of
dress rehearsals now and putting
that learning into practice with
this major investment is going
to pay off for our communities.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I also want to
add to that that I think that
there are other impacts that we
might see that, um, that I think
we are seeing this week that we
can't quite estimate just yet
but um knowing that earlier this
week, we had very high winds,
um, very low visibility, um,
dust storms that New Mexico has
never seen before, um, and, and
we are a windy state. That's why
we generate lots of wind.
power, but there is nothing like
the dust storms that we've seen,
um, this season, and it shut
down both I-25 and I-10.
And what that does is it also
stops commerce from coming
through the state, um, people,
uh, I hope not that the
financial impact might be like
we need to avoid New Mexico in
the spring and all this commerce
goes around the state, um,
because of turned over trucks,
uh, and lost, um, and, and lost,
uh, commerce that's going
through. So I know there was an
argument earlier today about not
having enough cars on the lot
we're not gonna have any cars on
the lot.
because they can't get delivered
here because of high winds. And
so, um, I really think that this
is really smart policymaking,
um, it gets ahead of, um, the,
some of the issues that we're
seeing, it's proactive and
clearly it's not going to solve
all of our climate emergency
because as we said this is a
global issue, but we're helping
New Mexicans get prepared now,
um, from replacing their windows
that helps lower respiratory
illnesses.
which therefore lowers asthma,
which therefore lowers doctor
costs and copays for families
who have asthmatic kids, um, or
other respiratory or chronic
illnesses that matters. It may
not feel like a lot, um, in, um,
in the grand scheme of things,
but to that family who has an
asthmatic child that matters,
um, and it matters to the person
who uh might be rebuilding after
a fire or a flood that they have
support that they need.
Um, to be agile and to adjust
and so that's why I um really am
supportive of this bill and um
and I'm excited that you and um
Protem brought this forward to
the body. I would encourage the
body to vote for this, uh,
wholeheartedly so thank you
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
there is for the debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield? I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I'm gonna kinda
just kinda
Regurgitate some of the things I
said last night, if you don't
mind, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, um,
You know, I don't know what
caused the Dust Bowl, um, but it
certainly wasn't man-made.
And so while I um while I say
this, um,
With a little bit of uh
Hesitation, uh, I don't think
we're in charge.
And, uh, so I'll state that
first off and second off, I
don't believe in a lot of this
man-made um talked about what
we're causing to the earth, so
that being said, I'd like to
talk uh just briefly just tell
you a couple things from a
dealer in New Mexico that we've
had the opportunity to to visit
with.
Um
26% of the, if this bill goes
into effect, 26% of the vehicles
that they'll be getting are EV
vehicles. Currently they have 1%
of all sales are EVs.
He states my stores, he has 3
stores, and he said that we
would uh shrink by 50% and we'd
cut 60% of our employees.
They currently take in $600,000
a month in GRT for the state
vehicle sales tax, um, and that
would crater as well and uh so I
uh I just think that as we, as
we talk about what we're going
to do to, to the business
community within our state as we
talk about what we're going to
do to the citizens of this
state. I, I really, really
believe that this is a mandate
that should have been put out to
the people in, in the state of
New Mexico because.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I don't believe for one
minute that the people within
the state of New Mexico would
ever vote to only drive an EV
vehicle, um, you know what what
some of the things I talked
about last night were how are we
gonna
What goes through, what goals do
we have and how are we gonna
measure those goals when we get
to that point and nobody can
answer those questions and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
Have you been able to come up
with any of the goals and what
we anticipate from implementing
this bill.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen
and um we do have information on
some of the goals as well as I
just wanna make it clear, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, this
legislation does not mandate the
use of any electric vehicles or
mandate that that anyone adopt
the use of electric vehicles. It
simply makes funding available
so that if a community was
interested in building up their
local electric charging
infrastructure, for example, or
if a public entity want.
to purchase an electric vehicle,
they could make a proposal to
receive funding, but there's,
there's definitely nothing
mandatory and, and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, on, uh, your
question of goals, uh, we did a
little research because we
appreciated your questions last
night so we have a compilation
of all of the different funds in
this bill. So, um, the way that
this bill is structured is it's
not creating all of these new
funds, it's actually
utilizing funds that already
existed in law, um, but they
weren't listed in the
legislation. They're listed
already in state law, so we
pulled that, um, so for um uh
for example, for the uh energy,
minerals and natural resources
department grid modernization
grant fund, um, the goal is to
assist in the electrification of
rural areas, um, and, uh, they
have to in terms.
of the reporting um report the
miles of infrastructure that is
created as a result of the grid
modernization.
Uh, fund as well as uh what is
possible is one of one of the
goals of the grid modernization
fund is to allow for the
electricrification of well pads,
um, for oil and gas operations
and so that it would be another
uh.
item that they could report on.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, I don't
wanna go.
Uh, too long, so I just wanted
to, would you like me to
continue on some of the other
goals on, on the programs. Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I
think, um, what I had asked last
night, and I think you're doing
a great job of telling me where
you're gonna spend the money.
But what are the goals when we
talked about uh Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, when we talked
about, OK, we're gonna do this,
but what are we trying to
achieve? Are you gonna be able
to tell me at 2 years from now
that this, this took the, the
temperature from whatever it is
right now, down a 0.25%, um,
were we able to, to get uh
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
when we talked about, OK, we're
gonna do this, but what are we
trying to achieve? Are you gonna
be able to tell me at 2 years
from now that this, this took
the, the temperature from
whatever it is right now, down a
0.25%, um, were we able to, to
get better, um, energy efficient
in 4000 homes, that's what I'm
wondering about it at the end of
the day we're gonna spend a
whole lot of money on.
and at the end of the day I'm
not sure that we're gonna move
the needle one bit.
So with that in mind, I've got a
friendly amendment, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
And it's very friendly.
And I would like a roll call,
please have a roll call. We will
get that amendment passed out.
Can you tell me the 23 number at
the bottom, please.
Uh, Madam Speaker, that number
is 232-090.1.
OK, that matches the 22 number
23 number I have here and we
will get that passed out.
Stand by.
OK, it looks like that has been
passed out, gentlemen, to
explain the amendment.
Thank you Madam Speaker, all
this does is when an
appropriation is going to be
made, uh, that, um, that we
would, uh, when an appropriation
to fund a project um is
described in Section A of this,
uh, subsection A of this
section, so require the
department of finance and
administration to contract with
an independent research
organization and conduct a study
to find out if the proposed
project uh will impact the pro
project on greenhouse gas
emissions and climate change and
so
that a project that will not
significantly reduce greenhouse
gas emissions or climate change
shall not be funded.
Very simple.
Gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment Mr. Speaker, uh.
Madam Speaker, excuse me, uh,
and gentlemen, um, I know the
sponsor is very friendly,
however, I'd love to ask some
some questions about this
amendment, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, what, uh, what do you
mean, uh, how, how would you
describe significantly.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, the temperatures I
understand that since 1880 has
risen 1.7.
Um, degrees Fahrenheit, so if we
could take it down even 1.6.
I would think that'd be great.
So, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
so to to lower the temperature
by 1.6 degrees, is that, is that
what you said? I'm sorry, I was
searching for something too.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
no, uh, I said if they could, if
they could bring it down from
1.7 to 1.6, which is 0.1, or
raise it.
You know, you look at studies
and some studies say were too
cold. Some studies say were too
hot. So just a little bit. I
mean, I'm talking about moving
the needle that much.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, um, so I'll give you an
example of a
Uh
Project
That is contemplated in this.
Proposal in in and this is why I
really worry there are a couple
reasons why this amendment, um,
It is concerning to me, so
first, um, the New Mexico
Environment Department already
conducts a comprehensive, uh,
admissions inventory and
evaluates by sector, um, all of
the different contributions to
greenhouse gas emissions and um
thereby the impact on climate
change, so I think this
additional contract with the
research organization is
unnecessary, but I wanna give
you.
an example of one of the
projects that came forward
through the process, uh, in
working with the community, um,
and, uh, we have a number of
them, but uh
Uh, there is, uh, for example,
The um
Lovington, New Mexico.
The housing authority has uh
applied for funding to build 50
to 60 new rental housing units
to replace the existing units
with units that are more energy
efficient, um, and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um.
The city of Jal is interested in
uh uh increasing affordable
housing in the city, um, that is
energy efficient and built with
up to date standards, um.
Those are some of the, there are
some larger scale projects, uh,
that have come forward as a
result of this process, for
example, Peregrine Energy has an
energy storage project that will
span 30 acres in Eddy County,
um, but there are some very
small scale projects that are
contemplated in this grant
program, um, because this is a
community driven grant program,
so Mr. uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I would, uh, this
amendment.
is unfriendly, um, because I
think it, it will be difficult
um to prove an impact on the uh
greenhouse gas emissions or the
reduction in temperature, um,
that you are seeking was
something that is small scale,
however, because of the data and
the science behind it we know
that it's, it's working with the
entire state's program to uh
reduce our impact on the
climate, so with that I would
respectfully say this is an
unfriendly amendment.
OK, there is debate on the
amendment, gentle lady friend
Donana Nortero, Representative
Silva.
Thank you Madam Speaker, um,
does the gentleman yield?
Madam Speaker, gladly.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. I just have one
question, um, so you are
requiring the DFA research
climate change and its impacts,
correct, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam, Madam Speaker, and gentle
only if uh they're contemplating
a project.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen this amendment also
presumes that climate change
does exist and is a thing we
need to address. Is that
correct, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
that's 2 questions.
Yeah
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
understood.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, yes, in this case, if there
was a project, then I would
assume that uh some of the
projects that the sponsor uh
brought up, um, they're being
talked about and, and so
whether, whether the community
thinks it's a um a project that
is worthy of climate change,
dollars, or if they're just
needing houses, I don't know the
answer to that.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, well, um, I can't
support this amendment. I do
appreciate you bringing forth an
amendment that does address
climate change and has the state
studying it. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
There's oh
OK.
Gentle lady from Bernalio.
Madam Speaker, I moved to table
House floor Amendment number 2,
the Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended.
We have a motion to table the
amendment voted yes, and the
amendment will be tabled, a vote
of no, and we are back on the
amendment, the
is now.
Open.
The vote is about to close.
By a vote of 34 in the negative
and 34 in the positive, 25 in
the negative, the amendment has
been tabled.
Gentleman from San Juan, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uh,
this goes to the point of what I
was trying to accomplish, and
that is when we take science
into this.
You can't answer the questions
and that's my point if we are
going to do this, let's do an
independent study and let's
figure out if we're moving the
needle just a little bit if
we're moving in a lot and if
we're moving it a lot, then we
can all be grateful that we're
putting $201 million to this,
but if we're not, then let's
don't do it next year or the
year after. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. We're
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield yield to my friend from
Santa Fe. Thank you, um, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, thank you.
I just want to start off by
saying thank you and, and to our
sponsors and to.
To our senator for bringing this
legislation forward.
And I, I will say that science
is at the forefront of this
bill.
Science is at the forefront of
climate change and that's
understanding that.
And that's taking this issue to
the seriousness that
It, what it is costing our state
specifically because that's what
this bill addresses as our
state. Is that correct, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes, madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that is a a huge motivation for
this because um we have seen all
too recently in the last 12
months as we discussed
previously how catastrophic and
how expensive the cleanup is,
not to mention the lives that
were hurt, the properties that
were destroyed, um, and the
challenges in recovering from
some of those catastrophes.
And Speaker General Leader, why
are we
Scientifically speaking, having
more frequent catastrophic
events, Madam Speaker, General
Lady.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, you know, the, the
temperature of the earth has
been rising.
And and that's just the basic
fact which is resulting in, uh,
changes in weather patterns and
other um implications for the
planet, um, that you know are
are causing uh a lot of concern
and worry and um General Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, um, I
know for the next generation in
particular, uh, I know my kids
are extremely concerned uh about
this uh in ways that.
marriage, I, I don't know that I
was really thinking about, but
they are thinking about it.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for saying that. And
I'd just like to say I've been
thinking about this since I was
a kid. I was a young activist
and advocates and understood
that in 19 the 1920s when we,
and I studied the dust bowl and
understood the environmental
studies at UNM when I was a
freshman, a student there in the
early 90s that this was this was
the issue this was really
happening. This was, and what
were we doing then as a state as
a as a.
The nation
To address this, and the fact of
the matter was not enough, if
not anything really, but at the
time of that study and
understanding what that meant
and why um our, our agricultural
and farming practices have
improved and have changed was
due to that dust bowl in the
1930s. That was really
exasperated by the uh depression
in the economy at the time. So
we're not here to point fingers
or blame, because
We were in a desperate time and
the economy showed for that, but
it also um allowed us to study
and understand why that event,
that catastrophic event happened
and it was due to those those
poor practices. It was due to
the native, uh, vegetation and,
and grasslands being devastated
by those practices, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, that was
one of, that was just one of the
things that I, um, studied and
understood uh through the
science and ecological studies
that I, I, I.
took at UNM.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
would say.
At this time in this this where
we are right now.
This bill provides an
opportunity for our state to
take leadership once again in
addressing climate change,
because it this bill provides
the steps, the planning, the,
the pro the practices uh that we
have learned from, uh,
scientific, um, experiments, if
you will, in knowledge and
ecological studies, uh, that
have been developed since the
1930s of why we need to take uh
this into
Into practice.
If we don't, Madam Speaker,
generally, what are, what's,
what's the cost going to be for
us, Madam Speaker, gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, if
we don't act now and if we don't
act at the lead of our
communities, um, we are gonna
have communities that are, you
know, left behind that are
unprepared for uh some of what
is coming, but we're also, we
have to take these opportunities
to institute some of these
programs so that we can actually
do our part to reduce um the
burden and to reverse, um, if we
can some of some
some of the changes that have
been occurring, um, and, and
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
take our role as a state very
seriously in that, um, and with
communities at the forefront
designing uh what those programs
should be and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I know you do too.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I would say that this,
this is um very sound. This is
very practical because this in
the planning um assessment of,
of what I've read in the amount
of money that we are going to be
funding really doesn't, um.
Really isn't enough by my
measure, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, but it's, it's the least
we can do in a huge way for our
state, if you will, um, and I'm
really excited, as you can tell
for this pill, I think that this
is, this is, um, so responsible
because it gives us the risk
assessments. It builds the
capacity for our communities to
withstand not if.
A catastrophe is going to happen
or or one of these um
Yeah, one of these, uh.
fires or floods or any of those
things to happen. It's, it's
when they happen.
Because that's because we
haven't acted fast enough as a,
as a country as a globally that
it's not if it's when and it and
it's going to happen and we need
to realize that and this is why
this is so important for us to
focus, um,
Our attention on uh Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and I get
a little choked up because I'm,
it's like
That's why I'm here, Madam
Speaker, generally. That's why
I'm a legislator. It's, it's to
pass legislation like this
because this is what I've been
advocating for. This is what
I've been preparing myself for
to, to really say this is this
is time for this to get done. So
with that, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you to you and to our.
Our senator from the bottom of
my heart and from all for our
future generations, I want to
say thank you for this. Thank
you.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from Otero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker, with the kind gentle
lady from Santa Fe, please
yield.
Otero.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
generally, so I guess the way
I'm gonna approach this bill is
it's short enough to just go
through the entire bill page by
page, and I'm gonna start on
page one or maybe I'll start on
page 2. I'll, I'll give us a
break. Let's start on page two.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I am on the amendments in
context version. Do you have
that version in front of you?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I have
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I have
the original.
Legislation.
OK I'll do my best to keep up
with you. OK, I'll try to go by
section then. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, we're talking about
this fund created in the state
treasury. It begins on page.
One, and to page 2, it talks
about it not being reverting.
Why did we choose to have a
non-reverting fund.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, that is because we wanted to
have a defined set of resources
that were available to these
programs, uh, knowing that, uh,
one of the things in working
with local communities is that
it can take time to uh get uh
proposals together and get
applications in and so, um,
Madam Speaker and gentleman
without a certainty around the
amount of funding, uh, it's very
difficult to do that.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then can you
tell me how much the fund is
currently being
Funded in the bill from the
budget. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, 210 million.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and then how many new
full-time employees are we
expecting to be employed with
this 20,010 million.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
we are not expecting to increase
the number of employees at any
of these agencies.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so then when it comes to what
we're spending this money on,
can you, can you just walk me
through what the major big
ticket items are that we would
be spending this 2010 on.
210 million.
Yes, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, there are 8 items.
Uh, the first.
And the largest is to increase
grid capacity, resilience, and
reliability through the grid
modernization fund.
The second is electric school
buses through the public schools
facilities Authority.
The third is increasing
renewable energy through uh
energy efficiency and renewable
technology.
The 4th is workforce development
at Workforce Solutions
department.
Energy efficiency uh through the
community energy efficiency
Development Block grant.
Workforce training at higher ed.
Residential and commercial low
interest loans through the
climate investment Center.
And economic development
initiatives, uh, for, uh,
economic development department.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, so something caught my
attention, and it was the EV
school buses. Can you tell me
how many school buses we would
be buying with $60 million. How
much is a bus? How much per bus
would it cost?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so what this fund is designed to
do is bridge the gap between the
cost of uh uh.
School bus that a school
district is interested in
replacing in the electric
vehicle cost. So, um, the public
schools received funding, uh, to
replace school buses on a
regular basis, and so this
program would allow for them to
pay the difference if they were
if they were interested in
having an electric school bus,
um, there's certainly nothing
mandatory about this program. It
would be up to the district, um,
and up to the.
The infrastructure of that
school bus department.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady that helps me with
that, but I'm still kind of
trying to figure out, so what,
what is the gap that we're
bridging? How much of a gap is
it between a regular diesel
school bus and a an EV school
bus because I'm just, I, I wanna
know from my community how much
that gap may be.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, we're
looking up that uh typical price
and, and I will provide it to
you once we get it. I, I know we
have it in one of these
analysis, but there's a lot of
paper. OK, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. So I may
have missed it. It might be
actually in the analysis that
I've looked at, it's on Senate
Bill 48. OK, so let me see.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I will just continue on my
questions while we're looking
for that. I didn't see a
department of uh a PED bill or
PED analysis, at least on the
website, so I'm sorry if I I'm
asking a question that may be.
Kind of
Not really defined, but yeah,
whenever you get a chance, we
can talk about that. So, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
gonna continue on the bill, so.
We talked about 10 million, I'm
sorry, 2.
$10 million for these things,
increasing grid capacity,
resilience and reliability when
that comes to.
Rural communities, how are we
going to target specifically to
rural communities, the increase
in the grid capacity on this
bill.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
so the grid modernization grant
fund is at the Energy Minerals
and Natural Resources Department
and um this is about
electrifying rural areas,
particularly those that do not
have access to uh electricity
now so there are certainly um
many areas on the western side
of the state, uh, that would
fall into that. We I heard um
some comments from one of our
colleagues about that, uh, as
well as.
Colonias, other areas that have
had difficulty in that electric
infrastructure, um, and but
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
this would also include um
potential projects for
electrification of well pads,
um, because that is uh a need in
the state as well. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
that does, that does help me on
that. And so regarding the bill
itself, I'm just kind of under
trying to understand how we're
going to
Accommodate these smaller
communities, so
On page 2.
I'm gonna skip past my first
question on page 2, but
The way I read it.
It says
Maybe a quarter down the page on
A.
A construction or a renovation
of a public building, the, the
reduction shall be accomplished
by practices that exceed all
requirements of the most current
international energy
conservation code. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, first I'm
gonna ask, why did we put the
word exceed. Why must it exceed
that? Can it just meet that?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
the.
The requirement to exceed is
because this is grant funding,
um, and so we're, we're
providing this funding for
projects that are interested in
going above and beyond, um, and
those standard the conservation
code that's referenced here is
available on the regulation and
licensing department's website,
um, and Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, we have an answer on
the school bus question, which
is that it uh is about $70,000.
additional
For uh an electric school bus
versus.
Um, a, uh, uh, gas operated
school bus.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I had someone
else do it independently
themselves, and it, I think the
way I read it from my colleague
here, it says 90 to 160,000 for
a diesel school bus and on this
one it said electric would be
$3000 to 400,000, so that's
probably about a $240,000.
Difference according to the
higher end numbers. So are you
referencing
A natural gas school bus or a
diesel school bus on your
figures.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
this is actually
Um, I'm looking at a chart that
compares the costs of school
buses over 15 years, which
indicates that schools could
save.
$55,000 per electric school bus
and um it is uh the capital
expense.
Um, is comparing diesel versus
electric there's also um,
Some considerable savings in the
fuel cost, the.
Maintenance costs.
Battery
Um, excuse me, and there's an
increased cost on battery
replacement.
And then you have savings from
the.
Grid services, so that's, that's
the rundown of where these
numbers are coming from.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, so instead of just
the cost, the price of the bus
itself, we're also factoring in
things like the diesel, what it
would cost to pay for that and
then maintenance and batteries.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just wondering what does it
say what the difference is
between the diesel battery
versus the electric vehicle
battery.
Yeah, yes, Madam Speaker, and
gentlemen, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, the electric.
School bus battery is about
$30,000.
The diesel battery is listed
here.
0 and the maintenance of the
electric school buses 25.
$1000 and $700.
Uh, and the maintenance of the
diesel school bus is about
100,000, so that's a difference
of about 75,000.
Um
Mr. Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I hate to, to
harp on the school bus, but so
I'm wondering what the range is
of a.
School bus that is electric
versus a diesel, because I know
in some rural areas, you know,
we want to target, we don't want
to just target specifically
urban areas. We want all kinds
of areas to be able to access
this if they want to, so the
ranges can really be a really
long time. I know some kids are
on the bus for hours. So can you
tell me, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, what it might be for the
range of an electric school bus
and how would that fare versus a
diesel because I just want to
make sure that it's not breaking
down on some county.
road and I'm sure that's a
concern of many people in the
body.
Yes, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, so it's interesting. I'm not
sure that we have the figures on
the range because I think it
varies by model, um, but it is
interesting because I recently
learned that there are programs
where the company um that
manufactures the school bus will
actually allow a district to use
the school bus for 6 weeks to
determine if it's actually
practicable in, in that setting.
So Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
would imagine that some roots.
Uh,
that and if a school district is
not able to have the electric
vehicle, uh, the electric school
bus charging infrastructure, it
doesn't make sense for that
district to uh uh do that, but
if a school district was
interested,
Um, and had, uh, access to plug
in that vehicle, um, they could
actually try that.
Uh, and see if it worked. And
one of the reasons why school
buses are interesting is because
they travel 4 billion miles in
the in the United States each
year, um, which is a lot of
miles and a and a lot of uh
pollution that comes as a result
of that and so, um, the
interesting thing about school
buses is because they drive a
morning route.
Um, they drive an afternoon
route they may drive, um, an
after school route as well for
activities, um, but it does give
some spacing in the way that,
uh, school buses operate to
allow for additional charging if
needed. So, so that's one of the
reasons why we look at school
buses when we look at easy ways
to reduce pollution in our
communities is is because they
have those routine routes that
they're driving and and
opportunities for charging.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, so that's good to hear
that some of these companies
have that option that's good to
at least be able to test it in
some of these rural areas, but
that would mean, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, so.
I, I don't know what
specifically the parameters of
the energy transition Act and,
and the current legislation that
we have like this is, but with
this phase out completely, the
diesel school buses because
we're trying to hit net zero by
I believe 2050. So wouldn't that
require no diesel school buses
anymore, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, the ETA does not uh
impact school buses or any type
of vehicle, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, the ETA, the
Energy.
Transition Act deals only with
uh, energy generation, um, and
so, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, and, and this
legislation does not require any
district to convert to electric
school buses if they are not
interested or as you mentioned,
gentlemen, um, if they have an
extremely long route and you
know, having this type of
charging infrastructure is not a
priority for them because
they're working on something
else that's important uh.
You know, upgrading a field or
upgrading a building that is
entirely up to the school and
the school district, uh, so this
does not change any of that.
What this does though is provide
some funding if a school
district was interested, um, to
help support them in making that
transition, um, and you know I
think many of the districts have
been interested because of the
reduced maintenance costs, um,
the breaking, uh, and part of
that is because the brakes do
not.
Where as easily because many of
these are equipped with
regenerative braking, um, and
you don't have an exhaust system
to maintain. So there are some
positives, um, and as well as
they're very quiet and so, um,
you know, there's there's some
positives there and but it's up
to the school district, uh, as
well as the, uh, you know, the,
the infrastructure, uh, to
decide.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and I do ask that because
I know in 2023, the governor had
an executive order mandating
that all state agencies and
certain public bodies transition
to purchasing only zero emission
vehicles, including electric
vehicles for their fleets. So
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
was asking that because I wanted
to see if that was something
that was currently being pushed
in any way, because if we're
going to be pushing directly to
only these electric vehicles.
I just wouldn't want there to be
any kind of
Situation where these vehicles
which were needed, these diesel
vehicles were phased out.
Um
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
there's no requirement uh for um
the school districts to
transition, um, so, you know,
sometimes in this chamber we
talk about carrots and sticks
and I would describe Senate Bill
48 as a whole bunch of carrots
all in one.
Um, and I think, uh, I, I think
what we're trying to do here is
for those districts for which it
makes sense, uh, this will allow
for them to to have that
difference uh supported through
this funding.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General lady, and then is any of
that funding also going to the
local roads, the funds that help
with the local roads because I
know electric vehicles are much
heavier, and especially when
they're transporting a bunch of
young youngsters, kiddos, uh,
that could be a really heavy bus
on some of these local county
roads. And so Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, is any of this $60
million going to help alleviate
some of those problems in more
rural areas or even urban areas
where
these EVs are
Heavier and thus creating more
friction on the pavement.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
so, uh, this does not address
road funding that is dealt with,
um, in our House Bill 2 as well
as um by our DOT, um, however,
you know, there are some uh.
Uh, permitted projects that
would improve pedestrian
infrastructure, um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, um, we
are one of the deadliest states
in the country for pedestrians,
uh, and so if a community felt
that that was a serious issue
that they wanted to address, um,
they could apply for funding to
improve the conditions for
pedestrians which might impact
roads, um, may impact crossings
and things of that nature um.
Um, however, this is, this is
not fund roads. We do that
through a separate process here.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, I, and I
understand that. I just think if
this is going to have an impact
on the the roads that everybody
drives on, I think that could
certainly be something we all
have to look at in the future
and I would just love to maybe
nip it in the bud here since
we're talking about these, uh,
electric vehicles and electric
school buses. So also I I
believe in 2 years ago in one of
the, I think it was.
Radioactive and hazardous
materials Committee. We talked
about some of the, the problems
with electric vehicles that may
happen, including.
If they catch fire for some
reason, and hopefully it doesn't
happen to anybody, but if it
does, they can't really be put
up with water that can be used
to cool it, but you have to use
PFOS and other kinds of things
that will put out the fires. So,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
have we, do we have any concerns
regarding these electric school
buses versus just the regular
electric vehicle when it comes
to potential fires.
Um, Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, that's, that's not in
this legislation, um, and I, I'm
not, uh.
I can't speak to to that
particular topic.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. I would just
certainly urge the body to look
at that. I believe it was 2023.
The radioactive and hazardous
materials Committee we met at
Donia Anna Community College,
and there was a report from one
of the state agencies that
talked about that. So I don't
have that specific thing in
front of me right now, but I
would definitely want to look at
that as maybe a safety measure,
maybe some training for the, for
the
driver or something regarding
that. So, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I'll continue on the bill
here. So I was on page 2. I kind
of skipped around a little bit.
I'm now gonna go to number one.
It says reduce the green, a
greenhouse gas provided that for
projects related to
construction, etc. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I believe
we have definitions for
greenhouse gas later on in this
section, and it says it means a
gas.
Or gaseous compound that con
contributes to the process
through which heat is trapped
near Earth's surface by
absorbing infrared radiation.
Including carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxide.
Some other words that no one can
pronounce. So I'm just
wondering, can you please tell
me a little more about this
hydrofluorocarbons that we have
in this definition and what are
those? How are they affected,
affecting greenhouse gasses and
how are they?
Affecting it in any way.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
so, uh, this is uh this
definition of greenhouse gasses
is a standard definition that's
used, um, in much of policy
making across the country, um,
and you know, gentlemen, um,
you, uh, may not remember, but I
remember when, uh, all of the
cans of hairspray changed in
this country, um, and that was
related to the to a very
specific compound that that is
one of those um because that
was.
found to be increasing the, the
temperature and contributing um
to our greenhouse gas emissions.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that is a
extremely outdated reference,
but I bring that up, uh, just as
an example.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and I'm totally right
about that actually, so and
maybe I don't know how outdated
it is. It's probably not that
outdated. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I think that's
something that we need to look
at, but I also I'm wondering
because it, we talk about
greenhouse gasses and then they
relation to climate change
itself.
In the bill, right? So we
defined climate change as a
significant change in the
measure of climate lasting for
an extended period of time,
typically decades, which is what
it says, and includes major
changes.
Major changes in temperature,
precipitation, wind patterns,
and other weather related
effects. So earlier I heard we
said it was the earth was
getting hotter.
I believe you said temperature
of the earth is getting hotter.
That's a direct quote. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering how, cause we used to
call it.
Global warming.
Now it's climate change. So can
you tell me a little bit about
why we
Why we've chosen to use the word
climate change if we're talking
about specifically warming.
Um, Mas secret and, and
gentlemen, I think that's
because we've had the
opportunity to do a lot more
research, um, and really develop
an understanding and so this
definition here of climate
change, um, it, well it does
include major changes in
temperature, um, some of these
other, uh, results such as
changes in precipitation, uh,
wind patterns, other related
effects as we've seen um with
other weather phenomena, um,
that is all really.
part of the research and the
evolving science around climate
change, uh, so Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, in this definition
does uh match some other
definitions that we have, um,
both in regulation, um, and also
correlates with through the
state of research on this topic.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I asked that
because it says it includes
major changes in temperature,
not minor, and so I know a few
weeks ago, maybe last week, we
were talking about climate
change and the Earth if we pass
bills that would target climate
change, it could reduce the
global climate by one.5 1.5
degrees, so Madam Speaker
general lady, is that considered
major, what is considered major.
I'm just trying to figure out
from the global standpoint,
we're a
adopting their definitions. What
does that mean when it comes to
our state of New Mexico.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
the 1.5 °C that you're referring
to has been said is an
international standard for um
how we benchmark meaningful
progress to reduce the impacts
of climate change, um, and so,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, how we measure that is
really dependent on uh the
projects and uh the our
contribution to emissions.
is one way of looking in that
which, as I previously
mentioned, the environment
department does regularly, um,
with a comprehensive review.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, could you tell me which
global
Entities have set this 1.5 °C,
which we're trying to attain.
Um, Madam Speaker, among others,
the United Nations, the World
Meteorological Organization
intergovernmental panel on
climate change, um, the.
Yes, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so the UN and the meteorological
panel of
Climate
Stuff
Which I, I didn't catch the
whole thing, but that's, so two
entities.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
so that is commonly referred to
as the IPCC, um, in, uh,
certainly.
Uh, widely reported on in the
news and uh that is the number
of countries that come together
regularly to discuss um progress
being made, but um.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
just to bring us back to the
legislation, um, these are about
community based projects, so you
know, one state operating alone
can do its share, which is what
is laid out in this legislation.
All right, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for the
information. So I guess I'm just
kind of trying to figure it out
because I, I have heard the
arguments on both sides, and I
also see that there are
countries like China, India, a
few other countries that do not
follow these global initiatives
and even the state initiatives
and so they're polluting like
crazy in some of these places,
they have no carbon capture at
all, nothing like that. So,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
just wanna make sure that what
we're doing is a
which is costing $210 million is
not going to be totally wiped
out in a day or two by a country
or a state that does not utilize
these same standards. So can you
address that for me?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
great news and that we are
making progress, uh, over the
last 6 years since there has
been regular measurement, um, of
our progress towards reaching um
goal, the goals of reduction in,
uh, greenhouse gas emissions,
uh, we are on target to reach
goals that were set for 2030.
This legislation is an important
piece of that, um, and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, while we
can't
control the behaviors of other
nations, um, we can control, uh,
what we're doing here and again,
just creating a set of funding
opportunities for communities um
is what this legislation is
intending to do.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, that's good.
Good to hear. So.
We're talking about those
targets that we're trying to hit
by 2030. Was that on the state
level or nationally? What, what
was that, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen at the state level.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So then I'm, I'm
gonna continue on the bill here
regarding, I'm gonna skip past
climate change and then go to
energy efficiency.
So we're talking about,
actually, you know what, let's
not go there. Let's go, let's go
later on in the bill.
Where it says on page 6.
We'll go back there though, but
we'll be on page 6 here and it
says maybe halfway down the page
on 5A.
Renewable energy source means
electric or useful thermal
energy that is generated by
solar, wind, and geothermal
hydropower facilities brought in
service on or after July 1st,
2007. So, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I'm, I'm wondering why
instead of.
Renewable energy resource, we
didn't talk more about clean
energy resource because it's my
understanding that we want
something that is zero
emissions, so when I think of
this, I know I keep on harping
on this, this session, but it's
really important to me. Why is
nuclear power not included in
that since it is a 0.
Emission
Energy.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
uh,
This bill is incorporates a lot
of funds that are already in
existence, and so in order to
ensure that the renewable energy
definition matched what is
already in statute this
definition of renewable energy
resource was taken from the
rural Electric Co op, um, law
and so uh that this way uh we
are not upending any of the the
requirements of any of these
existing funds.
Um, so Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
this is simply matching uh
what's already in the law with
our, uh, rural electric
cooperatives.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I'm
wondering when it comes to the
cooperatives and its definition,
does this
Not allow these solar wind
geothermal and hydropower
facilities from using petroleum
products and plastics, things
such as that that are
petroleum-based in any way since
they are indeed talking about
climate. So does this make
Any kind of requirement that
there is no use of any plastics,
anything that is from oil and
gas or any kind of fossil fuel
in the use of the
These, uh, projects, these
facilities that are generating
power. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, no.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I guess that's
maybe one of the concerns I have
because we're talking about
renewable energy resources, and
I know many of these resources
such as solar panels, they
require these minerals that are
mined and that is a natural
resource, right? So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, when we're
talking about something like
cobalt, which is mined in the
Congo, and there are no safety
requirements. Many of these are
people are slaves or kids who
are mining this. I'm wondering,
is there any requirement that we
use no slave labor, no.
Child labor and actually follow
safety protocols when pro uh
producing these kinds of solar
panels, windmills, etc.
Madam Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
so that's not in this
legislation, um, but Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I will say
that I know that battery
technologies, solar solar panel
development is evolving rapidly
and so for storage capacity. I
know that many, many companies
are looking at uh ways to store
solar energy, for example, um,
with renewable resources as
well, so, um, but, but, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
that's not contemplated in this
legislation.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I guess I
just asked that because I know
that this is a lot of money and
with a lot of money, we can do a
lot of good when it comes to
protecting people, especially
globally, because we don't want
our neighbors in the Congo, for
example, to have to be subjected
to these subhuman labor
standards that are way out of, I
mean, they're, they're worse
than the early 1900s in this
country, you know what I mean?
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I just want to make sure that
we're also considering that as
well as the blades on these
solar.
I'm sorry, these wind turbines,
they need to be buried, and they
have to be buried in these very
large.
Areas of land and they can't
really be recycled because they
made of fiberglass. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, when we're
talking about trying to be
regenerative, trying to talk
about being clean, uh, can you
address how the state of New
Mexico is talking about the
The storage or the removal of
these wind turbines that are
indeed made from things that
cannot be recycled.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
this legislation does not
require wind turbines to be
recycled.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and I think that's
another, you know, I, we talked
about climate change, we talk
about saving the world, saving
the whales, whatever we're
saving, but we don't talk about
how we're going to protect
these.
Entities from how they.
Remove these things that are
being phased out like an old
windmill blade, for example. So
I, I think that's just something
to consider and then continuing
here, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, are we also considering
the effects to the wildlife. I
know sometimes some of these
wind.
These, these windmills, they can
kill bats, they can kill birds,
and I know that there are some
ways that we can negate that,
but does this contemplate in any
way the helping of protecting
these aerial life forms from
being killed, murdered, sliced
apart by these windmills or even
being fried in midair by these
solar panels because it can get
really hot, especially in
southern New Mexico.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the, the wonderful thing about
this legislation is that it is
community based and community
driven, um, and so if a
community had a specific type of
wildlife that they were
interested in protecting, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that's
certainly something they could
contemplate, um, because one of
the purposes of this legislation
is to reduce the effects of
climate change on the natural
environment, um, and so.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and, and
if the community was interested
in starting up a, uh, wind
turbine blade recycling project
or um uh storage battery
recycling project, as I
understand those batteries can
be recycled, uh, quite easily,
um, that is certainly something
that could be proposed as one of
the uh projects that's funded
through the community benefit
fund.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, so I don't know about the
batteries. I'm sure that they
can be recycled, but I know that
those blades for the wind
windmills, they definitely
require, I'm sure maybe a lot
more.
I think they just, they
literally cannot be recycled,
I'm pretty sure. So a lot of the
time when we have these, they
either are buried here
domestically or they might be
shipped across the country to
out of the country and so I just
think that that's something to
consider because then when we
ship it, that's also some more
carbon emissions which we're
trying to stop. So I'm like, OK,
how do we, how do we fix this
when it comes to what we're
trying to do with the bill and
then how do we use the tools
available to us on that. So,
Madam Speaker, generally, I'll
just continue on
5 I'm gonna flip back to page 5,
sorry. So page 5, we're talking
about grid modernization, and it
says improvements to electric
distribution or transmission
infrastructure, and I'm just
wondering what specific
equipment is included because it
says including related data and
now analytic equipment. What
what equipment is required on
that?
Yes, madam Speaker, gentlemen,
so this is all encapsulated in
the grid modernization Act.
Um, which actually lays out, uh,
an enormous amount of detail
regarding all of this, um, and
included in grid modernization
would be projects to electrify
communities um to electrify oil
and gas operations to electrify
rural communities that don't
have access to electricity, um,
or electrifying, um, or, or
improving the grid, so, um,
creating micro grids and, and a
huge variety of projects.
Can be contemplated through the
grid modernization fund.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
gentleleti. So when it comes to
the analytics, it's, you're
saying it's just based upon the
project is a project by project
basis.
Yes, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
so this is a, a list of items
that uh would be included.
Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
I'm just gonna flip back to page
4. I'm going back and forth, I
know, but on page 4, I see that
there is
A provision that says shows that
notice of the meetings was
provided to overburdened
communities that may be impacted
by the project. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how are we
defining an overburdened
community that's at the top of
the page on page 4.
Yes, um, actually, if you look
at the next section C, it
discusses how those overburdened
communities would be identified.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. So I, I did, and I was,
that's actually one of my next
questions down on C, it says,
which our community is
experiencing disproportionate
burdens, so I'm wondering how do
we measure someone's
disproportionate burden
regarding, I believe it says
climate change, energy, health,
housing and legacy pollution,
how are all of those considered
by NM
What is it? NMRD M nerd, how,
how did they consider all of
those different situations to
find out if a community is
overburdened because it is
disproportionately burdened, and
I think the word burden is used
to define burden. So I'm just
quite, quite confused.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so this is a place where science
meets GIS mapping, and so there
are 11 environmental indicators
that are examined to identify an
overburdened community, so it is
not a uh sort of judgment. I, I
cannot sit and say, well, I
think this community might be
overburdened and this one is
not, um, because it is based on
uh measurements of particulate
matter, ozone.
diesel, lead paint exposure air
can't air toxic air cancer
risks, uh, respiratory hazards
and then proximity to Superfund
sites risk management plan
facilities, treatment storage,
disposal facilities, um, and
major direct water dischargers.
So, um, this is all included,
um, and it, it looks at also um
the uh census.
data and really looks at the
community, uh, particularly
factors such as age, educational
level, poverty, um, and, uh,
incorporates that as well so
basically you're identifying um
based on all of these
environmental indicators.
Which communities could be at
risk and then taking a look to
see um the profile of those
communities and, and, uh,
identifying them that way.
Madam Speaker, gentle ladies, so
theoretically when we're talking
about diesel.
A school district that is forced
to use diesel because an
electric vehicle or an electric
school bus only goes 115 to 150
miles on a single charge, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how would
they benefit from this since
they wouldn't be able to get the
money for electric vehicles
because they require that. So
how do we, how do we balance the
two for using diesel as one of
the parameters to see if it is a
community that is overburdened.
Well, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
I think it would depend on the
number of people exposed and so
um it's really proximity to not
just the diesel school bus, but
also traffic, and so if you um
are in a very rural areas, parts
of my district are, um, you're
not going to be near that
traffic, uh, in the way that if
uh you're in uh downtown Santa
Fe or downtown Albuquerque,
certainly, um, you would
have a, a lot more exposure to
that particular um area, but if
you had a community that was
that was really had a lot of
roads and had a lot of traffic.
I think that's where this would
become a concern, so I, I don't
see the interplay with the
electric school bus for for
rural districts uh in that way
because I don't, I don't think
this would, uh, capture that.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. OK, well, then I think if
we're, if we're looking at it
through that lens, then in, in
my opinion, if someone is in a
rural area that uses the diesel
school bus then.
I think an urban area could be
actually higher up on the list
because there are more cars
there, isn't that the way that I
guess I understand it that way,
is that the way that you're
envisioning it because the rural
area has fewer cars, fewer
diesel buses, uh, school
district that's very urban has
more people, more cars, so
wouldn't it stand to reason that
that urban area would be higher
up on the totem pole, so to
speak, to get this help or these
funds.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, no,
because that's just one of 11
different uh measures that are
being looked at and so that's
why this can cross rural and
urban areas, um, and Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, this is
just uh one way that we are uh
identifying and doing outreach
with community. It's, it's not
an exclusive um uh uh list.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I also would
caution people to think about EV
school buses because apparently
they use diesel exhaust fluid as
a catalyst uh to reduce harmful
emissions in diesel engines.
In the EV engine as well. So it
talks about nitrogen oxide. So I
just think maybe a larger
conversation is to be had, but
it's, I'm gonna, I'm gonna get
off the school buses and I like
to talk about the school buses,
but I think it's important to
consider that as well. Also,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
looking at page 4.
And I believe
S C O NC Lord only knows what
that is. I don't know what
committee that could be
conservation maybe Senate
Conservation Committee, they
added the department shall
ensure that data from tribal and
indigenous communities are
included in the data used by the
data tool, and it doesn't say
me, it says shall. And so Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering how that works with
tribes that are, they use their
own sovereignty, so we can't
compel a tribe to give us that
data. So how is it a shell
instead of a me when it comes to
that information.
because I'm, I don't want to
force a tribal entity to give us
data because I think that would
potentially be infringing on
them. Would that be correct?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
it's great that you've
highlighted this because this is
very important that for any data
that's available that includes
tribal and indigenous
communities, um, it should be
included in Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, I think we
uh as state lawmakers really
pride ourselves on recognizing
the sovereignty of indigenous
and tribal communities and
acknowledging the government to
government relationships, so
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, if it
does take a little bit more time
to
uh, work with those communities
to access the data, then I think
it's well worth it and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I don't know
that we could get a complete
picture of communities that
really needed outreach, uh, uh,
because they fall into um this
description of overburdened
communities if we didn't include
such a significant part of our
state.
So thank you Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. So we're saying it
may take a little extra time.
Where in the bill does it say
that we're giving them that
extra time to get these numbers
for us or these figures for us.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, the
expectation is that DFA along
with energy, minerals and
natural resources department,
um, identify the data tool and
what this makes clear is that we
must include indigenous data in
that data tool and so Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, it's really
critical because this section is
not about who's eligible to
apply for the funding. This
section is about where we do
outreach and where we make sure
that we are doing outreach to
let those communities know that
these funding opportunities
exist, um, and that's really
important, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I know you work with
your local governments. I work
with my local governments. A lot
of times they're not familiar
with some of the funding
opportunities that are available
at the federal level or at the
state level, um, and I consider
it, you know, one of our jobs as
state lawmakers to know about
some of these grant programs and
make that information available.
And so what we're asking DFA and
Abner.
to do is also engage in that
process and ensure that that
these communities that may have
disproportionate burdens and uh
whether it be in the impacts of
climate change or some of the
health impacts of that, um, that
they, uh, that they are reached
out to and informed, uh, and
that they have the opportunity
to develop um community planning
for some of these programs.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Liddy, and that sounds
like a very good answer, but I
still am kind of figuring out,
I'm trying to figure out how we
get this data from these
entities because they have their
own data sovereignty as well,
right? So, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, when it comes to getting
these reports I know in December
1st of each year, a project
receives funding from community
benefit fund. It says that the
administrative agencies shall
submit a report to the
appropriate interim committee.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
if we don't have that data to
give to the interim committee
how, how
we ensure that these projects
are not going to be
deprioritized because there is a
lack of data because we may not
know that there are
disproportionately affected.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, the
our tribal communities have
worked really, really hard
actually on um sends
particularly census outreach,
um, and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, some of the most
robust efforts on data data
gathering and uh working with
community to get data for the
census occurred in our tribal
communities and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I, I was very
impressed and uh.
You know, really kind of humbled
by a lot of the incredible
outreach that was done to ensure
that our tribal communities were
counted in the state and so
because um much of this is
really looking at census data,
um, I have confidence in our um
tribal governments to have uh
created the data that they need
to identify their communities
and um this is requiring the
state to ensure.
that we are working with those
uh tribal governments to access
the data, so Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I don't see this as
being a detriment to this
process. I see this is being uh
a real uh plus in a in a a
really important and essential
part of ensuring that this out
outreach is happening in the way
that it should, so Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I don't
agree with the inser assertion
that this would necessarily take
longer or be.
More challenging, um, and in
fact we may be um uh on the
other end having a harder time
getting data for some other
areas of the state more so than
we would, uh, for some of the
communities that you're
referencing, so, um, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I, I
guess we just have to differ on
that point. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and I, I
don't know anyone who said this
would be detrimental.
To get this data. No one said
that. No one even implied that,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady. The
way I was saying was because
we're talking about census data,
correct? So when it comes to
census data, there was a huge
undercount in Native American
communities despite all those
good efforts and so because
there was a huge undercount in
the census, which did happen in
2020, I want to make sure that
we are indeed capturing these
people. If we don't get the data
from the tribe on time, that's
not the problem. The problem is
we
I don't know how many
individuals we are talking about
in that specific section of
land. And so, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I want to make sure
that we are continuing to
consider those people despite
the undercount, and that's why
I'm kind of having a problem
when it comes to looking at
census data versus other kinds
of data that the state may also
take in.
So I'm, I'm just wondering if
you could address that with the
undercount.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
New Mexico was one of the states
at highest risk for undercount
in the census, um, and I know
there were efforts all around
the state to address that, um,
and Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that's the beauty of
having this be based at the uh
our our state departments and
have this being a state program
is that um there are well
established relationships and uh
that will make the process of
accessing, um, data, uh, and
doing this.
outreach to ensure that these
communities are reached, uh, all
the all the easier.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and then I see also here
in the bill and.
I want to make sure everyone's
counted, right? So I'm gonna,
I'm gonna skip over that point
because I think we made it
pretty well, but continuing on
the bill on page 6, we're
talking about the kinds of fuels
and I also wanted to ask about
biofuels, biodiesels, how did
those.
pair with this as well, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, like
biofuel, biodiesel, things like
that.
Yes, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, you will see a
biomass resources, uh, described
in this definition, um, and, uh,
this definition, uh, is, is from
another section of statute in as
I had shared with you earlier,
uh, from the Rural Electric
co-ops.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, and then I see, I
see that I'm wondering on the
bottom of that page on 6 it says
be of appropriate scale to have
sustainable feedstock in the
near vicinity and then it also
says have zero life cycle carbon
emissions. So how do we measure
that when it comes to.
feeds stock.
The zero carbon emissions.
Mr. Speak Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um.
The
Uh
I think, however, this is used
in the rural Electric
Cooperative, uh, contexts that
would be how it would be
measured. I don't have specific
information about the technology
used to measure zero life cycle
carbon emissions for biofuels.
OK. Thank you, Madam Speaker
lady, because I see up on number
5 at the beginning, it talks
about limited to agriculture or
animal waste and so these fuel
cells, I just want to make sure
that we're not.
Putting a super strict burden on
them, so Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I guess we're, we're
saying we're not, I need to look
at the, the electric co op.
thing and it's kind of hard when
it doesn't specifically say
where to find it, but I'll, I'm
sure I'll Google it and I'll
find it, maybe. So Madam
Speaker, generally, I just
wanted to know earlier in the
debate, we're talking about the
dust bowl apparently, and we
were, I think someone was
talking about how it was tied to
climate change and so Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
also want to note that it was
only at the turn of the.
The, the 1920.
The 1910s, right? It was the
1910s when we started actually
using cars, twenties we were
using cars and actually using
factories and stuff, so I don't
know how that would play into
that. It actually was due to
poor land management practices
and the Great Depression, not
due to carbon emissions. So,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
also, I just continue to have
problems maybe when it comes to
some of these definitions,
climate change, for example, I
think we also need to look at
some kinds of other
Other scientific methods that
have been proven. I know that
there are many ways to prove
what climate change may be, the
earth is always changing in many
ways. It's always kinds of, kind
of changing and a lot of the
time I've heard some people try
to conflate
Fires in the state with
Climate change and really I
would say the main driver of
some of those fires is not
necessarily this climate change
due to what some people like to
think of as
Fossil fuels, it's actually many
times based on poor forest
management, specifically in the
federal government level. So I
think those are all things that
we also need to consider when it
comes to this bill. I know there
are other people on the board,
so I'm gonna let them get on and
uh continue to speak about this
legislation, but I really
appreciate the debate and I, I
have way more questions and I,
I've written up this bill. If
you could see it, I've like
written so many words on this
bill because I find it very
important to have really deep
conversations, especially
regarding bills that could
definitely affect us and
especially ones that are
$210 million of our taxpayer
dollars going to this, which I
do have some problems with
because it's quite a lot of
money. So I guess I'll leave it
there. I have like I have like
pages and pages worth of
questions that I could ask and
maybe I should ask, but instead,
Madam Speaker, I will just
continue to listen to the debate
and thank you so much for the
answers appreciate it.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero, Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does
the general lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Chavez Eddy and
Otero.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. Just have a
couple of quick questions
because I, I've been listening
to the bait and, and this is
something that actually uh has
bothered me for for a really
long time and uh the prior
debate kind of touched out at
the end, but when we're talking
about forest fires, can you tell
me the last 5, the biggest, the
5 biggest forest fires we've had
in the state of New Mexico.
What was the cause of those?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
could not list those, but, but
if you can describe that, I'd be
happy to hear that.
Thank you Madam Speaker. It
actually wasn't uh climate
change per se, right? When we
keep hearing that quite often.
Uh, you know, the calf Canyon,
which is the biggest forest fire
in the state of New Mexico was
actually started by men, Bert
the prescribed burn.
Uh
The black fire burned 325,000
acres. That was human caused. We
started the fire.
That's not the song that's
actually what happened.
Number 3 was a lightning strike.
Number 4, a tree fell on a power
line, so the 4th biggest fire
was a tree falling on a power
line. Nothing to do with climate
change that had to do with power
lines. I think even renewable
energy power lines would do
that.
And the 5th is a lightning
strike so matter or Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when y'all keep
saying that the forest fires are
caused by climate change. Can
you show me where y'all get
that?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't disagree with you that
those are the causes of those
specific fires, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, what I would
say is that we have been
struggling with a long period of
drought which has reduced the
moisture available in those
forests and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I would just say
that this funding would allow
for a community to propose some
forest management projects where
the uh federal
government maybe has not done
what they need to be doing, um,
and we have an incredible state
forester.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so, um.
I
Um, I think it's a synergistic
effect between some of the
impacts that we're seeing and uh
and those incendiary events that
you mentioned.
So Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I'm really
interested in what you just
said.
So within this bill.
There is money that could be
used.
To reduce the fuel load in the
forest to reduce the effects of
forest fires. Is that what I
heard, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't see that language in the
bill.
Anywhere we looked really hard
because actually that's
something I'm very interested
in.
I do have an amendment that I
wasn't going to run.
But based on what you just said,
I would love to run this
amendment, um, just to see what
you think.
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I do
have an amendment. I'm gonna
try.
All right, bring it down.
And if I can get a roll call,
sir.
You got it.
Gentlemen, can you read the
number on the bottom left?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is
0.232110.1 passed out and posted
online. I'll come back to you to
explain it in just a minute.
Right, looks like the
amendment's been passed out and
it is posted online, the
gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
basically what the amendment's
gonna do is on page 2, line 24
after the paragraph designation.
Uh, 6 strike the remainder of
the line, strike line 25 on page
3 strike line 1, and insert in
lieu there thereof clear fuel
load on state forest lands.
And a lady from Santa Fez is a
friendly amendment.
Just one moment, Mr. Speaker,
I'm just.
Reading this.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, this is, uh, again friendly
sponsor but not a friendly
amendment and um the reason
being that, uh, number one,
there are a number of districts
that are very interested um in
the uh electric vehicle
purchases, and so, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, while this
doesn't require any districts to
purchase an electric school bus
we do have.
districts that are interested in
that and so this amendment
strikes that and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, additionally, I
believe that uh what you are
authorizing here, Clear fuel
load on state forest lands is
already included in a purpose
number 5. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, in the
presentation of this bill and
previous committees, um, this,
this question has been asked
repeatedly about whether this uh
purpose is already authorized in
the legislation.
And, um, both, uh, the my senate
co-sponsor myself, uh, have
stated that yes, it would be
already authorized, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, for those
reasons it would be an
unfriendly amendment.
All right, gentle lady from
Berlio.
Representative Hogman.
Mr. Speaker, I move the table
House floor amendment number 3
to Senate Bill 48 as twice
amended. We're on a motion to
table House floor amendment
number 3 to Senate Bill 48 is
twice amended. A vote of yes and
the amendment is tabled. The
vote of no, we're back on the
amendment 32nd clock, the vote
is now open.
What's about the clothes?
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 3 to Senate
Bill 48 is transended has been
tabled.
Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you for at least
calling me friendly as you
destroyed my amendment so
quickly, but, uh.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
interested in the school buses.
We have about 60 million, is
that kind of what you've set
aside for school buses?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
you know how many school buses
that will buy.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we're
gonna try to do the math, but we
don't have that, uh, figure
right here.
Seeing, are you still debating?
OK, sorry, sorry, Mr. Speaker,
I'm waiting for the answers I
was about to say you know for
the debate.
Not again, please.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we,
uh, think at least.
Um, 150 school buses, um, but
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
funding could also go for some
of the infrastructure to um have
the appropriate charging, uh,
infrastructure at the wherever
the school buses park overnight,
etc.
And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
the thing I'm most disappointed
about when I keep hearing the
school buses there's a few
things I don't think we're gonna
get that many school buses on
the road, number 12, I don't
think you're gonna see the
reduction in greenhouse gasses,
which is apparently what this
bill is really aimed at.
So the reason for my amendment
is
That $60 million if we do about
$7500 per acre if we would have
reduced the fuel load, that
would have been about 8000 acres
of state forest lands.
Now, Mr. Speaker, General lady,
I know where I live because of
the fuel load in the forest,
what we're seeing is, is not
only fires, but we're seeing a
hotter fire that's burning so
much harder it's actually
scorching the ground. Now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
scorches the ground, it has a
hard time of reproducing.
Um
So you're not getting the trees
back as quickly, the vegetation
back as quickly. In fact, my
granddad can show me where a
fire was when he was a young man
that still barely has any trees
because the ground was scorched
so hard.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
we would have done 8000 acres of
state forest lands, the fires
wouldn't have burned us harder,
which wouldn't have put as much
smoke in the air.
And that would have been a
massive reduction in greenhouse
gasses. Does that sound correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I,
uh, completely appreciate that
we need to reduce the fire risk
and totally agree with that and
I, I feel um that.
That I, I don't want these two
concerns to compete in a way,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
because I appreciate and I also,
uh, many parts of the district I
represent are also a huge risk
of fire, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, you know, we saw
last year that we can't depend
on just the management of by the
federal government of those
resources, um, which was
disappointing to say the least.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
would just
say that I think um that the the
school bus piece is important,
but it's, it's not to the
detriment of what you you were
talking about, gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's where, you know, I,
I get so frustrated when I keep
hearing that climate change is
what's making the forest burn.
Um, and, and I totally disagree
with that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think what we have done
to our forests over the years to
what you just said is absolutely
correct. It has been poor forest
management that are creating
those fires that are making the
burn harder, which is putting
more smoke in the air, which
apparently and, and obviously
could create more asthma and all
those things so I really wish we
would have accepted this
amendment because I don't see it
in the bill. I looked everywhere
and I really would love to
understand.
in the bill forest management
is.
Um, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, where I would say
uh where it, where I see where
it is and what the uh my Senate
co-sponsor has also stated, um,
is, uh, paid.
Page 2 on the regular bill, not
the amendments in context page
2,
lines 21 through 23,
particularly assess or reduce
the effects of climate change on
the natural environment, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I
understand, uh, there's a bit of
a, a difference of opinion about
the impact of climate change,
but, um, when you're looking at
uh forest management and the
natural environment that's where
that would be.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. I think the last
thing I'll say is, is the two
items that y'all that that we
have continued to hear about
today between the Dust Bowl and
forest fires are both created by
poor land management.
So poor land management back
with during the Dust Bowl when
they plowed when they shouldn't
have, um, and the, the weather
cycles, that's poor land
management and we have poor land
management in the forest, uh,
right now which is creating to a
bigger for fuel load, uh, with
that, Mr. Speaker, I.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fey.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. I just wanna go
through a few things to make
sure I understand the, the.
So
If I read, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
On page one, line 25. The goal
is to reduce greenhouse gas. Is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
one of 8 purposes described, uh,
in this legislation, so that's
uh one of a numbered list there.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I see that uh increasing
electric grid capacity.
Uh, renewable energy resources
from electricity, Mr. Speaker,
that's like, that's line 14 on
page 2. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I'd like to talk about
that a little bit.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady down
in my neck of the woods, um,
we're 3500 megawatts behind
right now just with one.
Of our major suppliers.
And that process, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady has gone out for
RFP hopefully at some point in
time.
They can get their application
into PRC PRC can make their
decision in their 9 month time
frame, then it takes 30, 36
months to build out.
Capacity
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that means that electric needs
that we need today in 2025 won't
be complete until 2029.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, are
you aware that that process
takes that long?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
so is by the time we get to
there, the next part of the ETA
will be in place, which is a 50%
um.
Us as
Carbon neutral green energy,
however you want to call it, it
could be solar, it could be
wind, it could be bio. There's
several different parts of that.
Would you agree with that as
well?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
missed, would you mind repeating
that?
Mr. Speaker, so we just went
through a calculation that shows
that, um, and then a need that
is now won't be built out until
2029.
Fast forward one more year, we
hit the next phase of the ETA
which is a 50% carbon, uh.
Offset, would you agree with
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
Where is that energy gonna come
from when we look at it. And let
me, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, let me change the
question.
Do you do you know the
definition of accredited
capacity, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, no.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
Accredited capacity is walking
over to a light switch and
guaranteeing every day that that
light switch turns on whatever
that number is, OK?
So right now,
That one company I'm talking
about has a need for 3500
megawatts of accredited capacity
in 2024, actually, not 2025.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
out of 50% calculation, do you
know how much
Energy, they actually have to
buy to hit that 3500.
Um, megawatts out of 50% green,
green energy provided capacity.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I am
not sure about that, but what I
will say is a big piece of this
energy grid modernization
funding, um, could actually be
used to address the very problem
that you're describing with the
3 year wait for new electricity,
um, because there is technology,
um, that can be easily deployed,
particularly through a
partnership with um some of the
users of that energy to.
electrify well pads, for
example, using solar energy,
using renewable energy right
there, um, at, at that, at that
point. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I actually see,
uh, the utility of this for
making sure that those
operations are, while they're
running, but they're actually
using solar energy to power,
some of the equipment and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, and I,
I'm
I couldn't follow all of those
calculations required, but, but
I just wanted to give you that
information about that fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
agree with you that we can, we
can do minor projects that,
that, um,
can hit current needs, but once
again, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, those are minor projects.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, in
the last 3 years to in, in
Attempt to hit the
electrification needs that were
required 2.5 years ago.
We in Southeast New Mexico
exceeded the capacity of our
supply of our primary supplier.
And, and I heard in the debate a
little bit earlier that, you
know, we could, we can use that
um.
We can use some of these tools
in the oil field and, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady in those
places we have.
Um, and where we can, but in so
many places we're, we're not
able to actually meet the
immediate need requirements
because
Irrespective of what everybody
thinks we don't always have sun
and we don't always have wind.
And so, and biomass isn't where
it needs to be. There's, there's
a, a plethora of different
problems that go with that. But
I do want to talk about
Getting back to the electric
grid capacity and uh increasing.
Electricity from renewable
energies, combining all these
different pieces together.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
is about a 1.42 multiplier.
If you want accredited capacity
so for every what that you want.
If you provide it from a green
energy standpoint, you have to
provide 1.42.
To get that and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady right now that is
based on the fact that you have
an alternate energy source.
Um
Other than wind, solar.
Uh, biomass, etc. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, are you aware
of that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so this
legislation doesn't impact the
um the targets, um, for that
were set out in the ETA, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
projects that we're talking
about are not about energy
generation, they are grid
modernization, so, uh, in that
sense that it's a bit outside of
the the scope of what this is
contemplating to support.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, OK,
let's, let's go there. Define
grid modernization then.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, um, so as in
this bill, um, that is on page 5
lines 12 through 19.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
already have
For the, for the majority we
already have the the cap
capacity for data analytics and
the equipment for them,
otherwise we would not be able
to.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
bring
Different forms of energy
online.
And, and be able to assure a
constant accredited capacity, so
if, if I look at your definition
on line 14, page 5, where that
already exists.
Um
We want to design and
accommodate or facilitate the
integration of renewable
electric generation. I, I, I get
all that. I look at this, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, as
we go through a grid
modernization.
We also, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady you have to have an idea of
what that electrical source is
because that does change the
dynamics of.
What is inside of the power line
and how the transformers and
everything else work within
inside of that.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
not.
Here to to to to really
fight or debate over
Some of these aspects, I'm just,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
trying to bring a recognition to
what it actually takes.
To make that transition.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Everything that we look at from
a
renewable.
Uh
resource
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
actually requires a mineral
take.
From the earth.
We're for solar panels for wind
farms.
We have a mineral take.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
average lifespan of a wind arm
right now is less than 8 years.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
have the same problem with
several solar panels out there.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
every minimal mineral that's
required inside of the solar
panel, we're replenishing and
and pulling out of the earth.
On on about one about an 8-year
cycle right now.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
we continue to create the carbon
issue.
By rebuilding it, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, on the other
side of that.
None of those resources that we
have.
Um, from a wind to solar,
actually can generate.
The heat that it takes.
To make the solar panel or the
wind wind arm.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
takes 2700 degrees.
To uh make a windmill on.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
with.
All of the renewables that we
have out here right now.
None of those
Concentrated solar gives us 752
degrees.
Deep geothermal, 716 degrees,
biomass, 752 degrees.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
takes 3090 °F to make a solar
panel.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
we go through some of these
different processes, once again,
let's modernize the grid. Let's
add different thing fuel sources
to this so we can continue to
move that way. I think alternate
fuel sources are a great idea,
but as I look at some of these
requirements.
None of those, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady will actually reduce
greenhouse gasses at the rate
that we're.
We're talking about.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
At some point in time,
somebody's gonna have to
redefine.
What we use
For
For fuel
Because the only two things that
we're gonna be left with is
natural gas and nuclear to
actually generate the heat, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady that um
is gonna be required for each of
those wind sources or each of
those energy sources, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I yield
my time back.
See no further debate made it
close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
members, um, the community
benefit fund is not just about
responding to today's
challenges, um, it's about
preparing New Mexico for the
future.
Uh, by passing Senate Bill 48, I
would just encourage the members
to take this decisive action to
be proactive rather than
reactive in a changing world,
protecting our land where we
where we camp where we fish,
where we go turkey hunting, uh,
protecting our water and
protecting our cherished way of
life and with that, Mr. Speaker,
I would move that Senate Bill 48
as twice amended do now pass. We
are on final passage of Senate
bill.
The board's about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. Senate Bill 48 is
twice amended as duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Ber Leo
Representative Garrett, are you
ready on item number 3.
Will you please give me that.
Could if your mic sounded
better.
on the
cord.
That the direct reflect that all
action deserved place in Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 1115 as amended with
an emergency clause. I'm final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate to
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
Senate Finance Committee sub for
Senate Bill 115 as amended with
emergency clause is the annual
New Mexico Finance Authority's
public project revolving fund
which has to have
ization
by the legislature even though
it doesn't come from general
funds. I'm carrying this on
behalf of the legislative
oversight committee, uh, the
amendment simply adds.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh.
I know
for do pass for Senate Finance
Committee Committee sub for
Senate Bill 115 is amended with
the emergency clause. We are a
final passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 115 as amended with an
emergency clause. The vote is
now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 115 as amended.
With an emergency clause hasulli
passed his house.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
representative Duncan, are you
ready on item 29?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point that all action
necessary for placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 249 on final passage
has been taken and it is subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, what
this bill does when a health
provider gets paid, they lump it
in one sum. This bill just
breaks it out because there's
different GRT and the different
various municipalities, so this,
this bill just breaks it out so
the health care, health care
provider knows exactly what to
send to the state. I'll stand
for questions, Mr. Speaker.
There is originally from Berly
herbs, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll gladly
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um,
thank you Representative for
bringing this, um, bringing this
to the health committee. I know
it's been a hot topic for the
last few years. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I know we've had back
and forth conversation about our
budget generally specifically
what happens if and when we have
federal cuts um that come down
for Medicaid and Medicare
services and so um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, I hope I have
um a friendly amendment. I know
we've.
We're not, we're not doing the
amendment after all. OK,
that was my fault. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. It would have
been friendly. That is all I
have.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Speaker, I now move that Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
249 do now pass. We're on final
passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Center
Bill 249. The vote is now open.
Vos about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249 has duly passed his
house.
Gentle lady from Los Alamos
Santa Fe, Sandoval. Are you
ready on item number 47. Mr.
Speaker, yes, I am. Will you get
me to that point that election
has served for place in Senate
Bill 357 as amended our final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate.end
substitution. The gentle lady to
explain the bill thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Senate Bill 357 is the
implementing legislation for
article 9, section 14.
Paragraph 8, Mr. Speaker, with
that, I'm open to debate.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that
Senate Bill 357 as amended, do
not pass passage of Senate Bill
357 as amended. The vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The boys are closed by a vote of
61 in the affirmative, 3 in the
negative. Senate Bill 357 is
amended asuli pass this House.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on item 39? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, would you get me to
that point that action necessary
for placing Senate Bill 124 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gen related to explain the bill.
Senate Bill 124 updates the
authority of the superintendent
of insurance to match the powers
granted to other agencies in the
New Mexico Uniform Licensing Act
with that I stand for questions
from Lincolnresentative Vincent.
Thank you Mr. Chair, does a
gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Does the
superintendent of insurance have
subpoena power now?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what's the purpose for this, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this just
changes the timing of the uh uh.
The civil investigative
subpoenas so that they can be
issued before a notice of a
contemplated action rather than
after, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this will probably
reduce the number of uh
contemplated actions that are
brought, so right now the
superintendent actually has to
file a notice and then can issue
the subpoenas and so this just
uh allows her to do that before
filing the notice so that if the
notice filing isn't necessary.
She doesn't need to go to that.
final step.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
So you know for the vision to
close. Speaker, I move that
Senate Bill 124 is amended do
now pass. We passage of Senate
Bill 124 as amended.
The vote is now open.
Well it's about to close.
Was not closed by a vote of 40
in the affirmative, 23 in the
negative. Senate Bill 124 is
amended is duly passed this
house.
a lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I move that we go to
the consent calendar.
It is so ordered members in
consultation with the majority
and minority leader, we've
agreed to put 21 items on the
consent calendar, which is on
your goldenrod.
The calendar should be in front
of you. Uh, it's also online for
the public.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that.
House Joint Memorial too, House
Joint Memorial for House Joint
Memorial 6 House Joint Memorial
9 Senate Joint Memorial One as
amended. Senate Joint Memorial
2.
House Memorial 2.
House Memorial 24 House Memorial
31 House Memorial 15.
House Memorial 32 House
Memorial, 42.
House Memorial 43 House Memorial
34 House Memorial 38, House
Memorial 41 House Memorial 50 as
amended House Memorial 29 House
Memorial 53 House Memorial, 56,
and House Memorial 57 do now
pass.s sure the board is
correct. You guys got it? It
looks like it's correct.
All right, we're gonna open the
vote and you all can vote using
your buttons.
We are on a motion.
To pass
House Memorial.
How's Joint Memorial to. How's
your Memorial for? How's your
Memorial 6. How's Joint Memorial
9, Senate Joint Memorial One as
amended. Senator Memorial to
House Memorial 2. How's Memorial
24, How Memorial 31. How's
Memorial 15, How's Memorial 32?
How's Memorial 42, House
Memorial 43. How's Memorial 34.
How's Memorial 38, House
Memorial 41, House's Memorial 50
as amended. House Memorial 29
House Memorial 53.
House Memorial 56 and House
Memorial 57, the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative.
How's your memorial too? How's
your memorial for? How's your
Memorial 6? How's your Memorial
9, Senate joint Memorial 1 as
amended. Senator joint Memorial
2 House Memorial 2. How's
Memorial 24. How's Memorial 31,
How Memorial 15. How's Memorial
32 has Memorial 42, has memorial
43. How's Memorial 34, How's
Memorial 38, How's Memorial 41?
How's Memorial 50 as amended.
How's Memorial 29? How's
Memorial 53, How's Memorial 56,
and how's Memorial 57 have duly
passed this house.
Gentle lady from order, order,
order.
I appreciate it orders generally
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Introduction of legislation.
Uh, I withdraw that, Mr.
Speaker, I only we go to that
order of business concurrence
Let's go to item number one on
your concurrence calendar
generating from Bern Leo
representative Herndon, are you
ready?
Speaker. I move that the House
concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill 54.
The general, the general lady to
explain the amendments.
The amendment simply says that
each cardiac emergency response
plan shall be, shall be
developed using core elements
that are nationally recognized
and experienced based, I mean
evidence-based, right? We are on
a motion to concur with Senate
amendments 2, House Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill 54 as amended. All those in
favor C59.
Also, although supposed name,
the I have it, the house has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Education Committee
substitute for house 54 as
amended.
lady from Donana and Otero, are
you ready on concurrence
calendar item number 2. Yes, I
am, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, I move that the house concur
with the Senate amendments to
House Bill 143 is thrice amended
lady to explain the amendments,
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 143 as
thrice amended in Senate rules
to remove the House floor
amendments.
Right, there is debate on the
motion. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the
uh gentle lady expand just a
little bit more on what
Uh, was added and that was
pulled out. I know you're saying
the amendment, can you be a
little more specific, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um I
forgot to ask if the gentle lady
would yield. Yes, I yield to the
gentleman, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, just to expand on
that, the Senate Rules Committee
stripped the House floor
amendments 7 to 1 in a
bipartisan fashion and so uh
what we have is the original
House Bill 143, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. We are on a motion to
concur with Senate amendments to
House Bill 143 as thrice
amended. All those in favor of
see probably say I.
I was a supposed ne.
The eyes have it. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 143 is thrice
amended.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, Ria
Riva San Juan.
Gentlemen from Sando Barria Riva
San Juan, are you ready on
concurrence calendar item number
3. Yes sir, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill 218 as
twice amended to explain the
amendments 3 amendments in
Senate Finance removed skim oil
changes allowed small amounts to
be filed as frequently as
annually and finally allow kids
to request a waiver from TRD for
the past 12 month baseline
setting. Right
to concur with Senate amendments
to House Bill 218 as twice
amended. All those in favor by C
and I.
Well I suppose me.
The eyes have it. The house has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 218 is twice
amended.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business announcements.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 9:45 p.m.
in room 307. There should be
some pizza left too.
to cold pizza, gentle lady from
Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. Uh,
there will not be a health and
human services committee. I
threatened it today, but we
didn't get any new referrals, so
we will not meet.
Members take note, gentlemen
from Bernalillo.
Mr. Speaker, your house
transportation committee will
meet tomorrow probably at 9
o'clock.
Members, did you say probably at
9 o'clock. Promptly. Oh,
problem.
Mazo Minos 9 o'clock. OK, lady
from Donana. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your consumer and
public affairs Committee will
meet at 9:30 a.m. in room 315,
um, for just one bill that we um
excellent accidentally didn't
see the referral. Thank you.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House Judiciary Committee will,
will meet, uh, at 9:45 in our
usual room and I believe there
should be some pizza left over
for those of you who are hungry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You're a
rural development land grants
and Cultural Affairs Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at 10
a.m. We have one fast memorial,
see you there at 3:05.
note any other announcements,
gentlemen from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, the House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee will not
meet tomorrow.
Wow, I thought it'd be a lot
more cheering.
Members think, no, I think you
made him sad.
I'm sorry, Representative, we
didn't mean to do that.
Gentle lady from Bertillo.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic Development Committee
will not meet this evening.
There is no dinner. Go home.
Members take note, gentle lady
from.
Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand and recess until
tomorrow morning at 10:30. I
take that motion, uh, rookies,
freshmen, new members, um,
returning new members. There is
a freshman photo on the floor of
the house tomorrow right before
we start floor. So if you wanna
be in the rookie, freshman, new
member, photo.
You can come and take your
photo.
But you have to wear your coat.
Representative Hernandez.
All right, any other
announcements before I take the
motion, gentlemen from San Juan,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, last
night, Mr. Speaker, when I
spoke, I spoke with many other
state legislatures across the
country that are also convening
and Mr. Speaker, I just want to
mention that the Naval code
talkers have been restored back
on the Department of Defense
website.
Right, never erased thank you
Mr. Speaker.
Very cool. Thank you for that
update, gentlemen, gentlemen
from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, if April showers
bring May flowers.
What do Mayflowers bring?
Male groms.
Finally I got one. I'm one.
For 15.
I'll try better next time, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentle lady, let's go back to
your motion.
Mr. Speaker, I renew my motion
that the House stand in recess
