Representative Lungstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice chair Romano.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair de la Croce
student shadow with us this
morning. His name is Dylan
Montoya. Dylan, want you to
stand up, everybody? They'll
look at you.
Thank you for being here.
We're gonna start off with HB 99
representative, are you ready?
Please introduce yourself and
your guests.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee. I'm Representative
Janelle Eanornu, I am presenting
House Bill 99, which is a
salvage title bill that that
provides a process by which to
salvage a car title after the
insurance company has paid out
on it, and I will let my expert
introduce.
Mr. Chairman, my name is Mark
Bender, B I N D E R for the
record, I'm with Copart.
I'm sorry, Mr. Charo would also
like to introduce my co-sponsor
representative Cynthia Boregos.
Thank you. I think we have an
amendment, correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair, we have a one
page amendment that um has been.
Thank you. We all have the vice
chair introduce.
Mr. Chair, I move the amendment
for discussion.
We have a second. Any any
opposition?
So we have introduction by vice
chair.
Second by Representative Romero.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Thank you. We, we have an
amendment. Thank you. Let's move
forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, so, um, I.
Gave a very brief introduction
of the bill, but that is
essentially exactly what it
does, so if that's all right
with you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, we will stand
for questions. I will have my
expert, um, Mr. Bender.
answer most of those questions,
if that is amenable to the chair
and the committee.
OK, before we do that, why don't
you go ahead and and talk about
the amendment and what it means.
So as you can see, I'm sorry I'm
having technology issues, so I'm
trying to pull up everything on
my phones, my laptop was not
cooperating with me this
morning. And but as you can see
in the amendment, it is just
adding the one word defend.
Into that line of the bill.
And the purpose of that, I
believe Mr. Binder can answer
more clearly than I can.
It was requested by the Mr.
Chairman. It was requested by
the MVD in order to ensure that
they are indemnified properly if
needed to be in the
indemnification. Thank you. Any
questions? I think we're good.
Let's go ahead and present.
Mister
We, I move that we adopt the
amendment.
And the opposition
We have an amended bill.
You, Mister Chair.
And we do
Sorry, Mr. Chair, would you like
the expert to fill in more
detail.
You're a little quick on the
draw rep.
It's early. I'm excited.
Please proceed.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, as I said, my name is
Mark Bender, and I'm with
Copart. I encourage you to
support, asked Bill 99.
You probably never heard of Co
Harper. What we are is we're a
national.
auction Company with locations
in Albuquerque, the services the
entire state.
As described by the
representative, this bill, the
language will fix a unique
problem for insurance and
salvage auction industries.
It's very targeted.
Situation and what happens is
from time to time,
An insurance carrier will have a
vehicle brought to the yards.
It's at the facility of a Copart
facility and it has been
declared a total loss. The
insurance company does the right
thing. They pay the claim.
And issue the payment to the
customer so they're identified,
but unfortunately, there's times
where the insurance company does
not get the proper title
paperwork for the customer.
Uh or they get the proper title
work and it's, it's signed wrong
incorrectly and they're unable
to get new documents signed.
This is, um, so think about this
with insurance companies
identified the vehicle owner,
and now they own a vehicle, but
they don't have the proper time
to work.
And since 2016, we were using
the what's called the
affirmation certifying ownership
process or ACO.
We were using it successfully
when we had this type of
situation.
But in 2023, the MVDS advised
that we were no longer allowed
to use the ACL.
So with this current.
Bill does is fix the, fix the
statute to allow us to have an
option to get rid of these
vehicles for the insurance
company.
What it does is it creates a
process. It's, that's actually
in statute in 41 other states.
There's multiple other states
that have other options, but 41
other states have something very
similar to what we're proposing
here, including all of our
neighboring states.
Bill will amend the law to.
Allow for a non for insurance
companies to obtain titles on
vehicles which they pay the
claim and oh.
providing they provide notice
through certified mailings and
have received.
Not receive the appropriate
documents.
We've also heard that there
might be some confusion on this
language.
I want to clarify that this bill
has nothing to do with
abandoned.
Ben, excuse me, with abandoned
vehicles or has nothing to do
with non-repairable vehicles.
They're, you'll notice there's a
lot of pages in the in the bill.
It's just where the legislative
council moved the abandonment
language to from one section to
another and and non-repairable.
It also does not circumvent any
towings. There's been some
confusion on that if you look on
on page 11 line 1. It's
specifies that the insurance
company must take possession of
the vehicle.
And so that possession.
Before it was made, all the
tollings would have been.
I
Take care of at that time.
It's not OK, and I also and
I've, I've had a conversation
with the former executive
director of the American
Recycling Association and.
Cause there was concerns about
the ability, about them
impacting their ability to
purchase vehicles and she has no
concerns for that and and she's
in New Mexico citizen as well.
But
I ask again that you support
Senate Bill 99 and I'm excuse
me, house build 99. I apologize
and uh it is early, as you said
earlier, so I don't have
available to answer any
questions that you may have.
Before we go to questions,
Senator Morego, is there
anything you wanted to add? I
mean, Representative, I just
promoted her.
Thank you for that.
I'll take it, I think she liked
that.
No, I, I'm.
You know, I've had a little bit
of experience um with this
because um I've actually done a.
Back in time, I did a little
work with my brothers, um, who
are both in the automotive
business and it's kind of funny
cause they're kind of competing
with each other a little bit,
but they both own dealerships
and I, I understood um.
You know, when
Uh, vehicles were purchased, and
they were, they were or they
were trying to purchase vehicles
and it's, it really is more with
like you said, the parts, but.
When there's a lack of a title,
and you know, they can't, um, it
really create.
Thank you, members. Any
questions?
Before we go to questions, let's
see if there's anybody that is
in in.
Support of this bill, if you and
the others raise your hand and
if you wish to speak, please
line up.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association,
and Allstate Insurance Company.
House Bill 99 is a needed fix,
and we urge your support of the
bill.
I'm Scott Scanlon, good morning.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for Copart, and again,
I don't want to repeat what uh
what Mark said, but this is
fixing a basically a
bureaucratic glitch, um, and I'd
point you to the direction of
the uh the FIR analysis from the
Thaksin Rev uh that they're.
pretty positive FIR and I think
they I don't want to speak for
the department, but I think
they're in support of it, and we
appreciate your consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in the
webcast?
Is there anyone in opposition to
the bill?
Anybody in opposition on
webcast.
Amy Barrella.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Can you hear me?
We can hear you.
Great. Uh, my name is Amy
Barrella, and I'm the president
of the New Mexico Towing and
Recovery Association. Um, while
I agree with uh Copart's
statements. I want to make sure
that um they actually have
possession of the vehicle when
they take when they brand these
titles. The reason why I read
this bill as that if the
insurance company is unable to
obtain uh any communication with
the registered owner, it seems
like they're able to brand these
vehicles without
possessions, so I wanna make
sure that that is definitely
stressed that the vehicle is in
possession at the time that this
is declared non-repairable. The
reason why is because we are as
tow companies are mandated to do
certain kind of notifications to
the registered owners and all
that and begin the lien process
when we obtain a vehicle within
3 days of the vehicle. If the
title has to be changed into an
insurance company's name 30 days
is up.
Thank you.
Thomas Wyman.
Yes, thank you, Chair de la
Cruz, committee members, my name
is Thomas Wyman, and I emailed
you all my comments on House
Bill 99 yesterday. Let me
reiterate, 99 will simply help
the MVD and the insurance
companies violate the property
rights of the insured who want
to buy back and repair their
total loss vehicles under 49 USC
section 305025, a junk vehicle
can be rebuilt restored, or
crushed. Federal
controls and preempt state law
6634, 66310.1, which prohibit a
vehicle owner from selling a
non-repairable vehicle to anyone
except a junkyard. Please do not
pass House Bill 99.
Thank you. Do you have anybody
else?
Members, any questions?
Representative
Let's go to Representative Dao,
who else, please?
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Could you, um, could you tell us
if the the where is the
situation with possession?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative Dao, so
if you look at the bill on page
11, line 1.
It stipulates quite clearly and
takes possession of the vehicle.
So
To address the ecstasy in the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that. Um, how long
will tow yards be forced to hold
abandoned vehicles.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Doll.
The
The, the tow yards holding
vehicles is not part of this
bill. I have great sympathy for
their concerns, but this
situation we're talking about is
after it leaves the tow yard and
is at a copart.
our competitors' facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Representative. Do
you think that we will tow.
Will they, will they, will
people be less willing to tow
tow vehicles if this passes.
Mr. Chairman, um, Representative
Dell.
No, I do not believe so because
it's, it's a complicated
industry, but this the
It's 99 passes, this will be
after the fact of the toe and
after it is picked up on the tow
yard. One of
Vehicle is declared a total loss
and moved to COA facility. It
can't be moved until because the
tow yards and rightfully so
won't release it unless all
their
These have been paid.
So those fees are paid and it's.
And it's moved to uh our
facility.
And then they settle the total
loss claim and, and they move it
as quick as possible in order to
mitigate storage costs. So when
it's moved to our facility.
At that point is where the total
settlement is made in.
It's after the toe.
Lobby or to yards have been
indemnified for their expenses.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. If the insurance
company has the ability to
Stop them from branding it while
it's in the tow yard. Nothing
will happen at the tow yard.
What, what happens if the, what
happens to an insurance
arbitration.
What happens with that?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dow, the arbitration, this is
after the settlement arbitration
would always take place before
because the settlement means
there's an agreement between the
insured or the claimant as well
as the insurance company. So we
have a total loss. I pay you the
$10,000 and you send the title
and you, you sign Becca instead
of Rebecca. That's the the
title's void, and I ask you for
a new title and you.
Disappear because you weren't
even paid and you have no
interest in participating.
That's the type of scenario that
we see.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
basically I'm, I'm very
concerned about our wrecking and
towing industry.
And Representative Lindstrom
gave a perfect example of, did
you say 11 hours, the road was
closed.
Once the, I mean, they're just.
Very heavily overregulated,
they're facing a lot more fines.
For those of us who have a major
highway going through our
communities.
You know, we, I don't want to
put any burden, like we, we just
had another wrecking company in
our community closed down. I'm
very concerned about that
industry and it was such a short
public comment I have questions.
Anyways, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for your
presentation. Um, one of the
emails that I received says that
this will circumvent the.
A process of getting the.
Correct certification or or
information.
To, uh, release the vehicle like
from the the owner.
Now,
Uh, what is your process?
Of contacting the owner of the
vehicle.
Repres uh chairman, Mr. Chairman
and uh representative Armstrong.
How it, how it works now is
The vehicle is declared a total
loss by the insurance company.
Well, typically while it's at
the rec yard, sometimes it's
moved to our facility.
The insured or the vehicle
owner.
tells their insurance company
it's OK to be vehicle to be
picked up.
The insurance company tells us
it's OK to be picked up. We call
the tow company and we, we asked
to make sure it's been vehicle's
been released for pickup at that
time, we find out what the
charges are, are, are to.
The truck that we hire, we'll go
pick up the vehicle from the tow
company. It's a non-hire toe.
It's not a tow company that
you're thinking it's not, it's
not, it, it is a concept to
throughout.
Through a uh
A subcontractor.
They pay the charges that are
owed to the tow company and they
pick up the vehicle that comes
to our facility.
And I think one of the.
What you might have received
maybe different than what the
towing cause you're, I think you
might have been talking about
Novetis, which is the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information
System.
And the, the when a vehicle is
declared a total loss, it is is
required by an insurance company
as well as what they call a
junkyard and we're.
Word captured under the junkyard
facility as well as tow yards to
notify the Department of Justice
that this vehicle is a total
loss vehicle.
And those are done no matter
what if we, as long as we pick
up the vehicle and it is a total
loss that is reported. The
titling from House Bill 99 has
nothing to do with that titling,
with that notification. It's,
it's not a brand on a title,
it's just in a database, um,
that's used for fraud
protection. It's, it's from the
truth and uh excuse me, it's
from the anti-crime Theft Act in
1992 at the federal level.
OK, well, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So one of the things
that's brought to my attention
is, um.
If House Bill 990 is passed.
is enacted insurance companies
will have an easier path to
reclaiming titles without
settling outstanding toe and
storage bills.
Leaving the towing companies yet
another financial hardship. Is
that true?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Armstrong, that is not true
because the tow company is
fully.
Paid for their fees when we
picked the vehicle up. If not,
they would not allow us to have
the vehicle.
And I mean, there's, there's
examples.
Through throughout the country
where there's tens of thousands
of dollars in tow charges, and
we have to pay those before we
pick the vehicle up. That's
between the insurance company
and the tow yard, but it's all
handled before we pick up the
vehicle and I, and I wanted to I
sympathize for what you and
Representative Tao have said
about the to industry because
they do have a hard time. I
mean, they're the ones that get
called at 2 o'clock in the
morning, and they have a lot of
regulations. We, we have the
utmost sympathy for them. It
just, this bill has nothing to
do with the tow facilities. Uh
it's.
This is all after the fact. It's
way down the food chain of the
total loss process. Thank you
for that, Mr. Chairman and thank
you, sir. So, uh, what if the
tow company has a lien on that
vehicle.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, that lien would be
paid when we pick up the
vehicle. We would not be able to
pick up the vehicle. They will
not allow it to leave their
facility unless that lien is
paid.
Thank you for that
clarification. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Next we have ranking
member Brown.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman
Thank you for, for this bill.
I have a few concerns about it.
Some of those have already been
expressed.
Um, so let me just, uh, kind of
start at the beginning. So, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Representative.
This applies only to vehicles
that are deemed a total loss, is
that correct?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Brown, yes, that is correct.
Deemed unsettled
As a total loss, so they've been
it's not only been declared a
total loss, but uh.
customer or the vehicle owner
has been paid for the damage to
their vehicle.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
Is it Bender or bender's
Chairman Representative Browit's
Bender. It looks like binder.
It's a screwed up thing, so
it's like fender bender got it.
OK. Um.
So I, I guess I'm concerned as
well for the, the tow companies,
I guess we have an association
here in New Mexico for tow
companies, and it's my
understanding they were not
brought in on the discussion of
this bill, and I, I really
thought that in its present
form, I don't think I could
support it today, but I think if
There's some discussion among
these several parties that we
could probably end up with
something that
Um, I could vote for without any
reservation.
Um, one of the problems in my
district, Mr. Chairman, is
It's, it's not like.
You know, vehicles like cars and
trucks, it's off-road vehicles.
That, um, typically may be
abandoned and the company or the
business that either sells or
repairs these vehicles is left
with these basically abandoned
vehicles, no titles.
With this bill in any way help
them to dispose of the, they
don't want these.
If they're becoming storage
yards for abandoned vehicles.
This help in any way.
Representative Brown, no, this
would not have any impact on
them and, and I understand the
concern that there are actually
other for tow lots and and
storage facilities that vehicles
that are abandoned that they can
use, we, we can't use it because
we don't have the proper
license, but I know that that.
The tow industry has specific uh
lean sale type legislation or
statutes that they yeah, Mr.
Chairman, I've spent some time
actually on this issue, and I,
I'm not finding a a quick
solution to it, but again,
that's probably another lane.
Discussion, um, I did want to
ask on page 9 of the bill.
It refers to the insurance
company for an authorized agent
of the insurance company.
Um, it's a shelf stamp, the face
of the title or manufacturer
certificate of origin with the
word non-repairable, and that's
letters.
Is there actually, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Bender, does it have to be
an actual stamper or stamp or
can someone just write that
across the title.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
that is actually current law now
and.
I, we actually stamp them
ourselves. I don't know if you
can write them, but we, we have
a stamp where we stamped them,
and that, that's part of the car
law that I mentioned earlier
that was being at the
Legislative council just moved
from one section to another for
reasons which I don't know why.
That's what's caused a lot of
confusion. We had, I got a lot
of phone calls from the
recycling industry, to be honest
with you, because they thought
that we were changing their
non-repairable because they
didn't want to change, and I was
like, no, it's completely
separate.
They're just moving it for and I
don't know why they did, but.
Um, well, Mr. Chairman and, uh,
Representative, I agree with the
reorganization under this bill.
I think it, it makes it more
clear when we're talking about
the uh non-repairable vehicles.
So that was a good, good feature
of the bill, I thought.
Um
Let me ask you, um, Mr. Chair
and representative on page 11 of
the bill.
Um
Around my 10.
It says the application on a
form provided by the department
to issue a salvage certificate
or title or non-repairable
vehicle certificate.
shall not occur prior to 30 days
after the insurance claim
payment.
That it says what it shall
include.
Um, why the 30 day period, Mr.
Chair, Bender representative.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Brown, the 30 days is because,
and that's what's actually in,
in every other.
Every other state as well other
than 41, that is to allow time
for the vehicle owner to fix the
problem that they have whether
get a new title, fix the
signature, um, it requires the
insurance company to make a an
effort to obtain the title work
that we need or they need,
excuse me, not we, they need.
And, and Mr. Chair and
Representative.
so I just say it's a historic
vehicle.
I said autoclassic or something,
and it's considered
non-repairable, but the owner of
the vehicle.
wants to make an attempt to
either
But sell parts from it or maybe
even.
But are they allowed to do the
repair to get it to where it's
drivable again, or is that not
allowed with a quote unquote
non-repair repairable vehicle
here.
Representative Brown, that is
what is called an owner retained
settlement and which not would
not apply to this. What would
happen is the vehicle owner
would agree to keep the vehicle
with the insurance company and
they would deduct the salvage
value and it would never end up
at our facility. So to answer
your question, yes, they could
keep it and that's, it's nothing
you have to be a classic, it can
be any vehicle could be owned or
retained.
Spending of course the lien
holder agrees, which if there's
a lien on it, they typically
will not agree.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman, I,
I think that it covers um.
most of my questions except I
would just go back to my earlier
statement that I think the the
towing association, uh, needs to
be consulted on this bill.
Um, there may be a sentence or
two that can be added to assuage
their concerns.
And I want to make sure
everybody's happy with whatever
passes out of its committee.
So thank you for the time, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, ranking member, just
uh for every.
Both members and panel. I know
it's a bit of an inconvenience,
but if you would please turn off
your mic after you speak.
And then turn it on when you're
going to speak again. I think
that's what's causing that
little.
Annoying glitch
Uh, Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, the
question I had was again on it
was on uh possession. Could,
could you explain that again so
I understand that I know
Representative Doo had raised
that issue, but I'd like to
better understand that.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lindstrom, yes, the possession
is actually the the start of the
language on our bill is on page
10, line 25, and it says if an
insurance company makes a total
loss.
to a vehicle owner, so they had
to pay the claim and take
possession of the vehicle, so
that means the insurance company
has full control and ownership.
Rights of the vehicles in which
they do because it has left the
tow facility and it is at the
auction facility or uh they
might.
They may take it somewhere else
other than an auction facility,
but the insurance company has
the possession, they, they have,
they have.
Rights and control of the
vehicle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Lustrom, are, are
you done?
Thank you. I was consulting with
my vice chair.
Uh
I'd like to recommend and
there's no other questions.
Oh
I apologize, Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative and Mr. Bender. I
do have the same concerns that
have been voiced by um
Vice chair.
Ranking members, sorry, ranking
member Brown about, about making
sure that this is a bill that is
is good with everybody,
especially the towing industry.
I've, I've got one question.
What if the owner decides to
settle within the with the
insurance agent agency while
it's at the tow yard and the
insurance pays out, but the
owner never picks up the
abandoned vehicle, um, with the
lien process then be Mr.
Chairman, Representative Jones,
no, it would not because the
insurance company would not have
possession of the vehicle.
It would be in the possession of
the toe yard itself.
And could you explain to me,
thank you, could you explain to
me what would happen with the
vehicle after.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Jones, that
Uh, something that I can't, I
can't, it would be between the,
the total industry as well as
and the insurance company that
would have no impact on Senate
Bill 99. That's a different
issue completely.
Thank you for that, and I have
to admit I don't fully
understand this bill and what
it's trying to do and I have a
lot of conflicting uh questions,
so I'm in favor of.
Would you be willing to roll
this bill and have it worked on
so that I could support it,
Mister Chair Representative,
given the
Concerns laid out and the fact
that for some reason the
language of this bill seems to
be.
Wrapped in with the toe
industry, even though the two
things are not related at all,
if it is the will of the chair
and the committee that we roll
the bill, make sure that that
language is clearly separated
and delineated so that the toe
industry.
As is the intent of the bill is
completely left out of that, and
we bring it back at a later date
with that clearer language, we'd
be willing to do that, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I,
I'm in agreement with the
ranking member Brown. I don't
think it'll hurt the bill to add
a little more fortifying
language, it'll make it
abundantly clear the rights of
the towing companies. I think we
can get this bill to the
committee, uh fairly quickly.
Uh, back on the agenda.
So if, if it's OK with everyone,
we're gonna go ahead and roll
the bill.
Representative. Yes, and we can
make those changes, Mr. Chair,
and hopefully get back. Thank
you.
We will be moving on to HB 160,
stop, look and listen for
railroad equipment.
Representative Lindstrom.
Johnson
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
uh good morning committee. Today
I'm here to talk to you and uh
about house bill one interesting
title, stop, look and listen for
railroad equipment, Mr.
Chairman, uh, what this bill
basically does it amends the
motor vehicle code require all
drivers to stop.
A search for other on track
equipment besides trains and
rail at railroad crossings.
Um, existing language uh line 21
where we talk about other track
equipment, Mr. Chairman.
And with that, uh, we would
stand for questions that if we,
if I could have my experts
introduce themselves, please.
Would you introduce yourself?
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Um, I'm Frank Franco.
Uh, nice to meet you here with
me is my assistant legislative
director, um.
Peter Pacheco.
Uh, did your
Do you want any more
presentation are we?
Please proceed. I would like to
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before
you today.
On important public safety issue
for motorists, pedestrians.
And men and women who work on
the railroad tracks in New
Mexico and throughout our
country.
Um, like I said, I am Frank
Franco, New Mexico latest
legislative director.
Brotherhood made its way
employees division.
Division of Teamsters.
Along with me today is Peter
Pacheco. He's from Los Unnos,
New Mexico. He is the assistant
legislative director of New
Mexico.
We're here to offer our strong
support for House Bill 160 that
would amend current state
statute to include or other
on-track equipment.
Under New Mexico current New
Mexico law maintenance away.
Railroad contractors and other
on-track equipment are not
included concerning a motorist's
responsibilities when
approaching a crossing.
It is critically important when
the gates are down.
Or when there's a train
approaching or a flagman or a
stop sign is present.
The motor vehicle stop a safe
safe distance from the crossing.
House Bill 160 would update
existing railroad crossing law
pertaining to motorists
responsibilities at railroad
crossings.
Making a safe workplace for our
members and the motorists on New
Mexico roads.
The issue is on track equipment
has evolved into train-like
machines.
That present the same dangers of
a train not being able to stop
on a dime.
Throughout modernization of
railroad on track equipment, our
members now operate state of the
art equipment.
On the tracks in New Mexico.
And with that comes.
We are long gone from the days
when pushcarts ran up and down
the tracks.
While most of the public
understand trains occupying the
tracks in their respective
neighborhoods and to avoid them
at all costs. Not everyone is
aware of on track maintenance
and construction machines that
travel on the track
infrastructure in New Mexico.
And around the country.
This is a true safety bill.
That will protect New Mexico's
motorists and our members that
work and live here in New
Mexico.
Also, there's no cost to New
Mexico state DOT after this
legislation is enacted.
similar legislation has passed
in 39 states so far. There is
currently active or pending
legislation in 6 states,
Arizona, Missouri, Pennsylvania,
plus this bill in New Mexico.
This legislation is supported by
rail labor, railroads
themselves, railroad
contractors, and in fact I have
found no public opposition.
Uh, it will
To clarify that there are other
pieces of equipment.
That travel on tracks that
present the same dangers to
motorists as trains.
Also, we will help educate the
public.
Of this fact after the state
statute is amended.
Working with New Mexico
operation Lifesaver.
And railroads look, listen, and
live, PSA.
It is
Important to us, not only that
this legislation is passed, but
moreover that help educate
motorists.
The dangerous at railroad
crossings.
In closing, I would like to
stress again this legislation
will save lives both on and off
the tracks here in New Mexico.
Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today. I'm
happy to answer any questions
you may have on this issue or
railroad safety in general.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom. We're good on
presentation.
Is there anyone in favor of the
bill in the audience?
Thank you if you wish to speak,
please uh line up behind the
presenters.
Everyone will be given one
minute, including those on
webcast.
It's um, Mr. Chairman Robert
Romero, registered lobbyist for
BNSF Railroad.
This, as mentioned, as mentioned
by the speaker, this bill is
passed in 39 states, and it's
working. The railroad supports
this bill and asks for your
support.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name's JD Bullington. I'm
registered lobbyist in New
Mexico for Union Pacific
Railroad. We also support this
legislation and I just don't
want to add this is what a model
collaborative effort looks like
between the railroad companies
and the rail labor unions that
results in meaning meaningful
safety improvements.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Clem
Harris. I represent almost 600
members of the Brotherhood of
Locomotive Engineers and
Trainmen, and we stand in
support and request your support
of this legislation. Thank you.
Do we have any on webcast.
OK, do we have any, anyone in
the audience in opposition to
this bill.
We have no opposition in the
audience. Do we have, do we have
anyone in opposition?
You do.
OK, I, we're good members,
questions?
Representative Borego.
Thank you, thank you,
presenters, um.
And representative.
I thought this was already in
law.
It's not
German representative know when
you, when you look at existing.
Uh, statute in the bill, you can
see where we've added um.
The on track equipment piece,
but it is not, it does not cover
the equipment.
Not,
OK, and then Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, my other
question is,
at one complain to, I crossed
the railroad tracks regularly
off of Montagno and um off of um
Um, over by the rail runner.
In the North Valley.
And um
If somebody doesn't stop and
look.
If the little gate doesn't come
down or if there's a
non-existing gain against, um,
who would one complain to?
Cuz I saw that there is a fine.
the rail.
Railroad or
Labor union, I, it's.
If you see someone that
is through and.
Tries to beat the equipment, so
to speak, as as we see a lot in
Gallup.
It is
I, I assume handle just like any
violating the law.
I know, in our case, we've often
called or we let them know.
As it is.
Very, very dangerous that uh
that you go through the the
arms, so to speak, but I would
assume it would be handled this.
County sheriff, whoever the law
enforce.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, uh,
is this law, um, Mr. Chairman,
and um,
Representative, are we creating
a law to make people stop at
every railroad track, if it
doesn't have a gate,
Representative, what we're, what
we're trying to do here is to
make sure that uh we are
consistent when it comes to
large.
Track equipment.
Um
You would think that common
sense, uh, folks would stop when
they.
And in many lights, sometimes
it's nothing there, especially
in our more rural areas.
But what we're trying to do is
to make this consistent a driver
understands it not only.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative. I just want to
make sure that, uh, as you
stated earlier that there's not
going to be a cost.
Affiliated with additional
signage or anything else, and I
wondered if there's uh.
Some kind of campaign that's
gonna let people know that
they're supposed to do this. I
don't know that they people know
they should do this.
Representative, there will be a
campaign. I think you're right,
most people don't know.
So we're hoping then that with
the campaign people will be
educated to know also.
It's something that could be
included in driver safety
courses um.
Kids are getting their driver's
license and they're going
through that kind of thing that
they realize, yeah, I need to
stop. Thank you, madam, uh, uh,
representative, and thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Represent Lundstrom, good
morning.
So I've been reading the
analysis and there's some
language in here that I think
might be just a little bit.
Inaccurate
So the question boils down to
this, Mr. Chair and
Representative, does House Bill
160.
In any way change the stopping
distances that are required.
When one comes upon a railroad
and representative, is that
we're in the bill, do you see
that? Uh well, um. Or is it just
in the analysis what we're
doing.
Basically taking existing law.
And we're saying not only do you
need to stop for the.
Um, thank you very much,
uh, Mr. Chairman. So, um,
That's, that's the assurance I
wanted, um, again, it's the
fiscal impact report that's
throwing me off a little bit on
that, so I just wanted to make
sure where we are with that.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Representative.
I'm I'm trying to
Remember what other
A track using equipment used by
the railroad other than the
train cars looks like. What,
what are we talking about there?
Um
Just a short description, please
actually have pictures in my
file, but if we could ask is BNS
those pieces are.
Let's go ahead and do that. I, I
actually had some images of some
of the equipment as well. Uh, we
probably should have handed it
out, but that's fine. Let's go
ahead and have the equipment
described, please.
We need a microphone, please.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, this equipment is its
large, it's almost like it looks
like a small train, I believe um
with some of these photos we
can, we can explain that better.
Also, these are, these aren't,
um, they're not pushcarts,
they're not trucks on wheels.
These are large, large, large,
large.
This is a
Thank you presenters, if you
want to describe some of the
equipment as well, please,
please feel free.
Uh, chair of representatives,
um, I'd like to explain it.
We'll show you a picture of it
as well, um, but we have some
very large machines that go and
pick up uh ties along the tracks
and it's, and has um equipment
in the back, like backhoes and
as well as that, um, and they're
so big that.
They're, they're
Like a train. It's not a truck.
It's not like you said a
pushcart. This is.
A huge machine, um, some of them
have more than 10.
15 cars on it.
So, um
And as well as our uh
maintenance other maintenance
machines as well. They have a
lot of blind spots and they're
just.
some of it if you'd like me to
do that, Mr. Chairman.
Members, I think we're, we're
OK, uh, if offline somebody
would like to see him, that'd be
fine.
Just to make them feel better
about their vote.
Any other questions, members?
OK, what is the will of the
committee?
Mr.
I sure, I'm moving too fast.
Second
We have a
Do pass from vice chair Lata and
a second by Representative
Borego.
Let's go ahead and
uh
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brego.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative Doo.
Representative Franklin Hernan,
Representative Hochman Vich
Hill.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice Chair Romando, yes.
Mr. Chair de la Cruz, yes.
Looks like you cleared the
committee.
Thank you.
I understand that Vice Chair
Latta has the shadow as well.
Would you like to introduce your
shadow? Yes, I do. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd
like to uh welcome my shadow
today, Mr. Nico Salazar.
Welcome, and I hope you have a,
a good experience.
uh.
I, I, I look forward to, to, to
meeting with you. Welcome, Nico.
Thank you committee. uh, we will
move on to HB 32 Electric and
alternative fuel school buses.
We have Senator Sewell's.
Welcome, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. I went to check
because in the Senate typically
you have to have a senator
present a Senate bill until
things move over from the house
and so I appreciate you allowing
me to do this in front of your
committee when the the House
sponsor is, I believe, stuck in
another committee right now.
The
If you're ready, I'm ready to
present that accurate Senator,
please proceed and introduce
your uh your expert witness.
You're with me and many of you
know, uh, Charles Goodmacher
who's been doing lots around
electric school buses, uh, this
bill does only a couple of
things, um, and make some
clarifications. First, it adds
the section on page 2, the
department shall provide
districts the option to replace
school buses, keyword is option,
not required of anybody to do
so. It's only if it is
appropriate for that particular
district.
And then as you move over to
pages 4 and 5, it goes through
the process for replacement that
if the district is
Electric school buses cost more
than diesel buses. Um, if the
district is able to get outside
funding that they can get from
the
make sure I get the right place
of the transportation or the
normal mechanisms for replacing
buses up to 50%.
Of the cost up to what a normal
diesel bus would cost if they do
not have that, they can get 50%
of the cost or they can get the
outside funding and then pick up
the rest of it up to a maximum
of what a diesel bus would cost.
So this doesn't cost the
districts anything extra. The it
just fills in the gap over what
a diesel bus would cost or up to
that maximum amount. And then
the last is it allows the
district to enter into and
that's on page 5, the new
material.
the district to enter into a
mechanisms with
District with uh electric
utilities to use the buses as a
battery storage of extra
renewable energy, for instance.
And so it's a backup for all the
electrical systems. It's a way
of absorbing additional
electricity during high peak
times to use during other peak
times. That's what this bill
does, and I believe we'd be open
for questions. Mr. Goodmacher is
here to be a technical expert if
there are any, any details about
it.
Thank you. Do we have people in
the audience that are in
support. If you do, please raise
your hand.
And if you wish to speak, please
form a line behind the
presenters.
Good morning, Chairman and
people of the committee. My name
is Santiago Hardy. I'm a youth
intern with EM Native Vote. I'm
19 years old.
I'm Spanish, Jami and be.
Um, born and raised in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Today I'm here asking for
support for HB 32, the electric
school bus transition.
I graduated from my Native
American community academy where
I had to ride the school bus to
and from school.
Um, from firsthand experience, I
could tell you that taking the
school bus is no fun.
Uh, it was loud on the bus, so,
uh, I had a shout to my friends
to talk to him.
The smell of the exhaust would
seep into the bus, making it,
um, making me feel nauseous, uh,
which would affect my
schoolwork.
Electric school buses would fix
this problem and create a safe
and sustainable environment for
everyone.
Uh, studies show that diesel
power is more than 90% of school
buses and uh it's exhaust is
linked to Sirius and uh the
serious health and development
problems.
Transitioning to electric school
buses would benefit my younger
siblings.
And generations of students to
come, and the environment. With
that being said, please vote yes
for HB 32 for a brighter future
for New Mexico's up.
As a reminder of our speakers,
we have one minute to speak and
that as well for those folks
online.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Deborah
Condit. I'm the lobbyist for New
Mexico Voices for Children
Action Fund. Historically, New
Mexico voices for children is
charged has been to support
children through a good
education. Part of that support
also includes endorsing
legislation that protects
children from harmful
environmental pollutants,
hospitals 32 is one of those
bills that if passed would help
with that. Electric school buses
let off fewer emissions, which
can reduce asthma and often res
and other respiratory ailments.
We ask for your support on House
Bill 32. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Arturo Castillo and I'm
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Borders
New Mexico.
No one can deny that we are in
the midst of a climate crisis
and our children will experience
the worst of its impacts. The
least we can try to do is shield
them and a little bit and
improve their health today.
Conservation waters supports
this legislation because
allowing districts choose the
healthier, um,
And safer alternative to diesel
and fund and funding them to
make that choice is an important
step for protecting our future
generations to come.
Thank you.
Morning, Mister Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jacquelyn Walsh. I'm
representing the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter, um, and we
support HB 32, it will reach
every part of New Mexico,
providing funding that makes
electric school buses accessible
for all school districts.
Electric school buses have a
host of benefits. They can save
districts up to $15,000 a year
on lower fuel costs and
maintenance costs, reduce
emissions, especially inside the
bus, and they can serve as
batteries on the power grid as
an additional benefit. Vote yes
to bring these benefits to our
children in school districts.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
representatives of the
committee. My name is Scott
Lopez, and I am founder and CEO
of Vida Mejo Capital, uh, and
I'm also a registered lobbyist.
We are at 501c3 and very active
in several infrastructure
sectors in New Mexico, including
Power. We also host the New
Mexico Energy Policy symposium
in Espanola. HB 32 is an
intriguing bill in the sense
that vehicle to grid technology
is an innovative concept and
technology that is active and
operational in multiple states
across the country.
Is it, it is a technology that
supports the transition to clean
energy, enhances redundancy, and
can also provide economic
benefits to school districts and
local municipalities and
electric co ops. Thank you for
your consideration and the
passage of you. Do we have
anyone online? We do.
Giovanna Rossi.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Giovanna Rossy and I'm
here as a mother and the New
Mexico field organizer for Mom's
Clean Air Force, an organization
of over 1.5 million parents and
caregivers nationally who are
concerned about the impacts of
air pollution and climate change
on children's health. I'm
speaking today on behalf of the
over 20,000 moms Clean Air Force
members right here in New
Mexico. Parents across the state
stand in support of House Bill
32 because it's a crucial.
step toward improving the health
for our kids, reducing harmful
air pollution and modernizing
New Mexico's school
transportation system.
Uh, there's lots of benefits to
this, but just to say, we urge
you to vote yes on House Bill 32
and invest in the future for our
kids.
Thank you.
Shelley, man live.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Shelly
Man Lev. I'm the executive
director of Healthy Climate New
Mexico, an organization of about
250 healthcare and public health
professionals from around our
state who are concerned about
the health of children families
and we stand strongly in support
of HB 32 and this transition,
this important transition that
school districts have the
opportunity to make for a
healthier future and better
learning conditions for their
children.
I want to particularly add that
diesel fuels release a host of
air pollutants that are harmful
to children and family's health.
Small particulate matter,
nitrogen oxides, heavy metals,
benzene, all of these exacerbate
asthma can cause cancer,
premature deaths, and also
immediately impact earning.
Thank you so much learning.
Thank you so much and we again
hope that you will support HB
32.
Zoe Kraft.
Hi, good morning, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Zoe Kraft, and I'm here
on behalf of Yucca, a statewide
youth-led climate justice
organization with thousands of
members and supporters fighting
for a livable and just future
for New Mexico. Yucca strongly
supports House Bill 32 because
transitioning to electric school
buses is a critical step in
protecting students' health and
modeling real climate solutions
in our schools. For far too
long, students have been forced
to breathe harmful diesel
emissions while riding to and
from school, which is a known.
cinogen and contributes to
respiratory illnesses that
disproportionately impact low
income and indigenous
communities. No child should
have to inhale toxic fumes just
to get an education. And by
replacing dirty diesel buses
with electric and zero emission
alternatives. This bill
prioritizes student health,
reduces emissions, and takes an
important step towards climate
justice. Yucca urges lawmakers
to pass House Bill 32 because
our students deserve clean air,
a safe learning environment, and
a future where public
investments support
sustainability and justice.
Thank you.
Jacob Hester.
Morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Jacob Herbster, and I am the
transportation director for
Dulcie Independent Schools, uh,
Dulci independent schools
actually has 2 electric buses on
our school fleet.
Um, the buses were purchased
through the clean School Bus
Act, um, from the EPA, um, we
are thoroughly impressed with
our school buses that we have
here in the district. Um, we're
already seeing a positive impact
on our fuel budget.
Um, I strongly, strongly urge
your support.
On the committee on House Bill
32. Thank you for your time,
Christopher.
Good morning, Chair and
committee. My name is
Christopher Ramirez with
Together for Brothers, one of
the communities we organized is
Westgate, which has the
Albuquerque Public schools,
school bus idling lot with
several 100 diesel buses, idle
from drop off to pick up every
day at 90th and Central Avenue,
the idling lot is located next
to one of the largest mobile
home communities with a high
concentration of low income
households and households of
color in the city. House Bill 32
could affect air pollution and
respiratory problems for Latina
Latino.
households next to the idling
lot with electric school buses
instead of diesel. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience that is in
opposition to this bill. If so,
raise your hand.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition online? I could make
a quick comment about uh the,
the support for it and while we
appreciate the support. The real
focus of this bill is it's
relatively neutral as to whether
diesel or electric buses, it
just provides for the mechanism
for districts that choose to do
that. Uh, it doesn't have a
fiscal impact, it just
indicates.
that could be spent on these.
can be spent on an electric bus
and then sets up the mechanism
for using the battery as a, a
storage mechanism within the
district. And so that we
appreciate the support this
really particular bill is not
directly about climate change
or, you know, uh, diesel fumes
or anything of that sort. It's
much more just a technical
mechanism for districts on if
they're going to choose buses,
how they go about doing that.
Thank you. I also want to
recognize that we have
representative Gurola with us.
Good morning, Representative.
Did you wish to speak or add to
this topic.
Thank you.
Thank you, members. First we
have uh
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you uh for all the
information. I'm glad you made
that statement because everyone
was going.
A little crazy on the bill and
it's really pretty simple.
explanation of what you're
trying to do. But my first
question is why do we need a
bill to do it?
Mr. Chair, madam, Representative
Armstrong, um.
We need a bill for 2 reasons.
Uh, one is to do make the choice
to make the switch that they're
at least getting equal funding
as if they.
Had chosen a diesel bus. So, uh,
to clarify that in statute is
important.
Um, the second part is that
without the bill on that section
about vehicle to grid or the
buyback provisions for the
electric storage, um, the
districts can't.
sell back the excess energy.
Who utility when it's needed
during peak times.
There are districts in
Other states, uh, one district
in California with their utility
provider, it's actually written
into their power agreement.
Or, or their, you know, that
they file with their.
So this, this is a very viable
option that without the bill.
the asset that they have. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you,
uh, Mr. Goodmarker. So
I'm, I'm reading the, the end of
where it's saying about the
providing grid services. Is this
Is this from the charging?
portion of the bill of the, how,
how are they going to sell back,
what, what capacity do they have
to sell back?
Thank you again. Uh, yes, they,
um, you know, utilities now are
having differential rates at
different times of the day, you
know, so, so, uh, the Chargers
would be required to be two-way
chargers. There are some
chargers that are only one way
chargers, but, um, like Las
Cruces School District, which.
All the FIRs and so on note they
received 5 buses through the
clean school bus program. They
installed two-way chargers, so
they're already set, but this
would allow other districts to
do the same.
Thank you for that. Uh, now I'm
glad you brought that up, so in
the bill, does it say that they
have to install two-way
chargers?
option for the district. I can't
imagine a district.
Thank you for that information.
Um, have you taken into
consideration in this bill that.
The co-ops across the state of
New Mexico that are, you cannot
sell back into.
I think most of this is
enabling. It doesn't require
them to do so. It allows them to
set up these agreements with
whatever the utility would be.
And so if the co-ops don't do
that, this part of it doesn't
take place. This is enabling so
that districts are able to, if
that works in their area. Mr.
Chair, if I may also add, uh,
the New Mexico rural Electric
Cooperatives has indicated their
support for this bill to us. So
I'm not aware of any provision
that prevents that. Thank you
for that. That's interesting
because I know in Socorro.
We can't sell back.
Uh, I know right now in.
Los Lunas of Valencia County.
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
There's no capacity.
To sell back if you want to put
in.
Uh, solar panels.
There's no capacity left in the
grid. And so it's a concern of
mine that we're, I understand
that it's enabling in case they
are they are able to, but I, I
was concerned.
Um, about
They're, they're not able to
most rural electric co ops don't
allow that.
Um, and then some are over
capacity that so the the
capacity of the the grid.
Is, is, I think what we should
be worrying about as well. Uh,
on the second thing.
Um
I don't know.
I'm not a, uh, I, I bet um Mr.
Romero has a lot and knows a
little more about this than I
do, but I was curious to know
why, why would we need?
I'm still concerned that we
don't really need legislation to
do this because
They wanted to buy an electric
school bus, wouldn't they just.
Say OK and then they would get
the same reimbursement that they
would for a diesel school bus
and they'd have to find the
funding somewhere else. Is that
the way I'm reading this
legislation, and it can't be
taxpayer dollars. It has to be a
grant or, or is this include
taxpayer dollars, school
districts from PED or the the um
uh public school capital outlay.
Mr. Charon Representative
Armstrong, uh, what it does is
it just indicates that.
They can get up to the amount
that they would be paying for a
diesel bus. They would be
getting grants either federal
grants, uh, private grants or
others to cover the other thing,
but then.
They, they would never be more
than that.
And so it just levels the
playing field if you're going
for a bus and you can get
outside funding that the state
will provide up to the same
amount they would have provided
if they were buying a full out
diesel bus. That is not clearly
stated in the bus purchasing
mechanisms. So it's now would be
clearly stated.
Um, mad, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, wouldn't we just change
it in the purchasing statement
instead of making a law.
Mr. Chair and uh representative.
I don't know. I don't know where
that is or whether that could be
done in rule. This just makes it
very clear that
School buses will get whatever
the prevailing rate would be for
diesels and can apply that
towards the purchase of an
electric.
Uh, thank you for that
information. I, you know, I, I
don't have anything against
Mister Chairman against electric
school buses or people that want
to buy them or electric cars or
anything else, but we're talking
about grid capacity, we're
talking about co-ops, we're
talking about schools making
their own decisions, and I
think.
I, I really don't think we need
a law to do all this and, and
my, my whole.
Job as a lawmaker.
Is to fix
Laws that are broken need
fixing, not necessarily to make
a whole bunch of new ones. And I
think it could be done through
the purchasing agreement.
Much easier without codifying it
in law, so, but I do appreciate
you, you, your, the information
and answering all my questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I tend
to agree with representative
Armstrong, if you look at the
page 2 of the FIR, the other
one.
The very at the very bottom it
says ped noted $4 million from
FY23 transportation allocation
was carried over into FY 24.
Or a pilot project and invested
these buses in Albuquerque.
what it tells me is, is that if
you want to buy an electric bus,
you don't need a lot to do that.
They were already doing it.
I mean, how else could you?
Have this this information if
they weren't already doing it.
Is that
Am I reading that incorrectly?
So my question then is is.
You don't need legislation if
the districts are already buying
these buses and has spent
funding allocated through PE to
the district.
So I can get my head around the
bill, Mr. Chairman. What we're
basically saying is that.
The district requests school bus
funding.
The value that they received
could be applied to electric
buses, correct?
Mr. Chairman, would that also
include alternative fuels like
hydrogen.
Mr. Chair,
Reenter of Lonestrom. Yes, it
would include uh alternative
fuels as long as they're zero
emission, that there were that
phrase zero emission is written
in there, so it would include
hydrogen.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, we know
that um at Carson co op as an
example, has got a major
hydrogen project now going up in
the northern part of the state
where there I believe it's a
green hydrogen project, it's
water based.
So that fuel source, Mr.
Chairman, could be used.
If they could purchase a bus
that handles hydrogen. They
could do that.
Mr. Chair and uh representative
Lindstrom, yes, the, the
hydrogen technology for vehicles
is not nearly as fleshed out as
the certainly the diesel, which
is a long time technology or the
electric, but if as that comes
online and becomes viable, I
believe this would cover exactly
the same thing that they could
get up to the value of a diesel
bus towards the purchase of an
alternative zero fuel or zero
emissions, so Mr. Chairman.
If the school district does go
in and uh ask for replacement
buses.
I get a certain value.
And it's my understanding that
these electric buses are much
more expensive.
I mean, based on what the FIR
says.
What part of the.
District budget.
Could also be used to subsidize
that cost.
And they take it out of the
instructional category.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative
Lindstrom, um,
There there is an example
actually that in Las Cruces
public schools when they
initially received, they were in
the first round of receiving
federal funding. That funding
did not completely cover their,
their.
Expenses involved, so they
actually
Olay, you know, raised locally.
Um, available to them to make up
that difference. It was about
$50,000 per bus for 5 buses, so
they spent about 250,000 of
their own towards their expense,
but also that's an indication of
why we need that initial
language to the part of the
first part of the bill.
Uh, because at that time.
They had approached the PED to
ask for the money and they ED
was initially
Their initial response was that
they could not.
Supplement the money the way
that we're asking for in the
bill.
Um
So they went to their own source
and
completed the deal, so to speak.
Um, so administrations change.
And we're hoping that this bill
will pass so that it's, it's, I
guess, Mr. Chairman, I'm still a
little concerned about the fact
that.
Is the FIR says they can do it
anyway. They can buy these buses
anyway.
And if they have
If they've got the.
Cash balances or they've got a
grant source or capital outlay
source to make up the difference
in these purchases, I'm still
not, I'm still not completely
clear why we need the bill
except for maybe this grid
business.
And I didn't know that school
districts would be getting into
that kind of uh arena.
is fairly complicated.
Um
I've not heard of a school
district yet that wants to get
into the electric.
Um, providing business.
Maybe they are. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, Representative, good
morning.
So I'm, I'm looking at Mr.
Chairman at the uh fiscal impact
report and here are some of the
numbers which purchase an
electric school bus.
As compared to a decent school
bus, so the purchase price, and
this is a 2.
You figure, I guess.
Electric school bus $352,000.
Um, the diesel bus is about 1/3
of that cost, so that's 103,000.
Um, when you have an electric,
uh, school bus, you have to have
a, a fast charging station, I
guess, and that's $140,000 in
addition.
Um, looks like the, um,
replacement battery.
Uh, is needed at about year 8.
And Mr. chair that school buses
basically are considered good
for 12 years and then.
The districts get new buses.
So the cost of a battery at your
8.
would be um low end is 15,000
high end 120,000. That's another
big additional cost.
And then the insurance costs are
quite different as well and
electric school bus is about
double the cost. So, um, Mr.
Chairman and, and, um,
And, uh, representative and um
and senator, I'm
Yeah, I'm of the opinion that if
school districts want an
electric school bus, as has
already been stated, I think
they can acquire one now.
Um
But this is, I think, putting
more taxpayer money into
something that at this point in
time, I don't think uh the cost
benefit analysis necessarily
bears it out.
Um, so I'm, um,
also wanting to know.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, about
Fuel sources, so with this bill,
House Bill 32,
O
buses propelled by.
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
would not cover one's powered by
propane. Uh, those are not zero
emission buses, uh, couple of
things that you indicate, yes,
absolutely, the electric buses
cost more, their maintenance
requirements, their fuel
requirements are substantially
lower over the life of the bus,
uh.
All kinds of things you don't
have to change oil, you know,
there are all kinds of things
don't wear out. Uh, the brakes
don't wear out because you have
regenerative braking, I mean,
the overall cost for the life of
the bus is less than a
diesel-powered bus. Uh, when you
add benefits of being on.
rig tying them and using the
battery as battery storage, it
gets better.
This doesn't really go into any
of those type of things. This
allows the district to make
those decisions as to whether
it's right for the kind of
routes that they have for their
local area. It's just enabling
them to make those choices and
decisions. It doesn't have any
requirements that they must or
anything of that sort. They can
pencil it out as to whether it
works for them. On the charging
stations, charging stations are
expensive, but you don't need a
1 to 1 for every single bus
because you can when bum buses
off running, you charge in the
next one. This really is
enabling, not requiring in any
mechanism.
Mr. Chairman and and Senator,
thank you for that, um, yeah, I,
I agree and acknowledge that
there are pros and cons to every
technology.
One of the great concerns I
have, Mr. Chairman, is the
safety of these batteries.
Um, we know from the fires and
floods that we've been seeing in
parts of the United States that
These batteries get wet, they're
a true fire hazard.
the environmental consequences
of these batteries burning can
be very high, and I, I'm really
concerned about school children
if, if it's fire flood or
whatever.
Um, I know that, um, Mr. Cha
towing companies when they have
a damaged electric vehicle,
there are certain
Concrete vaults they have to use
to store the vehicles, which is
an additional expense that many
really cannot afford.
But there's certain safety
measures that that must be.
Uh, taken into account and I'm
just not convinced that this
would work and, and I, I really
do come back to Mr. Chair and
sponsors the
I did that school districts that
want electric school buses can
purchase them now.
Let's talk for a minute, Mr.
Chair, about the, the grant
money that's available. Um,
Uh, how easy is it to get a
grant? Who's giving grants for
electric.
and how's that working in
Mexico?
He
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative
Brown.
Um
The US Environmental Protection
Agency had been doing uh
offering direct grants or
rebates. That's how.
Now operating buses, um, such as
Dulce you heard, uh, so that
program is.
Not, we cannot rely on that
continuing at all.
Um
There are also um, you know, in
terms of so uh.
There are many other states are
providing.
direct aid and um many states, 6
states now are requiring by 2035
that all of their buses be
electric.
So the cost, because of this
incredibly high demand for the
buses, the cost is going to be
going down. Every major
manufacturer of school buses,
Bluebird, all, all of that,
it's, it's, uh.
That's where the demand is, um.
And then also in terms of the
cost, again, the savings, Santa
Fe School District, I think it
was referenced in the LFC was in
one of the.
analysis maintenance combined.
Um, plus the vehicle the grid
per year per bus.
Of revenue.
Which is substantial over the
life of the twelve-year span of
the buses.
They were actually either
cheaper or Chairman,
thank you, Mr. Goodman. I
appreciate that.
So one of the other overarching
concerns I have is when the
electrical grid goes down.
We know that happens.
More frequently, it seems, our
greatest stressed out.
We're gonna have children, I
guess, um, at home because they
can't get to school because of
these buses couldn't be charged.
And so, the last thing I want to
see is uh students being unable
to get to their schools.
It is um a topic of great
concern, Mr. Chairman.
We know our grid is is really in
bad shape and the demands are
only getting.
for for the usage. So,
I'm just afraid, and again, yes,
uh, districts will make their
own decisions, but I, I do have
some real strong.
Thank you representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Senator Souls and
representative goola for
bringing this forward. Um, so,
Mr. Chair and senator uh
Representative, I was involved
in Albuquerque's transition to
electric buses and ABQ ride.
As a city councilor and um
While we ran into some specific
issues regarding that
transition, um.
With, with regard to some of our
contractors, we did ultimately
make that transition and, and we
kind of have a hybrid system in
Albuquerque. We use both.
Electric and um.
And fuel
Uh, buses currently.
Um, but
Eventually, I think the city
will transition completely to
electric buses, um, and I'm
saying that because I think that
um.
You know, I understand and I was
talking with the representative
Lindstrom.
While we don't have
True
Authority over APS budget and so
on, I noticed that there's only
6 school districts that have
taken advantage of transitioning
to electric buses on, on the, in
the fiscal impact.
And, you know, 6 out of how many
Statewide, um, and so,
I think that
What this, what this bill does
in my mind, and I was an
administrator for a long time.
It
Oftentimes administrators don't
always know if.
They have the ability to do
things or not, if it's not
codified.
And I think that this what this
bill does to me if I was an
administrator in APS that
actually would tell me that.
The state supports it, the
school district supports it, and
yes, it's OK to purchase those
buses or not.
Um
Having the option to do that or
not, you know, is, is an
important thing, but what, what
it does is it sort of puts
everything into perspective of
um
You know, there is general
support for this type of a bus,
and so, um.
That is one of the things that
that tells me that I could
support this, um, legislation.
The other thing is that it also
sort of gives.
APS or any of the school
systems, the opportunity to
apply for federal funding if
there's any federal funding
coming for this type of bus.
That could supplement, and one
of the things I learned as an
administrator is to get projects
done, is that sometimes you have
to combine funding from all
sorts of different sources, um,
in order to get something done
and sometimes, you know, you get
state funding, you get federal
funding, you get.
Local funding or whatever, and
then you can initiate your
project.
Um
So from that perspective, I, I
really think it's an important
piece of legislation, um, you
know, how fast they do it and
how fast the grid system comes
together and all of that, um,
you know, I've had a lot of
discussions, Mr. Chair, with the
with the co-ops regarding that
and, and I know that the state
is a little bit behind on that,
but I think that ultimately this
is kind of the direction that
we're going in and um the the
thing that.
does concern me is the disposal.
At some point those batteries.
Die out, the infrastructure, the
other piece that's not in here
is the infrastructure.
In the schools and, and I didn't
see anywhere that um well I saw
some one little reference that
And it's not in the bill, but
it's in the fiscal impact that
talks about the infrastructure,
and I just, I'm concerned about
the infrastructure for the
schools, um,
And then, you know, ultimately
the grid, how that's going to
be, how the the state is gonna
move forward on that because
it's sort of all intertwined.
Um, those are my comments, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Hochman B Hill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and, and thank you,
Senator Souls and Mr. Goodmarker
for bringing the bill.
So sorry, I just had a a long
presentation in another
committee, so bear with me, my
voice here. um, so Mr.
Goodmacher, you and I have been
talking about this bill for a
long time and um I'm happy to
see it finally fully formed and
in front of us today, and I
remember the first question I
asked you about this is, this
sounds great, but why do we need
a bill?
it and it sounds like, um, you
know, the same question has been
echoed by my colleagues, but I'm
finally starting, I think, to
understand why. And a lot of
that has to do with um what is
happening politically, what has
just happened today actually,
and so with the changing of
administrations and different
ethos as it relates to how we
define energy, how we want to
use energy, what types of
technologies do we?
want to um signify to our
governments, we want to use and
invest in. I now understand
that's why we need a bill for
this because what is to have,
you know, what is to say a new
governor comes in, our new
president has come in and says
we don't define renewable energy
as energy anymore.
And so therefore, uh, we can't
have electric school buses, um,
so I, I finally now get it and
understand and appreciate why,
um, you need a bill for this. I
also wanna put in a shameless
plug for the virtual power plant
aspect of the school buses, um,
I'm working on the issues, many
of you know, and um being able
to plug these buses in,
especially in in places where
the grid is insufficient.
or non-existent to be a game
changer for many of our
children, so, um, I'm in full
support of the bill now and
thank you for bringing it.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator, and thank
you Representative for bringing
the bill, um, I, I guess in my
mind I have a rural district.
And especially on the rural
routes, the buses are not housed
at a school location. They're
not housed at a bus barn.
They're in our neighbor's yards.
They, where are they gonna
charge? How, how does this work
for these rural routes? First of
all, they're past 90 miles,
which when I looked up.
Uh, the Santa Fe examples, their
pilot programs, and I'm looking
at some of these, most of these
pilots are metro.
But I'm wondering, so they're
gonna drive more than 90 miles.
You're going to be parked at
someone's.
Yard, their house overnight.
Because the last drop off is
usually where we find these
contractors to drive the buses.
What, how does this serve that
purpose?
Mr. Chair and and
representative.
It doesn't, uh, and that's why
this is enabling, it doesn't
require a district to do that.
Most districts that have
electric buses don't have a full
fleet of electric. They may have
some routes where the electric
bus doesn't make sense. Uh, and
for those, you know, it doesn't
require them to move to
electric, it's only enabling,
and if it works for the local
district, the technology is
changing rapidly. The ranges are
increasing, but for instance,
some of the long routes in
Gallup, which are 150 miles each
way. Like your buses probably.
year old ways off from being
able to serve those communities,
but for some of the more
internal uh um.
Urban routes. They make a lot of
sense.
And that's why it really leaves
it up to and trust our districts
to make good choices. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Representative,
thank you. Um, and in addition
to that.
comment. It's also the rural
communities that have the
electric co ops that are
betterly designated and
subsidized and are required by
law to provide backup service
and, and the idea of the
enabling act.
what what the bill does is allow
the school districts to meet the
grid service at a school
district.
So not only are they going to
generate electricity, they're
going to sell it back.
And when we have someone like a
box store come in and put in,
uh, you put in their own solar
panels in their parking lot.
That puts a burden on our rural
Electric Co op.
So, I'm supposed to represent
the 35,000 people from District
38.
That need reliable, affordable
energy.
And I'm looking at the budget,
$11 billion budget and paying
attention to what reaches my
community. Already the um the
school uh reform fund.
There were a lot of money that
my district doesn't get to
access, ends up and gets
reappropriated back to rural
areas. And I'm not, I'm not sold
on the bill.
Um, I like the definition of low
carbon. I mean, even California
uses low carbon, and we've
chosen zero carbon, um, but, but
mostly it's because these
dollars end up in metropolitan
areas. I'm here to be a voice
for rural New Mexico. And
several people have commented on
where this is going, and I'm
sure it comes soon with an
appropriation that probably my
district won't ask for. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Representative Do,
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
A senator who ultimately makes
the decision to sign off on, on
whether a district.
Gets their buses.
Mr. Chair and and uh
representative.
I think
This really puts it back to the
local school district and the
superintendent as to whether
this makes sense for that
particular district. All it does
is the transportation at the PE
will provide them up to the
equivalent of what they would be
getting if they were putting in
a uh replacing a diesel bus.
And so Mr. Chairman and Senator
right now, it's PED that signs
off on whether or not that
school is going to get.
Money for a bus or get their
buses replaced.
Is a yes. I mean, I'm gonna echo
some of the comments of my
colleagues up here is that we
just had a lawsuit that was
settled in court a couple days
ago about a bill that we passed
two years ago about school time,
um, and it was pretty clear in
that bill, what we meant it was
something with me as a sponsor
had reiterated, worked with many
of you on, um, the language in
that bill that we meant ours and
not days. Um, I see this, um,
the inclusion.
of electric school bus into
statue as a way to protect and
provide that option for school
districts should an
administration who does not want
to provide electric school buses
and to take that option away
from our school districts. Um,
so as the presenters mentioned,
this is, this is to um
Codify it and to further stay
our intention as a legislature
as to what that funding can go
toward and in this case, it's
electric school buses that's the
reason that I support this, uh,
Mr. Chairman and and presenters.
Thank you, Representative. I
don't think we have any more
member questions, uh, have you
all studied as.
Maybe that it's not.
Specifically in the bill, but
the economics around both.
The cost of the buses, charging
stations if necessary for
districts and the economics in
the long run, uh.
Easel say versus electric. Have
you all?
There has been lots of research
around there and people often uh
focus on the high initial cost.
Uh, one of the ways it made
sense to me is what you're doing
is pre-buying some of your
energy, uh, as opposed to
continually buying diesel fuel
and the incredible fluctuations
that we saw, uh, during the
pandemic, diesel fuel went up to
almost $6 a gallon, uh, which
put a huge economic hurt on
districts. Electric rates though
they.
Very some they tend to be a bit
more stable, which allows for
more planning by the district.
The lifetime cost of electric
vehicles is usually about a
push.
Or slightly positive compared to
a
Uh, fossil fuel powered vehicle,
be it diesel or gasoline,
whether you're talking about
cars, buses, or anything of that
sort. They have much lower
maintenance costs. They have,
uh,
Electric motors don't generate
the same levels of heat. You
don't have to replace oil on
them. I mean just a multitude
of, of maintenance costs that
are reduced. And so the light
and they tend to last longer
overall than diesel powered
buses. And so the lifetime costs
tend to be about equal or
slightly less. The portion of
this that allows the grid
maintenance where you're using
the battery to stabilize either
a local grid at a school or the
community and the ability to use
that energy.
Sell it, store it, all of those
types of things adds to the
economics that make the
So that's, that's an interesting
notion.
Because we know that you can't
always sell back energy.
So it's an option to just feed
the energy back into the system
to help stabilize the overall
grid, is that correct?
Mm
I'm not an expert in this area,
but yes, I believe that's the
case is if there is an
abundance, the buses are all
charged. You've got solar panels
on the school, they're still
putting out energy, that energy
could flow right onto the grid.
Now, knowing that you're not an
expert.
Is there in any way that and and
this, I can even ask this of the
panel.
Is there in any way?
A harm done to a grid.
The addition to.
Or more power that might be
added to that grid.
Mr. Chair, I don't know. Uh,
there are some very technical
things and it has more to do
with the things that I've
learned over my years in the
legislature. It has more to do
with balancing the amounts and
things of that rather than what
actually how many electrons
flowing, but my expert may have
have more information.
it
Uh, very briefly, I believe that
those circumstances under which
the exchange of energy would be
that would be detailed in the
agreement between the district
and the utility provider, so I'm
certain that the utility
provider, the reliability of the
grid would.
would want to make that
provisions clear.
Thank you, panel.
Uh, just for the committee's
information, I'm aware that
there is SB 49 that is
requesting uh 60 million I
believe for electric buses.
Be available to districts that
might have interest in that.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
I'm, I'm sorry, I'm have my name
on there. I thought you wanted
to say something,
representative, I'm I'm sorry,
Mr. Chairman, I was a talking
cars with uh my friend over
here.
We are in transportation after
all.
Representative Hernandez.
the chair and uh.
Presenters, uh, senator and
representative.
Um
Would you say this would add
Um, another tool and toolbox for
school districts.
Mr. Charon representative, uh,
yes, this, this does not have a
financial impact. It doesn't
have money attached as the
Senate bill does, what this does
is it opens up mechanisms and
codifies a mechanism or
districts if it makes sense for
them on their routes and other
things to put electric school
buses in.
Mr. Chair, I've talked to my
superintendent at Central
Consolidated School District,
one of his biggest concern is,
uh, of it getting stuck in the
mud or even uh what he, he, he,
he likes to tease me about is
going through a red Valley snow
drift, and this go through a
snow drift.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hernandez, uh.
These buses are being used
successfully in many rural very
cold places, Alaska.
Northern Colorado.
They'll say you heard from the
superintendent in Dulce. They're
loving their two buses, so I
would say yes, the same as any
as a diesel by same issues.
Your diesel bus could get
through the electric bus
probably could too. If you're
looking for a supercar that
With outperforming the mud,
probably not.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, I think
there's also a financial aspect
to this. I really like this, uh,
information about the cost
saving benefits to school
districts. I want to take a
deeper dive into this section.
Uh, this body of of legislature
or or I'm sorry that the
previous body of legislature
passed a clean fuel standard,
uh, with this bill
Uh, benefit or will this bill
help uh district fleet units,
um,
In relations to the clean fuel
standards. Can you help me
understand that, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chapresentative, that is not
addressed, that's not part of
the concern, that's not part of
this bill at all. Uh, this just
opens up for districts if it
makes sense for them to do so.
Uh, the broader discussion about
whether we ought to be moving
everything to electric or
others, that's a much broader
discussion. This really is just
enabling for districts if it
during that discussion it makes
sense for them to have electric
buses. This is enabling and
allows them to do so. It is not
focused on.
guessing that it is just on
making sure that if districts
choose to, whether it's because
of the diesel exhaust, because
of the cost, because of whatever
they can.
My last question, Mr. Chairman,
um,
In, in, in
Portions of my district, we have
a tribal utility, um, company.
And they do not, uh.
There's no net metering program
there, uh, to allow
For, for that, uh,
Electric vehicle.
charging station incentives,
would this bill help encourage a
net metering program.
And with utility companies.
Mr. Chair Representative.
It doesn't require that, but it
might make a mechanism where it
would be beneficial to both
sides.
Using the language that's here
that they could work out such an
agreement to help stabilize and
providing power and, and a
mechanism for doing so. It
doesn't require either side to
do so.
I was Chairman, that concludes
my questions.
Thank you. What is the will of
the committee?
Miss Chaman Omo to pass.
I apologize. Who was the second?
All right, we have a motion to
pass from Representative Romero,
a second by.
Represent Brego, if we can take
a roll.
Representative Armstrong. No,
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Brego.
Yes
Representative Brown.
Representative Dow.
OK.
Representative Franklin
Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vi Hill.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Vice Chair Latta.
Yes.
Mr. Chair de la Cruz, yes.
What does it count?
7 to 4 the
Bill passes this committee. We
have first Representative
Armstrong to explain the bill or
vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, as
stated before, I, I don't really
think we need a law for this. I
think it could be done through
the procurement code. Also, um,
you know, we're living in a, in
a time where, uh.
Things are codified in law and
rules are still.
Being made and people are being
taken to court at the expense of
taxpayers.
In the state of New Mexico, and
all I can see is uh.
All, all I can hear in the back
of my mind is the EV mandate
that was done by rule.
In the state of New Mexico that
is been detrimental to our auto
dealers, and I can see this
coming for school buses. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ranking member Brown.
Yeah, thank you. um.
Mr. Chair and and presenters. I
really do appreciate this topic
coming up.
Um, I'm just not convinced that
this is the right move at this
time.
And um
Taxpayers pay the bill no matter
what the source of the funding
is or whether it's grant from
the federal government or state
funds.
Um
I also just kind of come back to
the idea, Mr. Chair, that we
really don't need this law.
If anything, I think this is
kind of setting up a subsidy.
I would just rather the
districts.
And some will choose to do it,
some won't, but even to this
point in time, Mr. Chair, not a
lot of districts.
Thank you, ranking member Brown.
Next to explain her vote,
Representative Doll.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm,
I'm just going to be frank
because I think the committee
members were.
I knocked thousands of doors in
my district.
a lot of the doors that I
knocked had children in K-12
school. Not once did they ask me
for an electric vehicle. They
want to see improved educational
outcomes. Not once did they ask
me to trump proof New Mexico.
They want to see their
children's educational outcomes
improved. That $60 million that
probably will soon follow.
Probably won't make it to my
district, and I'm here to
advocate for improved
educational outcomes. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, members see no
further business. We are
adjourned.
OK, I, sir, I apologize to you.
I thank the committee for the
hospitality from the Senate. I
appreciate it and uh hope to
see, let's let him speak.
It's OK. He has asked several
times, and it's been my failure,
so please speak.
Uh, I'd like to pass out these
exhibits if you did not get them
in the packages could help him
get those to the members,
please.
Thank you.
Um
I worked with uh Richardson
administration with a bunch of
volunteers to come up with the
easements, cross easements,
joint use agreements to create
the connection with the commuter
train between the two big
cities.
The Department of
Transportation.
approached us with a 19th
century.
Locomotive
280 ton locomotive pulling heavy
cars.
Let me interrupt you for a
second. Would you please
identify yourself, please? I'm
sorry, I'm Joe Shepps. 54 years
resident of New Mexico and Santa
Fe.
So there's 280 ton freight
train basically is.
too heavy.
It's polluting, it's noisy, it's
slow to start, slow to stop, and
low speed in environmentally
unsound.
He should have used, I can only
assume the Department of
Transportation did not talk to
anyone in Europe or Asia. This
is a
What the whole world is using a
diesel multiple unit train.
Each car is self-propelled, and
it uses a small diesel engine on
board, each carriage.
Runs itself, so the train begins
at the same time and ends at the
same time, and it can go 124
miles an hour on the existing
tracks.
I think that we should have a
study.
To analyze what the, you know,
how effective this is.
That what the rail runner is
now.
And what it would cost to
replace it with
Modern technology that's been
used for 60 years around the
world.
Uh, our present system is a
dinosaur.
I believe it was put in the
hands of the Department of
Transportation, which has no
expertise with
Uh,
Thank you, thank you. That's
time.
Excuse me, Mr. Shepps, you have
one minute like everyone else.
However, I would encourage you.
I would encourage you to visit
offline with members. I'm sure
they would be interested in what
you have, uh, now we have no
further business. Thank you.
