Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
All Representative Pettigrew.
All.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero there.
Vice chair Garcia your.
Madam chair review your.
We have six members present we
have a quorum.
Great thank you Theresa I'm so
first on the agenda of folks we
have Senate bill one seventy
four as amended and we have a
gentleman yield on chairman
thank you you're just.
I can hear you the get my video
to start because most of my
table face this morning.
The morning madam chair members
the committee thank you.
Senate bill one seventy four put
semis in the right hand lane
at seventy five and any of us
that live along I. forty are
have driven I forty those what
happens even before construction
this was an issue it's a
continuing issue I ran this bill
about three or four years ago it
died in the house
thank and waited but we have to
do something for us that live in
rural New Mexico in the state
Tularosa the Albuquerque Gallup
Albuquerque all get our medical
care in Albuquerque veterans
leave every morning from Gallup
at seven AM to go to the
veterans hospital for
appointments so my traffic pulls
out in front of you they're
trying to pass going up a hill
sixty five in it just backs
traffic up and continues to be
an issue other states have done
this Oklahoma has it some eyes
in the right hand lane at sixty
five.
California has all the right
hand lane at fifty five.
The next few of flagstaff is
right hand lane at sixty five.
And with that madam chair it's
pretty simple bill if you're
driving a semi truck a truck
with a freight trailer over
twenty five thousand pounds
you're going to drive in the
right hand lane except to pass
order mobile for emergency.
With that I think I can stand
for questions.
Right thank you Mr chair so
we'll go to the attendees first
or
folks who are in support and in
opposition will start first with
support if you could please
raise your hand and will allow
you to speak.
Okay first we have Mr Burciaga
had.
Good morning madam chair.
And members of the committee my
name is Franklin Garcia with the
department of transportation
Reasons for this bill our office
did run some data numbers for a
five year period and it was over
thirteen thousand crashes
involving heavy trucks for those
five years and two hundred
ninety eight truck heavy truck
fatalities on New Mexico
highways seventeen hundred of
those involved vehicles that are
traveling the same direction
our office and department would
be responsible for signage that
replace along the highways we'd
be able to do that through our
current operating costs our
office would also be responsible
for the.
Awareness to the law enforcement
to the driving industry in
general public well we would do
that through our partnerships to
our ports of entry to our online
permit system I information
system and the regular TV radio
and social media outreach so we
do status support.
Thank you so much for England is
there anyone else that would
like to speak on this issue.
We are currently on Senate bill
one seventy four as amended.
Okay it doesn't is there anybody
in opposition.
Mr Johnson did you want to speak
in support I can if you want to
raise your hand I can.
I could still we can still take
those comments.
Okay so we'll go ahead and then
moved to the committee first we
have Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for readiness for
you made a comment about the
right hand lane sixty five miles
per hour.
The no like I. forty I. twenty
five the speed limit is seventy
five so this as I understand it
this bill is still not going to
stop the slow motion drag races
that we see.
On interstates were going up the
hill as well as or well.
Representative madam chair Madam
chair representative so the bill
is that seventy five so they can
still drive the speed limit
seventy five others are
reduction in that but the
penalty is two hundred dollars
if you don't if you're not in
the right hand lane so all
those.
Truck races up the side of a
hill that backstrap but go for
ten miles and aggravates people
and causes racks
the state police will be able to
cite them at a two hundred
dollar fine.
Okay.
At what point are you allowed to
pull out and have someone that's
running sixty five up a hill.
It unless you have an ability to
get around him.
And and you have the power to do
that you are you to not to
attempt faster or that's the
part I'm struggling with
understanding I I agree with
your bill I can bill but I don't
fully understand.
How you're going to enforce it
how will be enforced I guess
well you know if if they can
pass assuming you know you're
driving a semi and I'm driving a
semi.
And you have the power and you
have the ability of past you can
passed I am moving to the left
hand lane for a police
emergencies or vehicles on
coming traffic to on ramps you
can move into that lane I mean
that's a driver's choice.
Okay.
And the state police will have
to.
Use common sense to determine
how that's going to be handled.
Okay.
All right I think that's all my
questions thank you thank you
Representative Crowder next we
have licensure Shia.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for being in this bill on the
can I did you have before by the
faces one.
Anyway they are.
On this bill the June of the
committee you know I work I
forty all the time and what the
structure doing madam chair
they're just going on both lanes
faster not bashing disapproving
graphics this is a good bill
because we do have major major
problems especially from Gallup
and groupie and I support this
bill and madam chair at any
point I would maybe like to make
a motion when it's acceptable.
Thank all will all take your
motion and shortly our vice
chair.
I know that there's a few more
questions so we'll we'll get
back to you on on that next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair I was
going to move a need passed okay
great I do just have a couple
comments Senator I actually have
a constituent down and on.
To live in in the in in the west
part of the state where they
have to do a lot of driving
into Albuquerque for doctor
appointments and she text me
almost daily about accidents
that are occurring and the call
and how it clogs up the traffic
and it really worries a lot of
the folks out there because
they're afraid they're not going
to make it to their doctor
appointments and things like
that and so how how long do you
how long do you think it'll take
to determine whether or not once
this legislation is is
implemented and it's being
It's it's it's it's starting to
take shape how how long do you
think it'll take before we can
start seeing whether or not it's
it's actually working.
Madam chair I think you'll see
an immediate effect once the
signs are placed out and and
truckers are made aware of it
probably be a mass email we have
so much to so it affected my
businesses and and what we're
doing and so I think you'll see
an immediate effect on the
problem becomes a if you leave
Arizona and you get Gallup you
know everybody's trying to make
it up the hill.
Similar nine mile hill same way
Laguna all directions
everybody's trying to get up the
hill school because they can't
and semis used to be a lot more
courteous than they are right
now and and the on the courteous
of it is they just without a
friend you and everybody backs
up.
So I believe that.
You will see an immediate effect
once the law goes into effect if
it's signed by the governor.
And it'll help traffic flow a
little better expressly to those
hilly areas.
Thank you Senator Mr chair idea
I support the legislation and so
by stripper COS will all take
your motion for the past
and then I'll take a second from
Representative Garrett Donna did
you have a question.
That.
Sorry to interrupt madam chair I
know.
Than usual for major analyst to
speak but I want to point out
that amendment was suggested to
this bill it was changed on the
Senate floor that structure of
language on page two about when
they would move over to the left
hand lane and the amendment
constructs that language and
leaves the original bill
language so the only difference
in the new amended bill is it is
the line putting in the amount
for the ticket and the penalty.
Graham.
Thank you.
Are there any other are there
any questions about that from
folks.
Okay we have a motion then from
my chair Garcia for two passed
on house bill or Senate bill one
seventy four as amended and a
second from Representative
Garrett trees if you can call
role please.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative daylight Cruz
yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero yes.
Vice chair Garcia this.
Madam chair Rubio.
Yes and I just promoted
chairwoman Lundstrom
and so just give her a second
okay chairwoman where we're just
voting now on Senate bill one
seventy four
I would just promoted you so
apologies for that but we're
voting on that now.
Go ahead.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
We have.
Nine yes zero No.
Actually trees I do.
Don't think that I think we had
to six to zero.
Okay I.
So Senator you have a do passed
on on Senate bill one seventy
four
thank you and good luck thank
you madam chair and thank you
members of the committee.
Representative by service you
did you have anything to add.
Madam chair before you go to the
next a presenter I would just
like to take this opportunity to
thank each and everyone of the
members of this committee.
It's a good committee I've been
on for six years and hopefully
we can see everybody here next
year thank you madam chair.
Thank you vice chair
I appreciate that.
I'm next we have
Senate bill eighty four it's a
committee set up and we have
Senator Shendo here.
Senator whenever you're ready.
Okay of the thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee of the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty four.
What what this a does is adds
another tool to the toolbox of
four D. O. T..
The construction of the
management general contractor.
Of the program this will allow
the secretary to adopt.
Of.
Seizure of when it when D. O. T.
feels that it's in the best
interests of of of the O. T. to
use this particular of process
for awarding contracts.
Your region I mean the the
typical design build design bid
build is still be in place.
The design build is still in
place this is another tool in
the toolbox which is the
construction general manager.
And it really allows for up both
of those
with in a way for them to
determine.
The it retains all the
preferences for New Mexico
businesses it removes the design
build pressure which was
currently set at fifty million.
Will chair the alternative
delivery method is would not be
used more than twenty five
percent of the time.
And
This committee is sub is
supported by deal T. and
industry.
And that really has had no
opposition of public opposition
I believe of of Dave cantata and
Justin Reese are on the call as
well.
And maybe Albert Thomas with the
American council of engineering.
companies New Mexico so.
Okay.
We.
Stand for questions great I
promoted sent Mr Rees and then
you said two more names
Justin Reese Dave can Tana
perhaps and then I'll Albert
Thomas with the ACEC.
Right.
I'm I promoted them all to
Panelists gentleman did you all
have any thing that you wanted
to say before we went to
the attendees.
Madam chair members of me know
what they think of me because I
I can stand for questions and W.
secretary risk and stuff for
questions at this time.
Members right madam chair at
this Burt Thomas with ACC New
Mexico no we we're here just to
answer any questions that the
that the committee my.
Sounds great.
Thank you all I'm so we're gonna
go ahead and go to attendees for
folks who are in support of this
legislation if you could please
raise your hand and I'll go
ahead and call on you.
first we have Jim Garcia.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jim Garcia on the executive
director of the associated
contractors of the New Mexico
Representative heavy highway
industry and the contractors
that are building the roads we
stand in support of this madam
chair we think this is an
excellent tool an extra tool for
secretary and for D. O. T. to be
able to utilize this and and
bring out more work for for the
contractors and for all the
people building roads so with
that thank you madam chair
appreciate your time.
Thank you Mr Garcia.
Next we have
Look at that.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's Luke
or federal I represent the
village of Los Lunas.
And the city of Hobbs and we
both this both municipalities
stand in favor of this as you
know madam chair there been many
projects going on in the
southeast part of the country of
our state and laws so this is a
barking and one of the biggest
ones on their I. twenty five
corridor.
This will tell us this will.
Given the opportunity for the
department to maintain cost
control over these huge
projects.
And as we know to the pandemic
will miss madam chair many
things the cost of goods and
services exit gone up and this
will give the department of the
ability to keep an eye and thank
control the costs so once again
we stand and support thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Sir.
Next we have secretary Santa.
Thank you madam chair Mike Santa
cabinet secretary for the
department of transportation I'm
just standing in support you may
remember just a brief history on
this bill a couple years ago
this did pass the entire house
went through the Senate and was
not able to be heard in Senate
judiciary last year we started
in the Senate still was not
heard in Senate judiciary and of
course this year is our third
attempt and we actually took a
couple hearings but we got it
through Senate judiciary and
through the Senate so this
committee has heard this bill
before it really adds a another
procurement option for the
department one that we think
will help save the time that it
takes to get projects
by marrying the designer and the
construction companies early on
in the process so we still will
preserve kind of our bread and
butter that design bid build
process but in some cases this
is a would be a good process for
some of our construction
projects and we want to be able
to do is look at each individual
construction project and pick
the best procurement option that
suits that project the pain on
the complexity of it so we very
much stand in support we'd be
happy to answer any questions
and we thank you madam chair for
scheduling this bill bill in
your committee.
Of course thank you Secretary.
I'm next we have Eric my ****.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my names are
Eric Martinez I'm the registered
lobbyist for the rest of the
soul Development group we stand
in full support of this
legislation as you know miss
souls biggest community our
master plans stated Mexico we've
brought in companies such as
Netflix of the Delhi and now
Netflix decided to make our
message also the north American
headquarters for the company we
support the legislation because
legislation like this will help
expedite the of the very
necessary I infrastructure to
keep up with a the growing
development of missed also in
these big companies are coming
to New Mexico so with that we
support this legislation thank
you.
Thank you Sir next we have
Patrick Killen.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Patrick Killen
registered lobbyist for chevron
chevron strongly supports SB
eighty four we appreciate
chairman Shendo for bring it
forward and we thank the
governor for messaging the bill
our top priority is protecting
the health and safety of our
work force and the residents of
the communities in which we live
and work.
Pressures from population growth
in industry activity have
resulted in road safety concerns
in southeast New Mexico is the
committee as well where and we
appreciate the collaborative
approach that secretary Santa
and the state department
transportation are taking to
address these issues we believe
pass just seventy four will
provide and you'd see with a
critical new tool to help
streamline construction projects
and road safety improvements not
just in the Permian basin but
across the entire state we
therefore respectfully request
the committee support for SPD
for thank you.
Thank you Patrick.
Great do we have anyone else in
the attendees who would like to
speak and support.
Is there any opposition.
Right it doesn't look like
there's any opposition we'll go
ahead and go to the committee
but first Senator Ivey Soto you
were just promoted to panelists
did you have anything that you'd
like to say before we go to
committee I'm good morning madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for hearing
this bill I just want to I'm
pleased to be work with the
department transportation and
center Shendo on this issue be
happy to answer questions I
don't want to belabor anymore
time.
Thank you senator first we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senators for bringing this
forward I like your bill I do
have a couple of questions on
the page three of your bill work
talks but the C. NG C. means a
person who percent to contract
with department provides pre
construction services that sign
up page to line one through
three and if you drop down the
line fifteen we're talks about
pre construction services means
consulting services related to
construction so my question of
Madam chair Senators perhaps Mr
release or or secretary central.
The does the pre construction
services or the other services
required for project we're just
the testing of the base you know
for compaction the testing of
the asphalt testing of the
concrete.
Where does that fall within this
construction manager general
contractors duties and
responsibilities I'm to it is
going to take care of the
testing to make sure the quality
is there.
Madam chair.
Senator Senator Shendo if you'd
like I can take that question
but go ahead go ahead the of Mr
Thomas right madam chair
Representative Crowder to that's
a good question and if you look
further in the legislation
there's actually a two step
process in this if you look on
page of I at the line seven
through nine the first phase is
the design consultation and pre
construction services that's
where the contractor comes in
during the design process works
side by side with the owner work
side by side with the designer
to develop the project and to
develop the best project during
the design phase step two is for
the project construction and
that's a time when the
contractor then goes out and
built a project based on the
design that was repaired during
that construction phase service
is when the testing of the base
the testing of the materials the
implementation of the of the the
equipment all of that takes
place during the phase two of
the construction so your
question was about the testing
that happens during phase to the
construction and its
responsibility of the contractor
to do the testing responsibility
the DOT to confirm that the to
testing is done appropriately
and matches the specifications.
It Sir thank you for that I I
know still a logo behind Houston
and great respect for that for
the appreciate your responses
Sir madam chair.
I'm not sure they're real clear
on the construction manager.
Contractors services these
providing is that the
contractors constructing the
project is still responsible for
that or is it the oversight
contractor that's gonna be
brought in I'm not real clear on
on this person's
responsibilities and duties sure
madam chair Representative
Crowder so the the first phase
of of the of the construction
contractors contract is to help
during the design phase so he
gives advice in terms of
scheduling equipment scheduling
materials identifying the type
materials the construction
methodology they could be used
on the project that helps us as
designers to develop the most
efficient project and be able to
come up with the design that
fits the criteria within that
one project itself and so the
construction contractor David is
going to be working during the
the this first phase on these
pre construction and technical
advice the second phase he now
becomes the builder and so his
second phase of the contract
you'll give the department a
guaranteed maximum price for
building the project and then he
will if it's if it's acceptable
to the Department and matches
the cost estimate that was done
by an independent estimator that
he will proceed with
construction of the contract and
he will be responsible for
implementing the design putting
the project in place building
the roadway bridges drainage
improvements whatever necessary
and so he will actually be
responsible for putting that
project in place right thank you
Sir I think as you spoke I think
my question kind of came to.
I got my question for me I think
will the contractor still be
required to use a licensed
engineer to do the testing as a
subcontractor some of you may
have an in house contractor that
does but don't have be a
certified engineer to test the
concrete asphalt mix the base
that sort of thing.
One final question madam chair
all of rest after that Madam
chair representative Crowder you
are correct that the testing has
to be done by a qualified
testing firm and that those a
geotechnical firms are are led
by an engineer and so yes he
does have to have the qualified
testing firm on his team to
complete that the construction
testing that's required by
specification okay thank you
madam chair appreciate thanks
for your responses Sir.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have a vice chair
Garcia.
By Representative.
I would like to make a motion or
do pass what is
That property.
Okay great thank you
Representative vice chair we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for this bill I just have a few
questions
so this is been amended to read
that it is a transportation
construction manager correct so
this method will only apply to
transportation not to other
projects in my correct in
understanding that.
Correct and Daniel A. Ivey Soto
you might want to.
Yes certainly madam chair and
Representative Garrett the so
this is always been designed to
be a transportation only project
one of the things that we did.
In the Senate was we actually
titled the act transportation
construction matter etcetera
just so that when people see it
they know from the outset it is
transportation on.
Thank you and madam chair maybe
some of this is is more targeted
towards the department of
transportation so only twenty
five percent of the projects
that that DOT is leading can use
this method so how will you.
I understand the losses you're
going to determine if this is
the best means of putting out
bids for projects but how will
you up publicly
let us know that it is a twenty
five percent and how are you
publicize this to the potential
people interested and capable of
delivering this type of a model.
Either of them or they were.
Or I can answer a madam chair
and representative Garrett
what we would do is utilize our
current twelve months leading
schedule and so we have projects
on there that go out twelve
months in the legislation
requires us to to notify folks
that we will be using this
procurement process for at least
ninety days and so the
contractors the designers will
have the opportunity to look at
that to prepare for that they
know which will be a little bit
of a different procurement
process and prepare for that as
they prepare their competitive
bids so we do want to make sure
that people know about this we
want to remain transparent then
we don't want to go over that
twenty five percent threshold
and that'll be identified on the
let schedule.
Okay thank you because as you
know when you're dealing with
the procurement code and
everything even if this is the
best method the public likes
that transparency thank you very
much that's all my questions.
Thank you Representative Garrett
is there anyone else on the
committee would like to ask
questions.
Okay.
Great well thank you Senator
Shendo on Senator Ivy Soto for
bringing this legislation
forward I know it was it's been
a long road to get here so.
thank you for your patience in
getting it here
I do have a motion for do pass
from vice chair Garcia do one
second.
Representative Crowder.
Great so to reset if you can go
ahead and please call the roll.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative dela Cruz yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Chair Garcia.
Yes.
And that madam chair Rubio.
Yes.
Okay so I have the count is nine
yes there are no.
Thank you Teresa you all have a
due pass on Senate bill eighty
four the committee substitute
thank you all for being here
and good luck.
Thank you madam.
Thank you so much for this
hearing this morning thank you
thank you thank you all and just
for folks on the previous bill I
potentially treason was actually
right on the will count so it
wasn't nine zero I just I guess
I got nervous a little bit so I
just wanted to make that
clarification
before we leave it sounds like
it looks like this might be the
last hearing that we have for
House transportation for the
regular session I just want to
echo the same that by Garcia
thanks for Garcia mentioned it's
been a pleasure to work with you
all the session I and I really
look forward to working with you
all in the inner
and so thank you all for a
really great thirty days and we
will certainly see you all soon
I sure see it did you want to
add to that.
Hello madam chair of the like I
said I reiterate been a pleasure
working with you guys been a
pleasure working with deal Keyes
secretary Santa and all the
other gentleman that are on the
today and to all of you guys
thanks for all the hard work we
appreciate it and if we work
together we can make good things
happen to the state of New
Mexico thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr.
Great Representative Crowder
anything you know I would echo
the same sentiment I I think we
have a great D. O. T. group that
we're working with right now
I am still confident sentiment
and it's good to work with them
I am a in this I know that the.
Your Lundstrom read mention this
is our favorite committee I can
understand that comic completely
so thank you madam chair.
Representative Crowder.
Anyone else would like to
contribute to the love fest
before we we leave secretary
Santa.
Thank you madam chair and I just
want to say thank you to you and
your committee this is really
you know our our committee it at
transportation this is where our
budget starts this is where all
of the the project Blalock
starred in you have and this
committee have shown so much
support not only this year but
over the years we can do our
jobs without you so we really
appreciate our working
relationship
the way that we are able to
communicate and get things done
and and put things in the house
bill two that can really help us
be successful thanks to all of
you and trying get some rest of
these next couple days it'll be
a long couple days I know.
Thank you Secretary it will be I
think we're down to two hours
and two days and two hours so
try to find some time in between
Representative Garrett I just
madam chair I just have a
request to that D. O. T. if you
can ideally email us the
advancements of the commission
meetings
I think if it's in our district
we get it but it would be great
if we could just get that email
to us as a reminder so much goes
on that I forget to go to that
commission schedule to just a
request thank you.
Great thank you Representative
and then yeah I mean the interim
is is really where a lot of the
work happens so I'm I'm hopeful
that we can work together
throughout the process and
looking forward to seeing you
all again during the thirty day
the sixty day next year so
good luck everyone this year and
to the staff again thank you to
Marvin Donna Theresa and mention
thank you all for all your work
and your your efforts this this
the session we appreciate you
all and with that then we'll go
ahead and adjourned thank you
all.
Madam thank you all.
