It's.
This rule because because we
have a quorum.
Price for today's implication
provided to us.
Please rise for tourism occasion
provided to us by Representative
care.
Join me in prayer.
Emily father god source of truth
beauty love goodness and wisdom
we invite you to be present with
us during the sixty days but
especially on this first day of
really formal work we invite you
to be with us we pray that we
can have the wisdom the humility
they desire to truly communicate
about the issues that face us
not in headlines but deep dive
of understanding the issues so
we can benefit each and every
New Mexican in our state we're
grateful for this opportunity
and we pray that we can truly as
each state each week and the
session continues that we can
come together in collaboration
and in the spirit of true public
service to really work for our
state we **** and all the names
and traditions of everybody
gathered here amen.
Representative Hernandez lease
to salute the pledge allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
Representative Allison please
join us in the house and the
Senate to the New Mexico flag.
Thank you members level.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Six Mr speaker I move that we go
to the order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Projectionist so order numbers
we've got to finance phones all
all going to get started.
we have our doctor the day up
stairs is intent and going
and will have staff provide you
their cell number so that you
all can get in touch with them
show you anything.
also on the social calendar.
created to the committee on
development corporation quay day
breakfast he doesn't have a date
I wonder if it's today hopefully
not hopefully it's tomorrow.
Seven AM.
Thanks for New Mexico university
alumni association legislative
reception five to seven PM.
There's a New Mexico counties
legislative reception at the
Eldorado hotel at five thirty PM
and the Presbyterian healthcare
services provided appreciation
dinner at the Santa Fe Hilton at
six thirty with receptions of
fifteen Senator.
Also.
And this is especially for our
new members.
NBA.
Will be here on Tuesday the
twenty fourth and Wednesday the
twenty fifth.
From eight to twelve and one
thirty to five in this in the
legislature lounge this is your
opportunity to get that fancy
awesome cool red license plate
should you what what
if you don't want to consume
a registration and all that good
stuff of renewed life driver's
license if it's been expired for
two or three years probably a
good time to do it again that's
January twenty fourth and the
twenty fifth between eight and
twelve one thirty.
And I.
Lastly financial disclosure
statements or do.
To the secretary state on
January thirty first and will be
sending out reminders of from
staff both the majority and
minority offices to make sure
that all of your in compliance
with the financial disclosure
forms.
I see up there one of our old
friends and colleagues former
representative out of those in
the gallery welcome back
Representative.
The other elements.
Gentleman from doing it thank
you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty or fifteen minutes
following the floor session to
hear the revenue update from
three oh seven.
Miss note of gentleman there.
I don't have my cheat sheet yes
Representative somewhat I.
Thank you Mr speaker if you'll
see on your desk you'll see
something that's today.
brought in by eastern New Mexico
university.
And we are also celebrating from
eastern New Mexico university
our new president.
Dr James Johnson.
And thank you everybody hope you
enjoy the payment.
Thank you to get any payments
option but we greatly appreciate
to banks.
The gentleman from.
Thank you Mr speaker in front of
you you have a envelope with the
beautiful ten ornament courtesy
the border Intersil Association
and this is just a friendly
reminder that for economic
development day is on the
nineteenth will be having their
celebration on the the fund on
the plaza from six to nine
everyone is invited thank you Mr
speaker I also don't have an
envelope on my desk but I'm sure
you'll deliver once.
Announcements.
Representative Chatfield.
Mr speaker you're gonna have to
get in the line for these
goodies
Mr speaker on hopefully on your
desk but definitely on the desk
in front of me there's a nice
red packet from the phone good
folks at two can carry New
Mexico that in eastern New
Mexico and the good the should
fund some cheese and there are a
lot of goodies and they do a
good job there in two can carry.
And if you get one I'll get you
one.
I appreciate that Sir I
understand from the settlement
could put all that stuff is
delivered to my office so if you
want to triple the questions
would be great.
Thank you Mr speaker will do
that and we need to.
Gentleman is Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning good morning members
it's a special day in the house
of representatives I have a
buddy of mine whose birthday it
is Representative from
Bernalillo county Gregori on
that just Romero turns thirty
years old today congratulations.
Did you see thirty.
Twenty one or thirty and on the.
Well
You know when I used to sit down
there I used to seeing eight
million eight this to the board
for the.
Celebrants and some wondering if
hi there of our leaders one
winds can maintenance in singing
Happy Birthday to the gentleman
from Bernalillo.
I can I just can't sing loss
monitors without the words in
front of me.
Provided to sing Happy Birthday
to you.
More on the.
The fifteen thirty to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
This.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I go to the net that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports
civilization is so ordered.
Point.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Click to read.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to Mr
Foord house bill one has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
needs and small chair.
Move approval.
We're in a favorable report on
house bill one all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
The supposedly.
The eyes have it reported up to.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I move that we go
back to announcements and
miscellaneous business see no
objection it is so ordered.
Members in consultation with
members of the minority
leadership and maturity
leadership.
we have agreed to suspend the
rules and allow us to go into
third reading for the purposes
of hearing house the one on the
floor.
Right now the calendars a
Passover gonna give the team
time to pass that out local real
slow.
For the sake of transparency.
We've got folks were working
overtime right now to get things
calendar of phone the website.
Slowly do that members plans
finance consent that we suspend
rule eleven dash twenty dash one
similar junction it is so
ordered.
Yeah.
What.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
That we don't see it now being
eleven fifty nine AM I move the
adjourned until twelve or one PM
house will come to order.
Districts.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules basically
ended and that the journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's a
judge's order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to the revision and
approval of the rules in order
of business committee again
there's objection it is so
ordered.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
third reading of legislation no
objection it is so ordered.
Members you should all have a
supplement to go under your
desk.
Not yet on the website will take
just a quick thirty seconds.
While the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and expert witness
get ready.
For house bill one.
Thank you Mr speaker ladies and
gentleman of the house madam
okay.
Just hold on one second.
If you really want.
For it folks cells like the
submitted under is being on the
website now so we are ready to
go.
The lady are you ready to go.
We get to that point Mr speaker.
Thank you ladies.
The record reflect that election
server placing House Bill one on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house house bill one
provides the necessary funding
for the operation of the twenty
twenty twenty sixty day
legislative session this
includes security employees
salaries printing supplies and
other legislative expenses it
will also provide necessary
upgrades to New Mexico's
legislative systems to improve
constituent services virtual
participation in more I I'm
going to give a little bit of an
abbreviated function of the
light winds script and so that
you don't have to listen to me
talk for too long but I'm happy
to elaborate on anything when
there are questions specifically
the entire budget appropriate
succint tire Bill appropriates
eleven million seven hundred
forty seven thousand one hundred
dollars for the expenses of the
twenty twenty three legislative
session this includes for the
house of representatives four
million two hundred and twenty
seven thousand nine hundred
dollars one million and for the
Legislative Council Service one
million five hundred fifty five
thousand four hundred dollars.
For session expenses and running
the joint bill room mail room
and Legislative switchboard the
bill includes additional annual
appropriations for the permanent
legislative committees and the
expense of the Legislative
departments.
And for the Legislative Council
Service operations eight million
five hundred forty eight
thousand eight hundred dollars
for additional interim committee
and operational support for
fiscal years twenty three and
twenty four seven hundred and
twenty thousand dollars for
interim legislative expenses
four million dollars for next
year's session preparation five
hundred and ten thousand dollars
for the statewide legislative
internship program fifty five
thousand dollars.
Regions in fees for national
organizations four hundred and.
Thirty five thousand three
hundred dollars for the
legislative information system
for fiscal years twenty three
and twenty four two million one
hundred forty three thousand
nine hundred dollars.
The fiscal years twenty three
twenty four for the on going
planning design and development
of a legislative processing
system nine million five hundred
thousand dollars for committee
room audio visual upgrades one
million five hundred thousand
dollars for the contractual
services of the capitol
buildings Planning Commission
one hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
For the purchase and
installation costs of a
constituent services platform
five hundred thousand dollars
for the upgrade of the house and
Senate chamber display boards
one million three hundred
thousand dollars and last for
last but in this category the
hiring of a consultant in today
to study the feasibility of
districts staff offices for the
legislature two million five
hundred thousand dollars the
bill also appropriates to the
legislative finance committee
five million six hundred seventy
three thousand three hundred
dollars to the legislative
education study committee.
One million six hundred ninety
eight thousand dollars for its
operations for the house chief
clerks office and house
leadership office three million
six hundred thousand dollars and
for the legislative department
chair of the continuing.
The continued ongoing
development in partnership with
the New Mexico compilation
commission in the south
publication of the New Mexico
statutes four hundred thousand
dollars and with that Mr speaker
I will stand for questions and I
have Mr Raul Burciaga are
director of the Legislative
Council Service here as an
expert witness Senator there is
debate the gentleman from Chavis
today and that'll Representative
Townsend.
Good morning Mr speaker good
morning
Well the gentle lady yield
Mister speaker I yield.
Thank you gentle lady I
appreciate the.
Some of the comments about of
the reasons for the increase in
spending I think it's important
for the body to realize that
there's about a forty percent
increase between two thousand
twenty one sixty day session and
what is being proposed.
in this budget.
There are worse
descriptions given and I was
just wondering if you could
share more details
with the body so I mean for
example the one million dollars
to the house minority office.
To give any more detail on on
that of what's being spent for.
A million dollars for five
employees I'm sure there
greening from here to here right
now.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
twenty twenty one sixty day
session was a virtual session
largely so there would be
obviously of at additional
expenses for an in person
session salaries have also gone
up based on across the board
raises provided over the last
two years including a seven
percent increase in twenty
twenty two.
Additionally.
On house bill two required no
one in state government should
be paid less than fifteen
dollars an hour so that the
compensation classification plan
was adjusted to reflect that and
so that in and.
Also it comes for increase.
That
speaker gentle lady it does but.
I'm trying to get through this
and I'm not trying to dig
through.
There's no there's five full
time employees in the minority
house.
And there's a million dollars
proposed in the budget.
That's two hundred thousand
dollars per employee.
I think we have crossed the
threshold of fifteen dollars an
hour and I'm just trying to
figure out how that break down
what happened and what that
break down this.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
maybe the house chief clerks
budget includes the house chief
clerks office the major office
the minority office and the
speaker's office it's not just
five people in the house chief
clerks office.
So session.
That's my point Mr speaker and
gentle lady that million dollars
for is that house minority
office what you're saying is it
pays for its proportion of the
house clerk's office and others
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I'm confused about the million
dollars for the minority office
because I don't have that figure
anywhere.
I'm sorry I was alignment that
was in the Senate that salaries
and benefits in the Senate we're
going from one point nine to two
point nine million dollars in
the in the salaries and benefits
for Senate staff in the house
staff that number is is about a
hundred thousand dollars side I
apologize I was in one row often
that and and I I'll let you off
the hook on that one so you can
you can stop sweating on that
issue but it is important for
the body to realize there's a
forty percent increase.
From eight point four million
dollars to basic include
basically eleven point seven
five million dollars and that
increases the healthy increase
when you're going down and you
look at the non session expenses
the total non session expenses
are going up.
four hundred and fifty five
point one percent.
Four hundred and fifty five
point one percent that seems
awfully healthy.
when you go and start breaking
down through the house clerk's
office.
From two thousand twenty one to
two thousand twenty three thirty
one point three million dollar
increase most of that falls out
in to contract services.
which is about a half a million
dollar increase in the in on top
of that
There's about seven hundred
thousand dollars to that is
called personal services and
benefits can you give me any
detail in that personal services
and benefits.
Mr speaker and gentleman while
Mr Burciaga just checking one
thing I know for certain is that
the house chief clerks offices
authorized to have five full
time staff they currently only
have four so we're getting them
up to the five and in addition
please keep in mind that we are
returning to pre pandemic
staffing levels and I'm looking
for more.
So in addition Mr speaker and
gentleman in addition to
what I mentioned the pre
pandemic staffing levels it's
raises and increase in the
numbers that all the speaker's
office the chief clerks office
the majority and the minority
are all expanding.
I appreciate that and Mr speaker
and gentle lady when you look at
contracts services for example
that's increasing five hundred
thousand dollars which is more
than we have ever seen in any
thirty or sixty day session in
the last of.
Decades from my research can you
give me any indication what that
half million dollars is for.
Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
Burciaga pointed out that when
we what this does is it allows
the leadership offices to do
some contracting rather than
hiring staff gives them more
flexibility if necessary.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady are we talking about staff
for legislators are we talking
about staff in the office have a
million dollars I mean if we
were going up fifty or a hundred
I would understand that but that
that seems like when you're
tripling the budget.
That seems like quite an
increase can you give me any
detail on that half million
dollars Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm I can tell you is for the
office offices is not for
legislators.
So the grand gentle lady can you
tell me about that half million
dollars is to be spent for.
That would be Mr speaker and
gentleman that would be at the
discretion of the leadership
teams on both sides of the
aisle.
So can Mr speaker and gentle
lady can give me the breakdown
between the house of of on both
sides of the aisle what the
breakdown is of to be designated
between the minority and the
majority office.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What line item.
Contract services Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
we have done with the
percentages this year is to
return to the traditional
percentage of
forty percent for the
Speaker's office thirty percent
for the minority office and
thirty percent for the major
office.
Well I appreciate that thinking
it all it really should be a
third third and a third I would.
It is there is Mr speaker and
gentle lady are there.
Projects being planned that
would cause us to increase our
contracts services spending
significantly.
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
a a line item in this in house
bill one for contracting with an
entity and that's a rather
extensive contract that's for
two point five million dollars
that is something will and not
likely to recur but is very
complex.
Well.
Representative appreciate that
Mr speaker.
Generally that two and a half
million dollars I think it's for
this the the that's being
proposed for legislative offices
at setter is is that not correct
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
for it to contract with an
entity would look across the
nation at best practice in other
bodies and also we talked about
this in the House Appropriations
Committee.
At what's.
What the challenges are in the
state of our geographic size
we're fifth largest in the
nation and the lady from all
those counties with the largest
geographic's a district in the
entire country
they have different kinds of
needs thank I do and the central
part of Albuquerque so it's to
look at at what is needed in
order to a sparsely populated
diverse and large state with
seventy members of the house and
a hundred twelve members well I
don't know for you to do in the
Senate but I.
I believe that with this
legislative body.
Well I appreciate that
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
back to the half a million
dollars to five hundred thousand
dollars do you have any idea
what it's going to be spent for.
Mr speaker and gentleman again I
answer that it's up to each
leadership office.
Okay gentle lady I appreciate
that
It.
It just caused me to wonder
gentle lady wanna half million
one I mean if we're going.
If we're going to put a pot of
money in there for contract
services.
I mean what thinking was used to
get to a half million dollars I
mean was there reasons for that
and apparently.
We just have decided we think
they're going to need more
contract services and we got
lots of money I don't know other
any other reason Mr speaker and
gentle lady on.
I'm just trying to figure that
out I appreciate that let's go
on.
Gentlelady when I look at the
totals.
on the break down that I have in
twenty twenty one.
We spent thirty million three
hundred fourteen thousand one
hundred dollars in the grand
total of on the the bill.
In this particular the bill we
are presenting to the body
approval to spend fifty seven
million four hundred and thirty
three thousand five hundred
which is about twenty seven
million dollars.
pretty healthy increase.
and with talked about two and a
half million dollars of that
going for.
a study we had another nine and
a half million dollars for
legislative processing system
planning and design can you give
me any detail and that that.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
can we did talk about this in
the.
The new legislative drafting
information system will be a
single application database
consolidating drafting
legislative information
committee and chamber related
information components this
system reduces or eliminates
duplicate data entry efforts and
improves the sharing of
information between offices will
continue continuing to address
information security needs is
expected to be in place by the
twenty twenty six regular
session it's very complex and
costly.
I appreciate that and and I I
would agree with you that there
needs to be worked care Mr
speaker gentle lady
our is at nine and a half
million dollars is that design a
design that we have gone out and
looked at and said well um you
know this system is used by.
You know.
The state or that state and we
know it works I mean where we
coming up with this design Mr
speaker and gentleman this we
did
Hold on one second.
Wait we already issued an RFP
and this is the company talent
that was selected to loan and
they have begun and this is what
is needed to complete the work.
Correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady have
weeks and contracted this
services and we're covering the
contract is that what we're
doing here.
Mr speaker and gentleman just.
Well
I appreciate that.
generally there's a number of
other people on the board I will
let them have a shot at asking
questions I appreciate your time
or speaker thank you.
Digital equipment for the debate
the gentleman from Lee the
representative of Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I held I was looking
for you over here improved.
The the my request I can assure
you.
Just got a number of questions
also.
Similar to the gentleman from.
Chavis Indian Otero but I'd like
to focus on just a couple of
line items.
And this is a deal with the non
session expenses that have gone
with respect to travel.
From one million dollars two
four million dollars and I guess
my first question Mr speaker and
gentle lady would be what were
our expenditures for this line
item in this fiscal year.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
said this year's fiscal report
for this fiscal year is not
completed.
Hold on.
In the twenty twenty one as you
can see one million was
appropriated and we spent eight
hundred sixty four thousand plus
and we've had a lot more
expenses.
This year.
Mr speaker gentle lady to we
have a kind of a break down on
this four two three four hundred
percent increase in travel
expenses that yes a sense to be
quite substantial Mr speaker and
gentleman it is and we talked
about this at some length
channel in in both putting in
surprise and in.
The
House Appropriations Committee
this covers interim committee
specific studies and consultants
ethics or harassment
investigations outside in the
special counsel lawsuits the
inspection of public records
April's losses that I have.
I have experienced a
confidentiality challenges and
the redistricting lawsuits that
are pending and will continue
part of the continuing.
Mr speaker and gentle can you
describe what has been spent on
those activities so for this
fiscal year.
Mr speaker and gentleman what I
read you is what's we're trying
to anticipate that and now we
don't have the final accounting
for this fiscal year.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
have accounted for share to
date.
Mr speaker gentleman Mr Burciaga
says we don't have an accounting
at.
Jim lady now on really confused
we don't know how much was spent
today we can't we should be able
to project from that which is
going to take to go through this
fiscal year and now we're
looking at more than that four
six into the next budget year
on.
Once again need.
To see before I can vote for
this budget.
A little bit more.
Comprehensive accounting of how
the school.
Mr speaker chairman Ali bin said
this points Mr Burciaga is
trying to gather that for you if
necessary but the four million
is is based on all of those
factors that I mentioned that
we've had increases
In numbers
Ethics arrested in the
suggestions and we did change
the legislative policy so that
it requires the retention of
outside counsel for the the four
member committee comes a five
member committee and then the
needs to be investigated Council
as well so we have to have the
money in case there is such a
thing so we don't we can't say
what we think they're going to
be three.
Harassment charges filed with
the ethics commission this year.
Speaker gentle lady thank you
for that all zoom I will say
the.
I don't really believe are
perceived.
Adequate answer the inquiry but
let me move on Mr speaker John I
was actually talking to Mr
Burciaga to get you a little bit
more information so if I could
just complete the answer.
Mr Burciaga said they've
actually had to take some money
out of the Legislative Council
budget to go into the expenses
so far this year he does know
that much so we are over what
the estimate was for last year.
Speaker gentle lady what was the
estimate for last year and how
much did we go over.
Mr speaker and gentleman as you
pointed out it was a million
dollars last year how much we
went over exactly is what we're
trying to find out for you.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle lady.
The term point five million
dollar line item to conduct a
feasibility study.
Really quick math for three
hundred dollars per hour.
And that's eight thousand three
hundred hours of work is this a
consequence of a request for
proposal with a scope of work
and I that seems like a very big
number and a lot of hours for
feasibility study.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
actually did referred about in
the previous debate on the fact
that.
We do not have an RFP
articulated yet ready to go out
for bid obviously we need to
appropriate the money for us
before we could send out an RFP
but this is the one that I
mentioned that will be looking
at our legislature the state of
New Mexico what other
legislatures are doing the
effectiveness of various models
throughout the country and
making recommendations to us
here so we will be once the
funding is in place them in our
she would go out.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady from we have an
idea what the dollars per hour.
Home that could for that work
will be.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
be a competitive bid but I
totally expect one single person
to do the entire work so I mean
it's not it certainly is and be
divided
There's not going to be in my
view that.
A single individual who would
accomplish this without a staff
and without research staff in
and
There is experts.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady
missing one thousand over a
thousand hours of labor going
into this.
Usability study that three
hundred dollars per hour seems
like a lot of man hours for
study Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you very much for your
answers appreciate the debate.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from Sunderland we know already
with Parker.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to my former
neighbor when we sat together
and see that.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady those were those were good
days about ten years ago
the service speaker gentle lady
I want to first thank you and
the speaker in your offices for
working together with us on
house bill one I think that's a
great change for the last
several years and I just want to
first thank you for for that
and.
And also want to thank you of
the speaker gentle lady for
helping answer me my questions
early on and also Mr Burciaga
for helping to clarify some of
these items for me so I can
understand why there in here and
I guess.
I just have maybe one or two
comments and the first is
speaker really when you look at.
the actual session expenses for
two thousand twenty three and it
might not really fair to compare
them to two thousand twenty one
because we're kind of doing a
pandemic session at that point
when you go back to the first
time in the you know perhaps the
most relevant would be twenty
nineteen the sixty day session
twenty nineteen.
We really don't see that much of
an increase in the salaries and
benefits from the house staff we
have roughly two point seven
million in twenty nineteen an
hour two point nine million in
twenty twenty three so so when
you look at kind of the
increases there in other places
right we're not you know we are
increasing salaries which we all
agree to support in this
inflationary time but these
increases are really in other
places and some of my colleagues
Ortiz address though so I will
repeat that.
But one of the areas receipt of
a big one time increase that I
really just want to share some
thoughts on our this the the two
point five million dollars that
was appropriated for consulting
for the feasibility study of
district staff and offices of
the speaker gentle lady.
We don't have to spend all this
two point five million is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
you're absolutely correct.
Yes and and gentle lady I
understand there is
conversations also the Isle of
how much should be in here this
is kind of the middle point and.
And obviously this could be a
competitive bid we're gonna
choose the best bang for the
Buck and so there's a high
probability will spend all this
money on this bid process Mr
judge gentle lady would you
agree with that this is the
gentleman I would agree.
Speaker join thank you for that
and then I just want to make
sure just a couple thoughts on
this because this is something
I've really felt strongly about
for several years.
Is that you know I'm I'm I'm
sure all of you have had the
same experience were I'm I'm
picking up my cell phone right
to cold call and they go Hey I
want to talk with Representative
Harper lego speaking this is me
they don't no no I want to speak
to the representative who signal
this is me they're like what
hello General will you know this
is my personal cell phone the
going so sorry that was on the
you know the nominal I don't
have staff this is how you get a
hold of me and it doesn't if
it's a Democrat or Republican
there like.
You have no staff.
Right and and I think it is time
for us to look into this and I
am actually one here recently Mr
jollity is it correct that
there's only one other state in
the union that does not have
full time legislative staff.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
in twenty oh nine we would my to
staff researched there were nine
states now there's one other
thing about a.
The speaker and gentle lady so I
I.
I guess.
looking at this you know we're
looking at how we could be more
effective talk to you more
efficient how can we be better
representatives of our
constituents right
I really believe having a full
time staff person would be
wonderful now you can look at
okay they can help me with my
emails and my phone bill I'm I'm
I'm sorry my phone mail my email
my calendars I mean those things
are all great study helpful you
know I've got another full time
job that the great but to me the
real value and I think what
helps all of us.
Is.
If we had someone who could
potentially.
Look into and do research and
and meet with folks and we can
tell them Hey I can't make this
meeting can you go this meeting
and and I mean the the simple
all uses you know when I came
into this legislature I had a
pretty good idea of our tax
code.
But I can't just go provided
Council Service and say Hey I
need you to draft me a bill that
will reform our taxes.
We're going to go.
But what you want to do I want
to share a former Texas no so I
spend thousands of hours
researching our tax code talking
to experts and you know I I I
called my second Ph.D because it
really wasn't that much extra
work.
And and now I can go out there
tell them we need to fix
permitting me to fix you know
whatever.
and and right now the speaker
gentle lady I would really love
to have of someone dive into the
cliff affects issue that we're
having right now for folks who
are getting bumps in their
social security payments are now
not qualifying for food stamps.
Because of bump them out.
Right on the cliff effects are
real and I were talking about
this for years and I would love
to have someone I can say Hey
this is what I need to do the
study for it I want to come back
with this plot to this awesome
three D. plot where we will see
the cliff effects and you will
be able to be data driven.
And fixing our welfare programs
here the last several years
we've made lots of great changes
for awful programs but they
haven't been data driven and I
worry that we've created a
situation here where a lot of
people if they go out and work
they're actually making less
money and that's that's terrible
and that's our fault so having
someone that can help me that's
just one example Rountree are
everyone here has things are
passionate about but just having
a.
Someone who can help and then
and then look at what the what
the model legislation is what
other states have done help
draft proposed law changes and
work with Legislative Council
Service.
and then meet with stakeholders
I think we just make us all much
more effective self that's
that's really just my comment I
just want to thank you know the
the gentle lady from her really
the Santa Fe Santa inTaos
Representative the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett and Julie from Santa Fe
Representative students who for
for working with me and make
sure that we have a seat at the
table at this I really think
this is something that we need
to do I and I thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady for for
those few moments to share my
thoughts.
The gentleman there's further
debate the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield
Mister speaker I yield.
Thank you very much.
We discuss this morning and I
still have concerns.
I have a whole bunch concerns
I think it's important for.
Everybody that listens or will
come back and listen to
understood stand a few things Mr
speaker
How many total legislators to we
have been The New Mexico
legislative body Mr speaker and
gentleman hundred twelve.
Mr speaker and gentle lady does
that has that number changed in
the last four years.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
It has not.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for that in the light my
reasoning for the question is
very clear in two thousand
nineteen pre pandemic
twenty six million one hundred
ninety four thousand ninety
dollars was our grand total of
the bill.
Twenty twenty three are
estimated budget is fifty seven
million four hundred and thirty
three thousand five hundred
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if if
I understand correctly.
At the end of the day.
That almost double number.
Is for more than double actually
Is for the same one hundred and
twelve members is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
that is correct but we've added
nine point five million for the
legislative process in the
system.
Two point five for the study.
Three million extra from interim
committees and the the the
actual differences we've
discussed so far in the debate.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady for that so if I
take the nine point five in the
two point five in the three
million were fifteen we're still
almost double what we were
serving this pre pandemic two
thousand nineteen and so Mr
speaker and gentle lady's so
with that.
Is is you know I'm I'm a
sophomore so counsel me a little
bit as we go.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
To get me to a point can you
help me understand how the
capital outlay process works
with respect to municipal county
with respect to municipal credit
requests to us how the capital
outlay process works for them to
request funding.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
does give me to a point so.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
asking me about right now all of
a one time funding that's
included here.
Mr speaker and gentle lady know
specifically when a budget
number is sent to you from any
of your municipalities in your
area.
and it has a dollar number to
it.
To that capital outlay requests
have a justification than a
baseline for how they got to the
number.
Mr speaker and gentleman answers
planning design construction and
so forth.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady for
that answer.
This gets me to the point.
We have several budget line
items in non session expenses.
Have no justification behind.
We require our municipal agents.
Didn't matter to study done
matter for the road doesn't
matter for the building doesn't
matter what it is we require our
municipal agents to come to us
with a dollar figure backed up
with facts and figures that not
be correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman those
capital outlay projects cover
planning design the scope time
frame development testing final
acceptance and so forth and that
that's similar to what we're
doing here about the fight this
process is done through a
competitive bid R. F. P. and so.
In an appropriations bill we get
the better the exact amount that
may be available for such a
project and it could changes the
RFP or other procurement
requirements are developed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let
me catch you up because that's
exactly what we do in the
capital outlay process we put a
number out there we back it up
with facts and figures.
And then when it's appropriated
when it's actually funded then
they get to go out and actually
do the planning.
Let's say they go out and do the
planning they may.
The original estimate that
actually had some kind of
numbers facts and figures
associated with the.
Then they put it out for RFE
they get to plan done then they
go to the next stage then they
go to the next stage of that
process continues to work we
require this of our municipal
agents but I have a budget Mr
speaker and gentle lady the I
don't have numbers for.
I have nine point five million
dollars what we think we're
going to spend that was the
answer we received and House
Appropriations this morning
seven number two point five
million.
This is what we think we're
going to spend.
I have seven hundred nineteen
thousand dollars and increased
expenses for employees but we
don't know how many FTEs that is
there's no back up there's no
justification for I'm just and
trying to get to a point Mr
speaker and gentle lady were
where.
We hold ourselves accountable as
we hold the people that when
they want to come ask us for
money we hold them to there's no
level playing field here.
Mr speaker John I don't think
you actually asked me a question
but you said you were a
sophomore in and that you were
welcome the vote hoping to
information not every capital
outlay requests has all of those
details some are for funding to
design and that's the request
for that year and I have
projects in my district like a
jam at a neighborhood community
center that serves actually all
students with disabilities
throughout Albuquerque so we
needed planning and design of
quite some time ago and then is
taken faces of specific capital
outlay and it does involve with
the risk regard to what the
specifics are of the project and
So.
Not every single project is
complete visually when you've
got the capital outlay capital
outlay requests.
Mr speaker and gentle lady LA I
appreciate that answer very much
because I I I I I.
Understand what you just said.
What I don't think is the
amendment what I'm trying to get
across is actually come across
correctly because even in the
very beginning there was some
level of basis and justification
for the number that was
originally appropriated and we
didn't get that this morning and
House Appropriations on almost
every one of these budget lines.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
already went through in debate
on the floor exactly what the
nine point five is for and it's
a contract that is under way
with I'm saying the wrong a long
time line and it we have a two
point five million in seed money
that went out to R. F. P. that
company was selected and it
takes nine point five million to
complete the project that is a
on going project right now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
thank I heard the earlier debate
and that was a nine point five
but we also have a two point
five million dollars
line item here that had no
justification for the number.
Other than this is you know
several of us got together we
looked at this we looked at that
and we came up with the number
and this is the best thing that
we can get and that's a Madlib
obviously.
But at the end of the day I look
at that we have a two point five
million dollar budget line item
in the feed bill with an
emergency clause for bill that
hasn't even been been ready in
an instant pass both the house
and Senate.
House joint resolution for a
joint resolution if it passes
the house and if it passes the
Senate and if.
It gets signed by the governor
won't even make it to the.
Constituents to vote on an
election cycle until November of
twenty twenty four.
And I'm kind of curious is why
we're taking we're spending ten
point five million dollars on.
for the call and like Jack on
on.
I don't know there's a there's a
little place on like that kind
of gamble so there's a little
place some on a nonstop flight
jackets the let we're we're you
can bet on the odds were betting
on the the right now the we're
going to we're gonna spend two
point five million dollars.
For something that we're not
even going to know the outcome
on for over eighteen months
would that be correct Mr speaker
and gentleman now you're talking
about whether legislators would
about eventually receive a
salary of become sort of part
time paid employees this is
about staff for legislators it
does not require a
constitutional amendment and so
it after the study if we decide
to adopt the study than we would
you know we would be able to
begin of staffing up.
This has nothing to do with
legislators salaries.
Speaker gentle lady I appreciate
that answer in I know my
constituents to as well the the
budget line item on here is
consulting them to do for the
feasibility of districts staff
offices that does take a a bill
in the of some sort to be able
to approve the fact that we
could have a hundred and twelve
district staff offices maybe
more for that be correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman I don't know that
it built required hi that's for
us to discuss as a body.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
we.
I guess I'm confused in and
please.
Help me out here are we
suggesting that there's a
potential that
we can we can just open up staff
offices without legislative
approval without probation
without anything.
In the future.
Mr speaker gentle relative
the outcome of this study is not
predetermined.
That's the purpose of it so we
need to look at it.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I get
I get that I understand that
but.
The study was done.
In past.
Ever been in the been read and
everybody's got a chance to read
it.
For we suggesting today the
staff district staff offices
could exist without the
legislative body approval and
without the signature of the
governor or without constituent
of voting rights.
Mr speaker and gentleman we when
we get to that point we can
decide if enabling legislation
is required and of course if
it's required we will have to
pass it otherwise the the work
will be between the the
leadership of the.
Minority the leadership of the
major and the speaker's office.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm.
Confused again because it seems
like we're doing a study we're
gonna set.
The the motion to accept this
one of my when it's made this to
accept two point five million
dollars for a study for
districts staff offices that's
one of the blind items in here.
But we don't even know when the
studies done if it takes
legislative approval so we don't
even know the next step in the
state of New Mexico a hundred
and twelve legislators are going
to be voting on a two point five
million dollar expense that we
don't even know.
What the next step is would that
be a fair statement based on Mr
speaker and gentle lady on your
response to me Mr speaker and
gentleman the outcome of this
study is not predetermined.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
understand the outcomes not done
because the study did not there
because of studies out there but
we don't even know what the
potential step B. step two step
three step four step five this
based off Mr speaker and gentle
lady the answer that I received
to my.
Question too second question.
Mr speaker and gentleman I can't
speculate on I I am not able to
speculate what we're going to
have in the study.
What the results will be.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
confuses me and befuddles me
that that we would actually
consider spending to two point
five million dollars of taxpayer
money.
On something that we don't know
what.
Plan B. plan C..
Any of the other plans are that
follow this we can't even
predict I can't even go back to
my constituents and Tellem well.
The study comes back with this
we're gonna have to do this with
the study comes back with this
we're going to have to do that I
can't even justify the expense.
Mr speaker and gentle lady Ellen
confuses me significantly.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is I
look at it.
I do math a little different
than everybody else but we have
two point five million dollars
associated with the so if you
divide that by hundred twelve
that's about two hundred twenty
two thousand three hundred
twenty one dollars per district
office if we give everyone just
one.
And you know the simple solution
to me Mr speaker and gentle lady
is yes Representative are just a
Senator because they already
know if they had an office where
they would want to put it.
We don't need the we don't we
don't need to spend two point
five million dollars on that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's.
It's clear to me there are
things inside this budget that
are important I support.
Our state our staff everything
that they do for us.
I support the work that's done
during non session.
Time.
I agree that we actually need to
upgrade some of our technical.
equipment and it it would be
great if if we consistently had
committee rooms of the
audiovisual worked and and we
could do some of those things I
agree with some of that none of
this.
Has the detail in that that
should be necessary or would be
necessary for a typical private
entities for for
municipal agent.
When they sit there and they
throw their budget out they have
to be able to find expenses of
the justify that number none of
those were provided.
None of those for provided to
any of the seventy members here.
Well.
Let me speak for myself Mr
speaker and gently they were
provided to me.
And so and I as one of the
seventy people to get to vote on
this bill I sit here and I look
at the fact that we serve
there's a hundred and twelve of
those.
the population is growing not
significantly and darn sure not
enough to increase our budget by
double Mr speaker for those
reasons this is not a fiscally.
Wise choice in my mind and I
cannot support the bill thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
The gentleman there's further
debate the delay from Bernalillo
in Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady please yield Mister speaker
I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I have a few questions on this
on this
consulting entity.
So we're expecting someone to
put a pin on that is that
correct nobody has done a bit on
that.
Mr speaker and leader yes thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady
one with that been be open up.
Mr speaker and lady from times
first in house to be signed into
law and then.
The R. F. P. will be developed.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady probably forty five to
sixty days that would be an RFP
it would go out to contract.
Mr speaker that I'm sorry yes
did you read yeah will this
study be done by the end of the
fiscal year July one.
Mr speaker and maybe even
Torrance we're not certain how
fast it can be done.
It will depend on the bitter and
the the budget it's accepted and
contract negotiations.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and.
How long once the bid is
accepted how long before we're
going to get the results of that
study.
Mr speaker and made from times.
All of that would be part of the
response by the bidders that
would they would I knew I.
You know when I used to respond
our of peas when I was at the
university of New Mexico health
sciences center.
We would have
We would have a date by which we
had to submit and then they had
an award date that was all
formulaic this is a special open
ended although we will certainly
ask for certain outcomes and and
and as I said ask for a specific
study about the nature of our
state and the widespread
districts and some compact
districts and so forth so at
answering.
When we're going to know what it
is virtually impossible right
now.
Thank you Mr speaker generated
and I know this of course has
been being added on I don't
think you're supposed to say
that anymore I know this is been
gone over a whole bunch of times
but if you were to explain this
in most simplistic terms of of
our voters were here right now
how would you explain what this
is for in the most simplistic
basic terms to them.
Mr speaker and lady from towards
I like that question a lot I
think what we're looking at is
if there is a way for our state
legislators to be able to be
more effective in their jobs and
more professional if there's a
way for them to be responsive to
their constituents or somebody
talked about the be nice to have
someone answer the phone calls
but it would really be nice to
have people do policy research
so it's a way to try to help out
the people of your district in
my district so that I can I'm I
have a stack of problems that
people of called about that I
haven't had time to look into
that and they're not simple it's
not like I need help with and
the date or because the chief
clerks office does help us with
those I there are would you
really wanted described it as of
the way I see it is what
opportunities exist for us to do
our jobs better and be better at
making the laws that are
affected.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in person put in the bed with a
be somebody from New Mexico
exclusively Mr speaker and the
lady from Torrance that's not
required.
Okay Mister speaker jealous of
the could be somebody from out
of state okay so at another
brief question was on this
legislative process I know
discipline gone over extensively
about the nine point five
million to somebody ready have
that contract.
Mr speaker and later yes it's
the to long.
And it we had two point five
million invested the study this
study I'm sorry I'm back on the
last question the work is under
way this is what's required to
complete it okay Mister speaker
internally what was the name of
the company again and could you
spell it for me.
A. L. L. A. N. Mr speaker and
lady okay so that thank you Mr
speaker jealous that's in in the
committee I like to research it
and see who they are
can you tell me so how much so
they had two point five million
dollars that they have already
have what have they done and I
think that questions are
answered I just know what what
can I go back to my constituents
and say that this is what
they've done with this two point
five million dollars.
Mr speaker lady I'm I'm happy to
learn that they were good going
to be here during this session
to learn how we're doing things
now but the whole system it's a
new legislative drafting
information system it's a single
application database
consolidating drafting
legislative information
committee and chamber related
information components reducing
or eliminating duplicate data
entry efforts in improving the
sharing of information between
offices while continuing to
address information security
needs and it is expected to be
completed by the twenty twenty
six regular session.
Contract Mr speaker and later
towards is on our website.
Thank you Mr speaker delay
appreciate that so I and I think
I may be wrong the amount the
amount of money that they have
this year so far that will
they've already been allocated
is there a summary years or
something that I could look at
that I could physically you know
I have in my hand so I could see
exactly what they've done hours
charges like you would receive
any invoice.
Mr speaker and later towards it
is part of the contract which is
published on the website but we
can also the council service at
they can also provide that
information thank you Mr speaker
delay I would really really and
I think a lot of people do love
to see an invoice breakdown of
what they're charging per hour
what they're charging for what
they've done every single thing
that they've done so that we can
look at it because in my
district my district is not big
on big government and they're
not big on excessive spending so
they would definitely like to
know exactly where this money is
gone
Mr speaker gentle lady.
The last question I had a maybe
this was already addressed Mr
speaker daily why why did we go
from in pre COVID a million
dollars for travel expenses all
the way up to four million
dollars projected what what is
the reason for that big increase
Mr speaker yes we did talk about
that the four million.
Includes interim committees
specific studies and consultants
ethics or harassment
investigations including the
hiring of outside in special
counsel it's because of several
ongoing lawsuits and the
increase in lawsuits regarding
it broke and confidentiality
challenges and there's an I'm
going redistricting lawsuit now.
Thank you Mister speaker delay
you mentioned something about a
study what what is that study
for.
Mr speaker and maybe it's just
if the committee's request
studies for example the
Legislative Health and Human
Services.
Committee requested a study on
health care.
Okay thank you Mister speaker
generally I want to say I
appreciate all the questions are
asked previously before me I
appreciate your time and I'm
done thank you.
A utility there is for debate
the gentle lady from Eddie in
the Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I yield.
Thank you with gentle lady Mr
speaker I am just curious to
know little bit more about the
display boards there on the.
list here for one point three
million dollars in these are
display boards in the house and
Senate chambers we have to in
here there are two in the Senate
Mr speaker gentle lady I
remember it wasn't all that long
ago that we had these boards
replaced.
I'm just curious to know what
we're getting for one point
three month million dollars that
we don't already have.
Mr speaker and and lady from.
I and I was made to challenge
myself to remember it myself
lady from any it's been six
years the technology is us such
that we really need to upgraded
in both houses.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I remember the old boards before
we had these they were kind of
rudimentary looking the they
worked they I mean we could do
vote totals on them.
The only objection that I have
to these boards is the the print
is a little fuzzy for me and
when those boards came in I
remember getting a little set of
binoculars to use in the chamber
because I really couldn't read
very well what was on the board
so these give these boards I
believe have dynamic messaging
capability you can flash some
messages or whatever on the
board
so yeah technology has changed
but what are we gaining in
technology by spending one point
three million dollars Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and landed for us
and non technical person a
technical question but Mr
Burciaga said that both chief
clerks have expressed concern
that these are probably limited
in their
their
insurance.
Capacity and that they.
They really just simply need to
upgrade it and I completely
agree with you about region the
screens the others were easier
to read although they were very
old fashioned.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
so I would be willing to say we
can be prudent and economize and
maybe not invest one point three
million dollars in for boards.
I I respect the opinion of the
chamber clerks but honestly we
just really do a tally the votes
and I think we could economize a
little bit so let me move on Mr
speaker gentle lady.
We've had a lot of talk about
the
the a line item under non
session expenses is the first
item travel expenses for interim
committee staff at cetera.
we were spending about or
appropriating officially say one
million dollars for since twenty
nineteen up until of the request
for twenty twenty three it's now
four million dollars that's a
pretty hefty increase Mr speaker
gentle lady I I think part of
the reaction that I'm having to
that line item is that it starts
with the words travel expenses
for interim committees
and staff and I I understand
that I think we all do Mr
speaker gentle lady that at
cetera is where we've apparently
talked in some expenses what I
would call legal expenses and if
that were broken out as a
separate line item you know that
would cover the ethics
investigations hiring of council
of lawsuits and things like that
so I think it's it's a bit of a
I don't think it's a just a
deliberate misdirect but I think
just for transparency and
clarity of be nice to have that
as a separate item so there's
just a comment Mr speaker gentle
lady if you like to respond.
Mr speaker and leader from
adding it is all of the in the
state travel for the interim
committees and it also includes
out of state travel if members
go to NCSL or council of state
governments and the as I I
asking why it's not.
Categorized under legal expenses
and so forth I think this is
traditionally how that
particular expands its captured
in house bill one.
I'm sorry and the other thing
this is a good point Mr speaker
and lady from Eddie Haskell
Legislative Council for
authorization and a vote before
it goes its use for any of the
items that I mentioned.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
so I understand the logistics
but I believe sometimes
traditions don't always service
in the current day and just for
transparency before the tax
payers it would be I think very
informational for them to know
that that legal expenses are
bundled in there and maybe
shouldn't be so just just a
comment as I said Mr speaker
gentle lady I I see a lot in
this feed bill that are a I like
I appreciate I think we want our
staff to be paid for well for
the work that they all do
I I just want to underscore my
thoughts I expressed them in
House Appropriations this
morning that adding some staff
members to council service so
that the attorneys can spend
their time drafting and other
staffers can do more
administrative duties makes a
lot of sense and I mentioned
also that
staff members from council
service they have kind of a dual
duty and that is to draft
legislation for us and also the
staff the committees and
why I have this rule that I
don't usually try to bother them
to ask for a bill drafting until
October or later on because they
are just totally swamped and by
adding some staff I think we
could improve the quality of our
drafting I I think they would
tell us they do a lot of times
draft on the fly and they're not
always satisfied with their work
product and if we could take
some time and have months of
prep to ask for bill to be
drafted have some good research
done work on draft to get the
the words right things like that
we would improve the quality of
our our work here in the
legislature so I like that part
of the bill very much.
And with that Mr speaker I think
that covers most of what I
wanted to say I appreciate all
the work that went into getting
this bill thank you.
Usually there's further debate
the gentleman from San Juan.
And he's not in the chamber
representative from one school
year.
We can come back to this.
One reason will go it will go
back.
Thank you Mr speaker is
gentlelady from Bernalillo you
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you gentle lady
Once again I'd like to for the
members who do not serve
Appropriations.
I'd like to reiterate a couple
of questions and just go through
that again with you just for the
benefit of so few people serve
on probation so I hope this is
not tiresome for folks but to
help people be as informed as
possible when they vote that's
the purpose of the questioning
and now so Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
There are several line items
that are in this.
Senate Bill.
That have seems like open ended
outcomes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
number the the the dollar figure
for
In rural committee and
operational support and
Legislative intermixed Spence is
an increase of
Three full this actually it goes
up for of it's it goes up three
percent.
From over the last.
Three appropriation years twenty
twenty one twenty.
At twenty twenty to twenty
twenty nineteen
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady at you once again.
There was discussion about some
expenses that may can't come up
and I believe some of these
expenses were due to an increase
cost for for lawyers expenses
and is there any way Mr speaker
gently you could elaborate a
little bit on what what the
expectation is there for such a
huge increase.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure if you heard the discussion
of this earlier but the on the
The lawsuits right now.
R. on April.
Confidentiality challenges and
redistricting their on going so
we are just simply estimating.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and the increases that have
been asked by the Senate
obviously we I know the policy
out there is we don't we don't
to concern itself with the
Senate's budget they and they
don't concern themselves with
our budget but Mr speaker and
gentle lady the total budget
increase from the last sixty day
session is almost ninety percent
almost a ninety percent increase
it just
not a number that's easily a
number that you can ignore that
much of an increase
so I I'm I'm.
A little concerned Mister
speaker July maybe a looks like
you have a question there for me
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker John I don't
understand your numbers.
Looking at the numbers for for
leadership and and and full time
staff for.
The house and the Senate.
And including for a you know
that is coming through on the
clerk's budget Mr speaker and
gentle lady this is where we're
seeing that number.
I'm just wondering that if you
could reiterate that for
the members why that was an
increase.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
going to talk about the Senate
so leave that out and
the we've we've gone through the
fact that we were.
Thank our chief clerk is down
twenty percent she's entitled to
I staff members and has only
four and so this would be
providing that for her and then
both the minority and majority
of staff and I think the
speaker's office get an increase
in and their staff it's people
percentage increase in their
stuff so I'm not sure.
Thank.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm just like you the total
budget number.
Going the grand total in the
feet bill going up from twenty
twenty one from thirty thousand
thirty million dollars to fifty
seven.
And that is that's the number I
think that everybody's having a
hard time getting their minds
around is such a drag dramatic
increase from just two years
ago.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
because of the four million so
which is a three million
increase the nine point five
which is a one time expenditures
the one point I was just one
time expenditures the one point
three the display boards as one
time expenditures and the two
point five is a district office
study which is a one time
expenditures.
That's it.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Once again I I know several
these expenditures have been
described as we're estimating or
were were projecting
but Mr speaker and gentle lady
this is the question I and I I
knew we were gonna get to this
answer because it was just we
got to in committee the question
is.
What happens to those dollars.
If they go on spent where do
those dollars revert to.
Mr speaker and gentleman to
provided cash balances.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and of.
They do when they're in provided
cash balances.
I know that.
For most of these dollars to be
spent there has to be an
appropriation.
Tied to it.
however when pressed in
committee on this question.
The answer for this being
covered by.
By an appropriation.
It is the.
The line that basically say it
says that this has to go for
staff and for these other
expenses so in reality there is
a lot of.
Discretion.
By both
the director of Legislative
Council services and also by the
by Legislative Council so some
of these dollars.
can be spent without coming back
to this body.
For the pro for a designation
through an appropriation it what
it was designated in a very.
Nonspecific line item
appropriation which just is
basically for staff needs
consulting services but the
Legislative Council.
Gets to direct those dollars is
that
is that correct or is that
incorrect the speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
Legislative Council this is one
of our issues for those of us
who want to modernize the
legislature is that we don't
have an arm of the legislature
when we're not in session up in
our branch of government is
going to be an arm of government
and so the Legislative Council
serves that purpose.
Thank you Mr speaker range and
gently the question then is how
much money is currently in
provided cash balances.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Right now it's it's a moving
target just about two point
three million.
Mr Burciaga reminds us that it
must be appropriated.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady however part of the answer
that was received from Mr
Burciaga and committee was that.
Some of it is already
appropriated through vague
language that allows discretion.
During the interim.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
from the capital improvements it
does have to go before the
subcommittee on.
Facilities review.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I do appreciate that that answer
but it does.
It is concerning that the.
We can be putting money into
into an account that is stated
that it needs to go through an
appropriation.
if that is the case I'm not
exactly sure why and this is the
justification I'm I'm looking
for is why would we then not
just refer those dollars back to
the general fund if we're going
to have to get an appropriation
anyway.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The cash balances provide the
legislature of fund for which
you can draw for for special
projects of its choosing
including those it has
traditionally funded special
sessions redistricting legal and
technical services building
upgrades and sometimes has been
used for IT hardware and
software which is in phase one
the general fund a short.
In short the legislature should
be tennis powers the separate
and equal branch of government
meeting in the general fund
makes it easier for the governor
to line item veto as opposed to
respecting what the legislature
is doing with its own money.
Thank you Mr chairman and ladies
so this is something that
generally is a is a peeve of
several folks who think that and
accounting a strict accounting
needs to be kept.
at it appears and it's become
the custom that we are finding
little savings accounts either
through this bill or through
house bill two which will be
coming our way and all of the
creation of funds that the
dollars are unable to be
distributed out of and we it's
once again it's just it's
becoming a trend that I'm I'm
comfortable with which is we
then will designate kind of like
the governor was doing on
opening day kind of doing her
best The Oprah Winfrey.
person nations saying and you
get a ten million dollars and
you get a hundred million
dollars and we're going to.
To some degree that's what I see
that we're doing here is this
is.
Legislative Council gets
whatever that figure is
and the discussion is a so that
we don't have to appropriation
and the governor can get her
grubby hands on it.
So Mr speaker and and and gentle
lady I am concerned with that
but that's not my largest
concern sign I I I do not
believe that should be.
I don't believe that should be.
The way we handle.
Budgeting.
But Mr speaker and gentle lady
that the larger concern I have.
Is this a study.
The ten point five million
dollars.
That is the as I was listening
to debate earlier we're not even
sure.
That that would be done this
calendar year completely.
And I'm I'm unsure as to why
that two point five million
dollars has been placed in house
bill one instead of in house
bill two.
What what what is the reasoning
for this building and house bill
one.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
those who worked on that wanted
to get the study under way as
soon as possible.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
once again that was the answer I
believe we were going to get to
the question is.
Can we tell the body the folks
who worked on that.
This is supposed to be a fee
bill for the legislature for
this next sixty days.
US.
Dollars to run the legislature
and staff during the interim so
this being put in here by so far
unnamed sources of those who
worked on the study four who
worked on this who worked on
this that has asked requests for
this to be in house bill one Mr
speaker and gentleman actually
the gentleman from Santa in our
distinguish economic did talk
about
worked on it there was
collaboration on both sides
the lady from Rio Arriba
Representative at out of the
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Sapan skate of
the gentleman from Sierra
Representative Harper and I
believe they consulted with the
lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you
Thank you I appreciate that.
And that is exactly why I have a
problem with this is a number of
folks who collaborated and said
let's put this in house bill
one.
Mr speaker.
And gentle lady house bill one
is something we have to pass so
we can provide for the next
sixty days.
Kind of sensibility it has
become tradition that we pay for
legislative expenses throughout
the year due to staffing and
costs of running the building
and paying for expenses year
round.
And something else happens with
house bill one and it's on this
bill.
And that is an emergency clause.
We get this done in house bill
one.
Today.
Anyone who takes our job
seriously and knows what the.
Reason for house bill one which
is the fee bill which is how we
pay staff that puts legislators
all the position if there's a
problem if there's a provision
they don't like it's hard to
vote against it because.
We all want staff to be paid we
all want our staff our staff
does a tremendous job but this
Mr speaker and gently puts us in
a very very tough position.
Fund something that that
obviously does not belong in
this bill.
so for that reason I'm not
saying this is not something we
should pursue I personally
don't.
Like the idea but if we're gonna
percent this this deserves
debate.
Deserves more than one committee
this deserves to go through the
red the regular appropriations
process.
And if it ends up in house bill
two it will have full vetting.
And so house bill one the feed
bill.
It is not appropriate here.
This is a unfortunately.
This this this does not get the
proper scrutiny and madam
speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do think that's why it's
here.
And so for that purpose.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have uh introduced an amendment.
And I would Mr speaker if you
can give me that point I'd like
to introduce house floor
amendment one to house bill one.
Chairman
we're going to pause for a
minute to make sure people get
back he can look at the
amendment on their desk and and
also to get on the website so.
Give us give us a few minutes
they're making copies of it
right now how would you like to
continue with for more debate
while we wait for.
Yes thank
Mr speaker I will do that I'll
have a couple more questions
once again the I I believe this
will be addressed in the bay
but.
The more at Mr speaker and
gentle lady of whether or not we
should have full time staff.
Is the question I think we need
to have it was discussed earlier
in committee that we are one of
only I believe two states is
that correct Mr speaker and
generated the only two states
that don't have full time staff
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
cracked.
Thank you Mr president lady
It was discussed earlier it has
been discussed that we need to
modernize and that's that this
is part of that once again I
believe for that reason it needs
a debate the needs full vetting
by the membership.
but Mr speaker and gentle lady I
I do have questions about that I
we were kind of running short on
time and committee so I didn't
ask of the further question but
the question is speaker that I
have is
don't we have full time year
round staff now.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
leadership office and the
leadership offices speaker's
office.
Exclusively except I mean I I I
always consider lucid Council
services as part of our our
staff but clearly they're not.
They're not in the same our
business of doing constituent
service.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
There was a proposal a couple of
years ago to entertain the idea
of year round staff and the the
idea of that year round staff
would have been
The proportional to the number
of representatives within a
community and it would be a
shared office similar to what we
have right now with the clerk's
office which is staffing it with
folks who could do constituent
services for us to do research
for us but it would be it was as
has been discussed in the lead
up to the session it was much
less it was much there are
fewer.
There were there was any if you
were staff members and we were
gonna share staff and we were
going to look as I remember Mr
speaker and gentle lady if
you're if you had Senators.
and representatives in the
community they could share an
office office space very similar
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
the way it is out in the north
addicts if you go out to the as
as some representatives have
turn to the out house
we have we have
Are Republicans.
And Democrats using a shared
space.
And we have.
One staff member.
Who is working for.
Two representatives.
And so Mister speaker and gentle
lady you made a statement
earlier and I would like a
little bit of clarification on
this but the question was.
That was that was asked was
about the parameters of the
study.
And it was stated that we were
looking that they would have
direction and they would be
looking to add to certain goals
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady the question is about the
parameters of that study.
If if we were to hire someone
which could be.
Medially.
Since this as an emergency
clause if we were to hire
someone and they were to
contract to do this work order
parameters for what and are we
looking to have them discuss is
that they are are we looking for
one staff member.
legislator are we looking for as
I had heard from discussions
that there would be a
potentially if a person had a
multiple counties that they were
representing that there could be
multiple offices so one person
can have multiple the parameters
I that has not been discussed
either in my and by the way Mr
speaker gentle lady these are
the type of questions that would
happen through normal vetting if
this were to go through the
committee through committee.
Mr speaker and gentleman I want
to point out that one thing
before I answer that question
and that is that there was a
discussion into committees
because printing and supplies
discuss that particular
addition in approving the house
request and then we had a
discussion and House
Appropriations what the
questions you're asking are the
exact things we want the study
to recommend to us what do you
do in a district that's the
largest district geographically
in the country.
the Gallup McKinley school
district is bigger than the
state of.
We received Rhode Island I think
so it is just the end of so many
factors to consider and whether
or not you need someone to cover
office type of duties or policy
duties the those things are all
the the the concept I believe is
to look at best practice and
what makes you and maybe a
better better legislator what
makes is more responsive to our
voters what helps us what helps
the voters get their answers to.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
generally so the question the
follow up question would be
is there going to be some
enabling legislation that we
would see today that would help
guide the parameters of that
study or Mr speaker and gentle
it is adjustment for those few
folks who got together and
decided to put this proposition
forward for them to make the
disk the the decision that that
is why that I believe this is an
appropriate
for House Bill one so could you
answer that for me
Mr speaker and gentleman that
vast to be determined by the the
information in the study and I
invite anybody to have that
discussion to correctly and I I
to limited and that no.
In response but it certainly
isn't meant to be divided among
three or four people and this
has nothing to do with the
number of staff it's about the
study that would recommend the
number of staff digital include
part of the tradition but we do
have the amendment passed out I
believe every member has it on
their desk and I believe it is
also online is that correct.
Not yet okay.
Proceed thank you Mr speaker so
of the lady from Bernalillo.
the so it does appear as if for
asked that we're saying.
That we're looking to find
something.
That.
Is so open ended.
That we.
That we're not giving any
instructions whatsoever if there
are instructions.
Where four four there has to be
deliverable.
By whoever takes on this job to
do a study.
What is the deliverable there
has to be there's gonna be a
contract Mr speaker and gentle
lady that has put the
deliverable is.
If it just says a study.
That is not enough information
to go out to contract surely
there has to be enough
information to share with the
body.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
would be developed before the R.
F. P. is let.
Some speaker and and gentle lady
would develop that.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I believe that the legislature
would provide input and with
council service and I.
I think they're all kinds of
avenues of gathering information
from folks about what they need
we've heard quite a bit from
people here today about what
they need and what would be
useful and I think that that
would be this particular study
in addition to the like the
total on study they're gonna be
here watching us work during the
session to see what we need so
not to don study I shouldn't
college study it's work and and
they want to help find out what
we do and how to improve it and
then the this study may be
similar in in nature but.
Again.
It's.
We can't say right now this
includes you and excludes may
and and
It's certainly meant to be fair
and impartial and try to meet
the needs of our state.
Thank you Mr speaker the problem
is.
However determines that it's
going to be fair we don't even
know who that is and the person
who that is excluded may feel
more excluded for a reason so
Mister speaker once again this
is this proposals not ready for
prime time it's definitely not
ready for house bill one and so
I I believe it it doesn't appear
that there has to be a rush it
doesn't appear that this has to
begin tomorrow if this gets
passed passed to the Senate goes
up to the governor doesn't peers
a study has to be in how in
house bill one it doesn't appear
that it needs to be here that
has been expressed there doesn't
appear to be a dire timeline
associated with this
There are enough questions about
the about the feed bill and
dollars that are going to be
left that could go to cash
balances that the legislature.
At each member of the
Legislature loses control over
that for a smaller group to be
able to make those decisions and
usually the folks who are in the
position of making those
decisions think they're being
fair.
And the people who those
decisions are being made for
don't always feel like it's fair
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady
I I believe we need to pull this
out of here I think that there's
there's no reason the reason
that we can debate this that
this can be included house bill
two Mr speaker and if if the
members obviously your site has
the numbers to pass this
unilaterally without whatever
comes out of appropriations is
going to be in control of the
majority there's no need for
this to be in here and Mr
speaker and gentle lady this is
not the first time we've had the
debate on this floor as to the
appropriateness of a bill.
at all of the measure being in.
being in of the female it's not
that doesn't belong here it's
inappropriate and I would hope
for the consideration of the
body to pull this out of the
house bill one.
Gentleman there appears to be a
technical issue with getting
this on the website if it's okay
with you all and and hearing the
the health debate on this if
it's in if it's okay with you
all we can you can read the
amendment explain amendment we
can debate amendment vote on the
amendment understanding that
there is a technical glitch that
has prevented this amendment
pool going on the website is
that okay.
Mr speaker at it is it's a one
line amendment
I think we're fine it's clear
what we're asking for and
To look for the record when you
what when you explain the
amendment and then you can move
the amendment thank you Mr the
rent essentially just.
Is out on page seven that you
that we delete lines nineteen
through twenty four which is the
language of two point five
million dollars going to this
study this.
Vague study.
The gentleman yield ladies as a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker now it is not a
friendly amendment.
The debate on the amendment.
Representative the gentleman
from eight percent bigger.
Mr speaker just briefly I did
did you accept my moving of the
amendment earlier.
Jennifer Lee to debate amendment
thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from San Juan you
know.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Mr speaker and gentleman how
long have you been up here.
Mr speaker this is my ninth year
the legislature but I did the
survey a uh here on the Senate's
working for the to the governor
Sanchez and working through this
for through very similar process
sees.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you agree that over the time
frame that you've been up here.
Pardon me
the similar similar additional
line items have been added to
the feed mill in hopes to to get
it out and get funding early
bypass so normal appropriation
process in bypass the normal
vetting process and through
debate even with our friends on
on the other side of the island
as a major we've been able to
pull those out in the past.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
there have been two.
Ways that that house bill one
has been used not necessarily
for the purpose of house bill
one.
one has been to add as an
amendment or a a a line item.
For two.
That.
The end of the effort is to get
it an emergency clause and goes
into effect immediately.
For to avoid the debate that
would happen.
Because there is a pressure
Associated Mr speaker and and
and and gentleman.
The reality is is a bit more
pressure on this today because
they should have gone through
appropriations last night and
we'd already be on to other
business this is already a
little bit of pressure for that
purpose
but Mr speaker and gentleman
I I do believe because this is
such a problem I'm not sure this
will get the emergency clause Mr
speaker and gentleman especially
Mr gentleman after what happened
last night there's a little bit
of turmoil in this room today
and I think that there could be
a potentially enough votes to
you makes it to the to not get
this to get the bill passed with
the emergency clause Mr speaker
and gentleman we have the
emergency clause so that we can
begin paying staff.
So Mister speaker and and and
and and gentleman
the necessity of keeping the
feet Bill Clinton is for the
purpose of not.
Starting off like this on the
beginning of a session for the
beginning of a new leadership
administration
to
keep a clean bill that's one
that's one way Mr speaker and
gentleman that the house bill
one has been the LFC abused the
other has been to add multiple
items on the bill giving
something to each department to
the judiciary to the
administration so it becomes a
general appropriation bill so
that it doesn't need.
The the
emergency clause and then the
bill gets passed anyway because
of the coming and a general
appropriation of Mr speaker and
gentleman those who have been
here for any period of time
knows that we have had.
Very strong debates on this
floor.
Over the fact that house bill
one has been unfortunately
become a vehicle to get things
through when they obviously
belong.
In house bill two.
This study Mr speaker and
gentleman has absolutely nothing
to do with.
Staffing the session for
staffing are year round staff.
So Mr speaker and gentleman it
generally and in the past this
has happened where an amendment
like this has come to claim.
The how the fee built up.
And it has been in the past
deemed been deemed friendly.
Mr speaker and and and gentleman
there have been other times
where it's been deemed
unfriendly because for whatever
reason.
the need.
To pass whatever that provision
is in the feet bill out ways.
Good transparent and proper
legislative authority.
Mr speaker and gentleman I can't
are you thank you can't debate
anything that you just said you
know as I go through these
numbers I can come up with
fifteen million dollars Ortiz
that should have gone through
the appropriation process and
and this is just a simple
attempt in my opinion to by pass
the vetting the that you
described earlier.
Mr speaker and gentleman
You know we went through this in
the thirty day session on some
other items and then we went
through this with us
thank you braces for the City of
Albuquerque and the special
session.
Doesn't belong there doesn't
need to be there and and so it
seems to be a.
Property maybe the the bills
introduced to quit calling at
the feed bill in just calling at
the port Bill.
You know we can.
We can we can have that debate
at some other point down the
road.
Mr speaker and gentleman like I
said I can come up with about
fifteen million and here the
that shouldn't be on this bill.
Gentleman here only asking for
two point five of the to come
off I think that's a pretty
fair balance even.
Given given that I mean we're
only asking for two point five
million out of fifty seven
million to come off and actually
go through and be vetted would
you agree with that Mr speaker
and gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman exactly I'm not asking
that and this vote.
It is today on the amendment
would not keep this provision
for passing what it would do is
it would require this provision
to go through the proper
channels.
And for it to be in the right
bill and so
it is something that.
Is concerning.
that that today that we're still
trying to start off on a new
foot that immediately we're back
on the old foot.
And and and I think it's it's
concerning its concerning to me
that that we're doing this today
and and
Mr speaker
The idea that a few members on
our side may have collaborated
and talked about this this was
not something that was presented
to all of our members that it
would be in this bill for this
purpose and there's not been a
unilateral input on this so Mr
speaker would be incorrect to
think that there's a lot of
support for this
but miss speaker and gentleman.
I believe we just want it
removed.
From all raising our hands.
And stating that we are going to
do our jobs ethically.
And transparently.
And I would say Mr speaker and
gentleman this flies in the face
of both of those things are two
different Oakes that we took.
And one was to support
constitution and the laws of New
Mexico the other was for ethical
conduct and Mr speaker if we
vote for this today.
In this fashion I believe we are
breaking both of those
commitments that we all made
raising our hands once again
whether the merits of this
passing.
This study.
I actually believe already
foregone conclusion I think it
will end up in house bill two
and it will be passed by the
majority of the folks in here.
I just question.
Why.
House bill one white house bill
one and I don't I have not heard
an answer as to why this needs
to be in house bill one.
Mr speaker and gentleman I agree
with you again the index.
Interesting that in
appropriations committee this
morning we talked about.
The.
Leftovers from two thousand
nineteen through two thousand
twenty three.
And so you get a budget then you
spent and there's money left
over.
In each of the years
unfortunately we were provided
with the numbers from
legislative finance but
who are provided the numbers
from twenty twenty but just in
those three years two thousand
nineteen two thousand twenty one
in two thousand and twenty two
there's a total of somewhere
between one point three one
point four million dollars in
additional cash balances just
sitting there right now.
In in discussion this morning we
talked that sometimes that value
can be somewhere what's in the
cash balance could be somewhere
between three and eight million
dollars.
What it takes to get through the
session and pay our staff.
According to this is eleven
million seven hundred forty
seven thousand one hundred
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
can hello I would suggest that
we already have the money in
cash balance this doesn't need
to be pushed through today
there's no reason for sure today
we're not stopping people from
getting paid because the money's
already in cash balance.
Hello this is the transfer of
funds from one account to
another would you agree with
that Mr speaker and and
gentleman that was a point that
I was going to make is exactly
that that's us the number that's
in cash balances it could be
used for this purpose but
instead of taking from what we
already have.
And appropriating that we are
asking for this in a place where
it is not doing what the purpose
of the bill is supposed to do
Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman and into the body.
The question I have is we all
raised our hands yesterday.
And essentially what we're
saying is not only we gonna
follow the letter of the law.
But there's a line in the that
we took yesterday I'm gonna
follow the spirit of that law.
For those rules of ethical
conduct the gentleman I'm gonna
miss I'll be right there I I
just don't want to cross the
line I appreciate the debate
it's a debate you've got a great
points but let's not cross the
line into questioning our ethics
please thank you Mr speaker and
and and and body and gentleman.
The question is when we raise
our hands and we commit to
something or make a promise back
home.
When we want to help certain
things such as transparency such
as being ethical.
I I would just suggest that we.
Make those more than words.
and that we follow through I
think that's what the people
expect and I'm concerned that
the folks who maybe to the
following this debate today
could fill that that's not the
case.
that if we want something we
have something.
And if we want to pass it
through we find a vehicle.
And that we're willing to take
whatever steps necessary to get
what we want.
And Mister speaker and and
gentleman and body I think
that's that's just way too far a
couple of we had a discussion
last year towards the end of the
session and I and and to leave
the folks who grew up the way I
did with the type of parents I
had
I I told that my parents have
had it a phrase that they said
to me and my brothers sisters
all the time it was seen that
with some.
And.
That that means several things
but it but but.
Usually what it was implying to
me at that time was.
It seems right.
You're you're caring my name.
And and Mr speaker.
This is a body.
And it's amazing how many times
I vote against something and I
returned home to say why did you
do X. wires the site I have over
that.
Well we we are tied together and
so when we do something
regardless of who wants it to be
done Mr speaker and gentleman we
are all tied to that and so the
speaker and gentleman more
specifically to your question I
think that check the speaker
wants me to get back
specifically to the question is.
This is not the right place for
this provision to be this
provision.
Needs not only to the reason is
debating in appropriations.
Is.
What will be vetted more in
appropriations will would be.
How will this money be spent.
What are the parameters.
if what we're doing is we're
writing a check.
Today without vetting and then
somebody or somebodies get to
talk about what.
The parameters of that study
you're going to be.
Every member of the legislature
has given up their authority as
to having any say so on the
particulars of the legislation
and once again I I do have to
reiterate to the body the
majority has numbers to pass
this unilaterally.
Without us and the budget.
No matter debate on the floor no
matter how long that takes the
budget in some form will pass
and whether every Republican
votes against it or for it.
House.
There's no need for this
provision to be.
the the sole reason that I see
that's in here is so that we're
going to affect with the
emergency clause.
And if that's the sole reason.
That is improper.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
hear what you're saying in the
the interesting part to me on
this and I've heard throughout
the debate is that we don't even
know what the our fees can look
like.
We're gonna have to figure out
how to write that.
I watch the RFP I've been part
of the RFP process in the state
of New Mexico without the
emergency clause.
But are these are going to be
ready in ninety days so it
doesn't matter what that is at
the end of the day.
The emergency clause doesn't
help this process Mr speaker and
gentleman with that with that
said I support your amendment I
appreciate you bringing four
thank you speaker can I reply
one thing to that and that's
before we move on and and our
Representative Pettigrew gives
up the floor
I don't know that our new
members know that when they want
to debate on amendment they need
to stand up and they need to
hold their microphones up so
that they will get your
attention if you just sign on to
the board for debate that when
you sign on for debate that
would be after the discussion on
the amendment would be over so
if you have a question during
the amendment.
you need that you need to
indicate to the to the speaker
bye bye looking M. and waving
your microphone really hello.
gentleman of from the you you're
good to go okay thank you on the
debate and debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Rio Arriba and all those
counties thank you Mr speaker
Representative the distinguished
gentleman from San Juan County
you.
Yes and these are not words I do
yield to the kind gentle lady.
I wish to stand and speak
against this amendment because
frankly I was one of the people
that help frame this and I did
it because because for those of
you who don't know my district
is a size of Massachusetts you
know I go from the Rio Arriba
Santa Fe County line all the way
to the Colorado border I go over
to tell us and the and I now go
out to Cuba so any any time I do
a district visits or if there is
an emergency I know to go to
Cuba and a day or time of the
day it's going to take me just
six hours for the trip that's a
that's some windshield time and
I'll never forget the day that I
got a call and there is an
emergency meeting and trauma and
they were out of propane and
then I got another call and they
were having an update on the
pooling situation from sept dry
cleaning business that had
ruined the underground drinking
water system for Espanola and I
was called to the capital for a
quorum vote in a committee
meeting and I said I give I mean
I given how can I do this job I
we have introduces legislation
for this this.
Of that.
Part of the feed bills so that
we can begin to address how
legislators can better serve
there's constituents in New
Mexico this really isn't about
me it's not about anybody here
it's really about how do we
serve our constituents better
now I live I live in the north I
mean it's a really beautiful and
fun place to live but I there
are times on a Sunday afternoon
where I'm sitting with my
husband watching a football game
in a car drives up and they said
this is a new we need some help
on this capital outlay.
Of course I get a I go do that I
mean that's kind of part of my
job that's what I signed up for
I'm just trying to make this job
work better for everybody and
all of us are trying to make
this job this is really for all
of you and the need why should
we do it now why not would we
gonna wait for are you going to
wait two more years to do this
job can we do it now yes well
here's here's how we envision
this working that the bill the
two point five Hidalgo W. in our
S. P. here right the B. and R.
P. it'll go out somebody will
come in and bid on it and
they'll get the R. P. what you
all should understand is the
intent of this is that goes back
to Legislative Council so both
the leadership on the Senate and
house side Legislative Council
will look at the at the R. F. P.
and then look at the R. F. P. at
the proposals that come in they
will make those decisions that's
how this is intended to work so
I just want to say to the kind
gentleman.
I think the time is now I mean
why why wait we know this is
needed and I know those
Republicans and Democrats from
rural districts really need a
lot of help and that's not to
say everybody else does need a
lot of help to we all have I
have three three piles on my
desk one says in the other says
out the other says to heart
rate.
And it's the too hard that takes
the time you know when you
really have to dig in and find
out where the money is very
aware that capital outlay is or
how it got lost or how it didn't
make the bond sale all of those
things take time and there's no
easy way to do it and so what
I'm really trying to do and what
we're really trying to do I
don't speak for myself speaker I
speak for the caucus is what
we're really trying to do is to
make our government work better
for the people of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady just a question of why now.
Why not now.
Is why not.
Tomorrow when the discussion
begins on house bill two not two
years from now this session.
The the idea for this to be in
the feet bill why not now is
because that's not the purpose
of the feed bill Mr speaker and
gentle lady you initially said
the reason we introduce this
legislation and then you have a
back up the reality is the
proper way for this to be done
is legislation should have gone
through.
And then if legislation goes
through and gets passed.
And there's an appropriation
attached to it it gets put in
the appropriations bill now I
serve on probation I'm new to
the committee.
And reality is when I got here
the for the first two people Mr
speaker that lieutenant governor
Sanchez may need.
What and he said this is how you
do good government was looking
for L. I. Kiki survey there.
And I tell you what the
sensitive the.
Committee.
What is the priority.
And.
The idea was anything that is
supposed to be dealt with
through a certain process in my
committee the chair persons of
those committees at that time
said I'm going to do this.
Mr speaker and and and gentle
lady during the prior
administration the previous
speaker.
The community the safety of the
committees.
Really disappeared.
And the bills that should have
gone to certain committees
didn't go to Sir committees
bills they should have had
multiple Representative
Representative referrals got
seen referrals bills that were
unpopular and deemed unpopular
got three or four committee
referral even though I didn't
need those eight usually died in
a single committee.
The reality is.
The reason that sometimes the
senators on the other side tried
refer to themselves as the upper
chamber sometimes act like the
upper chamber.
By keeping the committee process
more sacred and following the
actual procedures Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we are supposed
to follow.
The only reason Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we would not do
this is and I and add through
debate now I I thought the
reason was emergency clause the
reality is the question of
whether or not this bill would
have trouble getting through if
it were a bill and needed to get
appropriation I'm I'm I'm
curious staff that's not the
reason that this is the vehicle
but either way
my antennas of the hairs
standing up on the back of my
neck.
I don't have any up there to
stand up this is a concern Mr
speaker and
and I'm afraid if we start this
way Mr speaker.
That.
We're gonna end up having a lot
more contentious debates
because.
As I discussed with you
individually I'm hoping not to
have the type of relationship
that I had with the former
speaker.
But.
If I'm always having to second
guess.
Motives for the end goal.
The reality is Mr speaker.
And gentle lady you have the
numbers to pass anything you
want to.
It doesn't belong here.
And the impatience that we seem
to have to get something we want
done.
We're gonna do it whether it's
improper whether it seems
improper and and and that that
is why I brought up and and and
I don't want to the labor that
that's why I brought up are that
the so we took that we don't
even with that we committed we
were to do things that don't
that are not gonna make people
question our motives and and
frankly if I'm sitting here
questioning motives I guarantee
you there are people and Mister
speaker I would have to say
this.
There are folks and we found
this out in recent days.
Regardless of what the laws are.
If they feel government.
Is rig.
Because that's this ones they
use.
We've seen how far they're
willing to go and Mr speaker
from the standpoint of just the
safety of our members let's do
things for our motives are
transparent they can disagree
with what we do but let's not
make them think that we're
trying to sneak one by them.
Thank you Mr speaker and if I
could just respond to the kind
gentleman I don't think we could
be any more transparent and
we're building right now you've
heard it in appropriation you
heard it in printing my gosh
we've been talking about this at
least for over an hour so if
people don't understand this
they do now and so nobody's
trying to hide anything and we
never that was never our intent
and that's what we're not that's
what we're trying to do is
explain the process and
explained the need and explain
the need for that for a
constituents of all people I
respect every member of this
body if you were elected by the
people you Representative than
you deserve an honor I totally
would be because if I didn't do
that I would respect the people
of New Mexico so I respect every
member in this body I respect
everybody who voted for you so
this is really I keep saying
this this is really about how we
serve our constituency in a
better way and and good people
as we know very decent good
people can disagree in this body
on any number of issues and that
will always be the truth and
that with that I just wanted to
stand up and say and to debate
this amendment and I urge people
to vote against this amendment
thank you.
Anymore to be on the amendment
the gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
Gentleman from San Juan you.
Thank you Mr speaker I just I
yield to the gentleman from Lee.
John was.
Some extensive conversations
about this two and a half
million.
But it is not about serving our
constituents better this is
about.
For a student.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did
the math on.
How many man hours.
Could
two and a half million dollar.
Appropriation and came up with
something over a thousand.
You know how the system of
expenditure was developed.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe we were told some people
got together and made some
decision.
Germans.
Perhaps.
Slowly some people got together
and decided that that was an
appropriate number.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
what I've been I believe we've
heard on the floor and I know
that's what we were told in
committee.
Aware of any formal scope of
work.
Was developed to support this
appropriation.
Mr speaker
my question prior to entering
the amendment was specifically
based on that I have no idea and
neither does anyone who attended
the the committee who was not
part of
a small group of people they got
together and made a decision.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Businesses are working and that
would be.
Construed as a wag as in.
Well guess.
I think we all try to do
business.
A more formal and productive and
fiscally prudent manner I think
I could support funding for
study of this nature.
If the parameters the.
To developing the scope of work
the product that we expect
developed of the school was more
clearly defined Mr speaker and
gentleman I'll be happy to
support chairman Mr speaker one
last thing before thanks for
having a chance to
maybe help the new members I
understand as well some of the
other rules and things that you
need to do during debate as you
can if you noticed I've tried to
make sure that I am facing both
the speaker and the person who's
talking to me that is proper
debate on the floor as because
of all of debate needs to go
through the speaker and every
question that's why Mr speaker
is always mentioned even though
the question is or the answers
being responded to to another
member.
Lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Mr speaker I'd like to have a a
a roll call vote want to get a
few more has regained.
There you have a roll call the
roll call.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number
one.
With a roll call vote.
Able to yes to table the
amendment.
No we would adopted the
amendment.
Well it is what it is with a
table the amendment.
And that's it.
Will give members a chance to
waltz into the chamber.
In a vote of yes no to table the
amendment.
The vote is now open.
The board is close by a vote of
forty four in the affirmative
twenty in the negative house
floor amendment number one has
been tabled.
Back in the bill Phillips loan
thank you Mr speaker
I I don't have any further
questions for
the the lady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker
hi I'm disappointed by the vote.
Mr speaker I I I have no choice.
But to wonder even though
certain indications were made
that
the majority wouldn't.
use.
Certain process sees.
And and that there be some
transparency I hope this is not
indication of things to come but
Mr speaker I.
At I think the the our
constituents what would like us
to do is as much as we can
within the parameters of what
the laws and the rules and
ethics with the.
The debate we have the other
Germans and one representative
can.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady Jan lady from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield.
I appreciate the questions and
the discussion today
as a new member of this body
this is great to see and and
we've finally and have an
opportunity to as new members of
this body to see a little bit of
this in action and and how bills
are made and the and produce my
question I may have missed it
gentlelady is on the nine point
five million you did stated
there's about twenty half
million that's already been
spent on this project.
Mr speaker and gentleman the two
point five million has been
appropriated it is not been
fully spent but they I pay was
let a contractor was selected
that's the toll on.
a group and they are beginning
their work now so what's needed
to complete that is the nine
point five so there's it's not
that there's going to be an RFP
for the nine point five that is
going to be going on the
previous of the the current
standard the current project.
Thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo so I
I guess I don't understand it
totally that so this between
half million was appropriated
was at appropriated bill and
twenty two twenty one.
Twenty.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
appropriated in that twenty.
One special session and the
twenty two regular session.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
This will debate the gentleman
from a personal representative
blocked.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo does the burden
of the the generated a yield
Mister speaker I think it's a
pleasure to speak with all of
you today and I just had a few
questions about your thing off
of my colleagues the gentle lady
from Lee and Eddie had a
question regarding the boards
here in the house and the Senate
and that that's one point three
million dollars I believe is
that the correct number but I
have.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct for four point four
point okay thank you gentle lady
yeah you know I I'm not sure
what the previous of boards were
and in these chambers but I'm
sure they were quite archaic
however might have been in
elementary school I probably was
I probably was a reserve rate at
that time right
Mr speaker gentle lady so
what's.
Technically wrong with the
current board because you know I
I glasses I need him disease so
I can see these is there some
kind of technical aspect that is
necessary to make sure these are
properly working.
The gate to a real answer Mr
speaker and gentleman that for
seven a state
You can take it from
Representative Brown admitted
that they were easier that I
should say the lady from any
because we're on the floor the
lady fermentation I have to more
trouble is for them the other
and I don't think it's.
So it's six years we're going on
six years with this so as far as
the technical changes Mr
Burciaga is going to try to
answer that for me.
Mr speaker and gentleman both
chief clerks and and there's
been a change in the chief clerk
of the Senate so now we're
probably talking about more than
to have reported glitches and
it's also getting more expensive
to replace the parts in the
boards and.
Mr speaker and gentleman they're
basically getting to end of
life.
Okay good to know I know
technology goes pretty fast so I
appreciate that gentle lady so
with the appropriation or the
the expenditure in the bill
itself would that include any
kinds of funding for keeping up
these boards to make sure that
they're working properly or is
that already in the budget for
the Legislative Council Service
is that where that is.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
a good question to we have an
ongoing service agreement with
the manufacture thank you and I
apologize for not addressing the
chair so thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady so going down to the
other expenditures in the bill I
see there's audio visual
upgrades for Committee hearing
rooms that's one point five
million dollars and what
specifics when we need to make
sure that our rooms are up to
the current technology Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
John that's another good
question because we appropriated
money last year to do that
thinking we have we we were
going to get the whole
legislature done and we got two
rooms done because what you want
is you want to screen that goes
down when there's a video or
Even just slides so that both
the audience and the committee
members can see right now
committee members have to go sit
in the audience if they want to
see the screen that's one
example about it's also the
technology video and audio
technology.
Okay thank you and so do do
these a expenditures also
include access for folks with
disabilities committees special.
A special accommodations to
ensure that they can participate
in our legislative process Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
have hybrid capacity for zoom
and other things because we have
continued the virtual
participation ever since the
comment session and
But we are and you'll see this
in your time here their
disability advocates here at all
times to really keep us on our
toes and help us try to stay
abreast of what their technology
needs are so yes okay that's
good to know and the you know I
think it's good that we have so
many constituents who can
participate in our legislative
process from different places in
the state I know I did during
the COVID so I appreciate that
so going down here Mister
speaker gentle lady but to the
two point five million that is a
very popular topic today about
the study to modernize our
legislature to see what we need
to modernize the legislature I
believe during the gentleman
from Lee county's the speech he
mentioned that.
We had a question that you said
would regard enabling
legislation so I'm just
wondering if it's a permanent
time right now to pass such a a
bill with these two point five
million dollars in fines if we
don't even have a bill in front
of us yet that is regarding
actually modernizing sets
legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
probably a question for debate
but what we have to do.
With regarding actual changes in
the Legisla- legislative
structure and function is go to
a constitutional amendment by in
order to.
Decide make a decision to for
our current legislators on
future legislators to hire staff
we can do that through through
statute so
This this sets it in motion to
look at what is recommended.
Okay so.
Mr speaker gentle lady just to
be clear here I apologize if my
question wasn't as clear as I'd
like it to be so I just wanna
make sure that by the time we
have the results from this study
they're not different from
something that we pass in its
current legislature to modernize
our legislature so we do a pine
on why this is prudent right now
as opposed to after we pass a
bill that is making such changes
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I would have to agree with the
lady from Rio Rita who who's who
made a case for quite frankly
for.
Many of us who wish we could
serve our constituents better is
it the sooner we can get this
under way
the more hopeful would be about
our future effectiveness and
efficiency and responsiveness.
Okay thank you gentle lady and
the Mr speaker gentle lady I
just have one more question and
that's regarding the nine point
five million dollars
appropriated in this bill to the
Legislative processing systems
can you give me a little more
detail Mr speaker gentle lady
about what that means because I
know nine nine point five
million dollars is quite a bit
of money I just wanna make sure
that it is putting going to the
correct place Mr speaker
generally.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
related to the legislative
process in the system we had the
appropriation the special
session of twenty twenty one the
regular session of twenty twenty
two for two point five million
dollars to let a contract to
improve our legislative process
and system that went out to bid
to loan was chosen as the
contractor and they have begun
work they're going to be here
during the session and it is a
single application database
consolidating drafting
legislative information
committee and chamber related
informations components system
would reduce or eliminate
duplicate data entry efforts and
improve the sharing of
information between offices will
continue to address information
security such as hacking and
we're expecting expecting it to
be in place by the twenty twenty
six regular session.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
that so all I had and I
appreciate your questions and
answers thank you madam there's
further debate the gentleman
from San Juan.
Representative Martinez I want
to put you on.
Mr speaker with the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
yield Mister speaker I yield I
have just one question
the company till loan.
That got this contract.
Is it in New Mexico company.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
not there on in New Mexico
companies that are doing this
kind of work.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank
you.
You know for the debate the
gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker I now move that house
bill one with the emergency
clause to pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one we have an emergency
costs.
The vote is now.
Open.
Yes.
Introduction.
What about close.
The vote is close by with a
forty seven in the affirmative
nineteen in the negative house
bill one with an emergency
clause has passes house.
Generally.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation to
no objection it is so ordered.
Members we have a big giant
stack of bills.
most of them sponsored by
Representative lane.
So we're gonna go ahead and just
plug away
We're not gonna take up any
other official business to
nineteen
will will do introduction for a
while feel free to go to
cafeteria and get a.
Given that the court get a
burger and will will be here for
the next.
Few minutes give or take.
to read.
House bill nine introduced by
Representative Herndon and act
relating to crime creating the
crimes of negligently making a
firearm accessible to a minor
and now the gently making a
firearm accessible to a minor
resulting in great bodily harm
or death providing penalties
providing exceptions house bill
nine introduced by
Representative heard.
House Bill money having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee the ends House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill twenty introduced by
a Representative Miguel Garcia
for the Land Grant Committee and
act relating to partitions of
land grants were set as
establishing qualified
partitions of land grants
percent as as a Thomas land
grants percent is pursuant to
chapter forty nine article one
NMSA nineteen seventy eight FY
twenty introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill twenty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house rural development and land
grant of cultural affairs
committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill twenty one introduced
by Representative Miguel Garcia
and act making appropriation to
the crime victims reparation
commission to fund law
enforcement based advocates for
victims of homicide and other
violent crime house bill twenty
one introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia house bill twenty
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Judiciary
Committee and the House
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill twenty two introduced
by Representative Miguel Garcia
and act relating to motor
vehicles authorizing the use of
automated traffic enforcement
systems for the issuance of
citations for certain violations
house bill twenty two introduced
by Representative Miguel Garcia.
House bill twenty to be having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee fans House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill twenty three
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia an act relating to
employment requiring requiring
background artist to be paid
within seven days and acting the
background artist act providing
protections for background
artists during employment
providing penalties hospital
twenty three introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill twenty three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor federation
military affairs committee this
the house commerce and economic
development committee.
House Bill.
House bill twenty four
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act relating
to property requiring counties
and then you can choose Parities
to take responsibility for the
repair improvement or
construction of sidewalks
repealing section three dash
forty nine dash four NMSA
nineteen seventy eight laws in
nineteen sixty seven chapter two
forty section one hospital
twenty four introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill twenty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government collections
in in in the first committee
this house reputation public
works committee.
House bill twenty five
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
labor increasing the minimum
wage for certain employees
providing an annual adjustment
to the minimum wage is based on
inflationary measures hospital
twenty five introduced by
Representative Chandler house
bill twenty five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house.
Labor veterans with servers
Committee thence the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill twenty six introduced
by Representative Chandler and
act relating to property
reinstating certain provisions
of this section of the law
regarding requirements for the
notice and publication of lists
of abandoned property eliminated
by laws twenty twenty one
chapter sixty five section ten
house bill twenty six introduced
by Representative Chandler house
bill twenty six have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
health insurance coverage and
acting sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance code the health
maintenance organization law and
the nonprofit health care plan
law to require coverage of
diagnostic and supplemental
breast examinations house bill
twenty seven introduced by
Representative Chandler house
bill two seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee followed by the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act relating
to labour providing an annual
cost of living increase to the
state minimum wage rate
beginning in twenty twenty three
providing that certain tipped
employees receive an hourly rate
that is twenty five percent of
the prevailing hourly minimum
wage rate plus tips Hospital
twenty eight introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill twenty and having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans
military affairs committee
events house commerce and
economic development committee.
House bill twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration to fund
integrated substance use
disorder programs and clinics
declaring an emergency house
bill twenty nine introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill twenty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty introduced by
Representative Chandler and act
relating to public schools and
acting the Public School
ventilation improvement act
requiring school districts and
charter schools to improve
mechanical ventilation systems
in public schools for the health
and safety of students and
school personnel house bill
thirty introduced by
Representative Chandler house
bill thirty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee and
the House health and Human
Services Committee.
House bill thirty one introduced
by Representative Chandler and
act relating to domestic affairs
eliminating the requirement to
file notice with proof of
publication preparing section
forty dash eight dash to NMSA
nineteen seventy eight in Los
internet line chapter three
section two as amended house
bill thirty one introduced by
Representative Chandler as well
thirty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill thirty two introduced
by Representative Sarinana an
act relating to taxation
creating the energy storage
system income tax credit house
bill thirty two introduced by
Representative Sariñana house
bill thirty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy and natural
resources committee this house
taxation and revenue committee.
House Bill house bill thirty
three introduced by
Representative McQueen for the
Land Grant Committee.
Act relating to land grants
including the crystal ball data
Serna Land Grant more said as a
land grant Merced governed by
the provisions of chapter forty
nine article one NMSA nineteen
seventy eight house bill thirty
three introduced by
Representative McQueen house
bill thirty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house for rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill thirty four
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to
children amending the family in
need of court ordered services
act expanding the definition of
family in need of court ordered
services hospital thirty four
introduced by Representative
Lord house with thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
Thirty five introduced by
Representative Lord an act
relating to families providing
to foster families enrollees of
the fostering connections
program and children in the
custody of the children youth
and families department free
camping passes and fishing
licenses.
Riding to enrollees of the
fostering connections program
and children in the custody of
the children youth and families
department from admission to
state owned museums and state
parks hospital thirty five
introduced by Representative
Lord house bill thirty five min
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty six introduced
by Representative Lara an act
relating to insurance amending
the group insurance
contributions for school
districts charter schools and
participating entities in the
public school insurance
authority making appropriation
house bill thirty six introduced
by Representative Lara as well
thirty six have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty seven
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act making
appropriation to the board of
regents of the university of New
Mexico to fund the University of
New Mexico health science
center's cerebral cavernous
cavernous angiomas initiative
hospital thirty seven introduced
by Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill thirty seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee and house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia an act relating to
taxation adding certain
pharmacists registered nurses
social workers behavioral health
counselors and therapists and
physical therapists to the rural
health care practitioner tax
credit house bill thirty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia house bill thirty
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill thirty nine
introduced by representative
Thompson and act relating to
school personnel adding dual
license in pool licensed
instructional support providers
and pool licensed instructional
support program administrators
to the three teacher licensure
system house bill thirty nine
introduced by representative
Thompson House Bill three you
have a minute times by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
fans house commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill forty introduced by
representative Thompson an act
relating to motor vehicles
creating the nontraditional
communication for disability
registry requiring peace
officers will enforcing traffic
laws to determine whether a
motor vehicle is in the
nontraditional communication or
disability registry house bill
forty introduced by
representative Thompson.
Well forty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee things House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill forty one introduced
by representative Thompson for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
Department of Health for a match
of federal funds for the
developmental disabilities
supports division of the
department of health to increase
provider reimbursement cost of
forty one introduced by
representative Thompson house
bill forty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee and Vince house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Yes forty two introduced by
representative Thompson an act
relating to public health
creating the statewide public
health and climate program
creating the public health and
climate resiliency Fund making
appropriations house bill forty
two introduced by representative
Thompson has reported to have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Hospital forty three introduced
by representative Thompson
Chasey Representative Andrea
Romero and Representative
Serrato an act relating to
education requiring public
schools and public and private
postsecondary educational
institutions about policies and
procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
protection and prevention of
sexual assault domestic violence
dating violence harassment and
stalking amending the public
school code to include a
requirement to set affirmative
consent as the standard.
For sexual activity house bill
forty three introduced by
representative Thompson and
Chasey Representative Andrea
Romero and Representative
Serrato house bill forty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then it's House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill forty four introduced
by Representative Matthews which
can act relating to loans to
finding federal home loan bank
in the insurers conservation
group retention and liquidation
law amending the insurers
conservation rehabilitation and
liquidation law providing
exceptions for agreements
involving federal home loan
banks in regard to the avoidance
of transfers preferences and
leans providing rights to
federal home loan banks are
regarding the secured claims on
insurers that are subject to
delinquency proceedings pursuant
to the life and health insurance
security association act house
bill forty four introduced by
Representative Matthews House
referred for having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee this House
Judiciary Committee house bill
forty five introduced by
Representative McQueen and act
relating to natural resources
amending the natural heritage
conservation act authorizing the
acquisition of land and other
interests in land for
conservation purposes making
conforming changes house bill
forty five introduced by
Representative McQueen house of
forty five and then twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
this house energy and natural
resources committee.
Forty six introduced by
Representative Garrett and act
relating to public works
requiring contributions to
apprentice and training programs
or to the public works
apprentice and training fund for
all public works construction
projects confirming references
to the workforce solutions
department throughout the public
works apprentice and training
act forty six introduced by
Representative Garrett also
forty six of amended twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house labor
military veterans and military
affairs committee followed by
house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill forty seven
introduced by Representative
Matthews for the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee and act relating to
health authorizing the New
Mexico finance authority to make
rural health care project loans
establishing terms for rural
health care project loans
creating the rural health care
project revolving fund providing
powers and duties of requiring
reports making appropriation
house bill forty seven
introduced by Representative
Matthews house of forty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the health house health and
Human Services Committee says
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Forty eight introduced by
Representative Matthews an act
relating to nursing providing
for an independent role for
certified registered nurse
anesthetists house bill forty
eight introduced by
Representative Matthews house
before he ever met returns by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee thence.
House commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill forty nine introduced
by representative Allison and
act making appropriation to the
Department of Health for county
and tribal health councils
statewide house bill forty nine
introduced by representative
Allison house bill forty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee then house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Fifty introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
an act relating to crime
creating the crime of unlawful
possession or transfer of the
large capacity magazine
providing exceptions providing
penalties making appropriation
house bill fifty introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
house bill fifty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee House Vince
House Judiciary Committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill fifty one introduced
by Representative Herndon for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
relating to prescription drugs
and acting the prescription drug
affordability board act
establishing the prescription
drug affordability board
creating the prescription drug
affordability board fund making
appropriation house bill fifty
one introduced by Representative
Herndon also fifty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill fifty two introduced
by representative Allison and
act making appropriation to the
public education department to
distribute to public to public
schools that offer International
Baccalaureate programs to
provide the International
Baccalaureate program yes free
of charge to New Mexico students
house bill fifty two introduced
by representative Allison house
with fifty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Fifty three introduced by
representative Thompson and act
relating to health insurance
updating coverage for persons
with diabetes requiring
consistent and timely delivery
of medically necessary diabetic
resources making appropriation
house bill fifty three
introduced by representative
Thompson house with two three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Just build a house bill fifty
four introduced by
Representative Figueroa and act
relating to primary elections
allowing voters who have not
designated a major political
party affiliation on their
certificates of registration to
participate in the primary
election process by choosing to
affiliate with a major political
party participating in a primary
requesting the party's ballot
making conforming changes house
bill fifty four introduced by
Representative Figueroa as we
fifty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee Vince
House Judiciary Committee.
Bill fifty five introduced by
representatives of Ramon
Hernandez and act relating to
crime creating the crime of
organized retail crime imposing
penalties house bill fifty five
introduced by representatives
Reem and Hernandez house fifty
five have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill fifty six introduced
by Representative Rehm an act
relating to license plates for
choir in motor vehicles to
display front and license plates
requiring issuance of
registration plates and stickers
upon transfer of motor vehicle
ownership increasing license
plate fees making appropriation
house bill fifty six introduced
by Representative ream house
bill fifty six seven hundred
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Yes fifty seven introduced by
Representative Rehm and act
relating to towards providing
immunity from liability for tort
claims pertaining to damages or
injuries or relating to
apprehension of the person
suspected of shoplifting in
limited circumstances cost of
fifty seven introduced by
Representative remote house bill
fifty seven have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
Fifty eight introduced by
Representative Rehm and act
relating to criminal sentencing
providing additional violent
felonies in the criminal
sentencing act for the purposes
of life imprisonment for three
violent felony convictions
eliminating the possibility of
parole except geriatric on
medical parole for defendant
convicted of a third violent
felony and sentenced to life
imprisonment providing that
certain convictions incurred by
defended before the age of
eighteen shall constitute
violent felonies providing
penalties house bill fifty eight
introduced by Representative
Rehm house bill fifty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill fifty nine introduced
by Representative Rehm and act
relating to criminal law
creating the crime of unlawful
carrying of a firearm will
trafficking a controlled
substance providing penalties
house bill fifty nine introduced
by Representative re house bill
fifty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee things House
Judiciary Committee.
As bill sixty introduced by
Representative Rehm an act
relating to criminal sentencing
requiring an enhanced sentence
for possession of fentanyl
possible sixty introduced by
Representative ream house bill
sixty having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
Public Affairs Committee then
it's House Judiciary Committee.
Sixty one introduced by
Representative Rehm an act
relating to criminal law
providing that the penalty for a
felon in possession of a firearm
or destructive device is five
years imprisonment in the
penalty for serious violent
felon in possession of a firearm
or destructive devices six years
imprisonment house bill sixty
one introduced by Representative
Rehm houses sixty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
Sixty two introduced by
Representative Rehm and act
relating to motor vehicles
limiting the locations were in
motor vehicle may be sold or
offered for sale prohibiting the
sale of a motor vehicle by a non
owner who's not a motor vehicle
dealer trespass XP two
introduced by Representative
Rehm House risks to having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer excuse me to the
house commerce and economic
development committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill sixty three
introduced by Representative
Rehm an act relating to medical
malpractice restoring
definitions of health care
providers for moving the
independent provider designation
of removing punitive damages
providing procedures for
challenging judgment judgments
providing limitations of claims
providing guidelines for health
care providers applications
removing the Video Conference
option for hearings of the New
Mexico medical review
commission.
Adding hearing procedures for
moving the requirement of a
third party administrator for
the patients compensation fund
for moving an annual fund audit
requirement removing an annual
actuarial study requirement
repealing the patient's
compensation fund advisory board
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight declaring an
emergency hospital sixty three
introduced by Representative
ream house bill sixty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee thence House
Judiciary Committee.
Sixty four introduced by
representatives repayment had
asked us and mentorship and act
relating to public employees
allowing certain public safety
employees to return to work
under certain conditions house
bill sixty four introduced by
Representative Rehm yes I was
just and Montoya.
House bill sixty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill sixty five introduced
by representatives reminded us
and Montoya and act relating to
public employees allowing public
employees to return to work for
affiliated public employers
under certain conditions house
bill sixty five introduced by
representatives of Rehm that I
was us and one Toyota.
House bill sixty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house.
Labor veterans and military
affairs committee thanks House
Judiciary Committee.
Yes sixty six introduced by
representatives reminded us and
Montoya and act relating to
public retirement adjusting the
calculation to determine maximum
pension benefits house bill
sixty six introduced
Representative Rehm tell us and
Montoya.
House bill sixty six min read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military military affairs
committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
Sixty seven introduced by
Representative Chandler and act
relating to energy storage
facilities amending the
industrial revenue bond act and
the county industrial revenue
bond act to include certain
electric energy storage
facilities as eligible projects
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for sales of energy
storage equipment or government
for the purpose of installing a
renewable energy storage
facility house bill sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler house bill sixty seven
have been having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house energy and
natural resources committee then
House exhibition and Revenue
committee Bill sixty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act relating
to motor vehicles and acting a
new section of the motor vehicle
code requiring free trailers
trailers and trucks to have an
undercarriage with a ground
clearance of sufficient height
to prevent vehicle for bicycle
from driving under it requiring
rulemaking providing penalties
house bill sixty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia house was exceed
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to referred to the house
transportation public works
think about improvements
committee of this house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill sixty nine introduced
by Representative Serrato and
Dixon.
An act relating to taxation
making the angel investment
credit refundable.
Increasing the amount of the
aggregate captain credits per
calendar year extending the
amount of time to make a
qualified investment and be
eligible for the credit.
Sixty nine introduced by
Representative Serrato and
Dixon.
House bill sixty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee this house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill seventy introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
department of transportation to
develop and implement a break on
yellow stop on red traffic
safety education program in
collaboration with the public
Education Department hospital
seventy introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill seventy having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee.
Vince.
House appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill seventy one
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act relating
to motor vehicles prohibiting
the alteration of mufflers on
vehicles providing a penalty
house bill seventy one
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia house bill seventy
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
and public affairs committee
Vince House Judiciary Committee.
As bill seventy two introduced
by Representative Roybal
Caballero an act relating to
crime creating the crime of
unlawful possession or transfer
of a semi automatic firearm
converter providing exceptions
providing a penalty making
appropriation declaring an
emergency hospital seventy two
introduced by Representative
Roybal copy at all House Bill
seventeen having been read twice
by title it's a sort of printed
and referred to the house
Judiciary Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Seventy three introduced by
Representative Dixon and act
relating to health insurance
coverage and acting sections of
the health care purchasing Act
the public assistance Act The
New Mexico insurance code the
health maintenance organization
law and the nonprofit health
care plan law to require
coverage of biomarker testing
house bill seventy three
introduced by Representative
Dixon.
House bill seventy three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee Vince house
consumer and public affairs
committee.
House bill seventy four
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
the criminal justice providing
requirements for public safety
assessment in pre trial
detention hearings providing for
pre trial detention upon
commission of a felony offense
well on release house bill
seventy four introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
house bill seventy for his
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill seventy five
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
health care health coverage and
acting sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance code the health
maintenance organization law and
the nonprofit health care plan
law to establish limits on cost
sharing and co insurance for
chiropractic physician services
hospital seventy five introduced
by Representative Hochman Vigil
house bill seventy five is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
consumer and public affairs
committee.
House bill seventy six
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil for the courts
corrections and justice
committee and act relating to
courts providing that the
administrative office of the
courts courts shall administer
the judicial education fund
creating the judicial education
services division in the
administrative office of the
courts making appropriation
house bill seventy six
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil has risen six have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Judiciary Committee
then house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
aviation requiring standards for
the painting and marking of
certain meteorological
evaluation towers providing upon
I penalty cost of seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil house bill seventy
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house.
Commerce and economic
development committee then is
House Judiciary Committee.
Seventy eight introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil an
act relating to taxation
removing the sunset date of the
distribution of the gross
receipts tax to the state
aviation Fund increasing another
distribution of the gross
receipts tax to the state
aviation Fund house bill seventy
eight introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
house bill seventy eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee there's House excision
and Revenue committee.
Seventy nine introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil an
act relating to insurance
mandating that a hearing to
consider promulgation of premium
rates and other title insurance
matters be held every three
years house bill seventy nine
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil.
House bill seventy nine.
Been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee thence house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill eighty introduced by
Representative Nyberg and act
relating to emergency powers
providing the declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to
the all hazard emergency
management act for the public
health emergency response act
terminates after ninety days
unless the governor calls the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency amending and
acting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight hospital
eighty introduced by
representative Nibert.
House relay and equipment read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee this House
Judiciary.
Committee.
Gen toll lady from this
Bernalillo.
The reserve this.
Yes Mr speaker and now I go to
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
The motion to go to announce his
business.
In addition is ordered.
Folks I'm gonna make a couple of
quick announcements
a little bit cleanup from a
committee assignment yesterday
the way they were transferred
over to Council Service reports
on the website there are a
couple of mistakes so I'm gonna
read them out for clarification
of conferred with the leadership
already on this.
Advancement appointed to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee and
the house health and Human
Services Committee
Representative block appointed
to the house consumer public
affairs committee and the house
government election Indian
Affairs Committee.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Mr speaker I now move that we go
to introduction of legislation.
It is so ordered.
Click to read.
Eighty one introduced by
Representative Chandler and act
relating to taxation providing
for the indexing of modified
gross income for purposes of
determining the amount of low
income comprehensive tax rebate
house bill eighty one introduced
by Representative Chandler House
Bill anyone having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
excision and Revenue committee.
House bill eighty two introduced
by Representative Chandler and
act relating to financial
institutions and acting the
student loan bill of rights act
providing for student loan
servicers license delineating
the duties of a student loan
servicer can bring
administrative responsibility
and enforcement power to the
financial institutions division
of the regulation and licensing
department providing for
districts of private education
loans upon a showing of
permanent disability requiring
the alternative repayment
options be offered to borrowers
equally providing rates for co
signers including notice an
access to information providing
for cosigner release prohibiting
certain acceleration of private
education loans creating the
position of student loan
ombudsman defining certain
violations of the student bill
of rights as unfair and and
unconscionable trade practices
creating a private right of
action creating the student loan
bill of rights fund making
appropriation house bill eighty
two introduced by Representative
Chandler House related to having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
this house appropriations and
finance committee.
House house bill eighty three
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act relating to
licensure amending the podiatry
Act changing reciprocity
requirements requiring licensure
renewal after two years for
moving the taxation registration
number requirement as a
condition of renewal having a
circumstance for post graduate
education waiver providing a new
sense a data for the podiatry
Act hospital eighty three
introduced by Representative
Matthews House related three of
men request by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this house commerce
and economic development
committee.
As bill eighty four introduced
by Representative Rehm and act
relating to elections requiring
county clerks to send notices
directing voters involved in the
transfer of ownership of
residential property to submit
an update to the murder
certificate of registration to
reflect the voters changed
residents house bill eighty four
introduced by Representative
arena.
House related for having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election in
Indian Affairs Committee then
House Judiciary Committee.
A spill eighty five introduced
by Representative Rehm and act
relating to public schools
providing for the redistricting
of certain school districts
requiring a redistricting a
redistricting plan creating a
task force required the
secretary of public education to
issue a redistricting
redistricting order providing
for appointments and elections
of local school boards house
bill eighty five introduced by
Representative Rehm.
House bill eighty five have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Okay.
Eighty six introduced by
Representative Rehm and act
relating to elections creating
the voter education elections
task force to study provide
recommendations and propose
legislation to implement best
practices to educate voters and
ensure the accuracy and
integrity of elections processes
in New Mexico declaring an
emergency hospital eighty six
introduced by Representative
Rehm calculated six amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then house
government election Indian
Affairs Committee.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business to
ensure that is so ordered the
gentleman from you I thank you
Mr speaker here House
Appropriations Committee we're
going to meet at three thirty
so just kind of the time we
expected to me but we wanted to
announce we're gonna meet at
three thirty PM for revenue
update thank you Mr speaker
the gentle gentleman thank you
the lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation to no objection
it is so ordered.
House bill eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Townsend and act relating to
civil rights amending the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act to
exclude volunteer fire
departments and volunteer
emergency medical technician
service providers from a
definition of public body
hospital eighty seven introduced
by Representative Townsend house
bill eighty seven have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then House
Judiciary Committee.
Eighty eight introduced by
Representative Townsend and act
relating to towards a medic
amending the medical malpractice
act to change limitation of
recovery for certain claims
against facilities that are not
majority owned and controlled by
hospital hospital eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Townsend house really eighty
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee then
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Townsend and act relating to
public finance creating the
taxpayer dividend income tax
rebate Fund providing for income
tax rebates changing the
distribution of federal mineral
leasing funds to the early
childhood education and care
fund to the taxpayer dividend
income tax rebate Fund amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight making an appropriation
house bill eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Townsend house bill eighty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house taxation and
revenue committee then is house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety introduced by
Representative Nyberg and act
relating to commercial
transactions amending repealing
and enacting sections of the
uniform commercial code
providing for controllable
electronic records Hospital
ninety introduced by
Representative night bird house
bill ninety having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house.
Commerce and economic
development committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
Ninety one introduced by
Representative Ferrary and act
relating to natural resources
authorizing the natural
resources trustee to bring suit
for damages caused by release of
an injurious substance pursuant
to the natural resources trust
the act providing for the Dobson
of rules for the assessment and
collection of fines related to
the release of petroleum based
injurious substances providing
limitations amending the natural
resources trustee Fund providing
that the natural resources
trustee major civil action
pursuant to the water quality
act.
Control act and the hazardous
waste act amending impacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight making
appropriation Hospital ninety
one introduced by Representative
Ferrary has been anyone having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house energy and natural
resources committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
Bill ninety two introduced by
Representative Ferrary for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
relating to behavioral health
making an appropriation to the
Human Services department to
provide funding for residential
treatment services house bill
ninety two introduced by
Representative Ferrary house
bill ninety two been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety three
introduced by Representative
Ferrary for the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee and act relating to
professional licensure amending
in enacting sections of the
pharmacy act repealing the
impaired pharmacist Act house
bill ninety three introduced by
Representative Ferrary House
alleged three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee.
Van's house commerce and
economic development committee.
House bill ninety four
introduced by Representative
Ferrary and act relating to
tobacco products prohibiting the
sale of flavored tobacco
products defining terms
conforming certain notice
requirements house bill ninety
four introduced by
Representative Ferrary house
bill ninety four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this house commerce
and economic development
committee.
This bill ninety five introduced
by Representative Lujan and act
relating to public land
mandating that the commissioner
of public lands establishing
renewable energy office Bill
ninety five introduced
Representative Lujan house bill
ninety five have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee amendment is house
energy and natural resources
committee.
House bill ninety six introduced
by Representative Townsend and
act relating to renewable energy
amending the rural electric
cooperative act and renewable
energy acts to include natural
gas use in combined cycle
technology in the definition of
renewable energy resource
Hospital ninety six introduced
by Representative Townsend house
bill ninety six a minute twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house energy and
natural resources committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
Still ninety seven introduced by
Representative Rehm and act
making appropriations to the to
the local government division of
the department of finance and
administration the district
attorney of the second judicial
district and the department of
public safety to fund efforts to
reduce the backlog of
outstanding warrants Hospital
ninety seven introduced by
Representative ream house in
ninety seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee sens
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety eight
introduced by Representative
Townsend and act relating to
civil rights amending the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act
reinstating the defense of
qualified immunity repealing
section forty one dash four
eight dash four NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being lost twenty
twenty one chapter one nineteen
section for
ninety introduced by
Representative Townsend house
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Generated from Santa Fe.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
This is the man.
Disturbing you can later in
Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business seeing no objection it
is so ordered.
Other announcements.
Gentleman from Chavis Mr speaker
thank you very much as I was
reviewing all the committee
assignments and everything there
to committees that were left off
here I wonder if that was just
an oversight or if it was set in
stone now the two that are
missing the rules which I think
are very important especially
whenever we go into the thirty
day session and enrolling in
grossing which I think is an
integral part of this and I
didn't know if there was some
sort of system that you were
going to go by or if we are just
overlooking thank you provided
for for that observation I'm
working with the the leadership
in the minority to to appoint
those committees and supply I
got a list from them already on
rules committee to get a list
from them for a role in
engrossing a and B. so we'll
plan on doing those tomorrow.
Thank you very much thank you
Julie internals Spence.
Members thank you for productive
day
thank you for your debate on
house bill one good healthy
debate
always good and always good for
us to have these conversations
in terms of what is it what is
best as we move forward and I
hope that this first debate is
a.
You know the first example of
many good things to come for
this chamber
Members
we will not be working on Friday
so those of you who especially
those of you from far away you
can you can go home for the
weekend
we will reconvene tomorrow.
We recommend tomorrow it will
announce a time here shortly
seeing no further announcements
the gentle lady from.
But Millie you'll.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning.
I see no objections.
The house was in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
thank you.
