You, madam.
Excuse me.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Here.
And Madam Chair.
And I'm sure we have a corn.
Great. Thank you all. Welcome.
Happy Saturday.
Probably the first of many, um,
we're gonna go ahead and get
started, uh, we're gonna be
starting with House Bill 104
Crimes Against Peace Officer
definitions, representative
whenever you're ready.
Yeah
Would be why.
Um, this is my um expert Barba
Romo from the 13th Judicial
District Attorney's Office and
then obviously Nicole Chavez
represented Chavez is my
co-sponsor. Um, House Bill 104,
what it does is, um, as you can
see, it allows um
Crimes against peace officers to
be an enumerated crime where
they received the same rights
that a victim would receive if
they were a, uh, if they were a
victim of a crime. So for
example, um, the victim's rights
under 31264, they're they're not
extensive, but um they are
important, um, one is to be
treated with fairness and
respect for the victim's dignity
and privacy throughout the
justice process.
Timely disposition of the case
be reasonably protected from the
accused throughout the criminal
justice process, notified a
court hearings so they can
attend those and be allowed to
attend all public court
proceedings accused has the
right to attend, confer with the
prosecution about pleas and
things of that nature, maybe
make a statement at court or
sentencing, um, in any hearings,
um, and restitution if there's
some loss um from injury and
there's a, there's a couple
others that.
Um, aren't, you know, as as
important, but what we're trying
to do is um add the crimes
against peace officers where um
they're able to at least
participate in the process.
Sometimes they don't even know
that they're getting noticed,
they're not even getting a
notice when there's a hearing,
um, they're not being um
consulted with if they've been
shot, um, or something of that
nature, and we don't feel just
because they wear the uniform
that they're setting themselves
up to be victims of a crime.
time and then not be able to
participate in the process and
have the same rights as um any
other victim, um, I will say
that, uh, the CBRC, which is the
group that funds this these
types of issues for victims if
necessary, like counseling. I'm
sure they have their own
insurance officers do, but it
would pick up any extra costs
from um any medical bills or
things of that nature are fully
in support of this bill and and
believe they can, you know,
have.
Have no issues with finding
this, um, I will defer now to my
expert, um, DA Romo, so that she
can um make some comments if
that's OK, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative excuse
me, Representative Reed. Good
morning, Madam Chair, and, and
committee members, um.
Representative Reed,
Representative.
Representative Reeb has already
if if you want, just you can
push it also to the back cause
it does this echo thing, so
yeah, that is that better? OK,
thank you.
As I was saying, Representative
Reeb has already gone over the
content of the bill and and the
it's it's purpose.
um
I, I just wanted to.
Read a a statement that I I've
put together that kind of
summarizes my philosophy and why
I've been trying through various
sponsors to get this bill passed
for about 10 years, it came.
After, after I witnessed and
prosecuted the murder of a Rio
Rancho police officer.
But the thing is it
There's no reasonable rational
there's no reasonable rational
explanation as to why.
These crimes should not be part
of the victims of of.
Victims of Crime Act
I mean, for example, these
gentlemen and ladies, women
sitting in front of you that are
in uniform when they're on duty
if they get shot.
And they don't die, they have no
victims' rights.
If they go home and they're off
duty and they're at a you're.
In their house or doing a
barbecue or what have you, they
get shot, don't get killed. They
get the they get victims'
rights.
And the thing is.
They are there.
Protecting to protect, to
protect us.
And to me, it's, it's
unconscionable that we don't
give the same rights.
To the men and women who are
sworn to protect us that we do
ordinary citizens.
I mean, I've heard people I've
heard I've heard arguments such
as, well, that's part of their
job they get paid to do that.
Well, I would beg to disagree.
They don't get paid to be hurt
or killed.
They get paid to protect us.
I mean, I, it may seem like a
silly example, but any of you
who have dogs who love your
dogs, who are guard dogs
perhaps.
If someone comes and shoots your
guard dog while they're trying
to protect you.
Most of us would be outraged.
Well, the dog didn't do anything
wrong. The dog was just trying
to protect you, right?
It's the same thing.
And
It makes no sense that just
because they're uh doing their
job, a very important job to
protect us that they don't get
the same rights that you or I
do.
If I'm standing up in court.
I'm doing my job.
If someone comes and shoots me
or beats me up.
I probably get workers' comp
too.
But I also give victims rights.
The also, the other thing I, I
asked the committee to consider
is one of the stated purposes of
the Victims of Crime Act as, as
uh delineated in the the statute
and the act itself.
Specifically says.
To ensure the victims of Crime
Act is.
Meant to ensure that the full
impact of the crime is
considered by the court.
Well
I argue that this is a public
safety issue.
Because if someone is willing to
shoot or harm or assault an
armed officer.
Sometimes in broad daylight.
What do you think that person
will do?
To you or your family or any of
us.
And at this time when our crime
is at such a high level.
And recruitment and retention is
at a low level for law
enforcement.
I'm asking you to pass.
Have a du pass or do pass this
this bill.
I'm asking you to have their
backs.
Like they have ours every day.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Go ahead
Thank you so much, um,
Representative Reed for bringing
this to us, um.
And I just want to add, I think
that I don't want to echo their
statements, but I'm gonna give
you a personal perspective, um,
when my son was murdered 9.5
years ago, we started a victim
advocacy group.
While that entire year we
started it because Officer
Benner was killed in Rio Rancho.
His wife Julie B Benner joined
my group.
Um, shortly after that, my son
was murdered a few months after
that, Officer Webster was then
murdered, and his wife Michelle
joined our group.
I was very concerned with the
fact that we got sentencing, we
got a notification when it comes
to hearings, pretrial hearings.
Um, we got victims reparation as
Representative Ree talked about
for reimbursement for funeral
costs, reimbursement for any
kind of mental health or
counseling. But
Officer Webster's wife and
Officer Benner's wife did not
get those same notifications or
those same benefits. Thank
goodness, um, we have several
nonprofits and organizations for
police officers that are killed
in the line of duty, but we
shouldn't have to depend on
that, and they should be able
because they are there to
protect us every single day,
running into danger, get the
same rights that any of us would
get when we lose a loved one,
so.
I appreciate you hearing this
today, and I also hope that it
passes.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, um,
for folks in the audience, if
you can raise your hand if you
are in opposition of the bill.
Um, are there folks online who
are in opposition.
OK, folks, online just for
confirmation, we are on
opposition of the bill, if you
could raise your hand, please.
Hello, can you all hear me?
Yes, go ahead.
The only thing that I would have
to say about this is that
If you and I'm not sure of the
statistics, but
yeah,
thank you. My name is Robert
Huber in Albuquerque.
Um, so we, we speak about the,
the kind of
Protector role and though I
don't necessarily uh think that
what you're arguing is off
point the uh
The inequity that would come up,
would come up from this and like
not looking at, say, teachers in
the same way. I think that that
would just be something I would
encourage everyone in this
conversation to, to consider, I
mean, peace officers are
definitely in a place of risk,
but I would ask how many
teachers have died in the line
of duty doing the same thing,
and do they have those same
rights? Are we arguing for those
same rights for teachers and
other folks.
writers, you know, a lot of
other people who are in that
protector role who may not be
getting the same argument. So
that's the only thing I would
add.
Great. Thank you so much,
Robert. Is there anyone else
online?
OK, um,
We'll go to support of the bill
and I forgot to remind folks,
um, it'll be up to 2 minutes,
um, for each person. So if you
could raise your hand if you're
in support.
And for folks who are planning
to speak if you can keep your
hand up and we'll have the mic.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bollington,
registered lobbyist for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and also the city of
Santa Fe, and I want to
acknowledge some of our finest
who are here. Thank you very
much.
Uh, this bill is simple, uh, but
an essential one.
It's all about ensuring our law
enforcement officers have the
same rights as all those in New
Mexicans.
These are the people who put
their lives on the line every
day.
Keep the rest of us safe, and
they deserve to have the same
rights, the rest of the Mexicans
have, if and when they're
attacked, battered, or
assaulted.
Law enforcement is a tough job
on a good day.
But on a bad day, our officers
need to have the same victims'
rights protections, as other
victims in our states, the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and the City of Santa
Fe urge you to support.
Thank you and just for a
reminder to folks who are
speaking, if you could just, um,
if if try not to repeat what
folks have already said, so just
letting you all know. Yes, good
morning, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, um, my name is Tom
Clayton. I'm the district
attorney from the 4th Judicial
District, that's Guadalupe Mora
and San Miguel counties, and I
stand in in in support of this
bill, and I, I applaud the
representatives and uh the
district attorney Romo um to do.
this and the reason is when we
go to court.
The laws that the courts in um
Listen to the judges here
clearly make a difference.
clearly make a difference and
victims' rights, you know, are,
are New Mexico constitution is,
is one, Article 2 Section 24
provides those rights.
And it is very common for me to
make the argument to the judge
that these rights are, are
something that's vested with our
individuals.
And the judges hear hear us.
They hear or are pleased. And so
when, when an officer is is
harmed.
And he, he or she doesn't have
the same rights as any other
victim. There's a distinction
drawn there.
But I think our judges are in
fact listening to our
legislators, and they say laws
matter.
And so
It is important to include our,
our brothers and sisters in in
in uniform or the risk they
take, but more importantly for
the harm that's done to them.
I ask that you do uh uh do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Troy Weer chief, New
Mexico State Police, uh, we
strand in strong support of this
bill. We thank the sponsors for
bringing it. I know this is not
the first time they have done
so, and we continue to support
that. Um, we support this bill
for all the reasons that um
you've already heard, I would
just bring one particular
example that I would want to
mention. Um, I know that
Representative Lord knows a
retired, uh, state police
lieutenant Jeremy Vaughan, uh, I
went to college, went to the
academy with Jeremy Vaugh, known
him over half my life. He
served.
Uh, this state, uh, protecting
the state for 20 plus years, uh,
on the eve of his retirement, he
was uh shot uh on Cedillo Hill
by a uh violent offender on the
run, repeat offender, um, and,
you know, I just
He absolutely should have had
every right to any other victim,
uh, would have had, and he did
not because of the issues that
we're discussing here today. So
I strongly, strongly urge you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, good morning, Marcus
Montoya, judicial District
attorney, also president of the
New Mexico District Attorneys
Association and uh for all the
wonderful reasons already
explained by the sponsors and DA
Romo, the um
New Mexico District Attorneys
Association does stand in strong
support of this bill, and we'd
like to thank the sponsors and
DA Romo for all their continued
efforts in this and uh to this
legislative body for all the
good work that you do and uh
particularly uh the uh law
enforcement who do sacrifice
daily to, to serve and protect.
So, uh, thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Marco Serna. I'm a
career prosecutor, um, when I
first uh spoke with DA Romo
about this effort years ago. I
was dumbfounded that law
enforcement weren't given the
same rights that everyday
citizens are, uh, especially
with what DA Romo indicated, but
I urge you to support. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam turn
committee members, I just want
to remind you of the testimony
that we gave you, um, on
Thursday regarding our officers
that were shot, they did not
receive um benefits and
notification of hearings, and
again, with you supporting this
bill that would give us those.
Morning, Madame Chair committee,
uh, Christopher Williams, Chief
of Police Pertalis, and also
vice president New Mexico Chiefs
Association.
Uh, the Chiefs Association is in
strong support of this as well.
And I'll just leave it at that
and echo everyone else.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jeremy
Story, chief of police for Las
Cruces Police Department.
This is something that's been
long overdue, and I'll give you
two additional reasons why now
is finally the time to get it
done. And we've seen officers
been battered since the start of
policing. We've seen an increase
and I
I would suspect that my
colleagues have seen an increase
in the past few years. In 2018,
39 people were charged with
battery on a police officer in
Las Cruces in 2019, 36 people.
The last two years, 23 and 24,
79 people were charged, seen
over double the amount of
batteries on our officers in the
last two years.
And the other reason goes hand
in hand. Right now we're also
facing a crisis with recruitment
and retention. And part of that
is because officers
For people that might want to be
officers don't feel supported.
And so sending a message that
Our state supports our police
officers, can help with
recruitment and retention as a
secondary benefit. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Ben
Valdez. I'm the deputy chief of
police for the Sanfield Police
Department. Uh, we also stand in
strong support of this, and we
hope you
Give it a go or uh moving
through. um I also wanna
Send my appreciation to the
folks at this table for what
they've done. Um, I believe it's
DA Romo who helped me when I was
assaulted as a police officer
and ensured that I got the
information that I needed to
make a judgment call on what was
going to happen with that. And I
feel that everyone should have
that protection, and that would
go a long way for us to both
recruit and retain folks in our
profession. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, we want to thank the
sponsors and the experts for
this bill. This is very
important. We represent about 5
police and sheriff's units
around the state. They don't
know if they're coming home
every day, and this is a little
bit of peace of mind that they
are included and respected like
everyone else in the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipschitz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO, uh,
representing over 40,000 workers
throughout the state and both
the public and private sectors.
We stand in strong solidarity
with our uh brothers in Blue uh
law enforcement around the state
and uh urge you to support this
measure, and it, it also serves
as a good compliment to House
Bill 103, which we have
supported. So these two bills
working in conjunction, um, are
vitally important for
our law enforcement. Thank you.
Thank you, anyone else?
Uh, do we have folks on
Um, folks, if you are in support
of this legislation, House Bill
104, please raise your hand.
Um, we'll start with CBRC admin,
if you can introduce yourself,
please.
Good morning,
members of the committee,
director for the Mexico Crime
Victims Reparation Commission.
Our commission provides victim
compensation to victims of crime
across the state, and we stand
in strong support of this bill
and we want to thank the
sponsors for supporting and
sponsoring this bill. New Mexico
victims' rights should be
inclusive of all victims of
crime uring that every victim,
regardless of the nature of
their position or profession.
have equal access to
protections, resources, and
justice. This includes victims
of crime involving law
enforcement, recognizing that
all individuals harmed by
criminal acts deserve due
process, support, and the voice
in the justice system.
Again, thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak. And
again, the New Mexico crime
victims reparation Commission
stands in strong support of HP
104 and we asked this committee
to pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Angie Smith.
Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman and the
committee and thank you to the
sponsors of this bill. My name
is Angie Smith. I'm from a small
community, Portales, New Mexico,
and living in a very small
community, sometimes it can be
very challenging to recruit and
to retain really good officers,
but crime has not gone down.
Crime is crime is only going up,
plus I also hear from parents
for the first time probably ever
in our history that are hesitant
to encourage their children to
go into law enforcement, a very
noble and
Incredible way to serve their
community and they encourage
their kids to do it because they
feel like they're not, they
would not be supported. The
government won't even support
them. And it makes them very
nervous. So coming from a very
small community where this is a
very important issue being able
to recruit and retain good
officers. I urge you, please
pass this bill so we can support
them fully and our officers know
without a shadow of a doubt that
their government stands behind
them strongly. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Jessica
Martinez.
Hello, my name is Jessica
Martinez and I'm currently a
prosecutor in in here in New
Mexico, um, and one of the
things I see when, when dealing
with crimes against peace
officers, um, is, is the lack of
of notice and the lack the the
lack of being heard in the
court, um, when we have victim
enumerated crimes. The court has
to give us 7 days' notice to
notify the victim, um, before
they hold a hearing. If we can't
notify the hearing, then the
court will continue to
allow the victims to be there so
they can be heard. Um, because
officers aren't, um, because
it's crime of.
Peace officer crimes are
enumerated. The court doesn't
have to do that. They can set
the hearing within 24 hours, 48
hours, um, and it's not enough
time for us to notify the
officer and allow him to be in
court and be heard, um, so this,
this requires courts to listen
to officers, um, until that
happen until this bill is
passed, courts don't have to do
that, and I see it over and over
that they don't do it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Looks like that's it for um,
online, um, representative Reed,
Reed, do you have anything else?
No, Madame chair where you stand
for questions from the
committee. Thank you. OK, great.
Um, first on the list for the
committee, we have
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Reed for bringing this
forward and good to see you.
District attorney Romo, um,
always a pleasure to see you. I
see you once a year. Uh, she
holds the Southwest Crimes
Against Children Conference
every year in October, I highly
recommend that every legislator
go to that because.
quite eye opening. Learned quite
a bit about.
Crimes against children.
Um
I was just looking
So I was trying to get
trying to get Jeremy Bond the
web webcast so you could watch
us talking about him, but I
couldn't quite get that to him,
but I told him that we're
talking about him right now.
Um
What I wanna say is sometimes
I'm very shocked when I learn
about things like.
How has it been this long?
There's just things that
Sometimes you can, why, why is
it taking this long to get here,
right?
It just seems sometimes there's
things that are no brainers and
you think that they should
already be a law and then I'm
finding out they're not, and I'm
like, how is this possible?
And I was looking at other
states, Colorado, our neighbor
to the north does have, um.
They have defined
Aggravated assault.
And it's just interesting it's
taken us this long to get here.
Um
I said last time.
I'm not gonna point out somebody
who almost made me cry in the
last committee but some people
are telling their stories and it
was very heartbreaking.
And like I've said, I've become
friends with a lot of you I've
stayed at people's houses. I
actually own a police dog puppy
that is from a long line of.
Uh, long line, long generations
of being a police dog and wow,
is this dog smart?
And hyper.
So
Um, it's a very emotional topic
because as I've gotten to know
you guys as I said last time,
it's I hear your stories.
them firsthand.
And again, I'm always surprised.
How
I'm just glad we're making it
right.
I guess it's better now than
never, right? It's better than
not at all.
Um
When
Generate a state police officer
Jeremy Vaughan was shot. That's
in my district. He is my friend.
And I'm texting him, are you OK?
Are you OK? What does he send
me? uh X-ray picture of where
the bullet went through his
neck, landed in his back, and
that's what he sends me. I'm
good. I just, you know, got
shot. He was very
Nonchalant about it.
But when I went to the
sentencing, which he was told
about specifically, it wasn't
like it was a notification.
Um
That was very hard to watch.
Because that guy that did it.
A complete flat affect.
No emotions whatsoever.
So when you go through those
things and you go to funerals
and you go to sentencing it
becomes very real of what you
guys go through and when you
hear people, when they let their
guard down and they tell you all
the stories, it becomes very,
very real.
So I appreciate this bill coming
forward. Again, it's always a
surprise, but it's nice at
Colorado already has this and
hopefully we can get this
passed.
And the last thing I wanted to
say on Monday.
Um
On the floor session at 10:30
represented Pettigrew,
Representative Harlan.
Uh, Vincents a block,
Representative Hall, and myself
will have law enforcement
appreciation day.
So just to let you know, we'll
be honoring you. So if anybody
wants to come, please come,
we'll be appreciating you on the
floor, and that is Monday at
10:30. And that's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative block, Madam
Chair, I a.
I second.
Thank you, we still have folks
on the list, so we'll honor that
that momentarily, uh,
represented Thompson.
Excuse me, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you. So if we
were discussing, it feels like
we've had this in our committee
10 times in 5 years. So I'm just
wondering what's happened to it.
Madam Chair, Representative
Thompson.
It's really
The way I see it has really been
a matter of logistics, for
example, we will, we've gotten
it passed this committee
actually, I don't remember how
many times my chief deputy says
it's twice. I think it's once. I
don't know, um.
The judiciary, I don't believe
we've ever gotten it passed, but
we've never gotten it to the to
the second chamber. Um, so I, I
don't think it's a matter of
opposition as it is a matter of
it not being prioritized.
And I, I didn't mean to cast
aspersions on you all. I, I was
talking to my daughter last
night and told her I had to come
up here and she's like they work
on Saturdays. I said, yeah, they
have to. They have so many
bills, and they still won't get
through them all, but I, I do
appreciate everything you do,
but that's, that's really the
the reason, madam Chair, and,
and Representative Thompson and
Madam Chair,
we always underfund VOA, so I'm
always worried about
Using those funds up and then
being without so is there
anything in place so that that.
And I, I don't wanna say double
dipping because that's not what
it is, but.
To ensure that if, you know,
let's say funeral expenses are
covered by another entity that
we don't also use voca funds in,
in, I I just wanna to protect
both voca for everybody.
This thing doesn't like me,
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Thompson.
Yeah, OK, um.
I do know CBRC.
Which I believe received some
funding from Voca. They, no
matter who the victim is, um, I
mean, like a lot of people have
insurance, right? Um, they
always.
Take into account any other
insurance payments that have
been made before they consider a
CVRC payout.
Thank you, that's what I needed
to know. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you,
Representative. I just had one
question regarding, um, there
was a comment in one of the um.
Uh, analysis around the dual
role of law enforcement. I don't
know if we've ever talked about
that in the past, but I just
wanted to ask the question
around, um.
The dual role as law enforcement
assisting with the prosecution
of a crime as a witness and a
victim and um whether or not
that's a conflict of interest.
Madam Madam Chair, Madam by
chair, that would not be a
problem for the simple reason
that if uh if an officer is a
victim, they would testify, but
they would not be part of the
prosecution team.
And ordinarily,
Well, not ordinarily, but a lot
of times, um, we, the district
attorneys will conflict those
cases out, but regardless,
that's something that is not.
Oh sorry, I lost my train of
that, um.
They would not necessarily be
involved in the case, for
example, if a patrol officer,
um, is on duty and he or she is
shot, but not killed.
They would likely be a witness
because just like every other
victim is normally a witness if
they're alive.
But they would not be part of
the prosecution team, if that
makes sense. There would be no
ordinarily if it's, if it's
handled in-house,
it would most places I've seen
you would go to a detective or
an investigator, so they would
not be doing both roles.
OK, so then it's just a matter
of like procedure that
It would just uh, it would just
be automatically.
That would be the process.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, I believe so, yes.
OK.
All right, well, we have a
motion for due pass from
representative uh Block and a
second from Representative Lord.
Is there any opposition?
Right, OK, Madam Chair, you have
a pass.
Um, a unanimous due pass on
House Bill 104. Thank you. Thank
you, everyone.
OK.
Uh representative, um, we are
on, um, House Bill 105, whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, um,
I would like to introduce my
expert Brian Nickerson from the
Department of Justice. I, I
would like to let him explain a
little bit about his background.
To the committee before I talk
about the bill, Madam Chair,
members of the committee here.
My name is Brian Nickerson. I'm
a special prosecutor with the
New Mexico Department of
Justice.
Prior to moving over to the New
Mexico Department of Justice, I
was a prosecutor with the 2nd
Judicial District Attorney's
office.
During my time, uh, I became a
prosecutor 5 years ago. I
started in 2019, right before
the COVID pandemic at the time I
was in the metropolitan court,
uh, which more or less operated
the same way for years and years
until the pandemic hit.
More or less overnight, the
entire apparatus of our court
system changed.
Um, there were weeks at a time
when
didn't really know how it was
going to function. We were
calling into court trying to
complete pretrial conferences.
We were trying to determine
whether or not it was even
feasible to hold bench trials,
let alone jury trials.
More or less overnight, the
entire judicial system changed.
We started
Operating court almost
exclusively on Zoom.
At the district attorney's
office. I conducted dozens of
virtual bench trials. I've had
witnesses, law enforcement,
civilian, um, in this case,
which is relevant to this bill,
experts from the scientific
laboratory division testifying
at those.
Trials
Um, at the time there were
Supreme Court orders in place
that mandated all these
proceedings he held remotely.
We operated under those orders
for approximately 3 years.
This bill is a common sense
approach to the experience that
we all went through in the court
systems operating remotely and
dealing with individuals who may
or may not be available.
Additionally, I conducted over
300 preliminary hearings also
all virtually during this time
frame.
Individuals would show up, they
would testify remotely, um.
The overall success and
prosecutions.
would go up, participation was
higher, cases would move through
the system with more efficiency.
House Bill 105 here essentially
takes our COVID experience in
dealing with the courts remotely
and applies this to
toxicologists and analysts at
the scientific laboratory
division to continue to be able
to testify at bench trials in
traffic offenses remotely.
Issues that have come up as.
We'll come back
Go ahead.
Madam Chair, just, just so you
understand, just a general
overview of 105, um, and I'm
sure we'll get into a lot of
issues, but what it does allow
is for a toxicologist or an
analyst on a DWI or misdemeanor
offense to appear via video uh
for testimony at hearings and
trials, um, this, uh.
This bill, um.
Has gotten there's an analysis
in there from the Department of
Health. I've talked to the
toxicology lab who, um, says
this will save them a ton of
time, a ton of money where they
can be in the lab actually, um,
test, testing things instead of
driving to like my hometown,
which is 3.5 hours away, taking
them out of the lab, um, to
where we can also get DWIs to
move faster, and the one issue
has always been confrontation,
um, and
We'll we'll go into that more, I
will say that we do have uh
rules on the book now after
COVID that is is showing that in
prelims we can do this, um, and
I think there's other states
that are doing this and so this
is a a common sense approach
with the technology that the uh
courtrooms have all now put in
place where we can do these type
of hearings, save money, um.
I don't believe it violates the
Confrontation Clause, but I'm
sure you'll have some questions
on that, um, and so that's what
the gist of this bill does, um,
and so for with that we'll stand
for questions, uh.
Great. Thank you,
Representative. Are there any,
is there any opposition to this
legislation we are on House Bill
105.
Is there any opposition online?
OK
Um
Miss Cook, if you can go ahead
and um you have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, um, Kim Chavez with
the law offices of the public
defender. The confrontation
clause of the Sixth Amendment of
the United States Constitution
and the New Mexico Constitution
in the same way, requires that a
witness appear in person to
testify. The United States
Supreme Court recently in 2024
decided Smith v. Arizona, and
reiterated that lab analyst
opinion testimony is governed by
the Confrontation Clause, and
New Mexico's case law on
analyst's testimony is very
clear that video testimony
generally does not satisfy the
constitutional right to look
your accuser in the eye when you
cross-examine them. We
completely understand the
practical challenges of having
analysts travel all over the
state for in-person testimony,
but unfortunately, the
confrontation clause, the
Constitution requires more than
a convenience to justify any
modification of the in-person
requirement. The pandemic
allowed for it because that was
an exceptional circumstance.
but convenience again is not a
valid exception to the
confrontation right. This
constitutional right cannot be
abrogated by statute, and if
enacted, there would be
extensive litigation and a very
good chance that it would be
struck down as unconstitutional.
So while again, we do empathize
with the challenges of in-person
testimony. It is unfortunately
required by the Constitution.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else online?
Um, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in support of the
legislation.
OK, if we can go ahead and um do
the order that we had earlier.
Um, 2 minutes.
Good morning. My name is Tom
Clayton. Uh, I'm here on behalf
of the district attorney's
office for the 4th Judicial
District, but also on the uh Mr.
Marcus Montoya from the
president of the NM AODA
had to step out, so I'm, I'm
here in support as well uh for
this bill, um.
I disagree with the comment that
this is just merely an issue of
convenience.
The Constitution's protections
are there and they are
protected.
They are protected. The
opportunity to cross-examine the
very fact that we have this
technology that the, the world
is using.
Our courts have used it and it's
been time tested through the
pandemic.
But the constitutional rights of
of of defendants are in fact
protected through the
technologies that we have. We're
broadcasting this very hearing
to our entire state.
The fact that Miss Miss Cook,
uh, was able to address you via
virtually.
Tells you that sir, I just stick
to your comments, please. I
understand that but but that
that proves my point.
Protection are being adhered to,
but there's also what we
addressed in the previous bill
protections of victims, they
have constitutional rights.
Article 2 Section 24 says
victims have rights.
So this opportunity to present
testimony.
Is we're we're we're living it.
So we're in support of it. Thank
you.
Um, next, Madam Chair, members
of the Troy Weler chief, New
Mexico State Police, uh, we
stand in strong support of this
bill, um, for all the, all the
reasons previously mentioned,
um, but also too, I mean, I
think that.
The uh sponsors have, have made
this uh limited in scope, um,
and so we appreciate that they
have taken those uh concerns and
this balanced approach. Also, I
mean, I think generally just
this bill is somewhat a
modernization bill here that we
need to uh make adjustments to
uh get with the times. And so we
uh appreciate your consideration
and as I stated before, we
support this bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee,
Benjamin Baker. I work at the
office of the Governor advising
on matters related to public
safety, we also stand in strong
support of House Bill 105. The
reasons that have mentioned, but
additionally want to emphasize
the notion that we believe that
arguments can be made relative
to the confrontation clause, we
believe that the deliberation of
this legislative body can help
New Mexico adjust to the times.
DWI does not, uh, has not self
mitigated.
The problem has not gone away
and we lose New Mexican lives
every day, keeping folks in the
lab doing the analytical work to
support the criminal justice
system to save New Mexico lives
remains a priority, I believe,
for this body and certainly
remains a priority for our
office. We urge your support of
this bill and thank you very
much for your
your hand so that they can see
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you to
sponsors.
Miss Ree, uh, Christopher
Williams, chief of police in
Portalis, vice president of the
Mexico Chiefs Association, uh
representing chiefs from all
four corners of the state.
We understand that
The difficulties of getting an
understaffed.
Scientific lab
Analysts to the four corners.
Or often continued.
Hearings over and over again
puts an extreme burden on.
The ability for these cases to
effectively make their way
through and we.
would urge your
Anyone else
Do we have anyone online?
Carla Sontag, go ahead 2
minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, President and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We support this legislation. We
believe it recognizes everyone's
rights, but it will streamline
the process as well, so we can
maybe get through more court
cases in a quicker fashion, and
New Mexico needs that our courts
are overwhelmed right now. We
have the technology and this is
a good way to do business in New
Mexico.
Thank you for your
consideration. I hope you'll
support this bill.
Thank you.
Uh, next we have Heidi Adams.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Heidi
Adams. I'm with the office of
the 10th Judicial District
Attorney's Office. And for all
the reasons before I stand in
strong support and I urge this
committee to support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative, did you have
any?
Um, Madam Chair, um,
The only thing I would add is um
this bill did um go to the house
floor and it was unanimous in
the House of Representatives.
Every representative here did
vote for this bill, it just
never made it over to the Senate
side in the last 60 day session,
um, so I just would, would like
to bring that up, um, to remind
them of the history of the bill,
but, but that will stand for
questions.
Thank you. Um, first on the
list, we have Representative
block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representatives.
And uh everyone for testifying.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I think we heard in one of the
testimonies, and I forget who it
was, may have been someone from
LOPD or something. But Madam
Chair representative, they said
that
Of course, in the Constitution,
I think it's the 6th Amendment.
We have the right to face our
accuser, but Madam Chair
Representative, I don't believe
that someone who is an expert on
lab tech.
is an accuser per se. Could you
just opine on that for me, Madam
Chair, Representative.
I think, um, Madam Chair
representative of what
confrontation deals with the
accused has the right to.
Face the people like.
To basically see the person that
is actually testifying against
them, and I think that's what
what she is is meaning in that,
um, but I'll defer to my expert
to add on.
Madam chair and Representative
Block, that is correct, just
directly quoting from the Sixth
Amendment as well as Article 2
Section 14 of the New Mexico
Constitution. It's when
individuals are confronted with
witnesses against them.
Um, so in this instance,
although this is someone from
the scientific laboratory who's
interpreting data, essentially,
um, that testimony is being used
against them in a prosecution,
so it would fall under the
Confrontation Clause for that
reason.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative that
it does help me and uh, OK, so
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
what else did I have here? I had
another question for you. Oh,
So Madamupresentative, I see in
the bill, it says pretty strict
language or maybe strict isn't
the word, but on page one it
says clear hearing of the judge,
the jury, and all parties. So
Madam Chair Representative, I
guess I want to make sure that
we understand. So as long as it
is
The visual and the audio.
And both parties can hear and
see whatever's happening, then
this would
Constitute
What this
Section of the bill is adding.
Is that kind of what I'm
understanding, Madam Chair
Representative expert. Madam
Chair Representative, yes, um, I
will say that during COVID
during preliminary hearings
where the accused, you know, has
the right to have their
witnesses, um.
To be confronted, you know, he
confront the witnesses, we did
this every single day. We did
him in DWI trials, we did all
our witnesses via Zoom, and
there was no issues with
cross-examination, see in the
witness, and specifically when
you're dealing with this type of
um expert, Madam Chairs
representative, this is
something that's run through a
machine and then you have an
expert who testifies. They're
not opening packages. They're
not doing anything of that
nature where you'd want them
present in court, they're.
Just testifying, um, and in
addition, there's been a new
case that came out, Smith v.
Arizona.
And um that case is being
interpreted across New Mexico
very differently, but it is
requiring lab analysts sometimes
to have to uh send 2 or 3
analysts based on subpoenas that
they're getting from the courts
to the different court hearings,
and so that is extremely um
hurting our our lab analysts, we
do not have many of them in the
state, and we sure don't have a
lot of experts, which is what
generally we need to go and
testify, Madam Chair, and so,
um.
Yes, this is, uh, this isn't
something where we're, we, we,
uh, attributed it to felonies or
attributed it to controlled
substances because in that
situation, yes, you might be
opening packages, Madam Cherry,
you might be, you know, handling
evidence and that needs to
probably be done in a courtroom,
so a jury can see the evidence
and things of that nature.
You're talking about a blood
sample here that's run through a
machine and then testimony. It's
not what you would typically
think of an expert.
Testimony, you know that I would
want to come to trial to do that
for, so I hope that answers your
question. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and yes, that
does, and I think that in my
opinion, at least the age of
what we went through with COVID,
it just makes sense, especially
if this person is just
interpreting what what they've
run through the lab reports and
I think it's very common sense
and it's also probably going to
save some money for the state,
as well as continue to have an
equitable justice system in New
Mexico. So that's all I had,
Madam Chair. Thank you all.
I would just comment Madam
Chair, um, and Representative
Black, yes, the they tallied
that about how much money that
would save for the state. It's a
ton of money.
Wow, OK. Well, thank you so
much, Madam Chair, and uh I
appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative block
next is Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative expert. Uh,
I have a question, um,
So that 6th Amendment, the
Confrontation Clause, that was
written.
When, you know, it was written
before Zoom and web technology.
Is that correct, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, yes, um,
this was written in the 18th
century, um, in respect to the
New Mexico state constitution. I
don't have the exact year on was
written, but early 20th century,
um, as you've noted, technology
has changed pretty substantially
since both of those have been
written.
Thank you, I could follow up on
that also, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, um, the
rules on preliminary hearings in
New Mexico where uh generally I
believe came after COVID, if I'm
correct, and uh it just says
where the defendant may compel
witnesses to testify against him
and the rules of evidence apply
now allow for witness to appear
virtually a magistrate and
metropolitan and
the witnesses we said is able to
see
and be seen by counsel and the
judge.
And so since COVID we are
already putting rules on the
book, uh, mountain chair and
Representative to deal with
these issues of our advanced
technology.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, because I know I
went through that when I had my
stalker followed me and they had
charged him with harassment, and
we did the whole thing via Zoom.
Um, somanitarian representative.
It it seems like when this
passes, I'm hoping that that if
it does end up going to a court
case that they will, that
there'll maybe make some changes
because this needs to be, I know
a lot of times we'll pass things
here that don't pass
constitutional muster, but we'll
pass them because we want to
challenge the courts and get
decisions on this. So this I see
this as a vehicle to further go
further to get the course to say
yes, we absolutely agree we need
to make a change on this and
maybe then go make a
constitutional change on top of
that, but side note on that.
So my other question that I have
with these people that work in
the state laboratory division,
where is that located? Where,
where are these toxicology
people.
Madam Chair and uh Miss uh
Representative Lord, I believe
it's Albuquerque as we're
scientific labs, so Albuquerque,
for example, um, is 3.5 hours
away from where I live on the
Texas border.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
Represent. That's what I was
getting to, because we seem to
have a shortage of a lot of
things and I would imagine we
don't have an overflow of
toxicology people. So what
happens?
If
Let's say, let's just take a
number. There's 10 people on
staff.
And 10, uh
What's the word I'm looking for?
Thank you, subpoenas come in.
And they're in, they get 20 in a
day, just using hypotheticals,
and one's in Las Cruces, one's
up Farmington. How, how would
that?
Get divided up that they could
travel to all those locations,
and when they do, then who's
doing the toxicology reports.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, so what happens it's
generally first come in the
first and if cases plea they'll
they'll basically, you know.
Go down the list, but those
cases generally they can't be in
all those places at one time, so
if Clovis is the first subpoena,
they'll drive 3.5 hours to
Clovis, they'll testify, they'll
drive 3.5 hours back. All the
other DWI cases will be pushed,
um, and then, um, they won't be
in the lab even testing testing
the ones that they need to be
testing, which is a, a, a big
thing for, you know, there's
been comments at DWIs Madam
Chair and Representative Santa
Fe aren't moving fast and
there's, you know.
But this is all part of the
problem and when I talk to the
toxicologists, they were very
much in support of this and said
they could they could pop on a
Zoom and they could do way more
subpoenas in one day and then
get back in the lab and start
doing their work, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Madam Chair, an
expert as, as everybody knows
who's ever been to any court
case for anything when they say
your court case is at 9, it
could be at 3.
So that also leads to the
toxicologist sitting there all
day.
And for no reason, because it
could get moved to another date
at the end of the day. So I, I
see this as, as us giving us
more ability.
to man and representative.
An expert when I'm, I'm trying
to say it, everybody deserves a
speedy trial.
Right?
This is a
This is a key component, making
sure that people get their
speedy trial. The toxicologist
can show up, they can, they
don't have to be part of the
problem that they can't be
there, they don't have to be
part of the problem that there's
not enough of them. This kind of
closes that loop that that
person can get a speedy trial
and then we're also making sure
when we have some people that
have like 89, 1011, 1213, 1415,
16 DUIs.
are not getting out in the
street. They're getting their.
A herd and
Protecting our community. So I
see this as a bill that will
help us, help us save money and
make it that people can get
their speedy trial and also I
think it should challenge that
Constitution and that in modern
day, we should allow Zoom in
some instances, especially in
this one, like you said, they're
not presenting evidence.
They're just doing a toxicology
report. And with that, I'm
finished. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
I know that that the 2nd
judicial district has lots of
bells and whistles. I went and
saw their fancy courtroom and
was very impressed and know that
it's very expensive. So I'm
wondering if, you know, some of
the smaller courts are going to
have.
I mean, I know they have Zoom
capability, but do they have, do
they have the money and the
technology to do this. It's a
madam chair and um
representative Thompson, if you
look at the FIR from AOC, they
will, they go into great detail
about the amount of equipment
that they've upgraded all over
the state. I can say in my small
towns, we have top of the line
equipment now. I'm sure there
are a few small courthouses that
may not be up there yet, but the
equipment is phenomenal, um,
and.
that you can share documents and
you can, you know, go into
breakout rooms, all the
different things that you can do
now, um, yes, I, I believe that
they have definitely stepped up
their analysis.
Thank you. And then I too, I am
worried about the
constitutionality of this, but
I'm not a lawyer, and so, you
know, if we move it on to
judiciary, I figured that's the
committee to decide on that.
And, but I'm also concerned on
page 34, where it says the
defendant shall be deemed to
have given consent, but I don't
see any place that that that.
The, the defendant has any
choice. I mean, if the
laboratory analysts performed is
subpoenaed, then that.
That the defendant shall be
deemed to have given consent.
Those two things kind of don't
match up with me.
Yes, madam Chair, that is what
that says, this, this bill would
not allow the defendant to um
choose whether the video lab
analysts come or the lab analyst
shows up in person, um, I, I
will tell you my experience um
if you ask any defense attorney
whether they want the lab
analyst to show up in person,
they're going to say they do
because they're hoping they
don't show and there were their
case will get dismissed at that
point. So the that that um.
First that section definitely is
Madam Chair and Representative
making it that they don't have a
choice on that. I don't know if
you wanna address the other part
my expert.
Represent Thompson, that, that
is all correct. Um, it in fact
will be challenged based upon
that clause. There are two other
states that have enacted similar
laws to this law, specifically
in North Carolina and Tennessee.
They do have a carve outs for
defendants to challenge this
presumption that an analyst
would come in and testify
remotely. Those are new laws in
those respective states about 2
or 3 years old. There really
isn't any appellate history on
them yet. Um, so at this point,
this law is.
unique in the sense that the
defend essentially is consenting
under the implied consent
advisory to allow this
toxicologist or analyst to
remotely, um, but the two states
that do have some water laws do
have carve outs, so this would
be unique amongst those two
examples,
I mean, this
this this is.
Sticky for me and I'm not an
attorney.
And I
to say upfront, basically defend
it, you don't have any rights in
this. That's really to me, it's
problematic in terms of, of
cases that use this, so why did
you not do a carve out?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, when you go to get a
driver's license, um, again,
it's one of those things that
you would be agreeing under
complied consent implied consent
that if you.
If you're gonna get this
driver's license, these, you
know, these chemical tests,
these things that are gonna
happen, this is something you're
agreeing to to protect the
state, um, when you choose to
get a driver's license, so do we
expect maybe this will be
challenged to expect as
Stephanie or as a representative
of Lords said Madam Chair, that
will, we may have some.
Case cases go up on this. We
want cases to go up on this
because we want this to be
established and and hopefully
move forward um with more
technology in the future or for
the Supreme Court or the Court
of Appeals to say no, we don't
think this is is gonna cut it,
um, that that's what we want to
happen, um, because this is, I
think where we are in
legislation right now and where
we are in the the process of
after COVID, but um we, we want
to, we want to see how this
works.
Madam Chair, I want to be a yes
on this, but I think this is is
I I can't vote for because of
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I will just say, Madam
chairs in um.
Uh, Representative Thompson,
this language was in there when
you did vote on the floor for
it, um.
Previously
unanimously from this this body,
um.
I, I agree with you, it should
go to judiciary. I think that's
where the these legal issues can
be hammered out a lot more,
which we did do last time, but I
would remind this committee that
everybody in this committee
voted yes on this previously in
this format.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Next we have
Representative Romero.
Ah, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you, um, to the sponsor,
um, and thanks for bringing up
this issue. I think the major
difference between that last
boat and this boat is the SCOTUS
opinion that
Or we had a 9-0 opinion talking
about the importance of the
confrontation clause
constitutionally.
And why the handling of this
type of evidence when being able
to confront your accuser is so
critical, and in that case,
right, it was uh sort of a proxy
person coming into court and
talking about what the test was,
whereas here we're talking about
using the proxy of, of video
equipment, and I think that
opinion's really important in
the nuances of what we're trying
to streamline in some ways with
the swift and certain justice,
but also
balance with the fact that these
are critical decisions that are
being made um in taking away
someone's rights and want to
make sure that we follow the
proper protocol to do that.
Um, so I think to uh
Representative Tom Thompson's
points, the idea that we
wouldn't have an opt out is, is
problematic after the SCOTUS
opinion, um, and understanding
that that right to confront also
ensures that we actually have
that ability to to confront the
toxicologist who made that
determination. Um, and again, to
the point of the technology not
being universal or equitable
across the state right now.
You know, we're doing that in,
in a, in a bunch of different
bills where we're hoping that we
get this, you know, the
structure in place, um, but this
is about, you know, your
constitutional right to do that,
in which case I feel that um.
We, we have to be responsive and
we have been in so many ways,
year to year on why we adapt
language to meet the demand of
what the Supreme Court is
telling us, um, and, and this
being a very conservative court
as well, I think is an important
note to um bring into
consideration, um, and so I
think for this similar reasons
having now read the opinion and
some law review articles on it.
I am also in opposition to the
bill for, for that reason, um,
Madam Chair and Representative.
if there's any, um, sort of
adaptation to the opt out, I
think would be really strong
with the um reading of of what
the Supreme Court has decided if
there is a willingness to, to
look at some of that, Madam
Chair, representative, I think
it might be more palatable.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, um, and I
understand what you're talking
about the opt out, I definitely
do because I know there are some
statutes that allow that.
I, I will say,
Right up front
I don't think there's gonna be a
defense attorney that's gonna
advise their client to opt out
because of the whole idea that
they're so bogged down, they may
not be able to show up for court
and people who commit DWIs are
going to walk, um, and that's
what's going to happen, but I
will say on the technology part,
um.
If you look at AOC's analysis,
they are very big support of
this, the courts, um, are very
big support of this, I mean I
think that's an important
analysis to look at because they
um have have provided the
equipment to basically make sure
that we are not violating
confrontation, and we are
complying with what the
definition is of confrontation
and um I'll defer if you have
anything else you want to add to
that, but I mean, I, I, I.
I could work with you on that
language, but I just don't think
it's gonna fix the problem at
that point, because I, I just
being in prosecution for so
long, I've never been able to
get somebody to not force us to
try to bring every single
witness and, and in this case
you could have 2 or 3 lab
analysts under the Smith case
being required to drive and
you're gonna have no testing
happen in the lab, but I'll,
I'll defer to the expert on that
issue.
Madam Chair Romero,
um, in respect to the Smith v.
Arizona case, which I believe is
the case you're citing from the
US Supreme Court in 2024. Um, it
did a couple of important
things, so the basis of that
case is your toxicologist and
the analyst who originally
interpreted that data no longer
worked for that laboratory by
the time the case went to trial.
So there was a second dairy
analyst, toxicologist who
independently reviewed that raw
data generated by the machine
and testified about that.
With the US Supreme Court was
essentially saying is yes, it is
a confrontation right, but
because that second analyst is
basically reinterpreting that
original data, it's permissible
for them to testify at that
trial.
Where issues happened in the
past is where that second
analyst was exclusively relying
on that first analysis.
process. So in a way, it doesn't
necessarily, although it brings
up the confrontation clause
issue, it doesn't necessarily
get to the heart of whether or
not having this person testify
remotely, its constitutional or
unconstitutional.
Here in New Mexico, our most
recent case law on this matter
dates back to 2016.
Um, and State v. Thomas before
New Mexico Supreme Court when
there's a carve out to the Craig
exception, which is really what
brings us here, um, there's
really two things they're
looking at. It's whether or not
there's an important public
policy by allowing an individual
to testify remotely and whether
or not there's the fair
opportunity to place that
individual under oath, the
opportunity to cross-examine
them and the allowance of
observation of the witness's
demeanor.
So in respect to that second
prong, given what we've gone
through with COVID, I believe
that's met.
We operate on Zoom. What
happened over Zoom. Trials
happened over Zoom, um, given
the advances in technology, that
2nd Bronx met.
First prong on whether or not
it's an important public policy
is really the heart of this
debate. Um, what we've heard
about the scientific laboratory
division is there aren't enough
of these toxicologists and
analysts, it's extremely
expensive for them to be going
to courthouses all over the
state. And really the question
that would be before our Supreme
Court is, is that a sufficient
enough.
Public policy
For this to be constitutional
and given the state of our
current case law, nothing's been
decided post COVID, um, from our
Supreme Court, from the Court of
Appeals that relied on the
Supreme Court's orders under
COVID or the US Supreme. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, expert, um, and,
and we heard all summer long
too, I think on the challenges
with getting these toxicologists
moving things forth in CCJ. So
I'm certainly sensitive and
empathetic to that, um, being a
challenge. I think the challenge
for me though.
We're talking about not having
enough personnel to do that.
The AOC also notes that video
capabilities and courtrooms are
um not currently set up, um,
for, to, for allowing
individuals to appear by video,
um, to be able to see and hear
everything going on, so when
we're thinking about oaths in a
civil context versus a criminal
context. I think these are
really critical distinctions,
um, when we're looking at the
nuance, not only perhaps looking
at data from a previous, um,
toxicologists who
is no longer employed with the
uh an agency versus that of not
being able to appear in person
to have that ability to cross
examine, um, to face that person
in court. I think those are
important sort of distinction
and and I think if we were able
to do this, perhaps in the civil
context, I think, exclusively
for now under understanding that
we don't have the technology.
It's one way, um.
But I'm not yet comfortable. I
think having read the um Smith
v. Arizona case that we're that
this gets us to that place of of
comfort and understanding the
the nuances, um.
And again, I think the opt out,
despite the fact that perhaps
everyone would opt out, um.
You know, defense attorneys and
otherwise to to.
Meet that demand, but, uh, Madam
Chair, Representative, I'm.
I'm, you know, trying to wrestle
with this, but at the same time
I think I'm deferring to the
constitutionality question, um,
in this being insufficient to
meet that demand. If I could
just respond to one thing you
said if the technology in that.
Small town courtroom, let's say,
isn't up to date then then
that's not gonna be able to meet
this bill, you're gonna have to
come in person, um, so it's not
just that they don't have the
technology, this is gonna happen
again, this is gonna happen, you
have to have the technology,
which is what all the courtrooms
are trying to get up to now, and
I mean for my district and I've
been in Tucum carry and I've
been all over the state and I
haven't hit a courtroom besides
TA, I think, um,
in uh in Rio.
that did not have that
technology, so if they did not
have the technology and they
weren't able to validly confront
them, then that person would
have to come in in person under
this bill, so that helps. Thank
you for that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
representative. Unfortunately,
that's not what the bill says,
and I think those constraint and
worries is that we don't know
how it would be applied.
And the inequity there with um
be, I think, one of the concerns
at the top level for that too.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
representative, I don't know if
any of the comments that have
been provided have.
Given you any um thoughts around
making some changes to the bill.
Can, uh, Madam Chair, if you
wanna roll the bill, I can, you
know, sit down more with, um.
Representative Romero and and
talk to some other, you know,
try to fix that if that's the
the sticking point, um, the
defendant being able to opt out
of it, um, I wanna see if if
talking to prosecutors, if
that's even if if that is an
option if if we're even seeing
that ever happen, um.
You know, maybe that'll come
into play, I'd like to talk to
the public defender too, because
I thought they felt there was
some middle ground on this that
we could work, so I, I don't
mind rolling the bill at this
time, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that, that would
be great. Thank you so much for
that, um, and thank you experts
for. Um, so then we're we're
gonna go ahead and roll over for
folks who are listening, um,
we're gonna roll over House Bill
105.
Um, and then we'll move on now
to House Bill 107.
And represented whenever you're
ready, um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, yeah, there's, there's not
gonna be.
desperate.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, HB
107. I'm, I'm here along with my
co-sponsor, Representative
Nicole Chavez, um, this is a
bill that um addresses the
state's dangerous drug
trafficking problem, um, which
is resulting in significant
substance abuse and overdose
deaths across the state and this
bill, I will, I will tell you is
a tough bill penalty wise, um.
And I wanna get this
conversation going about the
problems that we're having with
fentanyl and other things, so
what the spill does, um.
In 30 3120 trafficking
controlled substance, Section 1
of the bill. It includes
counterfeit Schedule 1 and 2
narcotics and the trafficking
statute increases the penalties
for distributing counterfeit
Schedule 1 and 2 narcotics, um,
and it ensures that any
counterfeit narcotic, a narcotic
that bears the unauthorized
trademark trade name imprint,
number device or other
identified marker likeliness of
a manufacturer, distributed or
dispenser other than the person
who in fact manufactured.
distributed or dispensed a
controlled substance can be
charged pursuant to the statute
rather than under the
distribution statute, which only
authorizes an 18-month sentence.
It does establish a nine-year
sentence for a first offense,
which is a 2nd degree felony,
um, so a person who's convicted
of trafficking will have to
serve the entire 9 years of
imprisonment, um, fentanyl, um,
in our major concern, it creates
a new 2nd degree felony for
trafficking that.
results in death, meaning if you
give fentanyl or another
substance to somebody, um, you
will serve a term of
imprisonment for 18 years with a
minimum of 12 years to be served
if somebody were to die, um, it
creates a new first degree
felony offense for a second and
subsequent offense that are that
if that offense results in death
and establishes a sentence of
life imprisonment, one other
important thing it does is for
distribution to minors in
section 2, it creates a
first degree felony for
distribution of a schedule 1 or
2 narcotic, which is fentanyl,
methamphetamine, cocaine,
heroin, opioids to a minor, and
lastly, um.
It's uh under 30, 31, 22, uh,
controlled or counterfeit
substances distribution remove
schedules 1 and 2 narcotics from
the section and moves them to
the trafficking statute, which
increases the penalties for
fentanyl to those under the
trafficking statute rather than
distribution.
Um, this is a bill that, yes,
well, penalties are harsh. We
believe we need to start talking
about this issue and the
problems we're having with
fentanyl, um, and so we
restructured this to um help
deal with the fentanyl crisis
and as you all probably know,
more people are dying from
fentanyl overdoses, um, then,
uh, or, or being given fentanyl
dying from fentanyl, then they
are actually gunshot wounds in
our state, and so that's what
essentially.
this bill does, I'll, I'll defer
to my co-sponsor, Nicole Chavez,
and then if there's any actual
um issues with the structure of
the statute and how we got there
and we also have uh Rachel Gudel
here from our caucus attorney
position.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, fellow
representatives, as you all
know, fentanyl is a major
crisis, which is devastating
families and communities across
our state 2 years ago,
unfortunately, I lost my nephew
to a fentanyl overdose. He was
an amazing state wrestler, great
athlete, amazing brother, but we
lost him to this drug, as we
know it's extremely potent,
often mixed into other drugs
without users knowing, and it's
leading to accidental overdoses.
So,
the rise in fentanyl-related
deaths, especially among our
youth, um, we really need to
address this issue, and it
requires a mix of education,
harm reduction, access to
treatment, and stronger
enforcement against traffic.
I think now
The legislative body to address
this crisis and create strong
legislation to try to address
this issue. Thank you.
And that will stand for
questions. Great, um, thank you,
um, we'll start first with um,
opposition to the bill, if you
can raise your hand.
And you'll have each, you'll
each have 2 minutes.
Committee, um, Diane McCash, um,
You all heard, I think, pieces
of my family's story over the
years.
Um, but he was facing 25 to
life.
Um, as a 22 year old.
Because of narcotics he bought,
um, and shared with a friend and
one of them was a 19 year old
son of a woman who is prominent
in our community, um, who went
home and died that night, um,
He ultimately
Did a plea deal.
And he testified against the man
he'd had been getting the heroin
from. Luckily he wasn't part of
the cartel.
Or one of the others that are
operating at that time in our
community, um, because he wasn't
killed for his testimony, um,
He, uh, turned 36 this week.
He's now been sober for more
than 18 months. He's off paper.
He has a good job. He's finally
getting a life.
If he had gone to prison.
He was still there.
God knows what would have
happened.
Thank you.
Madam Chair committee members.
My name is Jasmine Tying Fong,
and I'm an attorney with the
ACLU of New Mexico. HB 107 makes
excessive punitive changes to
the controlled substances Act.
It requires mandatory minimum
sentences, removing discretion
from judges as to what
appropriate sentence should be
given, given and considering all
relevant factors and individual
circumstances within each case.
Studies have also shown that
mandatory minimum sentences have
no overall benefit for.
control while creating further
substantial harms. Mandatory
minimums also further perpetuate
racial disparities rampant in
the carceral system and
contribute to prison
overcrowding and further strains
on state resources.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Bennett. I'm the chief public
defender. I've been either
prosecuting or defending
criminal cases and many, many
drug cases for almost 30 years
now. I'm, I, I just wanna let
you know that this is not going
to cut down on drug trafficking.
Um, there is a sentencing
structure which is
Very strong in our state where
high level traffickers who are
convicted in the state system
are going to get significant
prison time, mandatory time, 9
years for so many of our cases
are people handing somebody
who's addicted, handing to their
friends two fentanyl pills.
People sharing $10 worth, people
being brought in by undercover
police officers who would not
otherwise transfer drugs and
being brought in to transfer
drugs. Those people
Perhaps are guilty of
trafficking should be punished,
should also have the chance at a
treatment, but that's not what
this bill does. This bill is a
big hammer and nothing else that
I see. So, uh, we need to deal
with fentanyl. Everybody knows
that this bill is not the way I
asked the committee. Thank you.
Anyone else in opposition?
Um, we'll move to the um zoom
first we have um Kim Travis
Cook, if you could go ahead 2
minutes, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Kim Chavez cook with the offices
of the public defender defender,
I do echo um comments already
made, but I rise to address
specifically the new crime of
trafficking that results in
death, which presents
significant legal and policy
concerns. First, resulting in
death fails to capture the legal
proximate cause requirement that
is a
minimum for both criminal and
civil liability. Recognizing
that fentanyl is inherently
dangerous, the proposed crime
does not require any
case-specific mental
culpability.
Like that a particular dose was
highly concentrated or knowledge
that a user was likely to
consume a lethal dose. If those
circumstances were present, the
state could already charge
homicide, but a mandatory life
sentence on par with first
degree murder without any such
knowledge and without
approximate cause requirement is
incon
with how criminal law works. I'm
also highly concerned that
imposing life sentences on users
who might have shared their own
supply with another who
overdoses, which have a chilling
effect on users calling for
help. Imposing exceedingly harsh
penalties for traffickers to
address overdose deaths simply
isn't the solution. Overdose is
a public health issue and
requires a public health
response. Well, the crisis
certainly isn't over. I would
note that overdose deaths have
declined 8% statewide since
2021.
And that's because we're using
effective ways to reduce
overdose death, including
expanded access to rescue
medication and fentanyl testing
strips, and we should also
expand our good Samaritan
immunity law to incentivize
seeking emergency assistance.
While the bill recognizes a
truth that drugs are dangerous
and life is precious. It could
have a significant chilling
effect on a population already
skeptical of law enforcement and
lead to more preventable deaths.
We ask you to oppose this
legislation.
Thank you. Next we have Robert
Holbert. Hello. Thank you, um,
Robert Holberg here with uh over
20 years of experience in
recovery.
And hard drug addiction and uh.
What I can say about this is uh
echoing what other folks have
said.
But it's proven that the
criminalization of the mental
health issue that addiction is
just leads to further withdrawal
and isolation.
I mean
They
There are so many instances, you
know, where people are in these
communities and the only people
that really maybe look at you
like a human or the other folks
who are in the same boat as you,
and there's a lot of communal
kind of aspects to that that
really, uh,
Will encourage that kind of uh
It, it just, it, it makes it so
that everybody's liable, uh, for
what everybody knows they're,
they're making as a personal
choice, and uh I think that we
just really have to look at the
fact that a lot of folks who
have chosen to start trafficking
or trying to support their own
habit and likely folks that have
taken that route and see, uh,
less opportunity in other
places.
In life are going to be
marginalized populations, and
that's why the drug war has been
uh seen as a a race, a racially,
uh, motivated and
Uh, very unproductive way of
using resources and destroying
people's lives. I mean,
thankfully, I never got into the
system, but there were occasions
where, uh, perhaps if I looked
different. I'm sorry, your time
is up, if you can just finish
your thought.
Yeah, I, I hope that you do not
support this. There's way better
ways to deal with this issue.
Thank you. Next we have Micaela
Trujil Baxter.
Hi everyone, I came through
here, um, in opposition of this
bill, as someone who's also in
long-term recovery. Um, I have
never
Historically experienced the
fentanyl crisis. However, I'm
now a community health worker,
peer support worker, and
community support worker dealing
with it on the front line. Um,
and these are people who Robert
had mentioned who are lacking
things in other areas of their
lives.
Um, and they're the last thing
we need is to put life sentences
on people who make these
mistakes. I have also had loved
ones who have fallen victim who
were star athletes have fallen
victim to this epidemic.
And uh we need to reinvest
these.
Hammers into community-driven
organizations and solutions.
Um, and that's how we will find
the best results. That is all. I
hope you oppose this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next one move to the
audience for support, if you
could please raise your hand.
If you're planning to speak, um,
if you can keep your hand raised
so that the.
Stop on the mic
Good morning once again, Madam
Chair, uh, Tom Clayton, uh,
district attorney from the 4th
Judicial District and here also
on behalf of Marcus Montoy from
AODA were in support of the
bill, um, and uh from my
perspective as the district
attorney of my community.
We're 100% in support of
treatment, diversion programs.
Whether it's a sobriety court,
whether it's drug court, whether
it's pre-prosecution diversion
program, we're in support of
that.
But there's a clear distinction,
a clear distinction between
Users and traffickers, and I
know they they transcend, but
there is a distinction. This is
a business.
When they are selling this
poison to our community. It is
killing our youth.
The youth that these individuals
talk about. Absolutely, that
needs to stop.
Um, so there has to be a
mechanism to to get this poison
off our streets, and it's got to
be the traffickers because I,
like I said, we are doing
everything we can in our
community to deal with treatment
for those that are addicted to
this poison from a personal
perspective, my godson, my my
mother's first born grandchild
died of substance abuse
overdose. So this is personal
for me as an individual, but
I understand the plight.
But we cannot, cannot continue
to allow people to traffic
narcotics in our communities.
That
That
So we have to have the
Mr. Bauer talks about.
He, he and I have been on, on
this, on, on doing criminal law
for many years. Oh Ben very
well.
Honorable person and I think
those that are doing defense
work doing justice for their
clients, but we as a community
need to stop this poison coming
in and fentanyl is killing our
communities.
Thank you. Next, madam, um,
chair, vice chair, members of
the community. My name is Versa
Macias. I'm in I'm from
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I'm a
lived experienced mother. I lost
my son to fentanyl.
In 22.
A drug trafficker gave my son
pill and just
knew it was fentanyl and just
threw him behind a church in an
alley to die alone in the rain.
And I am in a approval of this
bill, and I believe that as Mr.
Clayton said, yes, I'm, I'm for
everything, education, harm
reduction, like, uh,
representative Nicole Chavez
said, anything that we can get
by drug traffickers like Mr.
Clinton said it's a business,
and they make money off of this
stuff. They're not helping out
the community. They're keeping
it for themselves to get more
fentanyl, to get more drugs, to
sell the poison to.
for our children. So I am in uh
approval of this bill.
Thank
Madam chair and Madame Vice
Chair, thank you for allowing me
to be here today. I am speaking
of personal experience of losing
my only son, Alexander, who was
only 16 years old to aanyl
poisoning.
But all exposure can be very
deadly to children under the age
of 18, and then should be
categorized as child abuse, too.
He was unfortunately exposed to
fatan all the first time 10
months before he passed away,
leading him to be in the ICU.
The doctor said that if he ever
had anything with that and all
again that it would stop his
heart next time.
That day, as teenagers want to
go and hang out with their
friends or girlfriends. He
begged me.
To go hang out with his
ex-girlfriend and her mom, and I
knew that they suffered from
addiction and were known dealers
too, so I did not want him to
go.
Unfortunately, he said that they
were just gonna eat pizza and he
would be home.
I was trying to get a hold of
him. I could not get a hold of
him or the mom or anybody and
everybody's said so, he's a
teenager. He'll be OK.
Unfortunately, he was not OK.
The narrative that was told to
the police that night is that
they smoked a cannabis wax with
him while they're alive, my son
is dead. 911 was not called. CPR
was not done. Hours went by.
They removed items off of his
body if they had all that time
to do that.
How come they couldn't answer my
phone calls and my text messages
and how can my son couldn't come
home.
Our children are being
stigmatized. He was stigmatized
from being given a fake pill a
few months before and being in
the ICU and nearly losing his
life.
I try to put him in rehab, the
psychiatrist said he's not
addicted.
His heart can process if you
could just finish your thought
and if you can give us your
name,
please for the mother of
Alexander Landon Gross, who
passed on February 28, 2022, and
this is why I support House Bill
107 because a drug trafficker
took my son's life. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
JD Bullington, registered
lobbyist for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber and also the
city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe City
Council, the governing body, has
adopted very clear resolution
that it's supporting measures
this year that really target
fentanyl specifically fentanyl
traffickers. Well, New Mexico
ranks the top 5 states now in
overdose deaths.
And fentanyl is the number one
cause of drug overdose in
Albuquerque. Fake pills often
contain lethal doses of this
dangerous drug.
Chamber believes we need to
attack the fentanyl traffickers
from every angle possible, and
it's important to know that
there has been an emphasis that
this bill is aimed at
traffickers.
The chamber believes if we start
arresting and convicting only a
few, organized crime leaders and
punished them severely. Where
it's gonna get out pretty fast
that New Mexico is a bad place
to peddle fentanyl.
Which is killing so many of our
citizens.
Chamber believes it's time to
stand up for New Mexicans who
are being victimized by the
trafficking of fentanyl and
urges that you pass this bill.
Thank you next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Troy Wiesler, chief,
New Mexico State Police, um,
first off, I just want to
reiterate, um, what, what you've
heard from those uh before me
that, you know, we fully support
the efforts at prevention and
education, uh, to deal with the
uh current drug crisis. Uh, I
spent several years as a member
of the governor's overdose
council working with the
Department of Health regularly
on, on many of those efforts.
Um, but we also need to do more
on the enforcement side.
Uh
As you've heard, hundreds of New
Mexicans die every year from
fin, fentanyl overdoses and
thousands more have overdoses
that are non-fatal.
Some of the same drug
traffickers are responsible for,
for many of those deaths. Uh, I
mean,
Not just one, the same drug
traffickers peddling or
distributing and trafficking
these drugs are responsible for
multiple deaths a year with the
product that they distribute.
Now I oversaw state police, uh,
Criminal investigations and
narcotics for many years. What I
will say is over those years
across this entire state.
I cannot recall a situation
where I saw any sort of
significant penalty up to an
individual because they had a
pill or two.
In fact, the reality that we
regularly saw was the
individuals that trafficked
large amounts of narcotics, os,
pounds, uh, we would arrest them
time and again, and you usually
wouldn't probably be till the
3rd or 4th time that they were
convicted before they saw
significant consequences, uh, or
they got their probation finally
revoked because we arrested him
for trafficking, uh, while they
were on probation for
trafficking. Um,
And so I, I strongly, uh, we
strongly support this bill, and
I encourage you to uh consider
it. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Ben Valdez, IPA Chief
of Police with the Sane Police
department. Um, I want to echo
what everyone already said. I
had the pleasure to serve with
Chief Weasler in the capacity
investigating narcotics
organizations, but what has been
absent from this discussion is,
we're looking at these
traffickers and the irreparable
harm that they do.
At regular intervals, our
officers and our paramedics
responding toyl overdoses in our
community here in Santa Fe.
Sometimes we are fortunate
enough to be able to revive
folks from their coma.
And they were able to live to
see another day.
And we try to get them the
resources they do need.
I've also stood before the
legislature before to ask for
assistance with launching law
enforcement assisted diversion
programs many years ago
concerning opioids.
With the fentanyl and all these
other things we've been doing
outreach, education, prevention,
we're making some small strides.
This will help us out with
addressing those folks who
caused the most harm, drug
traffickers.
The harm that causes not just
narcotics, it expands often the
root cause for many crimes in
our communities, including
violent crimes, property crime
offenses, human trafficking,
child exploitation and child
abuse cases. I strongly urge
your support for this
legislation and bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jeremy
Story, please you for Las
Cruces. One of the commenters
mentioned the reduction we've
seen in overdose in the last
couple of years and I believe we
should celebrate those small
wins, but you have to zoom out
to see where we really are in
2021, which was our peak, we had
1,029 overdose deaths in New
Mexico. If you look at 2001, 20
years before that.
We had less than 400.
So we have, we've gotten to this
point where we're on this
mountain and although we've come
down slightly, we're far above
where we were and why is that?
Well, Fenel is different than
anything we've seen before. And
I've said it many times and I
never thought I would say it,
but I would take heroin back in
a second, because spindle is on
another level, and we're seeing,
uh, just this correlation
between crime, homelessness, and
although there are other
factors, Fenty is a big driver
of that. I don't think we'd be
having a lot of the
conversations we're having about
crime and public safety that
we're having this year.
If we took away fentanyl
overnight, we had a magic wand
and it was gone. I don't think
we'd be having the same
conversations. You won't see so
many officers here, um, as often
as we are to push for these
things.
And so I believe we should do
prevention, intervention,
diversion, treatment, we should
invest in those in every
possible way we can because
those are very important, but we
can also go to the other side
and really target the
traffickers and the people who
are bringing these substances in
and distributing them throughout
our community. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Christopher Williams,
chief of Police Portales and
also vice president New Mexico
Chiefs Asso chief story hit it
best. This is.
By far the worst thing.
I think we've seen ever I
started my law enforcement
career in '98 and
Yes, this is the most lethal
thing we have ever seen out
there. Somebody can go to a
public bathroom, put it on the
sink, and any person in here,
your family, your children,
anything can touch that and die.
Law enforcement now has to carry
Narcan.
And we can't keep enough of it.
You know, it's
It's so bad that there has to be
something.
To incentivize the removal of
this from our communities. It is
coming in by the truckload.
There's no way we can keep up
with it, so we have to have
something to try and stop this
before it.
takes us out worse than COVID
did.
It's just the same.
Before you know it, they can
weaponize this and spread it all
over and just take out a
building they could do it here.
Thank you.
Thank you, anybody else in the
audience?
Um, we'll go to Zoom, we have
one person, Carla Fontag please.
You have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
Mexico Business Coalition. This
issue of drugs and drug
trafficking is killing.
Our people and our state.
We have got to take serious
action to stop this.
We're in very strong support of
House Bill 107, and I hope that
you will support it too. You've
heard from our law enforcement,
and you've heard heart-wrenching
stories of people who could have
been saved had New Mexico taken
a stronger stance against drug
trafficking. We have got to stop
this. We've got to stop the flow
of fentanyl. I urge you to
please pass this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, um, Representative
Reeve, do you have any comments
before we head to committee? Um.
Just, Madam Chair, thank you,
um, we just fill this bill is it
we're at a point where we need
to really be addressing these
traffickers and uh the fentanyl
crisis that we have, um, looking
forward to uh feedback from the
committee on this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you first on the list, we
have Representative Lord. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um.
I want to address something. I
went back and you were talking
about the penalties.
Have you reviewed the federal
trafficking penalties compared
to yours because they're far
more stringent.
Uh, no, um, I have not, but if
you want to enlighten me, I
would love to hear those. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative
Lord. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So,
What you have in your bill is
for the first offense resulting
in the death of a human being,
and I want everybody to remember
we're talking about the death of
a human being, and that includes
if you're doing, doing it
without knowing, which is, we
have involuntary manslaughter.
When you do things are a
consequence.
So the first offense is a 2nd
degree felony, and that is up to
9 years.
On the federal trafficking, they
have, they go by so much grams.
The first defense is not less
than 5 years and not more than
40.
OK. So it's far more than what
you have.
If death or serious injury.
Not less than 20 years or more
than life.
So they, that you are looking at
death.
Even if you don't know.
And if he gives, I mean, you're,
you're dealing a drug, right?
Um
is 20 to life.
So that doesn't even compare to
what you
could be up to $5 million.
And if somebody dies from that,
it's $25 million.
Second offense, not less than 10
years, not more than life.
If death is automatic life
imprisonment.
So
The more and the more you have,
it goes up.
First offense, not less than 10
years, not more than life, uh,
death is 20 to 10.
Again, with the second offense,
it is life imprisonment.
So when you're talking about
your bill you have here.
It
Not as stringent.
So I don't think anybody can
make an argument.
Now,
With that said, Madam Chair
Representative.
I agree we need to do a hell of
a lot more in New Mexico. We
have fought, we were so far
behind. I have all this money
from oil and gas, and I don't
understand why we're not doing
more for treatment or rehab or
behavioral health.
And I applaud our.
The lady who came up and
testified that her son got
sober. Unfortunately, that is
the.
Exception, and it takes a long
time and a lot of rest before.
But I fully believe that.
We're talking about people who
have murdered another person.
Manslaughter, however you want
to call it. There's a dead
person.
And while it can be unfortunate
circumstances, we have got drug
trafficking in our state.
Madam Chair and Ribson
And the people that are
trafficking.
Don't care about human life as
we've learned just from human
trafficking from they bring him
across the border, they die,
they're like, OK, this one
didn't make it, take a picture.
Sorry.
Don't get the money from the
family.
When
You're in this position when
you're a representative, you
talk to a lot of families that
come and tell you about 2
fentanyl.
I agree with the officer over
there talks about that's a whole
different level. The fentanyl is
a whole different and I, I'm
also glad you just didn't put
fentanyl because people and
because otherwise you would run
into the issue well that cocaine
was laced with fentanyl and I
didn't know. But then I would, I
would go back Ma representative
to talk about involuntary
manslaughter and criminal
negligence. It's a 4th degree
felony in New Mexico. There are
consequences for even when you
do something accidentally, oops,
sorry, I didn't mean to kill
that person.
So the main thing that stuck out
with me more than anything else.
Is that
Your charges didn't come close
to what.
The federal level are.
So I would argue in that
instance.
That
Those aren't excessive penalties
at all.
So I, I would definitely want to
address that.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I also noticed that when the
analysis, LOPD said it
significantly impacts the plea
bargaining.
Well, you know what?
Um
Yeah, exactly. That's that's.
State police officer hair.
It's no longer with us.
And
His murderer got to plea
bargain.
I don't agree with that. There's
some cases, I get it, they're
trying to move up the chain of
people who are selling drugs and
going up the chain, but you know
what?
In some instances, there
shouldn't be that ability to
plea bargain, Madam Sha
representative because what's
the goal of this bill?
To take
Drug dealers off the street, so
they stop murdering people.
I don't know how to make this
bill more simple, that's it.
Take people off the street that
are distributing drugs that are
killing people in record numbers
in our state.
Period. End of story. There's a
summary of the bill.
And I also know in the state,
Madam Chair representative that.
We have a revolving door.
Everybody's acknowledged that,
including the governor.
We have issues with people
getting right back out again.
And all we're trying to do is
make sure
That those people are not out in
the streets.
Selling a drug to somebody.
And then killing somebody's
child.
So that's what I have to say.
The goal is to take bad actors
off the streets so we can kind
of stop them.
Yeah, so far in Mexicans,
especially our younger.
Chair and Represented Lord,
thank you for that, that is
exactly what this bill is trying
to do.
Thank you, ma'am sure, that's
all I had. I just wanted to
remind everybody that what this
bill is about is to take these
people off the street.
So we can stop having
Dead New Mexicans.
From drugs that are
That they're getting through
people that are trafficking
drugs. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Next we have
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
if you look at the FIR, the
final paragraph on page 5 says,
unlike other states, New Mexico
does not have set thresholds as
criteria for trafficking and
distribution.
This means street-level sellers
who may give away, share, or
sell minor amounts of drugs will
be subject to the same extreme
mandatory minimums as someone
who sells copious amounts.
People with minor roles in the
drug supply chain are most
likely to be prosecuted. So
Representative Reeb and
Representatives An Chavis, as we
say in health, um, I think
that's where we need to start,
we need to have a law that says,
you know, if you have.
For personal use, that's very
different than kilos, and, and I
can't support this bill because
um what I've been reading is
that frequently the the users
are the ones who are.
Arrested in the hopes that they
will turn on their suppliers and
then go up the chain and
mandatory I mandatory sentences
for those people who are
addicted.
And not traffickers really.
Really doesn't sit well with me,
so I can't support this bill,
but I would love for you, you
have a few more days, um, to
introduce bills that would
actually say, OK, we're after
the folks who are doing the
kilos or the ounces or the
whatever, not the people who are
addicted. And then Madam Chair,
just one more and I would
support that. One more thing,
madam Chair, um, the, uh, let's
see, um, the National Library of
Medicine.
Says
That
Uh
Toxicologists have found it is
impossible to inhale or
transdermally absorb enough
fentanyl to quickly overdose.
So, so I, I would, I would love
to be able to support this bill
if it just um.
Targets with these.
Heavy penalties, folks who are
actually trafficking, not folks
who are who are using or who are
um.
Selling to support their own
habit.
And, and I appreciate that, um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Thompson, um, and, and just to,
I mean in kilos, kilos isn't
really how we should be thinking
about fentanyl pills because a 1
kg is 500,000 pentanol fentanyl
pills, so that's uh that's a lot
of pills, you know, um, and I
know what I think what you're
trying to say, um, and I
understand also what you're
saying about the low level drug
dealers, um.
But part of this also is when
even if you are a low level drug
dealer in your trafficking.
You have to remember that when
you're dealing with something
like fentanyl, it is common
sense that when you're dealing
with a.
Selling drugs that there could
be fentanyl in there, there
could be, you know, fentanyl is
one of those drugs that
everybody knows the wrong person
takes, you know, the, the wrong
amount it it you you could, you
could definitely die from it,
and, and the bill is trying to
get all people who are
trafficking in certain
situations. I do understand what
you're saying, and I will
definitely take your feedback
and um thank you and
and I just said kilos because
that's how how it's talked.
People
say helos you know how many
pills? No, no ounces or whatever
it is, but I'm really concerned
about taking away the judge's
discretion for folks who may be
a, you know, first time sales of
or even giving a pill to a buddy
or whatever, so I, I don't wanna
have cast such a large net that
and, and please let me say that
um I feel for the families. I've
got a nephew who is who is an
addict and we worry about him
all the time, but, but.
I, I don't want him to go to
prison for 18 years because he
shared his stash with someone
else, and one thing I would, um,
say, Madam Chair, and while
these are set sentences, it
doesn't necessarily take away.
Plea bargains, I mean you can
take a, a first degree felony
and make it an attempted and
bring it down to an, you know,
discretionary levels where you
can still do some please on
them, so just wanted to throw
that out there that it's not
hard and fast with prosecutors
can do on these cases. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and representative. So, OK, I'm
just, I'm reading the bill here
and I just want to be clear.
What does it say regarding
Let me, let me get the proper
language. Distributing narcotics
to a minor.
I believe it's somewhere in the
bill, but could you just tell me
what it does pertaining to.
Selling these
Deadly fentanyl pills to minors,
Madam Chair.
Yes, um, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair represent block, we felt
that was a very, um, we actually
are creating a first degree
charge for distributing it to we
were talking fentanyl,
methamphetamine, cocaine,
heroin, opiates to a minor, and
we're seeing that, you know, so
frequently and so many kids are
dying, um, so that is a very
what we feel important part of
this bill to help protect our
kids and our young people, so,
um, yes, that that.
is a very important part of this
bill to us, Madam Chair,
represented black.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representatives, uh, so I guess
my, my question is,
Does it have a specific
threshold when it comes to
to what that is? Or is it just,
you know, here's a pill, let's
sell it to a kid. Is there any
kind of number? because I know
that that's a concern that
people have regarding the
legislation, but I, I guess when
you're talking about
trafficking, I'm guessing in the
word trafficking, I'm sure that
that has some kind of threshold
in law already. So I'd love to
just have you clarify that for
me, Madam Chair. Yes, madam,
representative, so yes, in
regular trafficking, you would
definitely have to have expert
testimony to say that the
amount, I mean, let's just say
it was possession with intent to
distribute.
You definitely would have to
have uh somebody testify that
that is a trafficking amount,
um, and obviously if you're
distributing it, that's
trafficking. We don't have an
amount in here for distribution
to a minor because we feel
anytime you're giving um heroin,
cocaine.
Fentanyl, any of those
substances could be laced with
fentanyl to a minor. That's
where we're seeing the big
problem, kids are dying in in
colleges all over the place and
so that its purposely left out
um because we want to get these
people who are getting to our
kids.
Out of jak. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative and I think that
that's a good thing that we're
addressing here, because
especially when it comes to the
youngsters, we don't want kids
to
Die. I mean, no one wants kids
to die, and I think that's just
something that's super common
sense, and I have no idea how
anyone could.
Possibly oppose that idea in any
way, shape or form, because I
hear the argument, oh well, we
don't want users.
Who, who are just buying buying
one drug to to go to prison. And
I don't think that that.
is included at all. That's not
even thought about, Madam Chair,
at least from what I'm reading
in this bill, which I've read 3
or 4 times already. So, I mean,
I think that that's like a
really, that's like a straw man
argument. I think that that kind
of argument from any individual
who would, who might make it, is
a weak way to say that.
I want
To continue to let this crisis
hurt our kids.
And I don't know who might make
that argument, but if they did,
I would certainly oppose.
Any kind of justification for
Opposing this on that ground.
So,
And I look at the statistics
from the New Mexico Department
of Health.
And I just looked at these this
morning and
65% of overdose deaths in New
Mexico are fentanyl.
That's over half, and according
to the CDC numbers I I saw were
the 8th highest drug death
overdose rate in the nation.
And then according to the, I
think the NIH is
I think it was the library. It
was a referenced earlier in one
of the
Individuals, National Library of
Medicine.
That also says, Madam Chair,
that overdose remains the
leading cause of injury death
among all age groups, that
includes kids and is the leading
cause of death among adults 25
to 44 years old. So when we're
talking about fentanyl in New
Mexico, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Both representatives, I see that
this is not only just
Hitting kids, it's not just
hitting 25 to something. It's
hitting everybody and especially
younger folks who are working
age 25 to 44, that's our
workforce too. And I think
that's something we need to
consider because if people are
peddling these really deadly
drugs to these folks who are
family members, they're, they're
members of the community.
I think we need to have some
kind of deterrent.
Because if, if I was gonna go to
prison for 9 years, if I even
consider doing this, I might
think twice about, maybe, maybe
I shouldn't be pedaling that
fentanyl in the streets.
You know, and I think that
that's something that is totally
a deterrent, because I know that
the cartels, which I've, I've
researched a lot. They use kids
a lot of the time for this.
They use kids to peddle these
drugs into the country, and then
they go to distributors who also
are, are older, they're over 18,
and they use that as well. So, I
mean,
This crisis is not only hitting
our schools, it's hitting our
streets and it's hitting all of
our communities and it's, it's
not just
low income communities. These
are affluent communities where
kids are dying.
Everywhere. So I, I just would
love you to just clarify for me.
That this bill, it's intent and
its purpose and its language,
which I'm reading very clearly
here state, these are for
traffickers.
Folks who have large amounts of
fentanyl. This isn't just one
pill. This isn't 2 pills. This
is a bunch of pills. Like the
other day in Las Cruces, there
was, I think it was a a drink
out of a fountain that was, that
was laced with fentanyl. I mean,
this, it's horrible. It's
terrible, but that's not
trafficking, right? It's still,
it's still a problem. So I want
Folks who have large amounts of
fentanyl. This isn't just one
pill. This isn't 2 pills. This
is a bunch of pills. Like the
other day in Las Cruces, there
was, I think it was a a drink
out of a fountain that was, that
was laced with fentanyl. I mean,
this, it's horrible. It's
terrible, but that's not
trafficking, right? It's still,
it's still a problem. So I wanna
know, how are we addressing
specifically trafficking and
with, with this legislation, are
we going to get to those folks
and not just the everyday user
manager.
Yeah
Chap representative block. We
are targeting traffic
traffickers, um, and in the law
to distribute even one fentanyl
pill is trafficking, I mean,
under the law, um, I think that
um.
No, we wanna, we wanna help the
people who are actually, you
know, having the issues that are
addicted and yes, maybe help,
you know, we, we try to cut
deals to get to the higher
chain, you know, get to the big
destroy on the minor thing and
the reason why we're not.
Specified amounts or anything, I
I'll I'll tell you a story, uh,
briefly, my daughter is at Texas
Tech and um she went to her
dorms. It was her first year of
college and two girls on her
dorm floor were sold a Xanax
pill that was laced with
fentanyl. One of them died. One
of them almost died. The first
two days of school and that's
the type of stuff, I mean, it's
happening to everybody.
You know, affluent people, it's
happening to a poor people who
are whatever race, whatever
gender, everybody, and so I'm,
I'm just, I'm stating that we
were, we're trying to get the
traffickers here and the people
who are giving these substances
to uh all over everybody in our
community and specifically for
the miners, we're trying to get
the people who are just giving a
mine or something like that,
we've got it, we've got to
protect our kids and that scared
my kid to death that, you know.
something like that could
happen, I'm like you can never
buy stuff off the street, you
know, or anything like that, so
we, it, it's a really big
problem.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and I, I
agree with you. And at least in
my communities, we've, we've
seen.
This same problem in our schools
when it comes to just anyone
bringing it to the schools or
even when they they get home.
And a lot of the times, these
look like medication pills,
right?
And I've heard that they've been
mixed up with certain, certain
medications and it's ended up in
death of children. So especially
when it comes to protecting
kids.
I'm, I'm all for protecting
kids. You know, that's pretty
much half the bills I run every
year are to protect kids in our
communities. And I think that
this is something incredibly
important, and I, I think both
of you for taking on this very
large and important paramount
challenge to ensure that our
kids are protected in our
communities, that we're holding
the bad actors accountable to
ensure that
We have safe roads, safe
streets, safe schools, safe
communities, and
I mean, I see this is common
sense, and I certainly hope that
every single person on this
committee sees it the exact same
way and moves that do pass. So
thank you both and I don't know
if you have anything to add,
but.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um.
You know, I don't want to echo
everybody's comments, um, but.
I will say from an ant
perspective and from my nephew's
mother, um.
I see that you even have, you
know, an issue in your own
family, and fentanyl is so
addictive, but I would say that
she would give anything, even
the fact to see her son.
In prison for
9 years versus going to a
cemetery to visit him on his
birthday.
Ha
Facing these charges himself, if
you want to put it in that
perspective. Thank you.
Madam Chairman would do pass.
Thank you. Um, I.
and I'll I'll entertain the
motion, um, so I just wanna say
that um.
My heart goes out to everyone
who has lost.
Um
Loved ones to this tragic, uh.
I mean, it's, it's a, it's a
pandemic, obviously that we're
having with with um.
With fentanyl and it's um,
really.
Uh, scary and um.
And so I, I'm very, very, uh,
like I said, my heart goes out
to everybody who is struggling
with that.
Um
I also want to say that, um.
Increasing prison sentences
isn't something that is going to
solve this issue or it's going
to bring back.
People that we have lost to this
and.
Um
I, I understand representative
that you're you're, you're
trying to figure out a solution
to this issue, um, you know, I
grew up in the Southeast. I, I
know.
Firsthand from just my family
who's still there and we see it
in Las Cruces, where the chief
is from.
Um, this is an incredible issue
that we're all facing, um, but
historically we have seen what
the war on crime has done to our
to our country, it has
devastated communities, um,
particularly communities who
have been, um, deeply impacted,
uh, marginalized communities who
have been deeply impacted and so
I cannot support this
legislation because of that, um,
I do feel that um we should hold
traffickers accountable, um, but
we shouldn't be.
punishing people when they're
struggling in cycles of
addiction and poverty.
And um, and so that's the path
that I choose to go to and and
and so I'm, I'm happy to figure
out um ways to strengthen.
Especially when it comes to our
budget, figuring out how do we
put more funding into those
programs.
Um, but for me, incarceration is
not, in my opinion, the the way
to go and so, um, uh, the motion
to table is supersedes the
motion for a due pass and so um
I'll entertain that with the
roll representative block.
No table
tablesentative Ramiro, I'd like
to explain my vote.
Representative Thompson, yes,
and I'd like to explain my vote,
Madam Vice Chair, yes to table.
On a vote of 3 to 2.
Um, house Bill 107 has been
tabled.
Um, and we have Representative
Romero and Thompson to explain
their votes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Representative for
bringing it forward. This is an
absolute scourge on all of our
communities and has been in my
community for decades.
Um, the opioid epidemic, um,
And now in the form of fentanyl,
um, in the exacerbated form that
it is is is is horrifying and
for all of the families that are
representing folks here. I'm
with you because I too have lost
um.
Many close friends and family
too.
This epidemic.
So I, I empathize fully with
that and I um.
Certainly want to be able to um
figure this out systemically and
as we've looked at the various
options and um
Opportunities. This is a really,
really tough bill.
Um, and the, you know, the far
sweeping effects of, of
criminalizing and and
incarcerating folks that may be
in a struggle, I think, as we're
trying to figure out the right
pathways for folks to get.
To a place of um recovery, if
possible, and certainly support,
you know, we want to do that and
I think the accountability is so
hard to wrestle with, um, on the
intent.
With, with many of these
substances that we are trying to
target, and it could get from
fentanyl to something worse, and
we knew that with
methamphetamines, and we keep
trying to target the drug and
then it changes to something
worse. Um, and I think it's, you
know, and then we're just
chasing after it every single
year.
Um, so as we look at the
systemic sort of opportunities
to do that as we've continued to
build our behavioral health
systems and look at how it is
that we can treat this as a both
a public health crisis and
certainly um a crime uh problem
with where it's coming from and
so many of us are, are trying to
figure that out coming through
our borders, coming through, um.
You know, the different
mechanisms that that we know
we're trying to, to really
target. So I appreciate the
opportunity to
to look at this and certainly um
empathize with all of those that
have been suffering with this
and that we're, we're trying to
figure it out and unfortunately,
I don't think that gets us there
today, but always looking
forward that forward to that
opportunity. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Thompson, thank
you, Madam Chair, and I will
echo everything that
Representative Romero said, um,
and Representative Chavez.
It, it broke my heart when you
said she would rather have him
in jail than dead. There ought
to be something in between.
There ought to be treatment.
There ought to be a way for that
not to, I mean, those are both
horrible choices, and I don't
want that for folks who get
addicted. I was a little
disturbed when there was talk
about, you know, um.
communities in poverty versus
affluent. We care about
everybody. It doesn't matter who
they are or where they come
from, um, and, and, but as I
said before, if we can look and
get past a threshold bill.
This would be, this would be
something I could support, but I
just can't support it when you
know we know the folks who who
do the
Os or, you know, the big
amounts, they have great
lawyers, they have great ways to
escape things and so it always
turns out that it's the the
people on the far end of the
distribution list that pay the
price, so, so I, I would suggest
that you consider that and you
know, this year, next year,
whatever, but that would make it
much more palatable, I think to
a lot of people, but definitely
to me.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives.
Thank you.
We're, we're gonna move on to
House Bill 132, repeal of
deposit of will.
Representative Reed
It's rib day today.
Has the chair approved the
handout?
all the
Representative whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
want to, uh, first, um,
introduce my um my work let me
just introduce the bill first
and get to it. It's the smallest
pill you probably seen in a
while, um, HB 132, it's
basically repealing an act that
deals with wills, um, sitting
next to me is the CEO from the
2nd, um, judicial district
courts, Katrina Watson and
she'll be able to explain to you
more the issues that we're
having, um.
With the storage of the wills
and um, so I will defer to her,
uh, Madam Chair.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of this committee,
um thank you for um allowing me
to appear today. I hope this is
a slightly slight.
less heavy lift than some of the
other things on your agenda this
morning, um, I will talk about
this is really important to um
courts across this I'm sorry,
can you state your name again?
Sure, it's Katina Watson. I am
the CEO, um, for the 2nd
judicial district court, um, in
that capacity also serve as the
clerk of court.
Um
This is a really important issue
for courts across the state, uh,
there was a, a bill that was
passed, I wanna say.
Probably in the early to mid 70s
that we um um that requires the
clerk's offices to receive
wills, um, and maintain them as
we're really a repository where
we're.
Just a storage locker whom we
maintain these for safe keeping,
um, clerk's offices are official
record keepers for court cases,
um, this statute, um, has, um.
Um, has had the effect of um uh
requiring us to be a storage
facility for safekeeping of
wills, um, in the second I have
probably somewhere in the
neighborhood of about 10,000
wills going back to the mid 70s
that people have deposited, um.
Uh
It's, it's, it's
problematic for a number of
reasons. There's no geographical
restrictions or limitations on
who can deposit a will, um.
In Bernalillo County, you do not
have to be a resident of
Bernalillo County and Donana
County, you do not have to be a
resident of Donanana County, um,
it just goes across the same for
the state.
We, they don't have to be
resident of the state, they
don't even have to be a US
citizen. We don't track that
they people can just come in and
deposit a will, um, anywhere in
a district court um across the
state, um, it, it's, it's a
statute that's almost impossible
for our clerk's office to comply
with, um.
I can give you an example. I'm
required to um under the statute
I'm required to notify um the
testator or the district court
when I received notice of
somebody's death, um, we don't
have any way of differentiating
um.
Uh, Wills that have like the
same name, for example, in the
in the in Albuquerque I have.
Of 4 separate wills with the
same name of Paul Chavez, I have
7 separate.
Separate wills with the same
name of Richard Chavez, I have
no way of distinguishing that
Richard Travis from the next
Richard Chavez or any Richard
Travis.
That's on deposit in any other
uh district court in the state,
um, so it's impossible for us to
really comply with um this
particular statute I can tell
you, um, at least 16 states do
not have such laws as this and
in recent years an additional 7
have moved to repeal or sunset
these laws, including Kansas,
Kentucky, Maine, New Hampshire,
Rhode Island, Texas, and Utah,
um, we formed a work, a work
group at the direction.
of the Supreme Court and the New
Mexico Judicial Council that
included uh district court
judges, CEOs, and probate judges
and um we studied this and the
consensus was um.
We made recommendations to
pursue a repeal of this statute
similar to other states, um, and
with that I'm.
Stand for questions.
You caught me in the middle of a
bite.
Um, thank you, expert, um, did
you have any other?
Comments, uh, manager to just
say that I had this problem in
my district also, um, the
courts, um, I think all across
the state are having problems
with storage and things of that
nature and so um I would just
add that comment, stand for
questions.
Thank you.
And thank you for your extended
comments so that I could finish
chewing. Um.
And just for full transparency,
we are, we no longer have
quorum.
But we'll continue that to go on
to public comment.
Um, so if you can raise your
hand if you are in support of
this legislation, any
opposition?
Is there anyone online who is in
support.
Is there anyone online who is in
opposition?
We have, um, one person, Robert
Holberg, can you go ahead?
Yeah, thanks, uh, Robert Holbert
here. The only thing that um
it's just uh
Would make the suggestion that
perhaps we look at a
centralized, uh, digitized
database that uh runs through
the state bar and is able to
connect to legal aid so that
folks, uh,
Without the current maybe
underutilized
Uh, offering from the courts
still have an affordable um
solution that keeps Will safe
and uh in these uh modern ways
of storing information and uh
make sure family members know
what's going on and, and uh
hopefully use uh a system like
other states are to lessen.
Some of the issues that can come
up when someone passes.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, uh, that's all
for public comment. Um, we'll go
to questions, uh, Representative
Thompson. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm in favor of this
bill, but I just wonder what
happens with all you've got now.
Of Me chair representative
Thompson, thank you, um, there
would.
There's a proposed rule that
would go to the Supreme Court
where they would um um define
the requirements for continued
retention and eventual
disposition, um, the current
draft.
Um, you know, would provide that
we continue to maintain these
for at least 100 years, enabling
somebody to come in and retrieve
it, um, and then courts would uh
do uh some form of pub
publication, uh, notifying the
public, um, once that 100 year
mark is um has come up that, you
know, here's a list of, you
know, wills that will be
disposed of unless somebody
comes and retrieves them. Thank
you once again, a very
Complicated and burdensome.
Process, but I appreciate the
answer, thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Romero.
My apologies, just a quick
comment, um, this is so wonky
and kind of funny, um, that we
do this because after reading
the analysis, it was like we
don't know why we do do it, we
just have been for forever. Um,
so I appreciate I think working
with our clerks, I, I definitely
want to hear from mine about um.
You know what the situation is,
it sounds like there's just like
an archive somewhere, and I
think similar to Reb Thompson's
question is just making sure
that folks who have deposited in
these places just um understand
that.
They, there's another place to
go with this and um.
You know, I, I don't know how
we, um, also offer folks to
store them currently other than
in a safe place, and I think
just being able to educate, um,
as this is repealed, and many of
our bills get that analysis
saying how do we inform the
public, um, of the change, um,
Madam Chair, uh, representative
expert, do you, do we have like
a protocol that we recommend for
folks in store, safe storage for
this.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero, um, no it's my
understanding, um it it's.
It's a best it's not a best
practice for um.
These to be stored in a in a way
that um.
Family members don't know,
potentially, um, I know I have
thousands of wills.
Um, like I said, dating back to
the mid 70s that people probably
family members have no idea
that.
deposited, um, and I think
that's why it's not a best
practice, um.
Um
You know, perhaps the lawyers
that have prepared the wills
are, are they appropriate
perhaps you know, a personal
safety deposit box or somewhere
safe in a house where the family
members um would know to look.
That's fair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think just any sort of
guidance we can provide in lieu
of having the safe storage, did
not know this existed, so, um.
Yeah, with that, Madam Chair, no
further questions.
Thank you, Representative, um,
and just we don't have a quorum
right now to act on the bill, so
if you want to hold off and then
we can move on to your next.
That would be great. I think
they're voting somewhere else,
so I think they'll be back. OK.
Thank you.
Um, so for folks listening, we
are now at House Bill 134, we
are not voting on 132 until we
reach quorum, so we'll start
with.
Um
A presentation of House Bill
134, whenever you're ready.
OK.
Um, OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
um, this is a house bill 134,
which is, is relating to many
changes in the delinquency code,
um, I'm also here with my
co-sponsor Representative
Chavez, and two experts of Troy
Gray and Jason Greenly, and I'll
let them introduce themselves
and in their background, and if
that's OK, madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jason
Greenly. I currently am a chief
deputy district attorney at the
Berlio County.
District attorney's office, I've
worked as a.
since around 2 graduation law
school in 2005. I took a
3-year period where I
represented where I worked as a.
And now I'm currently back at
the DA's office.
Madame Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Troy Gray.
I have been in the state system
as a prosecutor since the year
202,020, 2000, this is gonna be
my 25th year as a prosecutor.
During that time, I did.
Um
Prosecute juvenile offenses.
In the years 2003 to about 2006,
and I'm currently the deputy in
charge of the juvenile division
for the 2nd judicial District
Court.
Great, and real quickly, cuz I
didn't catch both of your names
again, could you share again,
please. Um.
Yes, um
Vice chair Rubio, my name is
Jason Greenly.
And my name is Troy Gray.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, as
many of you know, this is the
juvenile stuff that we talked
about, um, if, if you attended
any CCJ
committee meetings, um, this
summer, um, this is uh what we,
we have a work in progress here.
We've been really meeting um we
haven't been able to get you a
lot of amendments but with a lot
of stakeholders over the last
couple days trying to um take
things out, put things in, uh,
that, that people have issues
with and so we're really
looking.
to get feedback from this
committee and hopefully get get
a bill that um all the players,
um, are happy with because I I I
believe one thing I, I
personally believe is the most
important criminal legislation
that we can pass, uh, this
session is dealing with our
violent juvenile offenders,
which is a problem all over the
state, uh, even in my my
hometown, we have 150% increase
in juvenile homicides, um, I'm
not sure.
if you want us to go through
everything this bill changes,
um, and I can have them do that
or if you want us to go to
questions, Madam Char there's a
lot of different changes or ask
a question, um, thank you, Madam
Chair. um, thank you,
representatives, um, I, I've
also heard of many serious
concerns about the bill, um, and
so I, I with the substantive
changes that we hope are coming.
Um, I would have, because it's
already a 52 page bill as well,
Madam Chair, I don't wanna
confuse our efforts in trying to
perhaps tackle some of the
questions, um, and I'm just, I'm
curious if we wanna wait until
the substantive changes come to
the committee before having
asking those questions so as to
not waste the public's time and
our time in the.
sort of Q&A of what we would
assume changes what stays and
then really evaluate the bill,
um, since there are gonna be
quite a few, as I understand,
substantive changes moving
forward, Ma'am. Madam Chair and
a representative, I'm, I'm
somewhat fine with that, but I
would love to get some feedback
from the committee and the
audience, um, also because we
have some key players here that
um have issues with certain
parts of the bill and like
certain parts, so maybe if we
could go through that, well, all
these people have come that
would.
Would that work, Madam Chair,
and representative, and let me
also defer to uh my co-sponsor
to see if she has anything to
add at this point, the way you
said it perfectly, I think.
Representative, right now we
just want to make sure we're
getting everybody's.
Make this bill what.
So,
OK, um, we're gonna open it up
then to public comment, um, for
folks who are in um support of
the legislation if you could
please raise your hand.
Um, and then, um, if you could
keep your hand raised, if you
plan to speak, um, folks, if you
can keep it to um 2 minutes
each, um, and please try not to
repeat what somebody else has
already said, if you could just
keep your comments, um, as
concise as possible. Thank you.
Good Morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, JD
Bullington, uh, speaking on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
This bill simply seeks to ensure
that the serious juvenile
offenders face the appropriate
consequences while closing some
legal loopholes and equipping
law enforcement with better
tools for handling these repeat
offenders, homicide ranks as the
2nd leading cause of death among
youth aged 15 to 24 in New
Mexico and firearms are involved
in 79% of those cases as
district Attorney Sam Bregman.
has said in media interviews,
juvenile criminal justice system
in New Mexico is broken.
He's pointed out that currently
we have 61 juveniles who are
detained despite there being 319
cases involving youth and
handguns and 2 murder
indictments over the last 18
months.
District Attorney Bregman
highlighted an example where a
15 year old could be driving
around with his friends in a
stolen car with 10 fentanyl
pulse pills, and AR-15 and
likely wouldn't spend a single
night in detention. The greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
strongly supports this bill.
Thank you. Next, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Tyler,
chief New Mexico State Police,
uh, we stand in strong support
of this bill. We appreciate the
sponsors bringing it forward,
um, for all the reasons already,
uh, listed, um, but in addition
to the obvious uh public safety
issues that we think need to be
fixed and that this bill helps
address, um, I think it has
become quite clear in my
experience of what that we are
seeing around the state is that
the current juvenile code is
failing the juveniles.
Uh, of the states. We are not
intervening or correcting
behavior until it is to an
extreme level to where those
individuals are kind of past the
point of no return to the point
that it's a first-degree murder
and now, you know,
Now, their lives are irrevocably
uh shattered. And so we believe
that this bill, uh, and the
changes that we will discuss
today and that will be hopefully
in the final version of this uh
bill will help address that so
that we can have some earlier
intervention, uh, with some of
these youths and get them
steered onto the right path
before it's too late.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Christopher Williams,
chief of Police Bertalis and
vice president New Mexico Chiefs
Association, uh.
We'd like to thank the sponsors
for all their hard work, and
they put into all this along
with all of the.
Contributions they've received
from the DA's and everybody else
around the state.
Uh
I can only echo what everybody
else has said, but like in
Portalis where a community of
around 15,000 people we've had a
juvenile beat a man to death
behind an allsps and shortly
thereafter he's out and provides
the handgun that another
juvenile kills someone with.
It's the violent crime of
juveniles is.
Out of control and there has to
be something done to fix it.
Otherwise, all we are is
Just helping people meet new
attorneys.
We would urge that you support
this. Thank you.
Hello
I'm Nancy Acres, uh, hello for
everybody there, the committing
and everything, um, an incident
on June.
0
2024.
Had me relocate to Edgewood now
due to a juvenile of a hit and
run on my partner.
Um, the juveniles do need to
learn.
A stiffer punishment.
Could be a gun, whatever, but a
vehicle is still just the same
as
A homicide, which was the only,
did not get it for homicide 2
years' probation.
But what is probation when you
could leave the the state and
the and the country.
But uh we do need a stiffer time
for punishment that they need to
learn what they are doing at an
early age, parents, everybody
needs to get these kids to go do
what they needs to be done, and
I really appreciate this bill
passed because it might not
help.
My partner of 17 years that had
me leave my life.
In Albuquerque, just to be
better in health and everything.
So thank you very much for
listening.
Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else on that side in
support of the legislation.
Over here.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Ben Valdez, Deputy
Chief of Police for Sany Police.
We also stand in support of this
bill moving forward. Um,
everyone is well known that a
lot of the large cities such as
ours have been affected by this,
but, um, Chief Blooms also
mentioned even smaller
communities as well. Um, our
concern is the violence that
these offenders are committing,
and we're hoping that the
legislation that the sponsors
brought forward will help with
that. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the community.
Um, I would like to support this
bill because oh,
my name is Lily Cochrane, and I
go, and I'm a student at
Albuquerque High School. And I
support this bill because we
don't feel safe. We are students
and we go around our lives and
Go to school in fear of what
could happen and what someone
could do to us, because people
aren't being held accountable.
There is no repercussions
because
And kind of our, like, school,
there's just a feeling that, oh,
we're under 18, we can just get
away with it after we turn 18.
There's no real repercussions
and we need to feel safe.
Students need to feel safe. And
I think this is a very important
bill that should be passed for
those reasons.
Thank you.
Next
Um, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Isabel Carlisle and I'm
a senior at Albuquerque High
School, and
Excuse me, sorry. Um, and just
like touching on that, we don't
feel safe. I feel like I
constantly have to look over my
shoulder that, oh my that kid
might have a gun at my school,
on my school campus. I might be
involved in a school shooting. I
can't go to the mall because
there's this idea that someone
can't have a gun and I might die
or my friends might be seriously
injured within that. And then
I'm probably what would you
would call probably a model
student. I get straight A's, I'm
very involved in my community. I
go to basketball games and I go
to all of this, but I
feel like I have to constantly
look over my shoulder because I
know that those individuals are
never going to have those
repercussions, and they also
know that they're never gonna
have those repercussions. So
they can
commit these crimes, they can
have a gun on them, they can
kill others, and they still know
that they can get away with it
and that they're not gonna be um
Like they're not gonna have any
repercussions for those crimes.
And also I just want to speak on
the part that like, if 18 dies
to gun violence, that's a 1415,
16 year old, 17-year-old going
the ground 6 ft under while the
person that committed that crime
is just going possibly and
minorly get a slap on the wrist
and it's not fair to the
families that have suffered that
loss, and it's definitely not
fair to that individual who lost
their life.
Thank you.
We might be good afternoon now,
madam. No, not quite. Good
morning.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jeremy story, police
chief for Las Cruces.
About 10 years ago, I was a
sergeant for our gang unit. And
one of the things we dealt with
back then was juvenile crime,
especially related to gangs. And
we saw some very troubling
things back then.
Fast forward now, and it is far,
far worse than what I dealt with
when I was in the gang unit. My
street crimes unit now, which is
what our gang unit became.
He's dealing with this probably
about 80% of their time.
They are seeing a level of
violence that I never saw.
Now, part of the problem is,
there is no accountability.
After we charge somebody with a
serious crime like a drive-by,
attempted murder, aggravated
assault. We monitor their jail
calls.
They should know that because
they're recorded. I can't tell
you how many times I've heard
these 1415, 16 year old kids
talk about how the system is a
joke. The case will either be
dismissed or there'll be no
consequences, or they'll be
found incompetent because they
know how to play the system. And
the sad thing is they've been
right every single time.
Those cases have been dismissed,
or there have been no
consequences. The way we've been
having to deal with stuff is
eventually when there's enough
violence in history, we get them
charged federally as juveniles.
And then there are consequences,
and I think you stand up here
for, for an hour, probably give
you examples from the past year
in Las Cruces, which I can't do,
man, I'm sure, and I won't do,
but
Having to rely on the federal
system to deal with this crisis
is not the way it should be. We
have to have accountability on
the state side, especially we're
talking about very serious
violent crime.
Not a kid who makes a mistake. I
believe in diversion, I believe
that a kid, uh, that's an
opportunity when they commit a
small mistake, that's an
opportunity to get them off that
path, but that's not what we're
talking about here. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you. Next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me. We represent people who
work in CYFD facilities and
Department of Corrections
facilities, um.
Our members strongly believe in
rehabilitation.
In getting people on the right
path.
And not being vindictive.
Having said that,
It is virtually impossible for
our CYFD officers.
To help the kids, the younger
teens, when their larger grown
adult men in these facilities
who are 2021 years old, who have
a history of violence and
inflict violence on those
younger kids. So I know you have
a tough balancing act in front
of you, because we want to
rehabilitate everyone.
But I think the balance of the
good here weighs in favor of
moving the largest.
All this most violent offenders
out of CYFD facilities so that
we can really work with the
younger kids in those
facilities, and I would also add
that I think it's a
significantly more dangerous
situation for CYFD officers than
it is for our Department of
Corrections officers because the
corrections officers in the
adult facilities are really used
to some of the most violent,
awful offenders and CYFD
officers really have a much
broader scope of social work
that they're really doing in
the.
facilities. So I think uh for
the most violent, largest,
oldest offenders, um, it would
be more appropriate to have them
in the adult facilities. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO once again
representing all tens of
thousands of our members, we
stand in solidarity with our uh
CYFD officers or corrections
officers who are in support of
this. Uh, also, our members are
parents, uh, and, uh, certainly
when we hear from some of our
students who are concerned about
this and are pushing for such an
effort. We
with them as well. Uh, so for
those reasons and others stated,
we stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in opposition?
Um, we'll move then to the zoom,
um, we have two people with
their hands raised, Larry
Sontag.
We're still in support. We
haven't moved on to.
The opposition.
Sorry if I misspoke, we're still
in opposition online, Larry,
please go ahead.
Hi, my name is Heidi Adams, and
on behalf of the 10 judicial
District attorney's office. I
stand in strong support of
This, um, in the past 10 years
I've been the primary prosecutor
of juvenile offenses in small
rural communities we're seeing
an uptick in the use of firearms
and other deadly weapons out of
the last 10 referrals or so from
the juvenile probation office.
We've seen 5 dealing with guns
and knives. Something has to
change. Many of our juvenile
offenders go on to be adult
offenders and something else has
to intervene or there's gonna be
more deadly.
consequences, I'm afraid. Please
consider passing this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. And just as a
reminder, we're on House Bill
134 in support, um, so if you
could please raise your hand.
Um, Larry, go ahead.
Larry Sontag, please go ahead.
OK, we'll move on. Um, we're
gonna go ahead and go to
opposition of the bill. Um, if
you could please raise your
hand.
Um, and if you can leave it up
if you plan to speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Andrew
Vallejos representing the New
Mexico Criminal Defense Lawyers
Association. We stand opposed to
this bill. This bill, I'm not
gonna go into the minute detail,
the analysis that you got from
all the state agency, the FIR
highlight the many problems with
this bill. What I'd just like to
say is philosophically, the
juvenile system has always been
based on rehabilitation and, and
having
Incarceration be the last
option, you know, uh, and
treatment and care, and it's a
heavy job and no one's here
saying that we don't have a
problem with uh violent youth
crime at all. But what we're
saying is, this is a radical
departure from the norms of uh
just criminal justice for, for
juveniles. And it might not even
pass constitutionality because
courts have made different
different differentiations, I
can't say that word right now.
um between the adult system.
And the juvenile system. And
this is a highly nuanced
approach. It can't just be done
by the hammer. It has to be done
in conjunction with a lot of
different agencies and with
that, I
I would urge your opposition to
this bill at this time. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, and sponsors.
I, I want to acknowledge that
there is a very real issue with
juveniles and guns and some of
the things that are happening in
society. They're, there are
trends that are changing things
and we need to be able to react.
And I want to recognize and
honor the issues that the
students here brought up and
that the unions brought up, this
affects uh people that work in
the system and it affects uh
young people as well, uh, our
problem in
There are a lot of aspects of
this bill, but I, I believe that
we can address this problem
successfully by looking at
things that may need to be
changed in the juvenile system
and addressing those rather than
taking young people, even those
who are accused of serious acts
and taking them from the
juvenile system and just
basically dumping them in the
adult system, uh, which is not
equipped to deal with a really
unique issues that they have.
For those reasons, we oppose
this bill.
Thank you next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Laura and
Violanta, and I'm the
co-executive director of New
Mexico Can. I stand in
opposition of HB 134.
According to the LFC policy
spotlight update on crime in New
Mexico and Bernalillo County.
Research shows the certainty and
swiftness of being caught for
criminal activities is more
powerful deterrent to crime than
severe punishment.
We believe in accountability,
but innovative systems for
children that provide
counseling, training, and
rehabilitation services, yield
positive results for public
safety and fiscal policy.
New Mexico must continue to
invest in children and families
to address poverty?
Increase healthcare access,
meaningfully implement diversion
programs, curb gun violence and
offer pathways to education and
employment. Please vote no on H.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
fellow representatives. My name
is Ivan Sharp, and I'm a youth
leader with EM Can, and I stand
in opposition of this bill
because I believe it is
important to support our youth
rather than further. Uh, good
afternoon. I'm Diane McCash. Um,
my master's degree is in special
education. I worked for APS.
From 1996 through 2014 with kids
from K through 9th grade. I'm
also a mother, including a son
who suffered since his teens
with substance use disorder and
is attendant intersection with
the criminal legal system. We
now sometimes have 3
grandchildren in the house, ages
4, 11, and 22, and what I've
learned from all my
relationships with kids over the
years is that kids need
intervention and care, not
criminalization. Despite all the
individual incidences, and they
are tragic, I know, of kids who
have made grave wrong.
turns in their lives and cause
great harm. At the end of the
day, our response should be
based, shouldn't be based on
anecdotal stories of harm that
drive our policymaking. It
should be about the data and the
evidence about her humanity and
our vision for a better future.
I should remember that our kids
are not young grown-ups. Don't
let us go down a road to what
research overwhelmingly
indicates is an ineffective and
counterproductive response to
youth crime. Please, I urge you
to vote no on HB 34.
134 and stop this, please. Thank
you.
Hi, good afternoon, good
morning, chair members of the
committee. My name is
Mikeabuzzini, policy manager
with Bold Futures. I want to
express my strong opposition to
HB 134, which expands youth
incarceration rather than
investing in proven
rehabilitation strategies,
research consistently shows that
incarcerating young people
increased recidivism, disrupts
education, expose you to trauma
and violence, particularly when
they are transferred to adult
facilities by eliminating
detention risk assessments
broadening the definitions of
serious youthful offender and
removing.
safeguards like amenability
hearings. This bill undermines
youth rehabilitation and
disproportionately harms
marginalized communities instead
of addressing the root causes of
delinquency, HB 134 prioritizes
punishment over evidence-based
alternatives that are more
effective at reducing crime and
supporting long-term success for
young people, rather than
expanding incarceration in
Mexico should invest in
restorative justice diversion
programs, community-based
rehabilitation, which have been
proven to lower recidivism while
keeping youth accountable in a
productive way.
And please oppose HB 134.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Nick Costales. I've
worked in the juvenile justice
system for over 2 decades.
Um, I just want to share a
little bit of concerns about
this bill. I agree that there's
an epidemic going on with
juveniles and guns and some of
the crime. But this bill isn't
tough on crime, it's tough on
kids, and I don't think we
should ever confuse punishment
with prevention. And I do want
to acknowledge also that I've
had some significant
conversations with the sponsor
of this bill and, and their
attorney as well as the district
attorney's office and I, I think
we're trying to work through
some of the current concerns
that I've shared with them at
the, in my opinion, the
devastating impacts that it does
have on kids, but there's some
things in this.
Bill, I think that some people
aren't aware of this bill isn't
addressing the small group of
people I think that we're all
concerned about, the ones that
they're the repeat offenders
that are causing some
significant harm to the
communities. This bill widens
the net for those that maybe
just need supports and services
in the community to make a
difference in their life. I
think most legislators this week
received some data on their
desk, uh, probably in the
chamber. They talked about some
of the actual facts um with
juvenile justice in the state of
New Mexico. It's great to hear
sound bites and anecdotal
stories.
If you look at the data, um, of,
of how the system works in New
Mexico. It might tell you a
story that maybe you're not
aware of. So for the youth that
do get an opportunity to be
placed on probation, 86% of
those kids complete probation
successfully and out of that
group, 90% of them don't commit
another crime within the next 2
years. So, the system can work
for those that are willing to
give it a chance and give it an
opportunity. Some of the other
things contained in this bill is
to do away with the risk
assessment instrument and you
heard somebody mention
a little bit about that. The
risk assessment instrument was a
a tool that this legislature put
in place in 2003 and is designed
to do two things, measure the
risk for reoffending and for a
child showing up to their next
court hearing. This tool was
recently revalidated and in the
two-year period of data that
they looked at of over 4000
screenings, 92% of the kids that
were released based on the
scoring of this tool, showed up,
I did not reoffend within the
revalidation period and 90.
7% of those kids showed up to
the next court hearing your,
your, your thought.
Sure, absolutely, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, one
of the biggest concerns that I
have with this bill, as I said,
it widens the net and one of the
things I want to draw attention
to is right now we have a
sentencing structure in New
Mexico
Finish your thought, OK, so
we support and your time is up.
Oh, OK. Thank you so much for
your time.
Hello, Madam Chair and members.
Uh my name is Steven Taylor and
I serve as the executive
director of Deserving Life. I've
had 17 years of experience as a
state and federal public
defender in New Mexico, as
someone who has worked
extensively with justice
involved youth as both a public
defender and through our
juvenile parole reform
implementation. I've witnessed
firsthand how children who
commit serious harm are often
carrying deep wounds of their
own. Through our work, uh,
implementing.
SB 64 juvenile pro reform, we've
seen transformation in people
who were once deemed
irredeemable as children.
Here formative experiences have
shown us that condemning
children to adult prison and
extreme sentences isn't just
costly ineffective, it's
profoundly damaging to both
public safety and human
potential. The harsh reality is
that most children who engage in
violence have themselves been
victims of serious trauma.
They often act from places of
fear, pain, and survival, not
malice rather than reactionary
policies that expand paths to
adult incarceration, we should
be investing in community-based
trauma-informed interventions
and rehabilitation programs that
address the root causes of youth
violence.
This is why I urge you to
oppose.
HB 134 and instead support
policies that recognize both the
trauma underlying youth
violence, and children's unique
capacity for rehabilitation and
change.
Thank you. Next.
Is there anyone else in support?
Or sorry,
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, thank you. My name is
Jasmine Tying Fong. I am an
attorney on behalf on on behalf
of the ACLU New Mexico. We ask
that you oppose HB 134. I
practiced for a juvenile as a
juvenile public defender for 7
years and proudly represented
hundreds of children who were
ensnared in the carceral system.
I saw children who were able to
get the proper services and
care, uh, to address their needs
flourish, while those, while
others languished in
Their mental health deteriorated
and any mild improvements they
made regressed.
This bill represents a backward
A backward approach to juvenile
violent crime, and it ignores
years of evidence-based research
of what is actually affected,
effective at helping children
and making our communities
safer. This legislation would
fundamentally alter the way our
state approaches children
involved in crime and usher in
another failed era of
over-incarceration of young
people, especially young
children of color. These changes
will have lasting, detrimental
social effects for families and
generations to come. The
delinquency Act
already codified in New Mexican
in New Mexico law, 32822 is
explicit in its purpose, to
protect the public interest, to
remove children committing
delinquent acts from the adult
consequences of criminal
behavior, while still holding
them accountable to provide
these children with supervision,
care, and rehabilitation, not
punishment.
The world is harder than ever to
navigate as a child. It's more
difficult than it was for you or
I.
And it is important that we
commit to providing children in
the carceral system support and
services that they need to
thrive in our communities, not
simply make it easier to
incarcerate them longer. We all
want what is best for children
and our communities. And this
bill does not do that for New
Mexico. Please vote no on HB
134.
Thank you. Is anyone else in the
audience in opposition?
We'll move on to Zoom, um, first
Loretta Trujillo.
Good afternoon, sir.
And members of the committee, my
name is Loretta Tregil, and I'm
the executive director of
Transform Education in Mexico, a
statewide coalition that
advocates on behalf of the
students named in the landmark
Yay Martinez versus State of New
Mexico court ruling. And I'd
like to take an opportunity to
uh build on some of the
important points made so far
about why this bill does not
serve students, but particularly
I want to highlight that as a 20
year career educator.
Working, um, with the, the same
young people that often have
found themselves mired in the
criminal justice system. I can
personally attest to the reality
that if we interviewed any of
the young people that are
currently sitting in detention
centers or in, in incarcerated
at all, we could also trace
their educational histories to a
a series of, of missed
opportunities to serve their
needs both as students with
disabilities, English language
learners.
And generally at-risk students,
all of which make them part of
the student groups named in our
lawsuit. And so I just offer
this, uh, I guess closing point,
if we are going to take action
to care for our kids, as many of
us, um, I want to do. We have to
take into consideration the
impact of a broken education
system. And so I ask you to
consider that point and our
coalition stands in opposition
to HB 134. Thank you.
Thank you, next, um, Michaela
Trujillo Baxter.
Hi, thank you, Chairwoman. Um,
as a person with lived
experience and uh experience in
the juvenile justice system, um,
we would just like to advocate
for rehabilitation at the root
cause within the home within the
family, um, most of these
children are suffering from a
lack of social determinants of
health, including income, food
stability, um, and those strains
weigh down on each family member
down to the child. They show
themselves in evidence in
school, um, and that started
To show in behavior and
attitude, um, and if there were
more people like peer support
workers and community health
workers and community support
workers there to aid within the
school system, we could prevent
and intervene in 90% that's my
own status um.
A potential crimes to be
committed because you're taking
the weight off of um other
social determinants of health
that are actually impacting
children's minds and behaviors
within the home um life.
Um, and present to school
pipeline. Um, we ask you to
strongly oppose House Bill 134.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Cueva
Hubbard.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Cleva Hubbard. I am from
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and I
am a certified peer support
worker. I am opposing how fill
134 for the reason of I'm a
person with um with past
incarceration. And so I do
understand the value of mental
health while you are dealing
with those situations with the
juveniles committing crimes. Um,
I also um opposing the lack the
removal.
the risk assessment tool. I do
think that mental health is a
top priority that needs to be
addressed with the juveniles.
Harsher punishments will not
help rehabilitation,
accountability is needed, but to
remove anything that is
preventative for our juveniles
is only putting them in a
position to learn new bad
behaviors and bad skills from
other adults. We have a lack of
mental health and preventative
services in the state of New
Mexico for our juveniles. I say
we and I say our because we as a
We lead by example. Why would we
only support a child who seems
to be deemed as perfect but not
a child that is, that has
behavioral issues. This is why I
urge you to vote no against
House Bill 134.
Thank you. Next we have Rodrigo
Rodriguez.
Good morning or good one minute
after afternoon.
Uh, my name is Rodrigo
Rodriguez. I'm a
Community organizer with Lalacia
Institute. I'm also the director
of the Albuquerque Justice for
Youth Community collaborative.
Uh, collaborative of 28
organizations working in and
around the juvenile justice
system in Albuquerque, um,
including inside the Bhall.
The YSC here.
You know, we work with these
young people every day,
connecting them to
opportunities, connecting them
to their cultures.
Uh, working
It's transformative justice and
restorative justice programming,
uh, we stand in strong
opposition as a collaborative
and as an organization to this
bill. Um, and we really seek and
ask our legislators, uh, to
invest in our young people. I,
I'm a young person. I was a
young person who went through
the system. I spent most of my
teenage.
The center there.
Uh, and I, I'm a testament to
what is possible when our
community invest in young people
when we wrap our arms around
these other people who like many
people have said, are hurting.
You know, a lot of our young
folks are going through a lot.
Uh, we live in a state that's
50th in education.
And something like 3 out of 4 of
our 4th graders can't read.
At the proper level, um, so
putting, putting the onus on
young people, particularly on
teenagers, um, blaming them for
things like the gun crisis and
the fentanyl crisis, um, is
unconscionable as far as we're
concerned as a community, and
we're really strongly urge the
committee to table this bill
today and vote in opposition.
Thank you. Next we have
Shili.
Soto
Go ahead.
Uh, my name is uh Chuy Soto. I'm
the program coordinator for
Albuquer Justice for Youth
Collaborative.
I'm setting in opposite
opposition of this bill along
with my community because uh we
believe that funding for jails
instead of education just lowers
the general health of young
people, um, like it was stated
in Mexico ranked last in child
welfare and education, and
that's not the fault of a
teenager, but the fault of our
decision makers and pushing
forward the wrong policies and
legislations always do more harm
than help. The incarceration has
an um incarceration has never
solved the problem in this
country when it comes to
The issues that we deal with
every day, um, and it won't
start now prioritizing the youth
would be investing in their
education and not the 70+
million dollars that goes into
juvenile justice, that CYD uh
receives annually, and just to
speak on the uh r rhetoric that
the youth face in the media
constantly, um.
Just to say, the youth on the
2nd Street home in Albuquerque,
the RPA adjudicated, which means
they have not been um charged
with any crime, and they are
still innocent until proven
guilty, as is that's the law in
this country. And so for the DA
and syrup outlet to continue to
push these narratives that these
youths are just murderers and
committing these heinous crimes
is false because they have not
been charged with anything, and
I think that uh it's important
for everyone to know the facts
in these cases and not just what
the
With the media one and the
narratives that they want to put
out, so that's all I wanted to
say. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Christopher Anderson.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Christopher Anderson,
and I'm a future leader and I
also have lived experience as a
juvenile being incarcerated with
the adults. I'm stand here today
to oppose um Bill HB 134.
As being incarcerated as a
juvenile with adopted only
affect me physically, but it
affected me mentally, played a
huge part in my mental health
and my emotional well-being and
run upon me anxiety, depression,
and I began to self-medicate um
with drugs. I didn't have a way
out and I began to start to
downward spiral.
And it took the innocence from
me.
The long term effect of this
bill being passed and
reincarcerating juveniles with
adults.
I was my innocence was taken, my
innocence was taken from me
while I was incarcerated with
the adults, not only was my
innocence taken from me. I was
labeled as a felon, which
impacted me entirely, um, from
housing to work, to school. I
couldn't find a job. I couldn't
find a place to live because I
already had a stigma label on
me.
If I feel if we had more support
resources and rehabilitation
that we would make a, I would
have had a different outcome. I
would have made a different
direction without as much trauma
placed into my life. I'm here to
stand right now and say I'm a
CPSW and I'm working as a and
I'm working on my LSAA and I
work closely with um youth
individuals against gun violence
and I teach them conflict
resolution.
I feel this bill is unnecessary
and if we play more juveniles
into rehabilitation instead of
incarceration, we will get a
better outcome. I know me
really, me working closely with
juvenile individuals, um, and
teaching them this
rehabilitation steps that I see
uhly impact on this, so I stand
here today and again, I'm
against.
Um, Bill HB 134. Thank you
we have Robert Holberg.
Uh well, thank you again, um,
committee for hearing my words.
Um, as I said earlier, I'm, uh,
in long-term recovery. Uh, I'm a
recovery coach, also working
towards my LSA and as social
work student working with the
Albuquerque Justice for Youth
Collaborative.
When I go back to my high school
days when my substance abuse was
first starting, I started doing
cocaine at 14. I ended up
getting uh suspended twice
within high school and uh at
that point, though, that was
happening, I was still on track.
I was in this business marketing
organization and you headed to
this national competition and
because of my suspension, I was
forced to disconnect from both
of those activities. And I don't
know if you could get.
That's how I felt about myself,
my place, and my future in the
void of those connections, but
what did I do more of instead,
drinking, drugs, despair, and we
know that 114 year olds and even
up to the mid or and late
twenties with the prefrontal
cortex, expecting someone to
rationally weigh long-term
consequences in a high pressure
moment is scientifically
inaccurate and fundamentally.
You can't, it doesn't really
matter.
What you're going to hang over
someone's head because that's
not what they're thinking of in
the moment. That's not how
someone's brain works at that
point. We know this. Also taking
the risk assessment instrument
away, something that actually
helps determine who is and isn't
a serious youthful offender
doesn't make any sense. And we
know that you prosecuted as
adults are more likely to
reoffend and that youth are the
ones who are inheriting our
culture of instability,
violence, and
we
That we've failed to fix. So
putting that responsibility on
kids is uh not what we want to
do. And uh the future outlook,
AI all this crazy stuff. We
gotta have some compassion. We
got to work with them and change
our own culture if we want them
to inherit something else, um,
strongly posed. Thank you.
Um
Last we have Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the laws of the Public
Defender. I first want the
committee to be aware that the
sentencing commission's
legislative committee made up of
stakeholders who work in these
systems every day, voted
unanimously not to support this
legislation. In the public
comment and support of the bill,
I kept hearing about slaps on
the wrist, cases dismissed, and
the lack of consequences. And I
want to pose a counterpoint
because almost every juvenile
client that I've represented
received an adult sentence as an
accomplice for
acts that were actually
committed by older offenders who
they were spending time with
because they got sucked into
things they didn't know how to
control and didn't know how to
disengage when things got bad.
Our children's code has tools to
punish juveniles as adults when
appropriate. Serious youthful
offenders automatically get an
adult process and an adult
sentence. Moving more charges
into that mandatory adult track
would paint all juveniles with
one brush, removing what we have
now, which is a crucial
individualized assessment.
Applied by judges and juvenile
justice experts to determine
when a particular juvenile is
particularly remorseful or
particularly treatable and can
be given those juvenile
consequences and come out of it
on top.
As the New Mexico Supreme Court
stated in 2010, the right to be
found amenable to juvenile
treatment is a powerful right,
and the court was quote, hard
pressed to conceive of a
decision that cuts closer to the
core of society's interest, than
an election to give up on one of
its children. Well, we're all
concerned with the rise in
juvenile crime. Current law
already treats the most serious
of these cases as adult crimes,
and this bill removes even the
option of treating children as
children. It doesn't give enough
weight to the importance of
rehabilitation.
And the hope of granting
children a better future. We ask
you to please oppose this
legislation.
Thank you.
Representative that we're done
before we had to. Yeah, thank
you, Madam Chair, I appreciate,
um.
Let it just go through those
comments so we can get that
feedback, we again, I know I'm
representative Fri wasn't here,
we are working with stakeholders
of some of these issues, I think
we're already addressing, um,
but what we're really looking
for is also feedback from the
committee so that we can see
what your concerns are and then
I have these great experts here
who can answer, I think, any
questions you have on any
specific part of this, so we
would stand for questions.
Thank you. um, first on the list
is Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you
experts.
So I was given this a lot of
thought.
Uh, based on an article that
came out, New Mexicans help
lawmakers tackle rising youth
crime, and that was December
2024.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around that if not incarcerating
juvenile criminals.
If that's not the answer.
And letting them out is the
answer, then why do we currently
have the highest rate of
juvenile youth crime in the
nation.
It's
Not
Working.
I think what we're here today
and why this bill is being
brought forward is to try to
come up with some ways to
address this juvenile crime
issue because everyone I talked
to and when I was out running
for office, people are sick of
the crime, juveniles and adults,
and they want something done
about it. They want their
neighborhoods and communities to
be safer.
So
That what we have with the soft
on crime currently is, it's not
working.
Now, do I actually believe in
rehabilitation? Absolutely. We
need more rehab, we need more
behavioral health, we need
stronger uh supervision of the
children. We need education, we
need all those things, but also
at the same time, we need to get
the worst of the worst kids off
the street.
So they are not terrorizing
neighborhoods, cause it's
usually the same kids over and
over and over again. They get
out, they do the same thing.
So we have a multitude of
issues.
And I don't think this is
necessarily a black and white
issue because we do have where
we want to make sure that our
children when they're released
by representative, they have all
the opportunities, but at the
same time, there are
consequences for what you do, no
matter what age it is. There's
always when I was looking
through this article, um,
ARQE had reported they had
talked to uh Burnleyo County
District Attorney's office and
to Medina and turn uh district
attorney Sam Bergman told the
legislative legislators courts,
corrections and justice systems.
That
What we're doing is not working
and it's broken.
So I look at somebody who's
seen.
You know, Harry, I live in the
East Mounts, part of my district
is Albuquerque.
And we see those high crime
levels. As a matter of fact,
they're starting to creep creep
into Edgewood now.
So now Edgewood has seen a high
level of crime.
So there has to be a balance in
that.
Madam Chair Representative.
We have all this oil and gas
money, right? We should be using
that for our youth and helping
them and looking at kids and in
a way that if it's simply a drug
addiction, possibly diversions
or rate answer.
But we, we don't want the worst
of the worst. That's what this
whole article is about, that we
don't want them on the streets,
period, end of story.
So Madam Chair, uh,
representative experts with
that, I do have some questions
on the bill itself.
Let me go to
Age 7 on the bill.
Line 18.
So when we're talking about a
serious youthful offender. This
is now being rewritten.
Is not a delinquent child. Can
you explain to me, um, I know it
was in here, the difference
between a serious youthful
offender and a delinquent child.
Madame Chair, Representative.
Lord
Um, that's already been defined
by the legislature, a serious
youthful offender as it
currently exists under New
Mexico law is a child over 15
years of age charged with
first-degree murder.
Um, there is another category
for youthful offenders which are
certain enumerated offenses
where the child can be treated
as a juvenile or as an adult,
and finally juvenile offender
are all other.
Crimes, um, listed under both
the Children's code and the New
Mexico Criminal Code, uh, so for
example, shoplifting is a
juvenile offense. It is not a
youthful offender offense. It is
not a serious youthful offender
offense. I can let you know that
our office doesn't actually see
those offenses because they're
diverted.
Rightfully by the juvenile
probation Office. We don't
technically
Need to see misdemeanors until a
certain amount have been
violated. Um.
And that helps resources for all
parties.
What we're seeing in Albuquerque
and
You can see by the numbers
provided.
The rest of the state of New
Mexico are serious violent
offenses by juveniles that fit
in the category of serious
youthful offense of which
there's 25.
In the youth services center
charged with murderous time.
Right now as we sit here today,
there are 25 young people, young
offenders charged with murder.
Um, there are some 52.
That
That includes some of those
homicide.
Offenders that are charged with
gun offenses.
These are not the people that
are being diverted. These are
the people that we're looking
for additional resources to be
able to manage the harm that's
already taken place.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative expert, and
that's what I was trying to get
at. So we're looking at those
particular people.
We're looking in those people
that are violent offenders.
So when I look here on.
Uh, continuing down.
Uh, line 25, murder in the first
degree.
in the 2nd degree.
And then we have violent
manslaughter.
We have Robbery while armed with
a deadly weapon.
Shooting at a dwelling or
occupied building, so that would
be like drive-bys, etc.
So those are the people that
we're referring to in this bill
because I wanna, what I'm trying
to get at.
It's come in. They get a
deferral based on shoplifting.
It's something minor.
But these people are some of the
worst of the worst. That's why
I'm trying to get at. Is that
correct?
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Lord.
That is correct. We're looking
at serious violent offenses or
things that are likely to lead
to violent offenses such as the
possession of firearms by these
young people.
Um
Much as some of the people in
our position we're speaking
about possession with controlled
substance which is a felony
offense.
is not a youthful offender
offense. It is a juvenile
offense.
They have been diverted in the
past and generally speaking,
they would be placed on a period
of probation.
But there's a distinct
possibility that they may not
even be referred to us, um, or
we refer it back because all
felonies do get referred to the
district attorney's office. We
have seen the history of the
child.
We see the history of the youth.
We recognize it as a substance
abuse issue.
That is not what we're talking
about here.
We're talking about violent.
Firearms generally related
incidents.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and, and the
unfortunate part.
Sometimes it's, it's due to
situational sometimes it's also
when you're dealing with
somebody who's narcissistic
personality disorder, they're
going to continue that or
extreme behavioral issues that
can't necessarily be dealt with.
Um, versus somebody who has
depression. There's a huge
difference. So that I, I have a
degree in psychology also plays
into that, so.
And I represent. So we're
looking at violence and people
that are violent.
Um
Moving on, I had, there was a
question I had, let me move over
to the, the analysis.
Do you have questions about
this?
And it's about how
CFD, sorry.
Find that CYFD comes into play.
Um
So let me stop right here with
the, the risk assessment, um,
Madam Chair, Representative
expert.
So
In 2003, it says the legislature
amended statute to require COFD
to use a risk assessment
assessment instrument to help
make objective decisions about
referrals into juvenile
detention.
And that is still happening. Is
that correct? They're still
doing the.
The assessment
on the juvenile Representative
Florida, yes, the risk
assessment instrument is still
being used. Um, I liken it to
the Arnold Tool which has been
disavowed by the New Mexico
Supreme Court.
Um, that it's utility for
conditions of release may be
appropriate, but not for
detention itself.
Uh, our concern is that
There are young people.
Um
Offenders that have literally
said.
You're not gonna be able to take
me in.
And they've been correct.
Uh, uh, I think that.
Um
The Bergman cited the example of
a young person driving around in
a stolen motor vehicle with
fentanyl pills and an air-style
rifle.
And that been released.
That is not inaccurate.
I know from personal experience
of a young person that took a
firearm to a
It's cool.
And there's a presumption in the
statute as it exists now that
they should be booked into the
juvenile detention center.
Or some facility
They were not.
So the idea that there are
repercussions for engaging in
serious offenses short of the
violent offenses that we're
speaking about.
do not necessarily result in any
period of detention whatsoever.
And that's in part because of
the risk assessment instrument.
OK, so thank you, um, Madam
Chair, representative experts.
So I'm gonna ask you a few more
questions on that risk
assessment.
Mostly because.
bite my tongue.
Um, when CYFD is involved, I'd
like to know exactly what
they're doing and how they're
doing it. So because I'm not
totally familiar with this
process within COFFD.
Who is the expert that is doing
the risk assessment or is it
just anybody and they just have
a checklist.
Check, check, check. So I'm
trying to find out some of these
people are not getting placed
correctly, Madam Chair,
Representative expert.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
it is members of the Children,
Youth and Family department
through their juvenile probation
office that administers the risk
assessment instrument.
Um, I have no reason to believe
that they're not well trained on
the instrument.
But I can also inform you that.
There are provisions and the
ability for them to override.
And of course
That gives me some concerns
because you're placing in
The role of public safety.
Um, people that are.
Responsible for supervision,
admittedly.
But
Are not front line workers
dealing with these young people.
deal with them only after
they've had contact with law
enforcement.
And so they're not in a position
to be able to say other than
reviewing through their history
of this particular.
Um
Young person, young offender, as
to whether they've come through
the system before and what those
other offenses may be.
But they're not law enforcement
officers in the traditional
sense, and that's part of the
concern.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, that's a
Interesting thing cause.
I'm looking at, as you have
somebody who's been trained on
that tool, but then they have
the position to override, but
they're not necessarily social
workers or therapists or law
enforcement.
So they're people that get some
training.
So that's problematic for me,
just that, that right there is
problematic for me in general
because
Um, especially with that
provision to override that they
could be letting people out for
a series of reasons, cause I I
present a lot of bills for CYFD
and there's some issues within
CYFD shortages and turnover is
quite a problem. So when I see
CYFD involved, I'm not saying
that person may not be trained,
I'm saying I have some issues
with a high turnover rate and
somebody not
Having
More experience and relying on a
tool.
Um, I guess you have to have
something, right? Cause
otherwise they just make
whatever decision they want, but
that's a big issue for me. So
going back to the chair, uh
sorry, going back to the bill,
Madam Chair and Representative.
OK.
OK, ma'am.
Chair representative experts on
page 7, line 19.
So we're going from, it was 15
before, now it's going to be 14,
is that what? There's a lot in
here, so I'm trying to bounce
around in the bill. So we went
from 1415 to 14. Can you explain
the reasoning for that, please?
Madame Cher, um, Representative
Lord, that is just to clean up
actually what's already existing
in New Mexico law, um, 14 year
olds, uh, and above can be
charged with any of the
enumerated fences that qualify
for youthful offender.
Distinction between the 14 and
the 15 is that a 15 year old is
automatically considered a
serious youthful offender if
they commit first degree murder.
14 year olds were excluded from
the youthful offender category.
But the way the statute was
written, it actually left out
first degree murder.
It it was actually written that
it was a 2nd degree murder was a
youthful offender offense. And
so they had to go back and clean
up.
By adding in a separate section
for if a 14 year old is charged
with first degree murder, that
is also is also a youthful
offender offense, but we're just
cleaning all of that up.
While we're in the process of
correcting conditions and
changes to the Children's code.
that the um experts also.
Um
Make shorter answers and just,
you know, yes or no. Thank you,
Madam Chair, representative
experts. I, I appreciate the
answer because I'm trying to
make a decision on a very
important bill, and I very much
appreciate you giving me the
full picture of what's going on.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
There was a part in here. I'm
sorry, let me see if I can find
it again. Oh, OK, on page 31.
Line 19
The court has discretion to
consider the child's unique
circumstances and history when
imposing probation or commitment
that may impose exertion. So
this what I'm trying to get at
the courts now have a
discretion. Is that what I'm
understanding in that portion
chair, representative expert.
Madame Chair, Representative
Lord, yes.
So venture, um,
expert, so.
In these cases.
Whether the cases, whether
they're gonna go to diversion or
not, or whether the cases
they've done a very hardcore
crime. Are they using the same
tool.
Make that assessment when they
have discretion.
Is it the the judge have the
discretion or they're still
looking at the tools used? Can
you explain that a little bit
more to me, please?
and
Madame Chair Representative Flo.
A judge gets to use whatever
tools they have available to
them, um, some of it is.
For example, the 8 factors.
Uh, that they can consider when
making a determination.
But they can use their own
personal experience that that's
the value of having the judges
and having them selected and
trusting him with making those
decisions.
So
They can use whatever they
finish.
Thank you, Madam. I'm trying to
get to the point that they
aren't just locked in something
that everybody understands it
just because it says X, it
doesn't mean they're going to
get a, it's a guideline for
those, the judge still has a
discretion to do it, do whatever
the judge.
I like to do.
I think I had a few more
questions on this.
Madam Chair and Representative.
It was in the assessment.
There's so much paper. We love
to kill trees at the house I'm
trying.
Um
That was answered.
OK, I was looking through, it
was in one of the assessments,
this will be my last question.
Um,
It was an assessment. Oh, I
think it's an IR.
So can you explain to me, Madam
Chair Representative, and
simplistic language.
What we're doing with children
right now when they turn 18
because.
I know there's been some issues
with older children in the
juvenile system, are we now then
moving them to adult.
The adult jail system, Madam
Chair, representative expert.
Uh, currently.
Oh, sorry, Adam.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, currently.
Um
in
Remain in youth facilities until
they turn 2.
At which time if they have
additional.
They would
to finish that sentence in an
adult facility.
OK. And Madam Chair
Representative.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around that because at 18 you're
an adult. It seems like you
should go to an adult facility
rather than staying there and
being an older person who may
have different influence on
younger.
People there for safety reasons,
that's how I look at it.
But Madam Chap representative,
uh, the main thing is.
That
People are screaming in New
Mexico to address the crime
issues.
They're just really sick of it.
And I don't.
I don't believe that one answer
is that we just do this one
thing we release kids on the
street, or else we would have a
really low crime rate, we would
have no juvenile crime. It'd be
great. They're out, they're
getting all these programs, but
they're not.
That is a harsh reality. They're
not getting what they need or
they're just defiant, and
they're not going to do what
they're supposed to do.
So for me, there's this balance
of OK, you're gonna do bad
things, you've done, you know,
you've done done certain things,
you're a violent criminal.
And
We're going to make sure that we
keep you off the streets if
nothing else for the safety of
the community.
We can't hug our way out of this
with some people. I'm just
sorry, it just doesn't work that
way as much as I would like it
to.
Um, we need all the other
programs that we have, we need
to make sure that our low level
kids, the ones that are doing
shoplifting or have a drug
addiction are getting handled
and going to diversion.
But the worst of the worst
definitely need to be locked up.
Um
And that's what my community
wants.
They want adults and juveniles
because the juveniles.
I mean, we just had that
shooting on tramway and copper.
Was it like 5 or 6 kids.
10
tend to
Yeah, there were a bunch of
young kids.
Excuse me, no one from the So
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I look at that situation and
I'm like.
These are kids who are in some
serious trouble. I mean, each
one needs to be looked at
individually, not grouped
together, but.
These are some kids that have
some serious issues.
That should not be out released
on the streets. I mean, we
Our biggest problem we have here
too, we arrest somebody and then
they're out.
Rest them and they're out.
them, and they're out.
And they do a lot of damage to
our communities. And that's the
thing we need to address is
making sure these people aren't
in this revolving and that's all
the questions I have. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I feel like I'm doing musical
chairs today, running back and
forth in these committees, but
thank you, and I heard you're
open and I was actually
monitoring what was happening on
the my phone in the other
committee. So I appreciate the
questions and so Madam Chair
Representative, I guess my, my
one
To point is
These individuals
Violent offenders, and I know
it's in the legislation. Could
you just go through it really
quickly.
who this entail, would this be
folks who are murderers,
rapists, armed robbers, school
shooters, would those all be
included and
I mean, like, I'm just, I just
want to make sure that we're not
putting folks that are just
stole candy bar or something,
which is really horrible, and
those kids should get punished,
right? But.
I mean, it's not killing
somebody. I just want to make
sure that there's a clear
distinction on here, Madam
Chair.
Um, um.
Chairman Representative uh
block.
The
The the proposal is to add to
the serious useful offense.
In addition to first degree
murder, which is the current
only crime.
A secondary murder.
Voluntary manslaughter.
penetration.
Armed robberies when committed
with a firearm, shooting at her
from a motor vehicle resulting
in great bodily harm or death.
And shooting in a dwelling or
occupied building resulting in
great bodily harm.
Or death
And so and so those are the
crimes that we are seeking to
add.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative,
and I, I bring, I really bring
that up and I thank you for
giving me those examples because
I know folks who have been
Unfortunately, the victims of
many of these, some of them are
not with us cause
They were killed, unfortunately,
and so Madame Chair
representatives.
So
Cause I know at least when it
comes to like the
Like rape.
That, that can really
hurt
Anybody for life.
Or someone's mom or dad getting
murdered can hurt somebody for
life. That'll change the
trajectory of your life. And the
other day, Madam Chair
Representative, I was talking to
some advocates who were victims
of this kind of abuse, and this
could even be from peers,
classmates, 14 year old and
14-year-old, etc. And this
This is something that not only
is a grievous act, but it's
something that I find to be
This is this is an adult crime.
In my opinion.
And it, and a lot of these are
premeditated, right? Like, like
it's a voluntary murder. It's
2nd degree murder. It's, you
don't get to that without having
the intention.
Doing that.
There's, it's not just maybe,
like no one mistakenly goes and
murders or rape somebody, right?
But
It's definitely showing this
kind of malice with the
individual who is the defendant.
And so Madam Chair
Representative,
Since that is indeed in here.
I know that in the bill, we talk
about the discretion of the
court. I think it's on pages
331, we talked about that. And
you go into to that and how the
court can handle such a case
where one of these individuals
is indeed charged with this,
this crime, Madam Chair, and
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block.
We have just made it clear that
the discretion the judges
currently have remains the same.
Um
Even for first degree.
Murder as a serious youthful
offense, the legislature is put
in place where
does not have to impose the
maximum sentence.
If they do not have to impose a
life sentence that is dictated
under that statute for every
adult in the state of New
Mexico.
So those things are still in
place. So as I expressed before,
the judge gets to evaluate all
factors, including their own
thoughts on the case and making
a determination with the proper
disposition is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you so much, representatives and
experts. And I think that's kind
of a big point that we need to
Rehash
The judge is the one who is the
fact finder. The judge is the
one who has to determine what
Pertains to this statue. So we
are still keeping judicial
discretion while also allowing
them to have tools, if there is
such a violent offense,
something like I've seen seen
cases in New Mexico where people
have decapitated bodies and
things that are so gruesome that
you couldn't keep you up at
night and it keeps me up at
night for sure to see this kind
of stuff. And so, uh, I'm glad
that the judge still has that
discretion, but I also liked
Madam Chair representative in
here when you're talking about
holding, ending trial, that
there would be.
A preference to have that
individual be in a separate.
A place, I believe it is pending
trials, so they're not with
adults until they're charged. So
that's keeping that presumption.
Even if it's a super, you know,
even if it's clear as day
evidence, it's still presuming
evidence, so I like that
constitutionality of of that if,
and that's if there's ability.
So it wouldn't put any burdens
on the court. So if they only
had one holding cell, for
example, before the court. I
know in our.
our area, we have a court house
that we're trying to rebuild and
we definitely want to
Make it better and bigger so
that we have those kinds of
partitions. So I did like that
and I think that was very
thoughtful, uh, ad addition to
this. Uh, another one, Madam
Chair, representative that I.
But I just want to clarify. So,
This doesn't require
An individual to, let's just say
it's
Uh, like a school shooting.
Which just happened in our state
multiple times.
Unfortunately, and if no one is,
no one dies, but it's still is a
school shooting.
That is, that is part of this,
right? Cause they're using a
firearm to do it, and it could
create great bodily injury. I
just want to make very clear
that individual could be tried
as an adult in this statute, I'm
sure.
Met him chair Representative
block, the answer is yes.
Thank you so much and I.
I think that's great. And
Representative Lord just gave me
the page, page 8, so.
I'm gonna look at that, and I, I
think that's good. So, I mean,
for me, this is not an issue
that should be polarizing. I see
that you have many bipartisan
co-sponsors on this legislation.
And so I think that this is
something that has been really
thoughtfully.
Look through and
I just want justice to happen
for these these families. We see
families that are suffering
because of things that have
happened to their family who are
no longer here, or they still
are here, and they're they're
battling.
And it's, it's, and it's
contributed quite frankly to the
behavioral health crisis we have
in this state.
If we had actual penalties for
this heinous crime, no matter
what age you are, if you know
that you're going to, you're
killing somebody, you know it.
It's a fact. You, you don't just
accidentally go rape or kill
somebody. It happens.
And it's intentional. And I'm
sick of this state being so
Lackadaisical when it comes to
our criminal statutes that we
have people who are able to bump
into their rapist or or their
murderer of their mom or dad at
the Safeway.
Or at the at the at the gas
station, and it just drives me
up the wall. So,
I think this is something
intentional. This is something
that is very well thought out,
and I look at the statistics,
this works.
This stuff works. We see stats
all across the board.
Keeping these folks who are
violent from a young age to
adulthood. This is indeed
something that works, and it's
not.
Not necessarily a life sentence.
But it is punishment. So they
know, OK, maybe don't go murder
or rape somebody when I get out
of prison.
That, that might be a good idea
for one of those folks, and I
think that's something that we
need to consider. So our state.
Needs to be tougher on
criminals.
And I think if we start young
and show them there are
consequences at a young age.
We won't have as many adult
offenders and indeed we will
reduce the behavioral crisis
that we have in the state will
reduce the recidivism rate
because they will actually have
consequences, and we'll also
just keep crime lower in New
Mexico. And so I think this is a
great bill, and I, I am happy to
support it, and I think everyone
should support this very
bipartisan common sense piece of
legislation, which I think is
just
The easiest vote I've made today
and I've had to vote in two
committees today. So thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you both.
And thank you all for, for being
your experts.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Rubio.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, I
just had a couple questions.
Um
Because there's been some.
Uh, talk around judicial
discretion.
Um, and can you expand on that
because.
It's sounding like there is
support for judicial discretion,
except that this actually takes
that out.
So can you clarify?
Madam Chair, um.
Vice chair Rubio, um.
It would
It is true that it would, it
would remove digital discretion
in the sense that it would add
charges in which people
automatically moved into the
adult criminal system. It would
retain discretion in that.
Judges would
still have
Full sentencing authority within
the range of those sentences.
So unlike some of these charges
which could carry mandatory time
for adults that would not be the
case.
Um, for
Um, juveniles charged even with
these crimes.
So I
It's hard for me to think of a
set of circumstances, but if a
judge decided that
16 year old even under this bill
who had committed second-degree
murder.
Deserve to be put on probation.
They could do that
If they, if, if they thought if
they believe that.
Oh, it was just.
Thank you
The reason that I'm asking is
because, um, there was, there's
some conversation around the the
the the judicial discretion
piece.
Um, but also in terms of
expanding the serious, uh,
youthful offender definition,
um, is that.
I mean, am I reading that right?
Um, I guess because.
What I'm hearing you say is that
that means a judge could not
impose a juvenile.
Um, sentence if they thought it
was appropriate.
Is that
Accurate
Madam,
Uh, chair, vice chair, uh,
Rubio.
That is correct.
Um
Yeah, I mean, I, I, I'm glad
that we're having this
conversation, I as um.
You might know, I, I have
concerns about this bill. And
so, um, I'm, I'm glad that
you're going to look at some of
these concerns, um, and, and.
See if there's things that can
be addressed and so, um, I
appreciate the.
Thank you, anyone else, I would
just like to, um, I heard
something said about.
Um
Juveniles, well, up to 21 would
not go to an adult jail.
Is that correct, what you
stated?
Um,
Madam Chair.
That is correct.
That juveniles, people's
sentences, juveniles, even for
First degree murder. So a 16
year old convicted of
first-degree murder will sit in
a juvenile facility with
children until they turn age 21,
at which time they will continue
on and serve the remainder of
their adult sentence.
Um, and then it all.
But if I understand this bill,
that's going to change.
Um
that is correct. This, this
bill, if enacted, would when
people turn 18 years old, if
they have additional.
Time to serve.
would be moved to
old facility
I believe that's against
federal.
Regulations or statutes.
Madam Chair,
um.
It is our contention that
Um, the statutes do allow
people who are
Become adults 18 that become 18
years old to be housed in an
adult facilities.
And that that there's not a
current federal law violates.
That needs to be clarified and
um.
Also, children held in adult
facilities are more likely to
commit suicide and suffer
physical and sexual abuse and
experience psychological trauma
more than those in juvenile
facilities. So that would be a
concern that just because you're
18.
Uh, doesn't really.
Uh, make you an adult.
Um
Uh, and also, um.
If
Since July of 23, there have
been 33 children charged to
serious youthful offenders.
And 153 charged as youthful
offenders.
Um, the serious offenders, and
if this bill goes into effect,
the numbers would uh increase
from the 33 series to 80.
And the 153 as youthful
offenders would.
Trip almost well, double 326.
And that's from the sentencing
commission.
So
We're going to be holding youth.
Um, who might not have the
maturity and the um.
Judgment that, you know, because
of their age, they haven't
developed or if they, you know,
um.
Had things such as um.
Alcohol
Substance abuse which impairs
your brain even more and your
development of your judgment.
And
I think this is going to make
it.
Where they aren't.
Going to um be able to have the.
Uh, recovery and the treatment
and.
Um,
The waiver, um,
Also
does not require the waiver of
knowing, intelligent and
voluntary.
It will likely be rejected um by
the appellate court because
you're not giving that option.
Of
The intent, I believe. Um.
Um, Madam Chair, I would say
that.
Um, some of the numbers.
Would not be quite so elevated.
The universe of current.
Um
Youthful offenses.
is much larger than the number
of offenses this bill would move
into
Serious youthful offenses.
That they're they're 14.
Currently
Why, offenses.
We're moving 5 of those into
useful offenses.
Serious, serious, sorry, it is
serious youthful offenses. It
remains the case that there are
wi, this bill is not simply
Remove the category of offenses
and convert them all into.
Um
It's all the fences, um.
Also, I can tell you we are in
discussions with um.
Several um stakeholders about
Um, amenability and issues
around
Amenability hearings.
Um
If
Our sense is that
If we
If the legislature removed
amenability hearings or
expressly allowed the waiver of
amenability hearings.
Um
We think that there is reason to
think the judiciary would defer
to that judgment.
That the current state of the
law is
Because they, they decided that
because it appeared.
Do without that expressed
language from the legislature,
they were not going to allow
children to waive that right,
which I think is a defensible.
We're asking the legislature to
amend the statute to change that
language so that.
in certain circumstances.
Um
Mm.
Representative in your experts,
I'm sorry I didn't.
address you
Both representatives.
Um
My understanding is that this
would also allow online
dissemination about juveniles on
websites.
And that violates the purpose of
the delinquency Act.
Um, to provide children with uh
the care and rehabilitation and
successful reintegration of
children, um, into homes and the
community.
Why
Would you take that away? Sorry,
thank you,
Representative Madam Chair,
you're talking about the the
unsealing of records.
He dispositional hearings or I'm
sorry, I don't have an exact
place, but it sounds.
I'll look for the talk about the
reason for the.
Not
Um
The, the
Madam Chair, I apologize.
Uh
Um, thank, thank you.
Uh, Vice Chair Rubio, um.
It is not our intent.
allow for the widespread
dissemination.
the records of juveniles.
And if there's a portion of this
bill that has been artfully
drafted.
It causes that to occur.
We'd certainly be open to
changing it. That's not the
goal, um, the unsealing for
records.
is for us
Mostly
A timing issue around preventive
detention.
The problem is that
An 18 year old be arrested for a
serious crime.
We have in very short order,
have to file a motion seeking
preventive detention.
This offender could have a
significant violent juvenile
history.
And by the time we file a motion
and seek leave of the court for
the court to unseal those
records so we can tell the court
we understand this person just
got arrested for a drive-by
shooting on their 18th birthday,
but they've been shooting at
houses since they were 15.
We think it's critical that
judges know that when they make
determinations about who they
let back into our community, and
that's the point.
provision
Um
Representatives and expert, um.
So that does make it so that it
could be.
Uh, disseminated.
Um
Now,
Madam Chair.
In the instance in which
Someone with a
Significant juvenile history
commits.
An adult offense.
Yes, that is a possibility.
OK. Anyone else? No, Madam
Chair, I moved the table. I'm
sorry, I moved you pass rather.
Yeah
I second that you pass, not the.
Um
My understanding is that the
sponsor would like to go and
make some more corrections.
Uh yes, madam Chair, we are
working with the stakeholders, a
lot of the concerns you've
addressed, we are working on
some of those and so, um, yes,
if you would roll this so that
we could actually sit down and
talk to just get all the
pertinent people wanna hear all
the discussion, hear your
concerns and then bring it back
to you with our amendments, we
just didn't have time to get the
amendments to time. And does
that include um clearing up some
of the contradictions even
within the bill. Yeah, yes, it
includes all the discussions we
had um.
day and some of the comments
that I think we we can uh
possibly address uh.
an opportunity.
OK, thank you.
And ma'am Chair, I just want to
officially withdraw the motion
just as it was made, so.
Um, now, um.
We will go back to um.
Oh, no.
On House Bill 132.
Um, we did not have quorum to
take a vote.
And this bill was um repeal of
deposit of will and uh but I'm
sure I move with you pass.
OK, it's been moved and
seconded. Is there any objection
for do pass. OK, you now have a
do pass on House Bill 132. Thank
you. Thank you. The courthouses
and the vote was 5 to 0. Thank
you, ma'am.
Representative Reed, did you
want to take a second to stretch
or
You've been here for
OK.
Let him cheer the local game
starts at 2, so just just
throwing it out there
I'm not a fan, so it's OK.
OK, thank you.
OK, well, we will continue if
anyone else needs to take a
stretch.
OK. All right. Are you ready,
madam Chair.
I just,
um, we'll now hear House Bill
136, the fentanyl exposure as
child abuse, and this, uh.
I was looking for a
representative torasas too.
OK, Representative Reeve, thank
you, Madam Chair, um, um, HB 136
is um.
As you stated relating to the
exposure and use of fentanyl as
evidence of abuse of a child. I
have, um, besides my co-sponsor
Representative Chavez, I have uh
my expert who is Rebecca Reyes,
she's with the 2nd Judicial
District Attorney.
Sorry.
Do you need me to start over?
Got it.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
representatives. My name is
Rebecca Reyes. I've been a child
abuse prosecutor at the DA's
office in Albuquerque for the
past 8 years.
Um
That is essentially what I, what
I do, it's not what I do and who
I am is, is prosecuting these
types of cases in the special
victims unit, so any type of
child abuse, a felony level
child abuse, including child
death, both intentional and
reckless, child sexual abuse
cases as well as adult sexual
assault cases, uh, those are the
cases that we handle, and we
have seen a huge uptake,
unfortunately in these what we
call exposure cases, um, and
Madam Chair, so essentially, uh,
this is a one word change of.
this committee, but I think it's
been in front of health and um,
it has also been in front of CCJ
and we, I believe got through
judiciary.
Last year got to appropriations,
um, but what this bill does is
it makes a one word addition to
36-1, which is a um.
Otherwise, there's no changes to
the bill in 2009, there was an
amendment uh which dealt with
methamphetamine. Uh, this was
kind of the time frame when meth
labs were a a big issue and so
and a huge threat to children.
Um
Because fentanyl is still um is
a big states, um, fentanyl
overdose among children uh in
the US and they were caused by
fentanyl, uh, the majority of
them actually, uh, basically are
trying to add the word fentanyl
in the one word change, which
basically it just means that um
if there's fentanyl exposure to
a child, uh, that's deemed prima
facie evidence of child abuse,
um, but it, it basically um.
Makes it uh.
I mean, I actually let the
expert explain, you would say
prima facie evidence means
because I know I'm sure that's
gonna be a question.
Thank you so much, uh,
Representative Reed, and uh.
Madam Chairwoman and
representatives.
So a prima facie evidence does
not mean that the person is
automatically guilty.
We still have to prove our case
to a jury beyond a reasonable
doubt. What prima facie does is
it tells the jury that if they
find that we have proven beyond
a reasonable doubt that the
defendant.
Exposed the child.
2 fentanyl.
As is the request of the
addition.
Uh, then we have then proven
child abuse. It does not take
away the requirement or the mens
rea of Beyond a reason I'm sorry
the the requirement that we
prove beyond a reasonable doubt,
uh, that the child was exposed
to fentanyl. It's simply adds
fentanyl.
Uh, in addition to
methamphetamine, to that prima
facie case.
Thank you, and then, um.
I'm sure one question will be,
um, and so I I'll just see if
she will my expert will address
it now, um, because, uh, uh,
what it, what exposure will mean
um that's that was always a
question, you know, how, how are
we going to define expert to the
expert on that.
Thank you, Representative
Madam, Madam Chairwoman
representatives, exposure is not
defined by law, and it has not
been, uh, even since the
addition of the exposure to
methamphetamine.
Exposure is a jury question.
So the jury gets to make that
determination if we have proven
exposure to their satisfaction
beyond a reasonable doubt.
When I am reviewing a case.
What I consider exposure to be
is.
Was the, could the child have
accessed the drug. Typically
what this means is when law
enforcement goes into a home or
uh sometimes it's a motel room
or an apartment, there is
fentanyl with an easy access of
we're talking usually young
children, uh, unfortunately, we
often see fentanyl or.
residue on tin foil that's in
the car seat, for example.
Uh, I would consider that
exposure, but at the end of the
day, it is up to the jury to
make that determination as to
whether or not we have proven an
exposure or not.
And so that's the basic premise
of the bill and with that, Madam
Chair will stand up for
questions.
Thank you. It will go to the
audience. Is there anyone in um
support uh you want to come,
we'll hand you the mic or you
want, OK, if you'll go to the
center.
And
Uh
2 minutes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, uh, we all know that
fentanyl, uh, can be used as a
legitimate pain reliever, but
when a child accidentally
ingests it.
Or is exposed to it in patch
form, it slows down and can and
eventually even stop their
breathing. The shocking part is
that the smallest adult dose is
enough to kill a child.
Sometimes fentanyl pills look
like candy to a child.
Sometimes they pick up a
fentanyl patch and apply it to
themselves. So creating an
opportunity for a child to
access a lethal substance like
fentanyl is at least child
abuse, if not worse, as the use
of fentanyl has increased, so
have the incidences of child
poisoning via this insidious
drug.
I'll spell 136 may not solve all
of the problems associated with
fentanyl entirely, but it does
hold account those dangerously
negligent adults. Thank you.
Hi, Madam Chair and Vice Chair.
Thank you for listening to me
again. Um, my name is Sarah
Nazoric. I lost my son to a
fentanyl poisoning. And I
briefly shared that his first
butanol exposure was by his
non-custodial parent and a drug
trafficker that picked my son up
from school.
And they offered him fentanyl to
smoke with foil.
Well
To see what happened to him,
What happened to him?
As he ended up in the ICU and he
nearly died that day.
And after that day,
My son had a lot of stigma, and
he felt the guilt and said,
Well, it was my fault and I was
just trying to fit in with my
dad and his girlfriend.
You know, our children are my
biggest fear when he was a child
when we had shared custody is
that one day they were gonna
offer him heroin or he was gonna
die from a drug.
Never in my wildest imagination
that I think my child would die
from fentanyl poisoning. Um, I
know that when people are in
addiction, they're supposed to
use in the other room. But
having a child seeing people use
on each other and exposure can
really end a child's life, and
it can actually give them an
interest to start experimenting
with drugs.
they use fentanyl with the
parent. So that is why I support
House Bill 136.
Thank you and memory of my son,
Alexander Cross.
I'm sorry for your loss.
Uh, good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Troy Weer chief from Mexico
State Police. Uh, we stand in
strong support of this bill and
appreciate the sponsors bringing
it forward, um, I won't
reiterate everything that we
have heard today, uh, I would
just say I just wanted to let
you know that we do support this
bill and hopefully you give it a
due pass. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Deputy
Chief Ben Valdez Sanit Police
Department. We also stand in
support of this bill, um,
oftentimes we see.
So our most vulnerable
populations, children, or even
infants that have been exposed
to this.
Due to the negligence of folks
that are using and again
battling their own addiction,
but
We need some protections in
place for our vulnerable, most
vulnerable populations, and I
appreciate your support for
this. Thank you.
You're online and you want to
speak in support of this bill.
Please raise your hand.
Uh, Larry Sontag.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
Carla Sontag, uh, with the New
Mexico Business Coalition. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we stand in the
strongest support of this. We're
very concerned about the safety
of our children. The drug that
we have had other conversations
about today is a real big
problem in New Mexico. Crime is
driving good families out of the
state and harming the good
families that stay. I sincerely
hope that you will pass this
bill.
and help us get stronger control
over what's happening in our
state for the benefit of all New
Mexicans. Thank you for your
consideration.
You
It
Uh, Marilyn Beck,
uh, secretary and members and
members of the network. We are
dedicated to.
and to serve them.
And we stand in strong support
of the the representatives and
the um everyone who's testified
before and we stayed in strong
support and pass it. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chairman.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
the chair for.
Um, I asked that you support
this.
Common sense and small change
that actually makes a big
difference with our children. We
have way too many examples of
of our kids being exposed
to females sometimes result in
death
fortunately, within less than a
month we lost a one month old
and lost posure.
So again, I ask that you
supported it and I appreciate
the sponsors for you.
OK. Um,
Now we go to the audience and
those in opposition.
Come
You have
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Micah
Bezzini. I'm policy manager at
Bold Futures, uh, we're neither
in support or in opposition, but
we just urge the community to
take into consideration of
continuing to add drugs to
definitions of abuse and
neglect, as we see a crisis
across the nation, this seems
to, I mean, and we would like
further discussion, um, to this
fentanyl crisis. Um, we seem to
be oversimplifying a complex
issue with far-reaching
consequences consequences. Susis
use disorder is a medical
condition, not a moral failing.
and treating it as automatic
child abuse ignores the nuances
of addiction recovery and
parenting. We're afraid this
policy will discourage parents
from seeking medical help or
addiction treatment out of fear
of losing their children.
Ultimately putting families at
greater risk. Um, we know that
family separation leads to worse
long term outcomes for children,
including higher rates of mental
illness, incarceration, and
homelessness. We, we do, um,
believe in protecting our
children, and we do believe in
strengthening our families and
not tearing them apart. Um, so
just consider, uh,
Um, these questions and these
thoughts while we're, um,
discussing uh a national crisis.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Rickie Lee Chavez appearing
before you today on behalf of
the Law Office of the Public
Defender, we appreciate the
intent of the sponsors in these
oppositional comments are not
provided in ignorance of the
issues the state is facing with
regard to fentanyl, but to
inform on statutory issues the
agency sees.
Making controlled substances
accessible to children already
is child abuse. It is
successfully prosecuted as child
abuse all the time.
A child abuse requires the
person acted with reckless
disregard for a child's safety.
The Supreme Court has been clear
for almost 20 years that for
criminal child abuse charges,
those are reserved for the most
serious occurrences and not from
theoretical dangers.
That means that a jury evaluates
the circumstances in a
particular case to see if that
person actually did recklessly
make drugs accessible to the
child. Our concern with the
prima facie provision in
subsection J is that it appears
to reduce that requirement and
expand the scope of child abuse
to anyone who even uses fentanyl
in a child's presence with no
actual risk of the child getting
access to it. This is not
criminal child abuse and is the
type of conduct our civil child
protective system.
is in place to address. This
legislation takes away a jury's
independent assessment of often
complex factual circumstances
and risks blurring the line
between civil and criminal
liability. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Jasmine Tying Fong,
and I and I represent the ACLU
of New Mexico. We are giving
comment, um, neither in support
nor against, but to um bring
attention to some important
points. Um, this bill in
practice would mean that um
parents experiencing substance
abuse would be criminalized
rather than be providing the
care that they need to overcome,
um, to overcome their addiction
and parent their child. Policies
like this disproportionately
affect low-income communities.
In communities of color who
already are overrepresented in
the child welfare and criminal
justice system.
Studies have shown, and we know
that black and indigenous
families are more likely to be
investigated for child abuse and
neglect, even when the drug use
is equal amongst racial groups.
Furthermore, we know that family
separation uh through the child
welfare system causes more harm,
if far worse than parental drug
use. Research demonstrates that
children placed in foster care
experience higher rates of
mental health disorders,
homelessness, incarceration
later in life, compared to those
who remain with their.
families. Children and families
deserve the support they need to
remain together, not separation,
criminalization, and
incarceration. Thank you. Thank
you. Is there anyone um online
that is an opposition.
Raise your hand.
Go ahead, Robert.
Hello, thank you. My name is
Robert Hoberg in Albuquerque and
similarly, I just want to bring
some
nuance to the conversation in
that I know of examples, uh, one
in particular comes up as I, uh,
something that I could see going
the wrong way with this.
Somebody that I know got into a
relationship with the woman got
pregnant. He did not know she
was using fentanyl, tried to
encourage her to go to rehab.
She didn't do that, and for
whatever portion, let's say that
this was enacted that he was in
the house and involved and uh
his baby was actually born
addicted to fentanyl, that the
only force in that child's life.
Now he's a single dad, raising
this baby, um, while the woman's
family is trying to challenge
that and take him away. He could
easily get swept up into the
blanket that he was somehow in
on this fentanyl exposure just
because he's the father. Um, so
I just think that there's a, you
know, I, I've unfortunately had
to educate my kids on the fact
that there are fentanyl pills
that look like Valentine's
candy, and it's really sad,
uh, conversation that we're
having right here, but again,
this is uh the outcome of these
criminal organizations being
forced to
Increase the potency of what
they do, in order to comply with
the circumstances that our drug
war has created.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
And
In opposition.
Do you have anything else you'd
like to, uh, Madam Chair, I
would just want the committee to
know that this does, this does
not apply to a child born.
Um
You know, by a mother, um,
under, you know, addicted to
fentanyl or fentanyl in the
child system, that's a total
CYFD issue is a criminal statute
that's exposure, um, in a like a
a physical setting basically, so
I just want to make sure that
distinction is made that it's
not having to do with the
exposure in the womb or anything
of that nature.
We'll stand up for questions.
OK, thank you. Um, we'll go to
the committee, uh,
representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair, thank you and thank
you expert. I just thought this
would be simple. We're just
adding the word fentanyl. We
already have.
Methamphetamine.
It just makes sense, so much
fun.
I just thought it'd be very
simple. Um,
What I want to say is what
because I was involved in the
drafting of the original bill.
What I want to say is,
Law enforcement tells me all the
time.
Yes, when a baby is exposed and
they die, that makes the news.
But guess how many times they go
into a house that is filled with
fentanyl smoke and the baby's
half dead.
Has a lot.
Those parents are not
responsible enough.
They need to go get rehab, they
need to get help, but they
should not have a baby with them
while they're smoking fentanyl
in a house.
I'm sorry, but to me,
That is very egregious, uh,
child abuse.
This bill addresses those
because it is knowingly
intentionally negligently.
Placing that child
In a dangerous situation because
it's just by luck that they
didn't die.
Also puts law enforcement at
risk too because they have to go
into a place that has.
Fentanyl smoke in the house.
This isn't about whether they
should get rehab or they
shouldn't get rehab. This is,
it's already has the words meth
andphetamine we're simply adding
the word.
That.
That's it.
Um, the other bill that was
discussed, Me Representative is
the CAR Act, which has nothing
to do with this.
The car act is a complete
failure because we're taking
drug addicted moms and giving
them the baby back and say, hope
you do better. Here's a
checklist, please go to 12 Step.
The disaster because you know
what I'm finding out from law
enforcement.
That they go home and they smoke
fentanyl and they're holding the
baby and the baby is half dead.
It does in a way.
So I support this.
Completely I did last year too.
We're just trying to
No, and no one, Madam, nobody's
trying to take anybody's baby.
What they're trying to do is
this common sense. There's a
baby that is half dead.
This may be the being exposed to
fentanyl. We're saying.
You need to get your stuff
together before you can get this
baby back. Nobody's trying to
take it away for life. We're
saying, look, you need some
help. We need to, you need to go
rehab, not twelve-step. I'm
sorry, that only works for part
of the population, that's an
optional thing. And it doesn't
work for people. Those people
don't believe in God and that
Tolsto doesn't work. Real actual
cognitive behavioral therapy to
take them to where they can get
clean so they can have their
baby back.
Nobody who's addicted to a drug
should be having their child
with them. I'm sorry, I don't
care what drug it is. If you're
addicted and you're not taking
your child, the child comes
first and the child is a
priority. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and I'll be brief. So I guess we
heard some concerns today, Madam
Chair, Representatives, expert
about the difference between
criminal and, and uh the child
code. I'm just wondering if you
can address those concerns, just
so we can clear it up before we
vote, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, thank you for that
question. Yes, this is a change
to the criminal code, not the
Children's code. So this change
will have no impact, or it
shouldn't have any impact on
what CYFD does. CYFD is already
investigating when a child is
exposed to fentanyl that should
already, I shouldn't say does it
should already be happening in
these cases do routinely come to
our office, uh, in the first
place, so this is only a change
to the criminal code.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative for
that clarification. And just to
be super clear, criminal charge
by law enforcement is not
substantiation.
Correct.
Madam Chair and Representative
Block, that is correct. Those
are two separate issues, the
criminal code, uh, whether
there's a guilty plea or guilty
verdict in the criminal side is
completely separate and apart
from whether or not there's a
CYFD subs substantiation.
I'm sure. It took me a while to
get that word out. I was like,
OK, let's see how to say it. But
I really appreciate it. And I
think it's very important that
we made that clarification
because I know that's a concern
of folks, and I think it's good
to ensure that we address that,
but now that we have, I find
this to be very common sense. I
think that
We're just adding the word
fentanyl along with smoking
meth.
Or whatever inhaling meth,
however people use meth. I, I
need to rewatch Breaking Bad, I
suppose, but Madam Chair,
representative, thank you, thank
you for bringing this forward
and I just want to make
clear that this is
A lot of fentanyl flo flooding
into the state, and it's
probably way more than the meth,
cause my sheriff, he just texted
me.
Last year
He seized 52,406 fentanyl pills
and 98.1 g of fentanyl powder.
So, this stuff is coming into at
least my community and it's a
concern for me and I, I just
appreciate you all for being
proactive and trying to help
alleviate this problem and uh
Thank you.
Thank you.
Alright, next we have
Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
just have a couple questions,
um, and it's based on something
that the expert just said around
um it becoming a criminal.
Uh, not civil, but criminal, and
so.
My question is, is that if the
law.
It, if it could this law punish
parents.
Uh, who legally have fentanyl in
the house.
For medical reasons, um, even if
they're careful, can this impact
them, cause I know sometimes
they give fentanyl for um
prescription, and so I'm, I'm
curious about that.
And I'll, I'll answer Madam
Chair and Representative, and
then I'll defer to the expert,
you still have to prove that the
child was placed in a situation
that endangered their life for
health, so if you have legal
fentanyl patches, let's say, if
you leave your fentanyl patches
on the table and the child gets
access to him, you could be
charged with child abuse because
your responsibility as a parent
is to put that stuff up, um, so,
so yes, it could happen, it's
it's the situation where the
parent is is described by the
other representatives.
Smoking
Betting all around their child,
placing them in that situation,
that dangers life or health, so
it's not, um, you can't have
legal fentanyl patches, but you
still have a responsibility as
with any prescriptions around
children to keep them in a safe
place, um, and so that that I
think is what you're asking, but
let me defer to um the expert
just in case she has additional,
she does these cases.
Madam Chair and and vice chair,
that is correct what
Representative Reeve said is
correct in the same way that if
you uh if a parent leaves their
Tylenol out in the, in an area
where a child can get into it
and they get into a ton of
Tylenol and become ill that
could also be child abuse, it
really does depend. there's a
lot of discretion, uh, with the
prosecutor in determining what
is and is not child abuse and at
the end of the day, it is up to
a jury to make that
determination if the conduct.
rises to that level of
recklessness, which is the uh I
understand that the standard in
the statute says negligence,
however, under the uniform jury
instruction, which is what we
are required to use the
standard, the lowest standard
possible is recklessness.
OK, and I guess that's why I'm,
I'm a little bit confused
because earlier, um, when the,
the word exposure was used, um,
that that's going to be defined
by the jury and so.
Now you're saying that the
definition isn't there.
Madam chair and and vice chair.
There is no definition of
exposure itself in the in the
criminal code that is up to a
jury, um, what the jury has to
decide is is.
There's jury, there's elements
of a jury instruction. So for
child abuse not resulting in
death or great bodily harm.
There's between 5 and 6 elements
the jury has to decide. They do
not mirror the statute itself,
which I, I find is, is shocking
to a lot of people that don't
practice in this area. The jury
instructions require us to prove
that the defendant.
Caused are permitted, the child
to be placed in a situation that
endangered their life or health.
The statute says may endanger
the jury instruction does not
reflect that language. It says
endangered life or health.
Um
So what
What is the lowest standard?
For the criminal
Uh, child abuse, it is a
reckless standard. Reckless is
defined within the jury
instruction, and I'd be happy to
read it if the uh.
If you would like me to. Sure,
go ahead. Yes, so, uh,
recklessness is defined.
By law as
And this is just element 3 of
the jury instruction. It says
that the defendant showed a
reckless disregard without
justification for the safety or
health of the child.
To find that the defendant
showed a reckless disregard. You
must find that the defendant's
conduct was more than merely
negligent or careless. Rather,
you must find that the defendant
caused or permitted a
substantial and unjustifiable
risk of serious harm to the
safety or health of the child. A
substantial and unjustifiable
risk is one that any law-abiding
person would recognize under
similar circumstances and that
would cause any law-abiding
person to behave differently
than the defendant out of
concern for the safety or health
of the child, so we are required
to prove that in every case.
And and would be in this
situation as well to a jury
beyond a reasonable doubt.
And I'm not I'm sure I would add
that that's so it's just it's
more than mere negligence, it is
an actual higher standard, um,
and it is hard, it it is, it
could be. OK.
And, and can you share a little
bit about like the just the
justification for saying, um, or
for you using the term reckless.
I'm sure.
Reckless is simply what is, uh,
so the sorry this is gonna
require a little bit of history
of our case law.
Our the current statute we have
is what we have had for a long
time.
Uh, in the early 2000s are.
Uh, appellate court interpreted.
Negligence
to mean recklessness.
So even though the term
negligence is still in the
statute.
We must prove more than
negligence when we are trying
these cases to a jury. In fact,
when we're charging these cases,
we must prove more than
negligence.
So the
What the issue really is, is
that our statute no longer
matches what the actual law is
on child abuse, and that does
get a little murky in terms of.
Law enforcement kind of
understanding because we are
using jury instructions which is
based upon the case law where
they are reading the statute,
which is of course determined by
the legislature and so the
recklessness standard has been
determined by our appellate
courts to be the appropriate
standard to use in terms of
child abuse unless there is an
intentional death of a child
under the age of 12, in which
case the standard is
intentional.
I don't know if that properly
answered that's helpful. Thank
you. Yes.
And so I guess my last question
is regarding um with parents and
um.
And, and we've talked a lot
about it today around um.
Addiction and just how hard it
is to get out of that addiction
and so when I hear when the more
that I hear about these types of
of of policies that were, we're
considering, um.
How do we, how do we see parents
and, and of course this is that
I can't ask you to answer this
because it's, it's all gonna be
different for everybody, but.
My worry is that parents will be
fearful of of maybe reporting or
not even reporting, but actually
getting support because of this
particular law, um,
Becoming or this policy becoming
into law and so I, I guess
that's just one of the, I don't
know if that's just a comment or
a question that I have, but I
just, I just fear that it could,
it could scare parents who are
struggling with addiction and um
And, and asking for help later
on and, and I don't know if, if
you all want to comment on that.
Madame Charon and vice chair, I
can tell you that in my
experience and I've
Dead
Because of this, we go to every,
every uh child death case we go
to the scene.
I have yet to see a single one
that we have prosecuted.
In which there was not either
prior law enforcement
interaction with with with the
drugs or CYFD so what I'm saying
is that I have yet to see a
single one where there was not a
prior at least one, and, in
fact, the last one I had, there
were 2 prior CYFD referrals.
Where there was not prior
attempts at intervention.
So
I, I don't believe that adding
the word fentanyl as per se is
going to change any of that.
Um
All of these cases that I have
seen, there has been prior
interaction with the system and
there's been opportunity after
opportunity after opportunity
for somebody to get treatment.
Unfortunately, we can't force
someone to to do treatment. They
have to want it.
Um, and as much as we we might
try and as much as we offer hey
go do drug court and we, you
know, so avoid prison go to drug
court, the person still has to
want that help.
And we can't force them to take
it.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you.
Um, thank you, representatives
and expert um.
I
OK.
Um, just make sure I didn't miss
someone.
Um
My concern is that you're
eliminating the discretion of
the judges, um.
And CYFD when uh fentanyl.
is involved even if it's.
Uh
Doesn't actually endanger the
child.
Can you explain why you're
eliminating that.
Madam Chair, respectfully, this
does not take any discretion
away this doesn't change CYFD at
all. This is the criminal code.
CYFD follows, uh, the, the child
abuse neglect Act, which is in
chapter 31. This is in chapter
30, uh, I think I'm referring to
maybe even CYFD.
Having to report something that
they saw, even if it's legal.
Ethanol use by
here.
Or in the home.
So if CYFD is called there's
already been a report everything
that's reported to CYFD is
automatically cross reported to
law enforcement by law in the
first place, um, this also
doesn't take any discretion away
from the judge, that the
sentence, uh, which for, for no
death or great boly harm is 0 to
3 years.
It doesn't take any discretion
away from what the judge can
impose as a sentence. It doesn't
take any discretion away, um,
from what the prosecution can
offer.
All it does is add the the drug
fentanyl.
To the per se.
statue.
OK, so someone that has.
Legally prescribe what keeps an
officer.
Madame Cher
In that situation.
It would have to be more than
the person just has a
prescription for fentanyl.
There would have to be something
that triggered law enforcement
coming to that home.
So typically what triggers these
is a child is taken to the
hospital or sometimes to the
office of the medical
investigator, and they have they
test positive for the drug, and
that is typically what triggers
the cross referral, so the CYFD
as well as the law enforcement.
Um
And what's to ensure that, you
know, in your courts that there
aren't other jurisdictions that
Might not have that same.
Outlook.
and I can probably answer that
too just being a prosecutor, it
it's handled the same way across
the state, um, sometimes there's
an overlap with CYFD and the
criminal charge because what she
as she stated once a criminal
charge is filed, um, it's
automatically referred to CYFD
to make sure that everything's
OK, um, but if you have a legal
fentanyl prescription, um,
you're not gonna be charged with
anything unless Madam Chair, you
leave that fentanyl out and.
Exposed for the child to you're
you're using it around them and
it gets a child sick or the
child dies or there's pills on
the table or whatever it might
be, that's what's gonna get you
into the the legal system, um,
but it shouldn't um.
The the
Representative and expert, so
you're saying if they
accidentally leave it out, that
now it becomes a criminal charge
automatically
more than mere negligence, so we
still have to show that the
child was placed in a situation
that endangered
to make that finding beyond a
reasonable doubt, and so then
when you define in the jury
instruction reckless, the
reckless standard, it's more
than mere negligence, it's
reckless, so if somebody
accidentally.
leave something out, it may not
be chargeable, it's gonna be
factual, um, also, if it is a
jury may not convict if it's
just look I.
Though I put that up and I
didn't, and this happened, I
mean, you know, it, it is just
gonna be factually on everything
every single one, it's not a
mandatory charge because it has
to be more than just being
negligent. You have to be
reckless and it's a much higher
standard, I'm sure. Does that
answer your question?
Uh
Yes, um, but it also brings up
that.
This could, you know, separate
children.
And their family and you know,
cause more
Um, impact on CYFD also it could
be just someone who's there and
doesn't understand and reports
it to the officers and then they
have to go through all of this
trauma.
Um, just because, you know, it's
not like you're just adding.
Fentanyl to something that's
already like math.
It, it's not legal anywhere.
So you're adding something that
is legal and
illegal.
Us and
Expecting this just to be.
Um, considered.
As as a criminal, in most cases.
Uh, well, Madam Chair, it's, it
still has to be proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that the prima
facie case doesn't mean that
it's just automatically
something that's gonna happen, I
mean.
If it ends up that they're in
the CYFD system and it could
affect, you know, some type of.
Custody issue or whatever. I
mean, CYFD is involved at that
point and that has to be
determined based on what is for
the safety of the child and so
yes, possibly they could end up
in the CYFD system, but that's
with any drug. If it, if, if
they're arrested with heroin
around a child or a meth lab or
anything like that, you're
gonna, you're gonna have that
crossover with CYFD because they
have to make sure one that is
substantiated and they have to
make sure the child is safe, um,
and so.
The idea here is, is we want to
protect children, um.
We can't so much concern
ourselves with necessarily um
having to deal with the whole
CYFD process because what we
need to do is make sure kids
aren't dying, and that's what
we're we're, we're here to do.
Um, and I'll defer to that. Yes,
um, Madam Chair.
This
As I ain't mentioned before,
CYFD investigations are
completely separate from the
criminal investigation, the
criminal code. This has no
impact on what CYFD does or
doesn't do. CYFD makes their own
independent determination as to
whether or not there's been
abuse or neglect and whether or
not they're gonna substantiate
whether there is a criminal case
can happen regardless of whether
there's a CYFD case. The two do
not impact each other in that
way.
CYFD makes a determination about
placement of a child and then
ultimately the family courts,
the criminal courts have a
completely separate focus and
goal, which is dealing with the,
the crime itself.
Thank you. um.
Representative and expert um.
This, um,
Because fentanyl is also legal
and.
We
I don't believe we should be um.
Making it so that it's so broad
the criminal part of this could
be.
Um, misunderstood in some
jurisdictions, um.
And you already have it where
you can prosecute for reckless
placing of f.
So that's all of my questions.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I move a you pass.
Madam Chair, substitute motion
to take roll call on the motion
to table.
Representative Block, no to
table. Representative Lord,
absolutely no to table.
Representative Ramiro.
Representative Thompson, yes.
Represented
Excuse me, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes to table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Uh, and Madam Chair.
Yes to table.
OK, we have um.
Vote of 3 in favor to table and
to opposed and on uh.
Senate bill, Senate bill, House
Bill 136 and Representative
Romero to um Rubio to explain
her vote. Thank you,
Representative. I think for me
it was, it's mostly the the word
exposure, it's it feel it's too
broad, it's it's too broad.
Um, um, and then I'm thinking in
terms of of.
And there we touched up on it on
it a little bit around um people
who I, I think one of the, um,
Public comment around
breastfeeding and um and and
would that.
Be considered exposure and so I
think there's a lot of different
um opinions around what that,
how exposure would be defined
and so that would be, that's one
of the biggest concerns that I
have around the term, especially
is.
Um, that it's, it's, it's too
broad, and so I, I wanted to to.
To make sure
And and and I appreciate that uh
and only I guess commonized
already in the statute, so and
it's been used over the years,
