Great so we have a full agenda
ladies and gentlemen.
Are we in a sock many.
Okay
you're gonna your public in the
need so we can wait a couple
more minutes actually we have
some time we just we have a full
agenda we have six.
Bills that we need to hear today
just to let all of you know
we're going to be kind of
jumping around a little bit here
and there there's a lot of
scheduling stuff going on so we
are not necessarily going to be
holding to this agenda as it
stated sorry about that but
that's just how goes sometimes
so I think I will begin with
house bill two thirty eight but
on representative of brown
destroyed
can we do your but your hospital
to thirty eight.
And also a breakfast is was
generously brought to us again
so please make sure to take
advantage of it do and silver I
think and city value court you
were responsible for these
breedos.
And members of.
It's my distinct pleasure to
bring before you h.
Do is propose th.
And.
And this is to.
And so
very simple were asking.
I have with me this morning we
have cheer jason burn.
So the idea here is.
Improve our roads.
Uh mr burns is go.
Thank you mister brings
thanks for joining us yes ma'am
good morning thank you for
having me
you know first off thanks for
allowing us to be here and kind
of propose
the bill on the initial I don't
know if anything like this is
ever kind of been proposed or
done but it's it's something
that we've talked about in
the
eddy county has discussed in his
willing to take on for as a
partnership and you know we we
wouldn't have seen the success
that we've seen over the last
few years without the
partnerships in southern new
mexico with dod.
A lot of our industry partners
so where we're trying to
continue on that initiative.
Um.
And what we're asking for you
know.
To be able to start new mexico
thirty one which I know is
already gone through some
preliminary work.
But the truth of it is that new
mexico thirty one from eighty
five to one twenty eight a.
It is in a state of repair right
now that is just not safe for
traffic and as that's one of our
main core doors and southern new
mexico for the.
Um
eddie my built not only at the
county but at and leave county
oil field it's it is a priority
and.
There.
The.
There's several priorities
especially in district to and
you know throughout the state
that.
Um this committee has heard now
we're what we're offering today
proposing is to take what we've
done in what we've perfect in
kind of curtain to.
To a pretty good process with.
Being able to design building
our partnerships that we have
down there to continue on our
success that we got down there.
Uhm.
During the last session that he
counted came and in through
several avenues was able to
secure funding to.
Finish the county reduce of fine
which ties into major in him
dealty roads route.
We're finishing that can as we
speak so we have resources on
the ground that were were kind
of requesting that.
We keep on the ground and keep
moving forward in a positive
direction.
Um.
The.
So it's a it it's really a I
think it believes everybody in I
think in him to your tease got
several priorities and projects
right now that they're focusing
their efforts on.
What we're going offering is a
helping hand keep this still
going forward in conjunction
with the dealt.
Will stand for any qu.
Madame chair and members I just
add that
mister burns and the public
works department in eddie county
just completed a loop road that
we have been asking.
So we know that the department
and.
They want.
We didn't want.
And we think this.
So without we do stand for
questions thank you
representative I was great to
hear our reps give credit where
credit is due to large agencies
that work really hard for us
I think from here we're gonna go
to the audience and I have a
show hands support for the bill.
All right we have a minute each.
If you could keep it to that or
less if you want to start.
Who was your hand hand over
there mister secretary would you
like to begin.
Yeah.
Chair committee my name is
edward city council
city carls back
we are for.
Highway thirty one is a.
To allow us to provide the
humanities for our very
deserving constituency and but
more importantly than the sales
are the soles the safety of the
people on these highways those
are those are my grandkids those
are my sons those are my
neighbors
their safety is.
Effort like this.
At the end of the day.
That i'm chair members funding
that thompson
restaurant lobbyist for the
permanent room safety coalition
civil toss resources in the
mexico mining association carls
b.
What
commissioner every year is just
said but I would like just to
reiterate what t.
Mr burns native county have the
expertise to do this on time and
under budget in any time of
partnership opt.
And the county that's willing
and has the expertise but we
strongly encourage in.
You're in opposition.
Okay for those of you online we
can now hear you if you want to
begin your comm.
Yes good morning chair and
committee members my name is a
then increased to do lou i'm an
energy and environmental
engineer I look for solutions to
problems with humans have
brought upon ourselves
especially toxic air pollution
and the current climate crisis a
retired navy commander I raised
my hand to support our
constitution and i'm a christian
i'll tell me to protect lives
people need clean air in order
to live and thrive parcelful
emissions account for ninety
percent of air pollution what
you're proposing here is to
support an industry that lied to
us and brought us to the point
where we have a situation which
in archipolco a hurricane went
from tropical storm to category
five in less than twenty four
hours with no warning it would
even go past category too how
many wildfires choking our loans
how many dry wells from how many
before we act so I in not and
supported this promoting and
subsidising the a farcel fuel
industry and the nuclear
industry which has not taken us
into consideration at all our
governments by with and for the
people.
Man thank you we're gonna start
be there and anyone else online.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee I made
both nothing registered
lobbyists for the new mexico gas
association we support this bill
to maintain high safety
standards by constructing
reconstructing state road and
needed the bestly partnered to
the oil and gas industry because
the the area where much of our
industry traffics as well as
where our employees live in work
thank you very much for your
consideration.
And last but not least.
Yes my name is jacob webber and
i'm just a citizen just happen
to hear this conversation here
i'm waiting for a different bill
but I would be in support of
this bill I think it's necessary
to happen with good public roads
I and we do need a well for our
modern society that it's
necessary for it for our
keeping our water clean through
filtering and transportation of
goods and services
it's good for it we need a wall
for millions of products that we
use every day that that keeps us
healthy save and strong
deliveries food to our tables
there is necessary to have good
public roads for for the safety
of the community thank you
thank you very much
this time includes public
commentary we're going to go to
our committee members I believe
I represent lunch from your
first
thank you matter and get.
The state I did have a few.
First i'd like to ask what do
your.
Are there any other examples.
Manager representative
we've done similar agreements
maybe not necessarily through
the avenue of a bill requesting
funds but we have done special
appropriations for building
roads at connect state roads
that are very similar to how I
would assume these funds will be
brought to the county.
The department.
The.
Maybe.
We have a couple of examples one
of them for construction of a
road which we did with.
For the project.
And then ongoing for maintenance
type purposes we have an
arrangement with the city of our
p.
Some construction locals are.
When you mention.
That's good.
The next question th.
What are the constructions down.
Better trade representative mr
burns will address that
number of.
In any of these roads that we
design with state money with
state funding we design these to
state standards what they're on
in him do two standards that
they keep readily updated which
we design our roads and
billbroads do the state standard
and what would be the initiative
with this road is that we would
do it in conjunction with the ot
and have them review it as we
are building and make sure that
they are proving the processes
on the design.
You know.
We have the equipment in the
expertise to do the road but
eddie county also has a high
level of maintenance requires
requirements what we would do is
we run this just like an
interview to you project we'd
put out a design and then we
would run a bid for the road and
we'd bring in a local new mexico
contractor to come and do the
work is what we would do and
we've honest wouldn't be
accounting.
Yes ma'am.
The section that we're asking
for today from where it would go
to be at the end of the inning
dot project which in india tears
currently preparing or I might
actually be all right now to bid
the intersection of two eighty
five and thirty one um they've
been working on that for quite a
while we've been supporting that
from the beginning and that
one's currently out the bits
where this would go from us from
the end of that project at the
intersection
through the intersection in new
mexico one twenty eight
it's it's right about eight
point seven miles.
And like I said that the
intention here would be to kind
of go through a design bill
process to make sure we go to
dealt to standards and review it
with um any dealt in the local
deal tea district to engineer
but the ideas that we would take
to this road and we do a full
reconstruct and we we've we've
really criticed some of the
processes we're doing some of
our roads that are connecting
both thirty one and
sixty two one eighty
and what we've done is we've
gone through and taking it all
the way back down to so grade
which is the original grade and
we've brought it back up with a
more suffice stabilised base and
then we've gone back with the
substantial payment section
and that's what we would intend
to do
its its were finding great
results for finding that it
works great we're finding that
we can get it in more
efficiently.
Which which more efficiency
means quicker because at the end
of the day what we're trying to
do is get a substantial road
section down it's going to last
for a long time as quick as we
can out of chair
is this.
The.
It's currently a two line road
so without what we would intend
to do is.
The challenge with this road and
this is also another reason that
we're here today's there is a
substantial amount of existing
infrastructure in this cordlord.
Um
what we would do in it in this
is and this is the problem that
we have with southeastern mexico
is we have
metropolitan or urban problems
in a rural area these roads were
not designed when they were
initially constructed to handle
the volume of traffic that
they're sink today.
So we are trying normal
reinventor or reconstruct what
we're currently saying that
accountings face this for since
the oil loyal and gas is started
and we've had to reconstruct all
of our old farm roads it might
have wanted to tractor down in a
week to handle thousands of of
vehicles.
We've we've done past studies on
this and I mean we're it's not
uncommon and we've we've
presented pictures and photos
and videos I mean will have ten
thousand vehicles in most of
them a seventy eighty percent is
heavy drop traffic
when.
No that's daily as daily and for
it and for down there and it
might be more we have not that's
been a few years ago
but the issue with this is in
this is kind of what I was
getting around to with urban
problems in rural areas it's not
necessarily the the volume which
is an issue it's keeping traffic
flowing because as we get there
and we try to get on and off the
intersections to where they're
trying to go in the lease roads
in the where they need to turn
if they don't have proper turn
lands in the avenue to get off
the road what that does is it
backs up traffic and it back it
up for miles and miles on end
that's the main purpose between
doing the two eighty five and
the thirty one project is to
keep the flow of traffic going
that's why we're doing one in
the proposed to do the
intersection at six or five is
if if we can keep traffic
flowing
then it it's a smooth transition
we're gonna look at doing some
passing line but would be more
important and be better abuse
would be turnline.
They do have a few but I think
what's.
Parts of the boom the of the
permit based and we're about
seven thousand vehicles
per day i'm in twenty nineteen
we did a study where around
around thirty two thousand
vehicles.
Representative will have to look
at it you took in the human
design.
Is.
The other other suggestion I
have.
Represented a long strong next
week.
Madam chair I don't really have
any questions.
To the secretary we also.
I see this is a very.
The.
We're going to be very
successful for in in nothing
like jason to pick one of the
hardest roads of.
And and so
there is.
Into this road.
There's a whole bunch of pieces
to listen I am not even willing
to guess it how many.
You know if you can't dream big.
Feel very confident that the s.
Vice.
Thank you madame chair
representative.
I have one question you're
asking for thirty million
dollars of non recurring funds.
And then would concerns music
the bottom of the physical
implications it says that this
might turn into a recording.
Manager and represent.
I think it's true that it it is
and this is on I guess it's.
So i'd like.
I'm not i'm sure the
representative were.
We're confident what the funding
is being requested.
Always busy.
What we're confident with the
number
and being able to bring this in
on time and under b.
It just concerned me that it
might turn into recurring and if
we get to that point would have
to revisit this at one point and
I would rather you guys have
enough money.
As you go down the line and you
know and like ribs in a room
trunk said.
Not doing very well and think
but you know I support this and
not an everything that I support
was the comment.
To higher contractors.
You know that that's important
that's very important because a
lot of these contractors have
been left.
You know to me that.
And on your preferences you have
you mexico contractors as a pr.
So the way that we've
traditionally started running
our bids as we actually offer a
preference for new mexico
contractors and local
contractors as well um that when
we are valuating the bids they
do get a preference with the
bid.
So that it it.
Instead of eyes local
contractors working in new
mexico.
Thank you for th.
That's very important.
Thank you vice chair I just have
a few questions.
First I want to start by saying
I I think that this is fantastic
I think that this could be a
model that could be used
throughout the states we've had
a problem from for some time I
think in that some of our
countries that produce a a
generous amount of revenue of
the state budgets end up getting
kind of ham strong and their own
ability to spend money they have
on infrastructure because
they're waiting for the rest of
the state and I know that that's
kind of the controversial thing
to say but I believe it's true
and i'm going to see it and I
think that this is actually a
way that we could possibly
leviate this problem so i'm
really I really want to hear
more about what the the joint
powers agreement looks like who
is who is responsible for what
who has upsigning these
agreements and at the end of the
day who was the authority to.
Can put execute them.
Thank you for the question madam
chair.
Manager.
Um typically the way these
things.
Similar agreement sir that we've
done dealt with work is um we'll
have an agreement with the.
Allotment and expenditure in
deal to your issue as a contract
with their terms and
specifications of scope of work
that the county will agree to in
the terms and that the
termination date that we have to
have done by.
Um.
And then what would what would
be as we would essentially be
the lead on this project with
oversight from dotty and so they
had write all their details in
requirements in that agreement
that eighty counting would agree
to and then work in partnership
with the ot.
Thank you very much
representative and and not to
not done this down but i'm just
a dumb lawyer I don't really
know a lot about these things
but so essentially dealt would
be your general contractor and
eighty county would be a serb or
no no the way that would work is
that.
Dot would essentially be.
And oversight they they would be
the.
The top that we would work
under.
The way I prefer to do these
native county as want to say
this but we were front of money
that he county we couldn't say
hey listen we have an agreement
now that the others going to pay
us we were front of money from
dealt we would run the project.
When dealt comes down and
inspected or agrees on there's a
disbursement that would come
back to deal to for completed
work um.
So with oversight from the other
car the way that works as I go
hire contractor to come in and
do the work that we've scoped
that they've approved.
They'll come in a sale k yeah
you did what you said you're
going to do we're going to pay
you after we've paid them out
it's a reimbursement.
So.
Thank you very much
representative and and so maybe
if someone.
This question how would you if
we were to appropriate let's say
the thirty million for this
project how does that work
what's the mechanism for that
how does that go into your
budget as online item would it
be AP three would it require its
own program what is how what
would it work.
Some items are perhaps the
simple way to explain it is
if we were like the federal
government issuing.
We were approving.
Probably the federal requir.
One of the the big things and
and i'm assuming.
Project the thirty million isn't
going to pay for the r.
Project in the long run.
But.
They need the support.
How do they secure the resources
that what otherwise.
And so the the other
consideration I just wan.
The model
that that you're looking at here
doesn't only benefit and
ambulance eddie county has
small.
That they're.
Tea for example puts out a call
for local government road fund
or transportation project fund
and a small co.
They could do the same thing
with a county where they would
come in and manage it that opens
up the possibility of aust being
able to tell gel well you know.
Appreciate that representative.
I could ask more questions i'm
not going to I again I think
this is a fantastic idea I think
you very much for bringing it I
am looking forward to hearing
more about it
as the days went on in this
session
at this time do I have a motion.
And do you need to call the
role.
Ten zero you have yourself.
And if you don't mind I like to
keep you up for two thirty one
as well.
Okay
committee.
Well.
Proposes to make an appro.
Reconstruct.
Madam ch.
It was so bad.
And when they were using a
microphone so essentially.
Hazard it's a great hazard so
the idea here is basically.
A study was done on h.
Scott.
And we know that the roadway was
never.
Lights of delays.
Made of channel the committee
know that this roadway corridor
is the heart of the o.
Madame chair representatives.
Um.
Don't like representative
branches and and if we
previously presented this is the
main core door on the artery
down to the.
The lifeblood of the world films
out these new mexico.
This is how they get in and out
and I mean that's this is the
room
and it is in its day to repair
it is a.
Yeah she described it's a rumble
so this one would be much more
em.
Ideal for the the
the fat three the passing lanes
too to get around in endow.
And be able to go in and and do
their own kind of previously
presented it it needs attention
now though the sword this would
be something that we would l.
Go to the instant have anybody
here in favor of the bill.
One minute.
Nest.
The.
Little western when.
Yeah.
Any member of your family.
The.
Thank you good morning maybe my
name again is any roberts so the
council calls bad
before I took the job I have.
Drove one twenty eight.
And there was the cherry snake
as far as you could see.
This is a very vital highway
this one that connects
carl's bad loving with
area jal area nuclear way
nuclear facilities leading out
towards during
as well as the website and this
is so vital for the only gas
industry as well there was a
question on the prior bill
regarding arterial connections
one twenty eight connects with
we have access road north and
south and with access road is so
vital to the all the gas
industry that in additional lane
was provided so that we have
traffic get off and get into
whip well all field.
Not chair committee members met
thomson registered lobbyists for
the premium road safety
coalition in mexico mining
association so the toss
resources cities across bed
hobs.
Just like everybody said this is
a bottle rock road but it's in
its a lot of industries that are
down there contributing a lot of
revenue to this state those
revenues have led to free school
lunches free college free early
childhood education and a multi.
Put in the place the last few
years if we're going to keep
moving the mexico forward we
have to take care of the year.
To be spread across the rest of
the state it's just like.
If you don't take your tools.
Strong suppo.
Yeah.
I mean back.
We have anybody else and support
here.
Can I start with those online.
A good morning good morning i'm
in support of this bill I think
it's time that that we fix some
of these roads that are to
desperate need in our state
special more rural areas I think
this is this from what i'm
hearing and i'm not from that
particular corner of the state
but I know that that that most
of our revenues for the state
come from that area that's it's
we can't do anything an
interstate without those
revenues its vital that there
that those roads be maintained
for the safety people so that
people don't get hurt on those
roads
you know whether it is the area
guide trying to drive to work
in our trucker that's trying to
get his load to to the the
refinery or whatever yeah it's
very vital we keep those wrote
safe for people so that they
don't lose her lives thank you
so much.
Thank you
makes me go to our own
person
thank you madame chair members
of the committee about another
registered lobbyist for the new
mexico oil gas sociation we
support this bill for many of
the reasons already stated and
the dangerous conditions and the
need for improvements in
additional lanes the highway
mainly serves the oil and gas
industry in the communities of
leonetti counties where those in
our industry lived in working
today and we think the sponsored
for bringing this bill forward
thank you.
Thank you very much now we go to
opposition does anybody oppose
this bill in the ar.
Do you have an opposition online
okay
members of the committee
represented the pedograph.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you preferred in a brown for for
this bill my intention was to
sign on this early and
appropriations as me running
around like a chicken with a
head cut off right now so
let him chair I think.
This whole committees heard me
talk about how we twenty eight
one twenty eight for four years
now so um
the the plan that are district
and and the ot has with respect
to this is
based as as was discussed based
on peace million things together
in that because of the way that
we're receiving.
There is no reason why we can
all this thing together
turn around a project and get it
complete while they've benefits
the state and new mexico.
Said this before and I will say
it again.
There's studies out there that
show for every hundred million
dollars you invest in roads and
the premium basin the return on
investment to the state is one
point five billion dollars.
There's not an investment scheme
out there like this.
And in fact if I get fifteen
times my money i'm going to put
it i'm gonna sell every house
everything that I own and just
put it in there so
with respect to that lee county
this neck of the woods is not
the tourist destination.
But it makes the rest of the
state a tourist.
Because of the revenue that we
bring in.
In as some of our people that
spoke in and supported this.
That this neck of the woods thus
revenue stream that is well over
fifty percent of our general
fund.
Creates the funding for all the
other projects across the state
as we dropped about free school
free food.
So many different pieces of the
pie that is happening state
wide.
And house appropriations we have
two point over two billion
dollars of funding that is
coming from the majority of from
oil and gas.
For different agencies with no
guard relates.
That creates a concern for me
but what it tells you is without
this we're not going to have the
ability to continue many of the
programs that we have.
Yesterday I heard a presentation
and and house appropriations it
says willing gas was platowing
with respect to the revenue must
be clear we're not platoing.
We diverted money from house
bill too senate bill twenty six
and senate bill through seventy
eight last year to make it to
wear.
Depending on who describes it to
where that are consistent number
anything in excess goes
somewhere else
we need to have this down here
the you've heard some of the
traffic counts and I actually
have the traffic counts for that
area that show for if you
compare one light one single
lane to a single lane between
farmington and albuquerque.
We're almost there.
This road consistently looks
like the end of the day after
the skira.
You've got back to
all the way down the hill
appear and
during the day and you know I
actually have my field staff
that I try and keep off.
We need to get it done we don't
need to build the thirty one
side the jobside in the four
intersections of this at
different times.
For the stated new mexico for
the revenue that the state needs
we need to.
Thank you.
Representative.
The.
Represent.
Okay go to hospital to forty
five.
Okay here in our house still two
forty five.
Rosal error center erasing
events one question
representative him rest first
bill presentation.
Uh madam chair yes and i.
Okay well i'll tell you a little
story representative way back in
the day we have used to actually
ask representatives to stand up
on the four of the house and
sing a song before as they were
passing their first bill so you
can imagine the issue the shenan
against that went on as part of
that process consider yourself
lucky that you would do you got
to avoid that but
that in my one and she tell us a
little bit about how to forty
five.
Thank you madame chair and tr.
But I can do a joke
did you did you hear what
happened to rude off the red
those random he was in a
terrible accident he's in high
cu hanging on for dear life.
For those if you who remember
her we might have another kelly
for hard on our
so
no thank you madame chair
members of the committee
house bill two forty five is an
appropriation for the
roswell air center i'd like to
say it is.
Pretty straightforward but i've
come to learn that nothing is
actually pretty straight forward
around here
but it is to help the roswell
air center develop
infrastructure to
and an equipment
to help a tracked the reno air
races which are leaving
reno nevada after fifty nine
years.
Essentially they this is why the
fastest motor sports in the
country
and the only f a a credit it a
credit did air race.
Reno erases have act have
essentially outgrown.
Part of the reason that they are
leaving.
And so.
Roswell is one of the.
For this
what we need to do roswell needs
to do the airport is show some
commitment to them there are
some upgrades to our facilities
that w.
Show them that we are in earnest
last year this last year.
Which was a little high.
Or economic and.
We're looking at around sixty.
With a.
At some point.
Balloon fiesta.
State.
Madame chier members of the
committee thank you very much
for allowing.
We are really really excited
with the help of my conspirator
and all the team that was has
been working on this project for
a couple of years now it just.
Gets everybody all pumped up
down there at the meeting that
was held in ras will in.
Of the entities that were in a
tendence there were obviously
the.
Grouped does.
You know which are no not going
to be held there anymore but we
are the community input not just
from the russell area or the
chavis county but the
surrounding areas was remarkable
and madame chair appreciate you
being there as well.
The.
People are.
Thrilled a death that we do
stand the possibility of being
the host for the rose will area
racing air racing.
Rose the raws will international
airport and that's what it's
called now it used to be an
airbase it's a second learn
longest runway in the united
states so we do have the builty
to do lots of things out there
we have to cape ability of.
The.
Ex.
Making something really
exquisite happen in light of who
else is the contenders for the
final I thought we were in the
top three
the top three now as far as
contention for these races
covered door state the economic
impact.
The representative says about
sixty thousand.
I'm going to be a little more
generous than that i'm going to
say between six.
And if this does happen we would
like.
You could even stand out at my
ranch do this because they will
be flying over here so
mr spirit if you would like to.
Thinking about him cheer.
This is a pretty exciting.
And it's a economic opportunity
and a tourist marked obviously
we met with the surrounding
communities in.
Impact obviously.
The.
An over a hundred.
The let this last race as a
represent of said
pretty hefty number of folks is
showed up to.
And the anticipate will see the
same thing for the fir.
Man share weaker that we we we.
We made it down to the top
three.
Two side visits already.
If they said if they could go on
the feelings of how they feel
about a place.
But it's a this is a decision
the other two locations are.
Lots of funny secur.
Because there's some things
we're going to need obviously if
you've been anywhere for fifty
nine years had to move your
house after that long it's tough
can you emerge in the amount of
equipment and things that they
w.
The economic corporation of of
ross will chave his count he has
fully funded every.
Proposal.
To a twenty five thousand dollar
submission for sight visits and
so on we believe that our
investment was surely pay off
for many years to come in this
bill madame chair members of the
committee is
not a recurrent bill it's a one
time van to help fun
infrastructure needs of well
actually for four years.
If you've been an ascar is like
dascorn the sky you know they go
five her miles an hour fifty
five fifty feet off the ground
and enrosals only play single
faster than that.
And the pilots of all the
classes are seven classes came
to rose looked at our airfield.
Looked at all the opportunity
and said we can't do but we
needed.
They have a slogans yet I think
we're now in there that
negotiation.
And I I was sure you madam sure
and members of the committee
that you know one of the areas
that we kind of header hit
shaken about was can we support.
Well.
When we contacted the the sran
communities and especially read
also who was just at an hour
drive away
they said absolutely because the
time of the racing is september
right after labor day when the
horse rations down and nothing
else is going on that time
period so the hotellers will
have great opportunities for the
incoming visitors as you know
that i'm sure this region as a
lot of military from parliament
to to cannon to white sands to
curling later military will come
here.
They were limited in nevada by
the either area primarily their
spectators were northern
california some out of novata
here they have a big.
The.
So we we're pretty excited
about.
Because not only will it help
the races once a year.
But also helped with through
every summer they have a
respitator we certification
score so the piles have to come
for training every summer so
we'll see them more than just
once a year and thre.
The many opportunities I believe
that will happen if we are
awarded th.
Not only from just the races and
the people in the business that
will happen.
Organically.
But the people they will
remember new m.
Only it'll be the air races and
everything else any messages
fames for you know one of the
things i'll sure missed america
is that.
This group.
Truly believes in the mexical
because of this reason.
They call themselves the
september family.
Cause every september aviation
aviators from across the world.
Come to reno.
And there were very much of
family.
They feel that culture and in
our state they fill in her
values in our ethics in the love
of our country the love of our
state the cuisine they loved new
mexico and were very excited
about that opportunity thank
you.
Thank you very much to go to the
islands can I show hands of
support from this bill.
You can even do two hands if you
want.
Are any opposition to the bill.
Yes good morning
i'm in general support of this
bill at the end of the help
support generally aviation also
in that state I know I have been
starting to be able to pile of
myself I would hold it some of
the money would be set you know
be used also to help out the
general aviation in that
community
may with hangers or or canopies
or some some way of helping the
general aviation
grow in that area that be my
comment thank you
thank you very much
and now we're gonna go to
members of the committee we are
going to start with.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
I think rose what was known as
the city.
And this is consistent with that
so many do you have.
So that request.
Thank you for the question yes
as you as you could imagine in
any large event.
One of the biggest price tags
is.
Three million dollars they have
a very large grandstand and we
don't.
Won't make a trip to the mexic.
Requirements either so we would
have to pursue that and they
were sufficient for the volume
of visitors they.
One of the other commission
asked car is is one of the.
Is that the large mount of are
veers.
And we are looking towards
putting the infrastructure in
the ground to support those are
viewers in reno
they have a number of resp.
Which means they're fully
contained our hope is to put
upgraded facilities where they
can get the water and they get
the electricity and so on so
when they stay there they can
have it.
And heather resource they
currently need when I saw the
arvie spaces in.
But that's some of the things
that we will need madam chair
representative and also we need
to do some fencing because we
need to as you know as you
mentioned as as their reps is
all mentioned about our large
runway we have two one ways and
will we plan to do is is
actually rope off the other I
will say robot fence of the
smaller runway and that'll be
the area for
all the activities and they'll
still allow all the businesses
to do what they need to do is
well submit airlines to flying.
So you'll pay for a lot of those
activi.
That's really good information.
Them to represent yes absolutely
they are as well.
With both of the.
Sect active sectory adams was
really intrigued and very
excited because this is another
steeped other city for new
mexico they'll be created with a
lot of the.
A funny stream in place already
for an instrument infrastructure
graham is very small as one
point.
That covers entire state
certainly won't make a big d.
However I think that we'll do
some clarify marketing and with
a choice and department so in
res.
Thank you and that.
Years ago.
The fact that.
Final question.
Themselves represent yes the the
anticipated december but i.
They really had to go to drive
more because they've not had to
move nearly sixty years and
they're looking for a promo
they're not looking for a
temporary location they're
looking someplace for another
sixty years
so so their time mine is shipped
from.
The fineless.
Over thirty you know communities
across the country that they've
been on it they never to down
to.
Start negotiating and they're
then to spate they will have an
announcement by.
Anticipated might be sooner than
that i'm hopeful because once
once we are works and would be
very optimistic positive about
it was rewarded they are racist
that it's and give us your
between the leverage to really
go out and seek those service in
almost different things that you
need to be successful and that's
what our situation will do up
you're right it's it's a scary
race you know it's five hundred
miles an hour fifty feet off the
gr.
You know one of things that i'm
sorry it's it's it's some sole
enthusiastic about these races
that it's not just the races.
Because when with the use for
filler between the races is an
air show.
And they've had the thunderburst
in the blanchels and the
canadian snow birds and I mean
all kinds of activities so it's
it's such a draw to bring people
in.
And I am still i'm sorry there
was one member and the audience
you wanted to make a quit quick
comment in support.
Jim think mentioned I just
wanted to say this is a great
build this is a great idea.
This came up.
This is right for the community
it also.
Now we go to you represent a
lot.
Thank you manager thank you
representative for bringing this
forward and a.
So I have a couple of questions
about him chair so how long how
long does this event.
Medicine.
Event is about seven or ten days
and I say that because they
actually come in.
They'll come in on a saturday
number saturday typically th.
And they're there for another
ten days because there's there
so that's when the pilots get
there with their airplanes but
all the main is team and
everything else comes in earlier
and they stay later so they're
about there about fourteen days
roughly in june about the same
time frame because they're going
bring their planes in they're
going to find the course one of
the areas ma'am chair
representative is is eastern
extra university in raswell is a
part of this on the endeavour
because during the during the
june event when they're here for
training the university is
offering them.
We find that experience in june
it will also be never number
days thank you thank you for
that think you manage her so a
is there a current commercial or
free flights coming in error
that airport now
manager represent yesterday we
have a daily flights with
american airlines from dallas we
were adding we have two flights.
And we are working towards other
your service opportunities
because we'll see this as an
opportunity to bring people on
to rose wall to the other air
carrier or through albuquerque
would have you to bring wor.
Thank you for that manager thank
you sir so with the event
interfere with that commercial
traffic.
That's your reserve no
absolutely nothing
another question that I have
madam chair and representative
is so
although into speeding though
all these people to come in
which is great promote new
mexico i'm for a hundred percent
as a matter of fact I may use
this as a template to prove my
area and somewhere another so
of my question is madam chair so
would we would there be a
preference to local vendors.
A medicine absolutely correctly
yes it's it's new mexico first
and the near body else thank you
for that III really I really
like manager what what is what
it what's being attempted here I
like the fact that this
investment is also going to help
commercial and possibly felt
free.
And so III think this
investments are good investment
and I hope that.
I I wouldn't mind.
We go to represent.
The.
Congratulations your first bill
has passed the
victim
chair thank you members of the
committee thank you very much
I don't know.
Okay we are now on the committee
sub for discussion represent.
Okay
there are some coast sponsors
here in and also the drafters
have been again is going to come
down if there's technical
questions.
They can look at it now while
we're discussing it
and bridge it will go upload it
to the system right now.
It hasn't been adopted yet.
Thank everybody for being here
madame chair this is the house
transportation public works
capital improvement committee
sub for house bill one ninety
public private partnership
agreements and the sponsors
include myself representative
lunch drum a representative
brown and senator.
As most of you.
Numerous p three bills i'm just
going to say p three standing
for AP.
Years in many of you.
For the past two years the bills
have passed the house last year
unanimously and they've been
held up.
Both of those spills focus.
Facilitate construction of roads
a transportation facilities and
broadband and they established a
board in the new mexico finance
authority to oversee the process
hospital one ninety streamlines
the process in consultation with
ceo market a rustle of the new
mexico finance authority are
demunisable league and several
of their experts this bill now
requires the board of finance
division in the department of uh
financi.
To promigate the rules for to
review and to approve the public
private partnership agreements
it amends an enact sections.
Why the committee sub
the original bill that you read
did not limit p three agreement
sitting.
That anybody wanted to propose
so we re added that
transportation broadband it does
add even charging facilities.
The regional bell as I said that
you received.
A couple points as you go
through this sections section
one has definitions and it does
define the public partner
as.
Roads and that is one reason why
I think it's so important to
this committee is that allows it
for their.
Section two is the new section
of the procurement code.
It.
Section three it's another new
section there's four no sections
of the procurement code it says
how to handle and solicited
proposals in detail at section
four has the rules of what the
division
in the division of the board of
finance should do a section five
talks about evaluation and
performance and section six
adds public private partnerships
to the most high term contracts
that are already in the
procurement code so section six.
Section
online ten page ten.
Representative guarantee had
ment.
Actually have the same c.
Changes.
Setting up agreements.
The project that we heard
earlier.
Much representative keeping mind
worse still on the committee
substitute do we have any
questions from commanding
members on the substitu.
III don't know for this really a
place to commit substitute but I
just have a question in general
so this is great I like the idea
however will we
who whose which entities can
apply for this counties I mean a
cipalities which I can can
partner with the private.
A state agency.
Thank you for that so a manager
by doing that and
madame chair representative that
hasn't.
Think thank you for that
representative
so then other questions I have.
Is will we be.
State municipal county
employees.
With private the private
companies and private private
individuals madame cheer
representative no unless it was
a specific kind.
Thank you for that so then that
so you're telling me that
manager that.
State employees.
When you spoil.
Yes manager thank you for that
clarification thank you manager.
Any other questions on the
committee substitute.
Care of a mo.
Opposition.
The.
Great you have yourself a
committee substitute we're back
on the bill i'm gonna go to
audience do we have anybody who
stands in support of this and a
new committee substitute so
let's start with secretary
certain please end up you have a
minute sure think about so a
couple of exam.
Design build maintain for
example design build me.
When we issued from never the
strategy to build out the states
charging infrastructure we
essentially provision that only
not only do these.
Providing the match pursuing to
our requirements for our bar
federal requirements for new and
the responsible for maintaining
the facilities for up to five
years and because they're
trying.
These facilities are are
properly functioning on a
regular basis is significant the
other example and we see a lot
of the.
Yeah.
That federal grand actually
included in it.
And so the federal government's
movie to this place now where
you can write in the private
partner into a federal grand
receiving award and then that
regard not have to go out to be
in once you receive that and so
far too often state agencies are
able to sign.
Been the private sector
direction these partnerships and
we recently come that with the
work we're trying to do to get a
gu.
But just like this bill we w.
Benefit of being able to do that
to get that project done so
we're supportive of tools that
kind of strengthen our ability
to get things the more quickly
and certainly in ways that.
Madam chairman of the committee
carter bonding with asked me we
do stand and support of the
committee sub we want to take
representative garrett of course
you work for four percent of
lunch from for years on these
very things we've supported the
transportation facility and road
and broadband for I think it's
actually been about five years
now we've supported that in the
inclusion of even charging in
the committees of is certainly
something that from our
perspective our members don't
really do that and we wouldn't
expect anyone in the public
sector to be building those and
maintaining them so i'm we're
grateful to both of the sponsors
for working on this and we do
stems work.
Next gentleman and.
The.
Yeah.
And at this point.
Right now.
My missing anybody
is there anyone in opposition to
the bill
anybody online
okay committee members.
I do not.
Have anybody in opposite.
Congratulations you have
yourself an amended minister or
i'm sorry committee substitute
thank you unwarded up working
with an effort a little bit
little.
The.
Okay next we're going to go to
house bill one eighty six
representative.
Yes.
Good morning representative how
are you manager welcome to house
transportation please tell us
about house bill one eighty six
thank you madame chair
but this bill does is it reasons
the threshold amount of damages
to a vehicle from five hundred
dollars to a thousand or more to
trigger the requirements for
written accident report.
Of the damage vehicle to the.
Resulting in bodily injury or
death of any person or total
property damage to an apparent
extent of a thousand or more
show within five days after the
accident for the written report.
So madam chair committee asked
you passed this bill to the
house and I passed it through a
senate and
senator sender was gonna present
it and it just ran out of time
it was like up next in the truck
ticked off some bringing it back
this year and.
Adam chairman members of the
committee my name is jeff berlin
the traffic safety director.
This bill really helps us in
terms of the crash data that we
process that's a very important
and vital component to the
program that we implement across
the state and the partnerships
we have to have with the law
enforcement agencies so this
essentially will eliminate some
of those minor fender better
crashes that are reportable to
us to the crash data system and
it'll help us prices that date a
little more efficiently not
having to sit through those
crashes that are under that
threshold.
To have anybody in the islands
who is in support of this bill
hands
okay i'll start with you mister
people change
their manager thank you very
much.
Thank you very much mister
secretary for the reasons
thanks representative again we
just ran up against the clock
last year.
Anybody else in support
anybody online.
One percent okay we can hear you
the person online.
Mr t as if you want to unmute
yourself.
Okay thank you
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee my name
is already on the acting
executive director of the border
programs at nmt I unfortunately
him ill and unable to be there
in person but i'm grateful for
this opportunity by zoom to
stand in support of this bill.
Very nice anyone else.
Mr every back
yes good morning i'm just
listening here to it i'm
generally in opposed to this
bill I don't think I think that
they will be confusing to the
general public I think that that
the five hundred dollars
is is more reasonable at this
time thank you so much.
They came out of chair thank
you.
So I i.
Mexico.
Regardless of.
Madam chair we know we call the
police.
So i.
Yeah.
Manager representative those are
from the law enforcement
agencies who collect those
reports and they're also from
you know any individual that has
to file the report for their
insurance purposes on the
automatically go into the system
so the way that their data is
collected is through actually a
formal.
Chair and.
Again.
I I think also there's a
question when there is a fender
bender let's say.
I don't think you do know
exactly what it is always.
The other thing is madame chair
or the driver.
Our secretaries here president
social.
I'm sure.
The.
Okay next we have a.
Representative to see you thank
you for being here
just really one.
Madam chair I think last year
that was the the number they
used.
Madame chair representative
based on data collected from
other states that kind of the
the limit or the amount that
other states utilized so that's
why we went with that amount but
you're absolutely right and you
know most minor crashes the
damage could be upwards of a
thousand dollars and I think
those those crushes are still
absolutely reported and they're
getting through the system this
really just kind of freezes up
reasons that we don't have to
analyze that those crashes that
are under that threshold so
those crashes are still going
into the system it just means
that we don't necessarily have
to sit through sit through that
data to i'm really look at the
severe crashes injury crash.
I don't also want to see you
come.
Madame chair I would be but i'd
like the department to do some
more homework to make sure
we were looking into that before
we just do it here on the I
think it's a great idea but
before we go to the n.
Let me ask the department to
just do.
Thank you that i'm sure.
Uh.
I'm not sure to remember i'm
sorry.
But you just.
But yeah i'll just you know i'm
happy to support this I just.
Everything is going to be.
Manager representative the one
thousand dollars is like a
federal recommend mandation from
the m m m ucc.
So that's the reason that we
were w.
Is to decrease the number of
reports.
Rate but you're not going to
decrease the number.
Thank you very much have any
other questions from committee
members
ever motion.
All right do you have any
opposition.
Graduations.
Yeah.
And that this point folks were
doing the floor around eleven
and the next bill we have going
to be paying a lot once we're
going to roll house bill one
nineteen.
Before anybody leaves i'm so
sorry i'm so sorry such an
important announcement we have
friends of transportation
toppers meal six to ten pm and l
c
tomorrow night the sponsors are
my extend of all justin race
escar consulting and then a
first we have our second
committee dinner because one is
just not good enough for us and
that's going to be on that's
next thursday february first
dinner for two five thirty
nine five thirty it's at six
dinner for two and that is
sponsored by joe thompson young
youtes and many many others so
we shall see all of you there.
Dinner for two is across the
street from doing what prime
yeah
and the address is on the
outlook out there invade.
