Start this morning with Senate
bill three thirty issue.
Senator okay wonderful are you
just happy to see you to morning
madam chairman members of the
committee I've Marquita Russel
here with me.
Mexico finance authority is
Madam chairman members of the
committee to make it simple.
Daniel we bring before the
communities in the legislature
it has to do.
Project revolving fund and all
it is is it gives authorization
to qualifying entities doesn't
mean they're approved because
there's no appropriation
authorized I if they decide they
want to do it throughout the
year this is for low cost loans
from the New Mexico.
That's all it does not
only thank you very much Senator
M. S. need very important.
Our prop programs every year so
thank you for bringing that
anybody in the audience here to
support Senate bill three thirty
two.
Anybody opposed to it.
Okay committee members.
Referred house.
We probably will for.
Copy.
Rural representatives from here
Representative.
Representative David Preece.
Representative Harper your.
Representative Johnson here.
Representative Lundstrom here
Representative.
You.
Representative.
Representative Barreras chair.
Representative Garcia here in a
couple weeks ago here.
Okay now we have a quorum is
anybody opposed to this bill.
Madam secretary yourself if you
thank you so much chairman
members of the committee now I'm
gonna take you up on your offer
couple this.
I highly recommend the
blueberry.
Okay next we're going to go
house bill three twenty.
Representative Castellano or.
There is.
Representative Sweetser.
The.
Chair.
Is.
Posted.
Right.
We
right tell us about your bill.
Thank you.
Committee I want to introduce my
experts Mr read more member and
others.
This bill makes forty eight to
that mission off highway motor
vehicle are.
All of my experience the the
changes why there.
When Mr chair.
Committee my name is Roy Moore
what was the law firm I'm also
here to represent their.
Harris I just.
The needed changes to the off
highway motor vehicle and it
changes which will help the
within the years of self years
we've built in the state of New
Mexico the first changes the
change the way to describe it
pulls.
Distracted news.
Now this rate is low pressure
that would change to our non
highway there's also a change in
the way that they describe.
Gross vehicle weight to a
driveway and there is a change
in how in the weight that you
are using to rules the primary
driver change in the way is that
a man for vehicles that are
electric driven so that people
are asking for collection off
highway vehicles and those types
of changes the vehicles get has.
Also demand for enclosed cabs
and when you start having closed
caps the the wait goes up for
those as well and then the
fourth change is to remove a the
description of vehicles that
talks about engine to select
which is no longer around in the
states in the various categories
New Mexico is behind the times
in terms of describing these
vehicles and I have you know the
not on page states what but I
can tell you reach one of the
proposed changes Mexico is
moving from the small minority
of states to the greater
majority of states that
describe.
That's a quick a second.
How do we have any here and
public support of the.
Anyone posted.
Of the.
All right let's start with
Representative delivery thank
you madam chair so.
This is.
Representative.
Madam chair representative who's
that's a good question hi
looking at statutes and not
quite sure and I apologize and
doing my best attempt to.
Service the expert could be here
today so I think the statute go
back and try to see all right.
Appreciate the changes only
because.
So much for now in the area and.
I appreciate that thank you.
Representative Fletcher the food
in a movie sure what would that
make sure.
With the table.
Yes second.
The other the session.
Right as anybody us do members
opposed to go.
Are at the center of the house.
More money for us here next we
have Senate bill one sixty.
Thank you sure.
This is not owners of looks
it's.
Finish up some of the work over
many years from reception.
We are seeing that locks the
phone related to each other at
insurance corporation
registration hello sees all
kinds of slowing move those
functions to more compared to
the corporations to secretary of
state with the insurance.
This is a transportation these
are these are not authorization
to attraction taxpayers.
For us those kind of things that
is part of this oversight
because they were they're not in
operation I need to do so try to
appears to be two of the.
Then the company and that is
where it says this last pieces
this is would move
transportation functions here
have seconds like this
particular.
Also rose the number of
all transportation related they
need to go under transportation
secretary.
And the places they build mostly
scratching up mission serving
part this page is provided
during that there are some new
sections that those are getting
things realligned some of
statutes that do you need and
the with that I'll turn it over
to my experts who secretary of
teaching in the bill of smaller
questions Russell wrestlers from
peers.
Morning secretary ari according
to transportation to.
We have.
We're in celebration after gonna
schools is the best.
Provisions of the world so I
mean obviously the from the
transportation sits in the
streets assuming
the transfer responsibilities to
the so recently with the point
of entry as you may know from
UPS and we've taken this bill
it's the second year I think
that that we are really close
sort of our warm to get up to
the governor's office we have a
lot of discussions internally
about the resources we need just
to manage the the actual cost of
friends responses we verified
with the LFC and others that
house to a standard language
that essentially provides for
the bi directional recurring
funds with functions and
reassembled legislation all we
know that there may be some of
the costs associated with.
Officers legal supported
business support and so we
expect that our first our first
legislative session will be with
you representing that we perform
for these functions that come
into the office and ask for
additional support so that
that's to be expected but very
shortly after you know these
discussions will stick with the
PRC and do the eight about what
are what we need to be done on
his of this is that every she's
one or within the council's
office with expertise on.
It's just currently even the
economic questions about yes
very much all right is there
anybody in the audience to
support this bill.
On the zoom.
What do you want to ask for is
to make a statement is next for
or is just your true.
Is there anybody in the audience
audiences opposes this bill.
Right let's go to the committee.
Representative Harper than
representatives from.
Thank you.
Senator secretary can issue this
morning
Just to I think quick questions
looking at some comments from
the PRC on page three of our.
they mention that.
There's essentially a six month
transition here they're kind of
talking about with regards to
collecting fees and.
And they recommends that there's
a temporary provision allowing
you all coming eight go and DO
to promulgate rules ahead of the
transfer so that there's not
kind of just six months period
where it's kind of vague about
what the fees are going to be
collected do you have any
thoughts on on that.
sure from chair representative
it's a good we actually have
that we can process it looking
at ninety days right after the
required public postings and and
so on and so forth so be sure
students this bill you know
passes will get to work on
because we understand that
there's a customer at the end of
these functions that we don't
want to disrupt and so from Palm
Beach this is the one that
filling in the gaps for example
the hearing process should
someone just sort of peel right
off provide that we oppose of
the junction of the lives of a
permit that we would issue I
will be working a job
administrative hearing office to
see if they could fill in some
of those gaps where those things
are ultimately be appealed to
the commission in this case the
PRC we might you know modify
those functions to and the
secretary or someone else
there's a lot of work to do we
start sooner
Okay so so madam chair and
Senator and secretary so it
sounds like
no was the passes I'm guessing
the exact need to act this is
July first for this bill so you
have some time to get those
things moving along so it sounds
like you don't believe that a
a temporary.
is necessary
to do everything done in time
Madam chair representative the
there's only one form concern
because with that in aggregate
wealth the building which we
would assume responsibility for
the state of these apartments is
that it occurs in the middle of
the screen.
And so today on the bill which
is January of twenty four what
essentially call for the special
rate assumption of those
functions that you need and so
one of the things you have to
ask the FAA very quickly is
orchestrate that that the
transfer of revenue to the
eighteen misses your tier right
that we don't miss a beat on
supporting those.
Okay that's that's helpful yeah
so effective is January one of
twenty four okay all right then
I think the only other question
I have madam chair and center
secretary.
Again on page three of all the
F. I. R. talk about sections
three three five.
that says peers is not aware of
any carrier subject to fees in
this section three of the bill
as water Kerzner crackers are
excluded and the fees do not
apply to real companies names
recommend strikingly sections.
The from the bill any comment on
that.
Your students Jeffries.
Morning Mr is.
Did you hear the question.
Yes can you hear me yes I'm
here.
Yes so section three can we
what do you want to do that this
session or into another session
that's fine
but I do have a COVID offer with
regard to the question about the
transition period and the
necessity of having legislation
to allow for the DOT to
promulgate rules because they
would not be it would be
prohibited from promulgating
rules without legislation until
we get there and that's not
going to be enough time for them
to have hearing procedures in
place of the not going to be
enough time for them to put in
the fees that will be needed in
rural.
I believe it Representative
Harper I'm sorry I'm not there
there was asking those questions
yes ma'am it was yes yes.
Yes I think the spot on with
those concerns.
Yes so so measures Senator miss
Jeffrey's thank you for that
I was very much in agreement
that we need to finish you know
of this transition and and
I want to slow things down here
we still have some time on the
session laughed I guess I would.
Recommend madam chair that we
think about eight.
Maybe of a foreman meant to
provide this temporary provision
and maybe strike session three
and then you would just have to
do concurrence on the Senate
side with that's workable we
actually just that.
So we didn't want to.
needed to study the.
There we we had discussed that
we may propose that we if we
feel us okay.
The.
Senator Browne.
Yes thank you madam chair more
Senator Mr secretary.
So I
think this bill makes.
Excuse me sense transportation.
Membership being transportation
I think of that I I remember
some years ago we we have a lot
of debate here in the
legislature madam chair about.
it seems to me the taxi cab
companies in Santa Fe almost
have an awfully and we're
fighting to keep the bar after
all that and that kind of.
Without that market when that
happens but I've always madam
chair question why this was in
the PRC and committee my
knowledge of history doesn't go
that far but I I think there was
just a traditions have those
kinds that respect to cancel the
HSD thank you I think.
Cashel we have an insurance
company or insurance function
with the beers.
We have our traditional Parisian
here's section is so that
happened so we're trying to fix
iterations so madam chair I
think it makes sense to do sign.
We don't often see those that
are this lengthy and again one
of it is just a little
mechanical change for the the
language
I hope we cut everything I think
they're eighty two sections to
this bill R. and I'm sure the
drafters of trying to catch
everything they could at this
this time that madam chair there
is something here in the one of
the analyses that I wanted to
mention.
Senator in secretary and it's
that the PRC has noted that
other state agencies might be
able better to take care of the
rules of certain parts of this
puzzle for example madam chair
it says here that inspectors of
might be at the transportation
division might better place with
the department of public safety
also
That apparently the ambulance
and
and what services regulation is
split between the PRC and the
department of health and so it
looks madam chair kind of like
the proposal for musical chairs
and I don't do that now but just
as time goes on and see how this
phone this these really do still
need to be in the proposed
department transportation one of
things after.
This vision or the program
colleges.
Physically located in one spot
all these functions are one
location for the most part of
the reason you were else on your
so if it makes sense from a
logistical standpoint all these
guys in the exchange of our this
farce of this not that simple
understand this farmers day
today operations and they're
able to continue more or less at
the there are technical issues
regarding fees and so forth it's
not as simple as saying that
it's the physical part of it is
service location they'll
continue to operate pretty much
as they do you're right we may
all future may well look at some
other things but from the
standpoint of simplicity and
making PRC all right are operate
this was a simple short period
and then finally madam chair and
senator secretary I think that
the public regulation commission
might actually be relieved to
the.
Free of this so thank you madam
chair very much Representative
Lundstrom thank you very much I
think part of the issue here is
that the PRC state hi result of
the former corporation
commission study corporation
that's filing out of anything
else ended up with the
corporation commission so it
doesn't surprise me that we have
this inside PRC madam chair but
I do agree with Representative
Parker I think this needs to be
a floor amendment to correct
this I I do have concerns about
the framework in terms of the
timing and all of this of.
I think this is the only
Canadian that this bill goes to
I think it's a simple amendment
Representative Harper could put
that on and or or the chair I
just think that we need to do
that thank you madam chair you
can.
The name anyone else.
I can share with the comments of
my colleagues I think that you
know does need to stop you here
but Senator if you would
consider more amendment I wanted
us to be happy to put it on for
you just a kind of make sure
were dotting all of our eyes and
crossing tease I also it sounds
like with throughout the
transition we should probably be
checking in with the O. T. to
make sure everything is going
fine and and over the interim
that might be one of the issues
that we want to put on our radar
so that we can continue to look
after the the transition if we
need to do to get you more FTEs
if we need to liaise with LFC
when there's just you never know
with something like this what
issues are going to come up so
I'll probably check in with you
secretaries certain on this
issue throughout the interim and
if you need any any help on that
we're happy to get you some so
with that can I have a motion.
I'm sure who do tests on Senate
bill one sixty six at.
We have any opposition.
Senator is a thank you madam
chair we will ask the secretary
if you will to visit with you
New Mexico Representative Parker
Sanchez the amendment is that I
think that's we talked a little
bit about that.
Thank.
Thank.
Sen.
I'm here but I can leave.
We.
Representative Harper is
speaking that we might need you
for.
So fine contact Representative
corporate office yes that's
right
that.
Thank thank you.
Thank you.
And last but not least is Senate
bill three nine six Senator
chair Shendo how are you will.
All right.
Thank you madam chair of the.
Committee of the six is
basically the registration will.
To go over the more cycle.
Twenty dollars.
And right now.
The rules to the motorcycle
safety program.
The four followed by a dollar
will go into that fund so
totaled seven.
And so it's a user fee to the
also for the motorcycle of.
Of
Senator also support as well so
thank you very much.
Do you those questions I frankly
more about.
Anybody and public support of
this.
Do this early.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is the Energy and I am the New
Mexico state coordinator for the
motorcycle safety foundation in
here in the state I'm in favor
of SB three nine six.
This bill will allow the deal to
to provide additional training
upgrade program training
equipment and improve existing
motorcycle training ranges.
He's public awareness education
for riders and drivers therefore
it's important more than ever to
ensure that motorcycle training
in New Mexico is a state funded
thank you Senator Shendo for
sponsoring this bill and thank
you very much for your
consideration of these comments.
Thank you very much.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this bill.
Okay go to the committee.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
So madam chair and senator I
don't with the motorcycle world
so I have a couple Rikki
questions if you wouldn't mind
answering Madam is a motorcycle
training course required to be
licensed to drive a motorcycle
in New Mexico madam chair.
Two of the chair and
representative of Franklin
the
if you're under eighteen there
is a requirement for more cycle
training before secretary Paul
Terry over age eighteen however
their budget intake the course
waive the motorcycle yes that
that would be the division also
there's options for insurance
discounts that you can get.
We have a basic rider course
people that are just want to get
on motorcycles and we have
experienced a lot of courses
also that are provided for
people that may be decided well
I have worse like most younger
now I want to get back on and so
it is required our sense of
course okay and madam chair and
senator and Franklin.
Is there a motorcycle training
course available and every and
the the office manager.
Chair and
The committee and Representative
Brown of the test would be
Division would be required to
get your class and and Dorsen
that's the north and that's
what's on your driver's license
so that opportunity with exists
to the more than however if this
if you take this course you have
to be able to waive that but
you'll have to go to our course
to get that the doors with yes.
Okay so.
Madam chair and senator and
frankly so.
Is this a.
Get out of the parking lot and
and to kind of force or is this
video or what I'm trying to get
at is do we have this training
available for ever are
Our constituents go for and the
services Madam chairman of the
committee and Representative
around it is a specific rate
that set up and so I just empty
parking on its striped it's it's
it's got visited curriculum
there is awesome curriculum and
then there's also the hands on
preview which is the benefit of
the course itself and so you can
either on the basic right of
course we find motorcycles on
the
it's very strong of course
renewal cycle but that's what
are right clothes are traded
also I want to go back to the
question of our workforce like
rights or
the training program those
traits the NMED staff on.
Yes but we do have these sites
throughout New Mexico there's
Albuquerque for me to Roswell
Santa Fe Los crucis that's what
our contract calls.
Getting additional funding for
the office.
Perfect thank you madam chair
thank you thank you.
Mexico Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair send this
morning I have a really quick
question for you Turman how I
feel on this bill.
Davidson.
The end of the school.
In the in.
Yes yes.
Representative Daley.
