with this bill.
Really deals with the shooting
threat and then we've actually
added swapping
would actually be one of the
first states to deal with the
issues wanting this is what
happened three weeks ago at any
of our high schools throughout
the state.
when they called the police and
told them they were shootings at
schools swat team all three
million
that is an example very real
simple for most of us what
swatting is so we put that new
law this bill.
We change the shooting threat
was we got a lot last year as a
misdemeanor to a felony.
And we that swapping instability
as well.
That's really what the bill does
trying to address those issues
that we keep having happened
with that several people
actually killed because of
flooding
where.
They have called and.
So that they were gunshots in
Sir branch house and we saw show
up and bust down the doors are
grants house answer branch
armed.
Disease projecting himself as an
artist to please and serve
record shop.
That's what has been happening
around the country so we're
trying to deal with that issue
the other state that is dealt
with the issue is Ohio
and so we would be the second to
I just did it for us because
there sections forms.
That's what the session is was
going for our they actually just
the this year.
So that that that is where we
need.
we go to the audience for
supported opposition is there
anybody in support or opposition
online.
is there.
Is there any opposition.
Our support your.
Right we'll go to the committee.
Representative Romero.
Madam chair I just moved to
pass.
I just have a question so we'll
we'll work on motion.
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you senator
I guess just on I mean we're
creating a felony out of this
crime that you're saying if and
I've heard this like in the.
Context of like gamers calling
well they're playing and you
know finding their homes and and
then we were talking about in
the context of.
Children calling
On forces at schools if we're
talking about under like for
juveniles who would be
subject to this law was that
your intent Mr
madam chair you Senator
actually.
The weather juvenile system
works if I understand correctly
the section one thirty might so
I get this wrong she would help.
the juvenile system that you're
actually charter juvenile
juvenile with a felony.
The juvenile whether it's a
misdemeanor or felony goes
through the same system goes to
the juvenile court system and
that is dealt with completely
separately at yeah has nothing
to do with what this law says
with the exception of if it's
not a crime they can't do
anything about it
and that's what we had before we
change the oil the law last year
it came to shooting threats the
shooting the swatting that
happened a few weeks ago was not
juveniles haven't found who has
done that yet but they actually
believe it may have been a
terrorist organization that was
doing those all around the
country
but most places around the
country it's not illegal.
down so even federally they were
having a hard time figuring how
they gonna deal with that
situation so this is kind of one
of those things where we're
gonna head of it instead of
behind it.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you senator so that that makes
sense on just being able to
charge I guess
just thinking through that with
you know the felon icing of what
we're talking about with in the
context of juveniles that gives
me pause
I'm also interested in and I
don't know the rules around this
in our state
sorted just the HSD theory on
like felony murder right so if
we're calling this a felony.
As
We're in the context of what
this creates is that if an
officer comes in and shoots
somebody
while being swatted the the law
enforcement is not
Liable for that but the person
who committed the felony it is
and so I'm just curious I don't
I don't know how that connects
to whether or not we have an
agency theory in our state on
whether or not they're liable if
the law enforcement does
injure or kill someone.
What being spotted.
The internet.
Madam chair representative I you
know that's that's an
interesting question we do have
separate statutes on the books
that deal with accessories.
after the fact and and during
the commission of crimes
sometimes it would depend upon
the way that the the crime would
be charged I believe that the
prosecutors I do not have the
exact answer for you at the top
of my head but there's a lot of
discretion and how these
particular plants we get charged
if there's someone else involved
I'm sure there's a way that they
can bring that person and thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you senator yeah that's we I
guess you know thinking through
how at the challenge of finding
these folks and I know they're
happening through tweets and
through other means of being
able to locate folks and
you know having the the law on
the books makes lot of sense to
me I'm just on the logistics is
where I'm kind of lost as to how
you know we get there I I it
doesn't mean we don't need the
law I think it's just you know
I'm curious how we could force
that I guess but with that I'm
interested in the debate thank
you madam chair.
right so Senator I have a
question so one two I know
there's a lot of there's a lot
of students who are eighteen
years of age I'm in high school
and so how how does this bill
specifically pertain to.
that age group.
If and when this situation
happens.
Is there any difference in terms
of somebody who's under age
versus someone who is over age
chair representative yes
what you turn eighteen under all
or loss if you commit a felony
your sources as without doubt
obviously if it's a first time
offense at the age going to get
involved they're gonna look at
it and decide whether or not
they can actually charge them as
lesser problem on a felony and
so that would really depend on
the debate but yes if you once
you turn eighteen in our state
state law says you can be
charged with actually depending
on the crime of the account for
fourth degree felony but if you
commit a first degree felony you
actually murdered someone you
can be charged all the gems
fifteen our state but that
really with the players which
are four.
Okay.
Right okay what we have a motion
for due to past and the second
from Representative board on we
took the role.
Representative block.
Representative walked yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Romero yes I'm
grateful to be able to do this
thing to to disagree.
Representative Thomson yes.
by Trujillo yes.
Madam chair you have a to cast a
five to zero.
Representative look forward to
seeing you all Senator.
Thanks.
I've got the tax.
Working.
Your chair.
We have centers that about this
very good afternoon afternoon
welcomes exciting days fun days
and here at the end so we're
over and Senate Judiciary
listening Lara House Bill.
Representative Romero less
exchange we looking for for so
we went right but for some of
our kids I looked around the
room and I don't know that we
have too much of the rest of you
all the situation is.
Do you yeah we do have some
years.
Well we usually don't we don't
uses but we're doing a special
just for you guys in the house
so we're trying to move some of
your bills I wish I would have
to build and to.
It would have been living with
it you know all the rumors about
Senate judiciary should listen.
The notion that we're tough on
you guys now this will be easy
though this bill I think will be
really quick on your agenda.
This last year I had the
experience I'm sure many of you
off of half of down time which
is I want to pay off a loan to
this case it was a mortgage on
my home and have the means to
pay off the balance on that so I
want to find out what that
payoff balance was if you think
this is a large national lender.
I think that that would be a
simple thing to do is find out
what the payoff balances so I
could pay it.
And the then the lender told me
by phone.
Sorry about that.
the lender of electronically by
email and chat whatever was like
a river my phone advised me that
the policy was not to give me
the payoff information by phone
or electronically unless I pay a
fee they would be willing to
give me the payoff information
they're required to do with the
payoff information by law but
that but their response was a
given to me by mail they put in
the mail and get it probably ten
days seven to ten days and as
you can probably appreciate the
time you get the pay off about
seven to ten days later it's
already stale and so doesn't
really do much good to get that
way so they really extorted over
the opportunities for me for the
payment of it was you know
fifteen dollars it was not a
great sum of money but it's
still seem wrong to me that you
would be expected to pay a fee
to get the balance on your
account from in this case Mr
Cooper
you know as a mortgage lender
and so that's what prompted this
bill was to ensure that New
Mexicans do not have to pay to
get a pay off balance and and
retire their loans and that's
all this bill does very
straightforward.
And great thank you senator
there is no one in the audiences
were anybody in support
opposition online.
Great so then we will.
We will open it up to the the
members are there any questions
Representative block.
I just moved another to pass
madam chair.
Okay we have a motion from
Representative walk in a second
from Representative Lord
Representative America thank you
madam chair thank you senator
just one question
we're seeing sort of the
increase having.
Mortgage lenders online out of
state secretary of how how do we
kind of that from the New Mexico
state law on protecting
consumers here.
So the next question I hope that
you all get a chance to hear one
of the bills and I'm sending
over your way which really stand
fair trade practices act that's
what this bill would largely do
is rely on the on for trade
practices act to enforce this
on to make of early pitch for it
you know we haven't changed the
penalties of the unfair trade
practices act since nineteen
fifty three the statutory
penalties a hundred dollars so
you know you're not the large
national lender to get called on
this to get sued on this and
have to be exposed to a large
liabilities not going to get
anybody's attention regions so
the dance your question I hope
was this would be enforceable
under the unfair trade practices
act number one number two that
we put some teeth into that law
so that people simply don't do
this and get it just seems like
it's a really extorted way to
get the international twelve or
thirteen dollars and somebody
just wants to know the balance
on their account to pay off so I
hope that answers your question
but you're you're right we have
large lenders the letter of in
my case there's a home mortgage
is not the original of the
person who wrote the loan rate
so we start with Wells Fargo or
some of those and then they sell
it to somebody they sell to
somebody so before you know it
your three four years down the
road and and we see all the
problems of that's created when
they try to forclose keeping the
paperwork straight but this
pretty straight for this means
anybody's got a long whether
it's a mortgage loan retail loan
credit or loan the other
credibility got to be able to
call somebody to have them tell
you what the balances and be
able to electronically pay off
that in there you got the means
to do it.
Share thanks and we'll see that
tomorrow.
Thank so we have a motion for to
pass is there any opposition.
Great.
Thank you for.
Then in order to.
Thank you all.
