Roll calls closed. We have
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation led by.
The gentleman from Chavez,
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, please
join me in prayer.
Dear Lord, we come before you
this morning in recognition that
your laws are ultimately the
supreme laws.
We're a humbled and honored to
do the work of your people. We
ask that you focus our minds on
the work before us.
We ask that in carrying out our
task you fill our hearts with
compassion and understanding.
We ask that you give us wisdom
and insight.
If any of our members are
traveling, please keep them
safe. Lord, lastly, I ask that
you bless and protect all in
this chamber. Our brothers and
sisters in the Senate and all of
our families and loved ones.
Thank you God. Amen.
gentle lady from Berlinaria with
the with the pledge of
allegiance.
And the gentleman from Lee Rosa
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning members.
Um
Welcome to Legislative Day 8.
52 more to go, but if we roll
the clock a bunch of times we
can get out of here today.
For the rest of the year.
Putting it out there
Um, we did, um, we did let folks
know, um,
Uh, that, um, yesterday would
would be the last day to
introduce memorials and
certificates, so we have a bunch
of certificates today. We will
not read them on the floor, but
you are of course welcome to
celebrate your guests that are
here with us today. Um, first,
I'm gonna go to representative,
uh, to the gentleman from
Donana, Representative Lara with
a certificate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I have a, a certificate for a
very um.
Important person not only in in
my life but is also in the in
our community in Southern Donana
County, uh, but.
What I would like to do, uh, Mr.
Speaker, if it's, if it's OK
before I introduce my guest of
honor, I would like for
Representative Rubio to
acknowledge the other guests
that are on the rostrum young
lady from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good
morning, everyone. Um, I'm here
to, uh, I don't have to yield
or.
We're good. OK.
Um, I want to introduce, um,
some very important people on
the rostrum this morning. Um,
first we have Marta Estrada, who
is a very close colleague, um,
but also friend we took our
first class together at New
Mexico State University. We did
theater together. Maybe one day
we'll get to act again and um
she's a collaborator and college
assistant program, migrant
program director at New Mexico
State University.
Um, and successful former
student from the College of
Assistant migrant program that
works with US citizens and legal
residents working as seasonal
farm workers, dairy workers, and
ranch workers across New Mexico.
Welcome Marta
Next, I want to introduce um
several young professionals who
are now working in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque. First, it's
Guadalupe Jaramillo if you'd
like to stand up, um, who's
originally from Hatch, is a
senior auditor for the special
division at the New Mexico State
Auditor's office in Santa Fe.
Next we have Norma Godoy, who's
originally from Artesia, owner
of Norma Godoy LLC, a personal
finance education and coaching
business.
Next we have Tirio Lopez who's
originally from from Sevoya and
is the New Mexico State game uh
state game commissioner.
We also have Doctor Manuel
Serrano.
Originally from Hatch and is a
research and development
engineer for the Department of
Energy at Sandia National
Laboratory.
And finally, we have Doctor
Carlos Cano who's originally
from Hatch and is an assistant
professor at the University of
New Mexico Medical school within
the Department of Family and
Community Medicine, whose
concentrations include primary
care, hospitalist, substance use
procedures and resident
education.
Welcome everyone to the Capitol
and, and I just wanted to just
say briefly that NMSU camp has
served over 650 students since
2002. It's an amazing program.
And um yeah, that's it thank you
so much.
Welcome to the house.
Back to the jump from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would
now like to recognize the the
the the source, the strength
behind this program.
Uh, I would like to introduce,
uh, Doctor Cynthia Bejarano.
Doctor Cynthia Mejarara grew up
in Anthony, New Mexico. She
received her bachelor's degree
and master's degree from New
Mexico State University and a
PhD from Arizona State
University, Doctor Bejanano
joined the faculty at NMSU as an
assistant professor of criminal
justice and is currently a full
professor in the English
department and a Regents
professor in the department of
gender and sexual and sexuality
studies at NMSU.
She holds the New Mexico State
University College of Arts and
Science, Stan Fulton endowed
chair.
And Doctor Bejarano has served
as New Mexico state's
university's principal
investigator for the US
Department of Education's
college assistant migrant
program since 2002.
She has published an an
anthology through the University
of Arizona Press entitled
Frontera Motherhood Brown
Mothers challenging oppression
and transborder violence at the
US Mexico border among other
publications.
She served as she also served as
chair and co-chair and member of
the J. Paul Taylor Social
Justice symposium and New Mexico
State University.
Doctor Bejanano is always has
also received numerous awards,
the most most recent being the
2024 onun Heroes Education Award
presented by Bellaarte Sioura in
Las Cruces, New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, Doctor
Bejarano.
Is is is buena gente.
She, she grew up in Anthony,
she, yeah, is the daughter of,
of two wonderful, wonderful
people came past Wisconsin.
She is a great mother. She's a
great wife. She's an excellent
friend and comadre.
And she, the work that she has
done has really inspired many,
many people.
It has led to many people's
success has testified as as we
can see up on the on the
rostrum, Mr. Speaker, and I am
honored today to present her
with a certificate, uh,
unfortunately we can't have it
right, but I, I play by the
rules.
And so we will present that
certificate to her and also we
have uh uh a nice uh a bouquet
of flowers for her as well to
recognize her. Thank you
gentlemen, if I may add my
words, I've met Doctor Bejarano
many moons ago. She doesn't
remember me. I was, uh, I was a
kid, um, my friend, uh, my best
friend ran the camp program at
UNM and so I tagged along on a
conference, so maybe a couple
conferences a couple of times
and got to see the amazing work
that Doctor Recarano and and so
many of her colleagues across
the country are doing.
Um, on behalf of these students,
uh, you know, we always talk
about.
Young people being in the future
and the future is sitting up
here. I mean, what a wonderful
program to have these wonderful
people leading the state in
different capacities in
different areas including health
care, uh, education, government,
and others, uh, deep
appreciation from this House of
Representatives to you, Doctor
Bejarano for your vision and for
your uh work over the many, many
years to help improve the lives
of communities far and wide New
Mexico and across the country.
Thank you very much. Welcome to
the house.
Gentlemen, do you have flowers
to present? Uh, yes, I do, but
before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I
would, I also have another guest
on the rostrum that I'd like to
introduce.
Uh, I, uh, I'm honored today to
be hosting Ryland Garcia. Ray
and Garcia, thank you, uh, Ryan
Garcia is a senior star
volleyball player for Mexico
State University, uh, Rayland
hails from Santa Teresa where
she attended Santa Teresa High
School.
Ms. Garcia is play center for
the Aggies where she's a
playmaker who sets the ball for
attackers last season the Aggie
volleyball season culminated
with a 19 and 14 record.
And I miss you play away.
Play their way to the conference
USA championship game for Ryland
was able to play in front of her
family and friends representing
the borderland.
Finishing 2nd in conference, the
Aggies were defeated by by top
seed Western Kentucky who
entered with a 23 match winning
streak. Ryland is studying
business marketing members of
the house, please help me
welcome my special guest Ryan
Garcia.
Gentlemen, to present the
certificate and the flowers.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Doctor Moreno, I just want to
make sure there's a real
flowers, uh, Saint Velara has
been known to, they are OK.
It's making sure
Gentlemen from Burtley or Romero
with a certificate and a
recognition.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
So I have some guests. I'm not
sure if they are up on the
rostrum. I couldn't see, but
maybe we can come back to you,
OK, if we could please, thank
you from Santa Fe Representative
Lujan with a certificate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I appreciate the time and all of
our advocates and our special
guests we have here today, Mr.
Speaker, hunger and food
insecurity remain critical
challenges affecting 1 in 5
children and countless
individuals and families in our
state today we.
Today's hunger Action Day in the
state legislature and today
advocates and organizations are
gathering and we want to give a
special thank you to them and
all their tireless work to
alleviate hunger in New Mexico.
Um, today we have some special
guests with us here.
On the floor, Mr. Mr. Speaker,
um, we have Reverend Lisa Joe
Besner.
Court and you can stand when I
call your name. Corey Mansfield,
Ja Jason Riggs.
Dana Yost Efron
riguerra.
Uh, Rachel.
Uh
Here are Ratano or GR I'm excuse
me for mispronouncing that
Sergio Matta Cisneros.
So Sandoval.
Joe 5.
Amber
And station.
Orlando Crespin.
And roadrunner food bank staff
and road and food depot staff,
Mr. Speaker.
And if you, we can all give them
a round of applause.
Mr. Speaker, we will, you will
see us and many of us wearing
the these bright orange t-shirts
today and it's, it's, it says on
here act now and hunger. We know
it's time, we know we're putting
our full efforts and I wanna
give a special thanks to our
house appropriations for doing
the, the tireless work and the,
the advocacy that we have to
spend our dollars and put our
values where those dollars are
spent. So Mr. Speaker, I'd like
to take that.
right now and say thank you for
all the efforts that we put all
together took all of us to do
this work to help end hunger in
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady,
and thank you for all of your
great work. We appreciate you
and I especially like your
haircut and your beard and your
glasses.
Why are you looking around like
I'm not talking about you, you
know what I'm talking about.
Great style, my friend. Welcome
to the house. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
And I'll hand out the
certificates now to everybody.
Thank you very much. up in the
gallery, uh, are there campers
up in the gallery, camp
students, there you are, rise to
be recognized. Welcome to the
house.
And I also see folks in orange
rise to be recognized. Thank you
for being here.
I also see a lot of ladies in
red.
On the rostrum, so this might be
a good time to go to the
gentleman.
From Chavez to introduce his
guests.
On the rostrum
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'm very
pleased to host today the New
Mexico Federation of Republican
Women, the women, the ladies in
red.
I'd like to begin
I'd like to begin by introducing
Teresa Barnecastle, the
president.
Fulbright, first VP.
Shona Neff, 2nd VP.
Thank you all very much and I'm,
I believe there may be some in
the gallery as well. Ladies in
red, please rise to be
recognized.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen, I believe you have a
certificate as well that you
will present to your guests.
certificate. Hopefully it's up
there somewhere. It'll be on its
way and when you get it, you
can, you can hand it over to
these uh wonderful guests of
yours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
May I make one more introduction
that was uh unplanned. I have a
very good friend of mine from
Rosville, New Mexico. Her name
is.
If you give me your name, I'll
formally introduce your friend.
My friend's name is Kelly Olson.
The gentleman from Chavez has a
friend in the gallery named
Kelly. Awesome. Welcome to the
house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Certainly, gentlemen,
Gentle lady from.
Berlio Representative Nicole
Chavez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
have 3 special guests in the
rostrum, because today I am
sponsoring MS Action Day here at
the Roundhouse in support of my
very good and dear friend Doctor
Jennifer Gomez Chavez, who
wasn't able to make it, but I
have 3 very special guests, um,
I would like to introduce you
to. First is Miss Danielle Zito.
She is the government relations
committee member living with MS.
Then I have Miss Barbara Benson
Haver. She's also government
relations, living with MS.
And last but not least, Vicky
Cole, who's the National MS
Society senior manager.
And I have some certificates I
can present you guys with, but I
just wanted to show my support
along with many of my other
colleagues for those living with
MS, um, multiple sclerosis
across our state and across this
country. So thank you so much
for being here today. Thank you
gentle lady and thank you for
being here and say hi to
Jennifer Gomez Chavez, please,
uh, anyone who was a UNM student
between 1996 and 20008, uh,
knows Jennifer Gomez, Doctor
Jennifer Gomez Chavez, very
well, so tell her, tell her we
miss her here today.
But I'm sure she's doing
something fun. um, I'll check
Facebook later and I'm sure
she'll be posting pictures of
something fun.
Maybe it's not that fun.
Guest of uh the gentleman from
Lincoln from Otero, I'm sorry,
uh, Rimside block the New Mexico
School for the Blind
Superintendent Heather Miller is
in the gallery. Welcome to the
house, Doctor Miller.
Gentle lady from gentlemen from
Otero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
also had another announcement on
everyone's desk is the Braille
New Mexico pledge to the flag as
well as the New Mexico symbol on
your desk and in Alamogordo we
are blessed to be home of the
New Mexico School for the Blind
and visually impaired, which is
why our superintendent is here
today, so can we just give
another round of applause to the
school.
Also, Mr. Speaker, one more
quick announcement. I do have a
shadow today. Her name is
Brianna Rourke. She is from UNM.
She is very cool and I think
you'll actually like her and
because of some of the, the
clubs that she is part of, Mr.
Speaker.
So Mr. Speaker, she is really
cool and I have her bio here. I
was kinda.
There we go. All right, Mr.
Speaker, so Brianna is a junior
at UNM and she's a double major
in poli sci and media studies,
Mr. Speaker. She's also part of
the ASUNM Student court and the
UNM Democrats, however, Mr.
Speaker, she is an independent
and very open to various
political perspectives the other
day, yesterday, she was with the
senator Jaraillo, so she's,
she's uh seeing the bipartisan
work that we do in this
legislature, and so she hopes
to.
In law school next year and is
honored to be here, Mr. Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
General lady from Bern Leo
representative on your Nonu.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
two totally separate
announcements, but first things
first, I would like to introduce
you all to my shadows today.
First, we have Ms. Kaylyn
Gonzalez, please stand.
Kalin Gonzalez is a senior at
Highland High School. She is the
student body president. She
participates in Girls of varsity
wrestling, softball, the FCCLA M
E C H A, National Honor Society,
the Student Senate, Upward bound
and a program called Super SA,
which is very cool.
I did.
Go Hornets district.
And she plans on attending the
University of Denver and
majoring in criminology,
minoring in sociology and wants
to attend a law school to be an
attorney, so please welcome
Caitlin. Welcome to the house,
Kalin.
Next we have Ms. Ava Platt, who
is also a student at Highland
High School. She is a junior.
She plays volleyball,
basketball, she's a power
lifter, she runs track and she
plays tennis and she would also
like to attend UNM and she wants
to be part of the BAMD program
and she wants to study to be a
doctor. Please welcome.
Welcome to the house.
And last but certainly not
least, you may recognize my last
shadow. This is Quentin
Ampersand, a 30 at UNM Law and
um Quentin's been running all
over the roundhouses session,
participating, giving public
comment, advocating for bills.
Please welcome Quentin.
Welcome to the house.
And before you get to the uh the
other announcement, I just want
to tell you one of your shadows
that I too am a former Highland
High School student graduate,
former Hornet. I wrestled and
when I wrestled, there's no
girls wrestling team so we had a
girl who wrestled on our team
and she.
pretty much beat all of us, um.
So very cool that you all have
uh a wrestling team at Highland
for the girls.
And thank you for uh indulging
me Mr. Speaker, for my 2nd
announcement. Party people, you
will see on your desk.
We have the flyer the 100 bill
party, please join us on the
28th at the farmer's market from
6 to 10:30 drinks, dinner,
dancing, it'll be a great time.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And
members take note.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Donana Sierra Socorro
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I do have a couple
of guests on the rostrum that I
would like to introduce if they
would stand please and uh this
is a co-presentation with the
Chairman Small. Um, so today we
have the mayor of Hatch here.
Um, so this is Dennis Torres. He
has lived in Hatch his whole
life and um he served as a
trustee for 12 years and, and
has now been appointed as mayor.
And so I've really enjoyed
getting to know him at Hatch is
new to me, um, but not visiting
Hatch, of course, we often drive
after church on Sunday to go to
Sparky's or to the Pepper Pot,
or, I mean, there's so many
great restaurants in Hatch. And
so you will also see on your
table today in um anticipation
of the floor vote for red and
green chili month. We have some
spices from the hatch chamber of
commerce for y'all to enjoy.
It's New Mexico, true. It's
hatch certified, and they are
also winners.
of the, um, I cannot read this.
What did you tell me it said,
Duncan? I can't read it. I get
glasses today. The this hatches
in the, this uh chili is in the
Hall of Fame. Thank you so much
for being here, Mayor, and, and
his wife as well. Please stand,
Bertha, if you would. She's the
municipal judge for the village
of Hatch.
So she's a real boss she's a
real boss and one of the things
I've learned about Hatch, it's
so small, everybody is related,
so you can't talk about about
anyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
Love me some hatch I love me
some chili and I love me
some gas station coffee. I don't
know the name of the gas
station, but it's awesome. Oh, I
have to go to the gym from
Donana, um, before I do that
though, um, I know you have a
couple of guests in the gallery,
but they are not from Hatch, so
I will wait on that one till
after the gentleman from Donana.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I want to thank the
gentle lady from Socorro, uh,
Sierra and Donana for bringing
this forward and introducing uh
the Mariner's wife. I'd like to
introduce Miss SP Holguin, uh,
Mr. Holguin SB is a government
liaison for the engineering
company Wilson and Company, a
former city administrator for
the city of Sunland Park
Colonious Advisor also and also
with the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, it is great to
have folks from the chili
capital and the home of the best
green chili in the entire world,
Hatch here today. Give him a
hand.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from uh.
Donana in part Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
do have part of Donana, part of
Hatch, and so I would like to
add my welcome to you, those of
you from Hatch, Mayor Torres,
uh, municipal Judge Torres and
um.
Mrs. Holguin, thank you for
being here today. I love having
the privilege of of representing
part of hatch uh.
It is um uh well known as the
Chile capital of the world, one
of the most fun things we do
down in southwest New Mexico is
go to the Chili Festival every
year. So, and I had the, the
great privilege of driving or
riding on the only monster truck
in New Mexico, mudding truck
with Representative Doo this
last year. It was great fun. We
had a blast, so much fun to be
in in the hatch and uh welcome.
We appreciate you being here.
Thank you.
Welcome to the house.
Alright, we've got a couple of
guests of Representative Dallas
in the gallery, uh, we've got
city commissioner.
In tier C. Mary Jo Fall, who's
worked for 30 years for the
Sierra Soil and Water
Conservation District.
Uh, while employed there, she,
uh, it's evolved from limited
conservation education projects
to projects such as watership
planning, proving that
assistance in the installation
of ranch land and farmland
improvement projects, forest
health improvement projects,
wild land, urban interface
defensible space projects.
Is it Mesquite or mesquite?
Mesquite Mesquite and Creole so
control projects, removal of
salt cedar projects and projects
to curtail the growth of noxious
weeds. Welcome to the house.
We also have Dennis Faul who for
30 years has worked for the US
Forest Service, working in the
Gila National Forest started out
at 19 years old, working on
trails and living in a remote
workstation in the Black Range
District. Over the years he
worked in different roles at
several ranger districts on the
Gila, but the work was always
tied to wild land fires. He was
recognized as a leader in
prescribed fire and with the
management of wildland fires.
Dennis retired after 30 years of
service. Thank you for your
service and welcome to the
house.
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, APS
is in the house today and I am a
proud graduate of APS, uh, APS
Super SA, which is the advisory
student advisory council to the
superintendent. I do have two
shadows with me today. Uh, my
first shadow is Ariana Guruule,
uh, she goes to college and
career high school. She is a
senior, uh, she's a dual credit
student and Mr. Speaker, the
other day she was actually here
for a PI day because she is a
3rd degree junior black belt.
And she's part of the karate
demonstration team. She loves
reading, she loves cooking, she
loves community service. She is
in the black student union and
I'm very excited, Mr. Speaker,
um, she is right now majoring in
criminology, minoring in
political science, um, she wants
to attend law school and be a
social justice lawyer, uh, so
this is Ariana Gurule please
give her a hand.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have uh
one other shadow with me today,
Damian Amaya, which is almost a
naya, but Damiana Maya, uh, he
too goes to the college and
career high school. He is in
11th grade, uh, he, I asked him,
Mr. Speaker, if he was a
creative person, and he said no,
and then I picked up the sheet
and it says painting and drying.
So, Mr. Speaker, he is creative.
He also loves traveling,
listening to music, um, and he
is planning right now to, uh,
To study architecture, so Mr.
Speaker, he is going to live out
my HGTV dreams. uh, Mr. Speaker,
and, uh, members of the body,
please welcome Damian Amaya.
Welcome to the house.
from Bri of Romero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also
wanted to recognize that we have
the Albuquerque County Public
schools superintendents, student
advisory council with us so you
heard for gentle lady from
Bernna Leo. There are also other
members that have student
shadows. This is an advisory
council made up of students to
advise the superintendent on
issues going on within their
respective schools in APS. So
with that, Mr. Speaker, I have
two shadows with me. So first,
Kayla Garcia,
was a junior at Valley High
School and is an active member
of the supersa, so if we could
recognize uh Kayla and welcome
her to the house. Welcome to the
house. Valley High School.
new district, Mr. Speaker, also,
um, we have Alicia Peralta from
Matrisco Heritage Academy High
School in the district that I
represent and where I teach.
She's a member of the cheer
team, dance team, Senate,
SuperSA, and junior class
secretary. So let's welcome
Alisa to the house. Welcome to
the Alicia. All right, thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady from Berle or
representative of Coola.
Thank you, Mister Speaker. I
also have a guest um here from
uh the superintendent council.
Her name is Elizabeth Esparza
Clark.
Um, studiantessa high school
siabogrado. She's a junior at
Wellnessa High School. She, um,
her activities include the yeah
um ROTC Marksmanship air
rifleputer science and she wants
to become a nurse and work one
day in the VA, uh, medical
center, so we'll come um
Elizabeth also she is my uh
constituent and we live actually
almost 3 houses away so we just
find out that so.
Melissa Bena please um help me
welcome Elizabeth to the house.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Eddie and Lee
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
members of the body. I, I have
two gifts to, uh, tell you a
little bit about they're at your
desk this morning.
Um, Mr. Speaker, if you come to
my house for dinner, you will
see that my husband has a place
mat at the uh where he sits it
is of the periodic table.
And when we're having an
informal dinner I just let him
use the place mat uh if we're
having a more formal dinner, I
have to hide it from him, uh,
but when I saw the place mats
that you have here on your desk
this morning, I got very excited
because I think it's such a
wonderful idea. so these place
mats and you should, uh, each
member should have 2 of them,
Mr. Speaker, uh, these are gifts
from the New Mexico coalition of
Educational Leaders, um, NML and
I wanna thank all the.
members of that organization,
they have 2 affiliate members. I
won't tell you their names
because they're on the cover
letter that accompanied your
place mats, but these are very
important organizations and what
they're trying to do, Mr.
Speaker, is get students in New
Mexico to get.
Positive thinking about their
education and so the theme uh is
and you'll see it on um the
placemat is New Mexico schools,
the best schools on the planet.
And Mr. Speaker, I have, and
I'll hold it up, I have one of,
of the solar system of the, of
the planets, uh, some of you
have that or you have one that
talks about telling time or
about the value of coins, but
Mr. Speaker and members, um NML
would like to produce these for
wide distribution and they would
like to add to the offerings to
include themes regarding music,
agriculture, state parks,
national parks.
And uh another example is
cultural and societal.
Contributions of indigenous
communities, tribes and pueblos
across New Mexico.
So I wanna just encourage
everyone, Mr. Speaker, to
please, uh, use these on your
dining room table or give them
to a young person, and I do hope
we can raise um the excitement
we have about our schools. We
have wonderful things happening
in our schools and I just want
us to acknowledge it and then
finally, um,
Mr. Speaker, I want to bring
attention to a beautiful
stainless steel, uh, uh, travel
mug which is a gift from Devon,
one of our fine New Mexico
companies so enjoy and thank you
Mr. Speaker. Thank you gentle
lady.
lady from Burnley or
representative Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
today 5 guests on the house
floor and um I'll be introducing
first my foreshadows, uh.
We have from the UNM Dems, if
you've noticed, there's been
quite a few UNMW.
Shadowing over the past couple
of weeks, um, but I have Ryan
Cruz with me.
And he is a senior. He is a CS
major and a fun fact about him,
he recently began baking cakes,
but I would not recommend trying
them as he says he has failed at
least 20 times.
Thank you, Ryan Kurz. Welcome to
the house.
I also have with me.
Kyla Steele. She is a UNM junior
and she is majoring in
international business, uh, Mr.
Speaker, she is originally from
Alaska but New Mexico has
captured her heart, and she
hopes to stay here after she
graduates. Thank you, Kyla
Steele. Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, I also have some
members from the advisory
council and um these are two
brilliant students from early
college academy and hopefully
they will be future lobos. I'm
wearing my lobo pin today. Uh,
we have Ray Harrit if you'll
stand up. She is in 12th grade
and um it is uh raise hope that
they'll go on to be a UNM to go
on to UNM to study fine arts, so
we have beautiful artworks
coming from.
Ray. Thank you, Ray.
Welcome to the house.
And uh my 4th guest is Joaquin
Olay. Uh, he is in 11th grade
and it is his hope to go on to
study architecture at UNM. So we
have here folks who can build
your beautiful home and folks to
fill your home with beautiful
art, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. Welcome
to the house.
And for my last guest, I have
Cindy um Callisto, who is, if
you'll please stand, she's on
the bench there, she's a family
nurse practitioner working in a
primary care setting in
Albuquerque for the last 3
years. She has a cumulative
experience of 25 years in the
nursing practice.
She grew up in Massachusetts and
graduated with her bachelor's
degree in nursing, um, from
University of Massachusetts and
then she joined the Air Force,
uh, so we also have here with
us, not just a nurse, also a
veteran. In fact, it was through
the use of the GI bill that she
was able to work full time and
go to school full time to earn
her doctor of nursing practice
with a focus in population
health at NMSU in August of
2024. Welcome, Cindy.
Welcome to the house.
Generating from Bern Lee or
Representative Garrett. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to
introduce my stand up, thanks.
My APS uh advisory member of the
superintendents uh counsel. This
is Kayla. No, and you spell that
NGO and I want to make that
point because I am quite
positive she'll be a member of
the House or Senate in the
future based on our interests,
uh, she's in the students, she
goes to El Dorado High School.
She's in the Senate Student body
historian.
competitive dancers, Spanish
national honor society, and
she's interested in social media
management psychology, politics,
and debates one thing remarkable
about her is she's trilingual in
English, Vietnamese, and
Spanish. I asked her if she's
getting the bilingual seal she
is in Spanish, not Vietnamese,
so I want to welcome this future
legislator US Senator Governor,
whatever path she takes to our
house.
Fantastic. Welcome to the house.
I can barely speak one language,
right? I can't imagine 5.
General lady from Santa Fe Los
Alamos, and Sandoval. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, I don't know if this
qualifies as a point of personal
privilege, but I guess I'll
invoke that, um, Mr. Speaker, I
was out shopping last night for
eggs, and I went to one store,
empty 2nd store empty and 3rd
store I got lucky and was able
to purchase some eggs and I
thought of you, Mr. Speaker,
because I remember you bringing
up the fact you couldn't find
any
eggs last weekend, so I brought
some in to help you and your
family out this coming weekend.
I know they're precious. I'll
put them in the refrigerator, I
mean a little bit so that you'll
have them to take home this
weekend for your family. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the
time you gentle lady.
You know if it's Sunday at my
house, it's pancake sundae, and
you cannot have pancakes if you
don't eat your eggs, so they
will come in very handy. I
appreciate you. Good looking
out.
We'll get your bills on 3rd
reading on the floor
immediately.
All of them.
Wow, that's all it takes, huh?
All right, uh.
Yeah.
I was just kidding. I was just
kidding.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I'll bring you
a chicken.
Just watch out because his
neighbors will eat.
His neighbor's dogs will eat the
chickens, so.
But that, that must be your
neighbor too because you guys
are from the same community.
All right, what's uh what's
next? You guys made me lose my
train of thought here, um.
Any other announcements?
All right, let's go to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Speaker, I'm sorry.
Gentleman from earlier I did
have an item. I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, for the gentle lady
from Bernna Leo. She had a
certificate for our
superintendent of Albuquerque
Public Schools, so she had to
step out. The gentle lady from
Bernalillo, but I was going to
present that certificate.
That's, that's great. She's not
with us, but Doctor Gabriella
Blakey, thank you for the work
you do for our students in
Albuquerque Public Schools.
Thank you. Thank you,
Superintendent Blakey.
Who happens to be another proud
Highland High School Hornet.
And it's great to see her at the
helm of APS now and I know she's
gonna turn things around for
sure. All right, gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, I
move we go to that order of
business Committee reports. It
is so ordered. Clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital Improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
270.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the energy,
environment, and natural
Resources Committee respectfully
submitted art de la Cruz, chair.
Mr. Speaker, a new adoption,
please.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
270.
All those in favor of and say
and I.
Palipo's name.
Yeah
The I have it, maybe the nas
have it this time, the IS have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital Improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
145 has had it under
consideration reports and with
the recommendation that it do
pass as amended. And that's
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted art de la
Cruz, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I, I move with
Dobson, please. We are a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 145. All those in
favor by C and I.
While Bona, has
the I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 334
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Lino Sorato chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report of House Bill
334, all those who favor singing
by C I.
All the supposed name
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 351
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the appropriations
and finance Committee
respectfully submitted,
Linda Serato,
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 351. All those in
favor and if I say I.
I suppose name.
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 411
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the government elections and
Union Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted. Linda
Serato, chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 411, all those in
favor signify by saying I.
All the supposed nay.
The I have it we report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
has been referred House Bill 311
has had it under consideration
report seen with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
house agriculture, asaias, and
water resources committee
substitute for House Bill 311 do
pass and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Christina Ortez,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move option. We are
on adoption of a nonfavorable
committee report on House Bill
311, but a favorable committee
report in house agriculture
asseass and watersources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 311. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose nay.
The nays duly noted. The eyes
have it be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture,
assekias and water resources
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 423 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Cristina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, move it. We're an
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
423. All those in favor
signified by saying no.
the supposed name
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
stakes and water resources
Committee to has been referred
House Joint Memorial 5 has had
it under consideration in
Portsinger's recommendation that
it do pass. Miss Buckley
submitted Christina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report and House Joint
Memorial 5. All those in favor.
Senior 5 by saying I.
From the supposed name.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 339
has had it under consideration
reporting.
With recommendation that it do
pass as amended, and this
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair. Move
adoption, Mr. Speaker of a
favorable report in House Bill
339. All those in favor, and you
probably say no.
I suppose they
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 159 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Patricia
Roel Caballero.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that um.
I'm moving down. I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
159. All those in favor of X if
I would say 9.
I suppose nay
The eyes have it can be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 336 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and it referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Rebel
Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I'm of adoption of
the committee report on adoption
of a favorable committee report
in House Bill 336. All those in
favor are signified by saying I.
All the supposed name, the eyes
have it community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 71 has
had it under consideration,
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
We are adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
71, all those in favor signify
but see a.
I was suppose Nate.
The ISA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance Committee 2 has been
referred House Bill 181 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Nathan's small chair. Mr.
Speaker, adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report and
House Bill 181. All those in
favor signify by saying nah.
All the supposed name.
The eyes have a committee report
is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and finance committee to him has
been referred House Bill 2 and 3
has had it under consideration
report, same with the
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house
appropriations and finance
substitute for House Bill 2 and
3 do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr.
Speaker, move adoptionavorable
committee report in House bills
2 and 3, but a favorable
committee report for House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
bills 2 and 3, all those in
favor.
signified by saying I.
Bona
The eyes have it. we report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
of disorder.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 17 as amended
Senate Bill 82 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 16 as
amended. Senate Bill 72, Senate
Bill 163 as amended with the
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Lujan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 6 as amended.
Senate Bill 109 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Mohan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 36 as
amended. Senate Bill 135 and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted de
Luhansson, a chief clerk will be
entered.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
OK
House Memorial 24, introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
A memorial requesting the
legislative Finance Committee to
convene a task force to study
and make recommendations on safe
staffing levels at the
corrections department and the
Children, Youth and Families
Department. House Memorial 24.
How's Memorial 24 haven't been
read twice by titles or printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 27, introduced by
Representative Serrato. A
memorial requesting the New
Mexico Legislative Council to
task an interim committee to
assess the best methods to
implement the exception the
voters approved to Article 9,
Section 14 of the Constitution
of New Mexico, commonly known as
the anti-Donation clause for the
provision of state assistance
for essential services and to
develop legislative proposals
based on the committee's
findings for the 2026
legislative session. House
Memorial.
27.
As Memorial 27 have been read
twice by tilers or reprinted and
referred to the House government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Memorial 28, introduced by
representatives block, Cates,
Henry, Hall the 2nd, and
Herrera, a memorial declaring
March 17, 2025, Irish American
Day in the House of
Representatives. House Memorial
28.
How's Memorial 28 have been read
twice by titles or not printed
and placed on the speaker's
table.
House Memorial 29, introduced by
Representative Block, a memorial
requesting the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee to examine the current
rules for applying for and
renewing driver's licenses for
people with diabetes, assess
whether the rules can be revised
to be less burdensome while
maintaining driver safety in
light of current medical science
and practice for people with
diabetes and develop legislation
based on the committee's
findings. House Memorial 29.
How's Memorial 29 haven't been
read twice by idlers or printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee.
House Memorial 30 introduced by
representatives small, Doo,
Chatfield, Sanchez, and Herrera,
a memorial declaring March 5,
2025, soil and water
conservation District today in
the House of Representatives.
House Memorial 30. Memorial 30.
Haven't been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speaker's table.
House Memorial 31, introduced by
Representative Serato, a
memorial requesting expansion of
the use of citizen science by
state agencies and requesting
the governor to declare a
citizen Science Day. House
Memorial 31. House Memorial 31.
Haven't been read twice by
titles or reprinted and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Memorial 32 introduced by
Representatives Pettigrew and
Cole, a memorial requesting the
public education department to
study the possibility of
granting teachers, master's
level college credit for earning
microcredentials to advance from
level one to level 2 licensure
and from level 2 to level 3
licensure, including the
identification of potential
barriers and pathways. House
Memorial, 32. Memorial 32.
Haven't been read twice by
titles or are printed and
referred to the House Education
Committe.
House Memorial 33, introduced by
representatives Terasas,
Senators Ramos, and Brantley,
Representative Jones, and Dow.
A memorial requesting a study
for responsible spending and
higher education. House
Memorial, 33. House Memorial 33
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered, printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee.
House Memorial 34 introduced by
Representative Herndon, a
memorial requesting the Supreme
Court to convene a task force to
study the gaps in legal services
for victims of domestic violence
and to make recommendations for
the design and implementation of
cost-effective legal programs to
address those gaps. House
Memorial, 34 Memorial 34 haven't
been read to us by titles or
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 35 introduced by
Representative Matthews, a
memorial requesting the
regulation and licensing
department, the New Mexico
mortgage Finance Authority, the
public regulation commission,
the Governor's Office of
Housing, the chair of the
Opportunity Enterprise and
housing Development Review Board
or the chair's designee and the
attorney General to develop
recommendations for a state
regulatory framework for mobile
home parks, House Memorial, 35.
How's Memorial 35.
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Memorial 36, introduced by
Representative Dixon, a memorial
requesting the University of New
Mexico to study the benefits and
costs of nuclear energy and
report recommendations for
statutory and rule changes to
facilitate the development of
the nuclear industry in the
state. House Memorial 36.
Memorial 36 haven't been read by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Energy Environment
and Natural Resources Committee.
House Memorial 37, introduced by
Representative Abeta, a memorial
affirming the state's commitment
to protecting and preserving
Mount Taylor as a traditional
cultural property and opposing
uranium mining projects that
threatened Mount Taylor's
cultural and environmental
integrity. House Memorial 37.
How's Memorial 37 haven't been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 38, introduced by
Representative Lord and Senator
Thornton. A memorial requesting
the New Mexico Department of
Transportation to consider
restoration of the Route 66
musical Highway, House Memorial,
38.
House Memorial 38. I haven't
been read twice. My title is or
reprinted and referred to the
House Transportation Public
Works and capital improvements
Committee.
House Memorial 39, introduced by
Representative Garrett, a
memorial requesting the higher
education department to conduct
a study on higher education
compensation for both temporary
and non-temporary instructional
staff in collaboration with the
legislative Finance Committee
and the legislative education
Study Committee, House Memorial,
39 Memorial 39 haven't been read
to us by tables or reprinted and
referred to the House Education
Committee.
House Memorial 40 introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero, a
memorial requesting the New
Mexico Legislative Council to
direct the creation of a group
to study the feasibility of
creating a state office of
peace, House Memorial 40.
How's memorial 40 haven't been
read twice by title. It's sort
of printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House joint resolution 17,
introduced by Representatives
Montoya and Senna Cortez, a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 4 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
provide that a declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to a
power granted to the governor by
law and orders issued in
accordance with that declaration
shall terminate within 90 days
and not be redeclared unless the
declaration of the state of
emergency is extended, modified,
or terminated by a.
joint resolution of the
legislature on an affirmative
vote of 3/5 of each house of the
legislature. House joint
resolution 17.
How's your resolution 17 have
been read twice by titles or
were printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 18
introduced by representatives
Rubio and Garrett. A joint
resolution proposing to amend
Article 4 of the Constitution of
New Mexico to add a new section
to create a citizen commission
on legislative salaries to
establish, adjust, and limit the
salaries of members of the
legislature and to amend Section
10 to authorize payment of
legislative salaries. House
joint resolution 18 resolution
18 haven't been read to us by
tilers or printed and referred
to the house.
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Joint Resolution 19
introduced by Representative
Pettigrew. A joint resolution
proposing to amend Article 4 of
the Constitution of New Mexico
to create a permanent interim
administrative rule oversight
committee and allow that
committee to recommend the
overturning of agency rules to
the legislature, allowing the
legislature to overturn agency
rules during a legislative
session. House Joint resolution
19 resolution 19 have been read
to us by titles or are printed
and referred to the House
government elections.
and Indian Affairs Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Joint Resolution 20
introduced by Representative
Dixon. A joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
Article 8, Section 5 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
provide a property tax exemption
for certified and commissioned
police officers and deputy
sheriff sheriffs, and active
firefighters who are members of
the public employees Retirement
Association and have earned an
amount of pension equal to at
least 95% of the person's final
average salary. House Joint
resolution 2.
How's your resolution 2 haven't
been read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 21,
introduced by representatives
Lord and Block. A joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 4 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
provide that a declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to a
power granted to the governor by
law and orders issued in
accordance with that
declaration, shall terminate
within 90 days and not be
redeclared unless the
declaration of the state of
emergency is extended, modified,
or terminated by a joint
resolution of the legislature on
An affirmative vote of 3/5 of
each house in the legislature.
How's joint resolution 21 have
been read to us by titles or are
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Memorial 7
introduced by Representative
Rubio, a joint memorial urging
the President of the United
States to honor his oath of
office to uphold the
Constitution and laws of the
United States and to focus the
efforts of his administration on
lowering costs for Americans.
House joint Memorial 7. How's
your Memorial 7? Haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
He's joint Memorial 8 introduced
by representatives Ferrari,
Lujan, Silva, and Block, a joint
memorial requesting the
Department of Transportation to
establish a rest stop on United
States Highway 380 at the
entrance to the Trinity site
near Bingham, New Mexico.
Hatewart Memorial 8. How joint
Memorial 8 haven't been read
twice by titles or reprinted and
referred to the house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee.
House Resolution 3 introduced by
representatives Lord and Block,
a resolution constituting
articles of impeachment of
Michelle Lujan Grisham,
governor, being a recitation of
the grounds upon which the House
of Representatives finds that
Michelle Lujan Grisham has
committed acts that warrant
impeachment and trial in the
Senate pursuant to sections 35
and 36 of Article 4 of the
Constitution of New Mexico,
providing for notice of
impeachment at the prosecution
of impeachment.
Resolution 3.
House Resolution 3 haven't been
written to us by title.
Excuse me, how's the resolution
3? Haven't been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Resolution 4 introduced by
representatives Silva, Anaya,
Abeta Gonzalez, and Javier
Martinez, a resolution amending
the House rules to allow for
prefiling of legislation by
members elect. House resolution
4.
How's resolution 4 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee the the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 17 as amended.
Introduced by Senator Jaramillo,
an act relating to parole,
amending factors to be
considered by the parole board
when considering parole of an
inmate sentenced to life
imprisonment, making the process
to remove a member of the parole
board providing for the
conscientious scheduling of
hearings. Senate Bill 17 as
amended.
Senate Bill 17 as amended is.
Referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
The Senate Bill 82 introduced by
Senator Sells, an act relating
to public school capital outlay
extending through fiscal year
2027, the provision that reduces
local shares by 1/3 for some
school districts and one half
for certain small school
districts, eliminating some of
the criteria the public school
capital outlay Council is
required to consider before
making an adjustment to a school
district's local share, making
conforming amendments. Senate
Bill 82.
Senate Bill 82 haven't been read
to us by title is referred to
the House Education Committee,
then the House government,
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Senate Bill 16 as amended,
introduced by Senators Figueroa
and Wirth, an act relating to
primary elections, allowing
voters who have not designated a
major political party
affiliation on their
certificates of registration to
participate in the primary
election process by choosing to
affiliate with a major political
party participating in a primary
by requesting the party's
ballot, making conforming
changes. Senate Bill 16 as
amended 16 as amended have been
read to us by title.
is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 72 introduced by
senators Worth and
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to nonprofit
corporations, allowing nonprofit
condominium associations to
transact business remotely.
Senate Bill 72. Senate Bill 2
have been read twice by title is
ordered.
is referred to the house
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
commerce.
In economic development
committee.
Senate Bill 163 as amended,
introduced by Senator Schendo,
an act relating to public
schools, permitting public
school students who are enrolled
or eligible for enrollment in
federally recognized Indian
nations, tribes, and pueblos to
where tribal regalia at
graduation ceremonies or public
school events. Senate Bill 163
as amended Senate Bill 163 as
amended is referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 6 as amended
introduced by Senator Padilla,
an act relating to children,
expanding eligibility for the
fostering connections program.
Senate Bill 6 as amended.
Center Bill 6 as amended have
been read to us by title is
referred to the house.
Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 109 as amended.
Introduced by Cinder Souls.
An act relating to the public
regulation commission,
distinguishing between the
commission and the agency that
supports the commission,
clarifying agency statutory
duties, making other clarifying
and clean up changes to the
public regulation Commission
Act. Senate Bill 109 as amended
109 as amended is referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Sinna bill 36 as amended,
introduced by Senator Cedillo
Lopez, an act relating to
governmental conduct prohibiting
disclosure of sensitive personal
information by state agency
employees, providing exceptions,
making the motor vehicle code,
prescribing penalties. Senate
Bill 36 as amended. Senate Bill
3636 as amended is referred to
the House government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
Sinabel 135 introduced by
Senator Wirth, and act relating
to reimbursement for out of
state travel, allowing
reimbursement for out of state
travel on legislative business
for legislators who are not on a
primary or general election
ballot. Senate Bill 135.
been written by title is order
is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
affairs Committee.
There's the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19 as
amended. An act relating to
state educational institutions
requiring all members of the
boards of regents of state
educational institutions and the
governing boards of of other
public postsecondary educational
institutions to complete 10
hours of training requiring the
higher education department to
develop and provide the
training.
Senate Education Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 19 as
amended substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended is referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 85 as amended,
introduced by Senator Wirth and
others, and act relating to
campaign finance amending the
campaign Reporting Act requiring
disclosures relating to
electronic communications,
revising the reporting schedule
for expenditures and
contributions standardizing the
supplemental reporting
requirements for all elections
to include any contribution or
pledge of $1000 or more
requiring the reporting of
monetary.
contributions received during
the legislative session
fundraising prohibition period
clarifying and changing certain
requirements relating to
contributions and donations
omitting certain reporting
requirements prohibiting using
campaign funds to repay loans
made by the by the candidate
that are subject to a rate of
interest, amending provisions
related to fundraising during
legislative sessions, Senate
Bill 85 as amended. Senate Bill
85 as amended.
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 124 as amended.
Introduced by Senator Duhig and
Representative Sapanski, an act
relating to the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance,
providing the power to issue a
civil investigative subpoena to
the superintendent of insurance
providing procedures to compel
compliance with such a subpoena.
Senate Bill 124 as amended 124
as amended haven't been read
twice by title is order is
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 47 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo for the land
grant committee, an act relating
to land grants, amending a
section of chapter 49, Article
1, NMSA 1978 to include the
Santa Cruz de la Cannada land
grant Merced as a land grant
governed pursuant to chapter 49,
Article 1, NMSA 1978. Senate
Bill 47 Senate Bill 47 haven't
been read twice by title is.
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, the
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 75 as amended
introduced by Senator Figueroa,
endorsed by the investments and
pensions oversight committee and
act relating to educational
retirement, making changes to
the educational retirement Act
clarifying restrictions on
receipt of gifts, providing for
unclaimed member contributions
to be deposited into the
educational retirement fund,
clarifying certain terms,
allowing for a member on
disability status who is over 60
and who
receives an annuity adjustment
to continue receiving the
annuity adjustment requiring
payment of allowed service
within 90 days, allowing for
disclosure of member or retired
member information to the public
employer's retirement.
board of to administer Senate
Bill 75 as amended. Senate Bill
75 as amended have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Education Committee,
then the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 161 introduced by
Senator Pete Padilla and Pope.
Senate Bill 161.
You
Introduced by Senator Padilla
and Senator Pope and act
relating to military affairs
requiring state and national
criminal background checks of
Department of Military Affairs
Employment or volunteer
applicants or employees who have
responsibility for minors
attending the youth challenge
job challenge academies, the
governor's summer program or
other programs that the
department that are open to
minors.
Providing the process for state
and national criminal background
checks, restricting the use of
criminal background checks,
check reports.
Allowing the adjutant general to
use appropriations and other
funding for youth programs.
Senate Bill 161.
Senate Bill 161 haven't been
read to us by tilers referred to
the House Labor Veterans,
Military Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
Gentle lady from Bernalio.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is so orders, we do
have some 3rd reading coming up.
I do want to make an
announcement, um, House Bill 357
was introduced yesterday and I
incorrectly read the second, uh,
committee referral, um, I
believe this has been, um,
Confirmed with both leaders as
well as the chair of the
committee that I, uh, mistakenly
sent the bill too, so this is
House Bill 357 introduced by
Representative Lujan. The
committee referrals should be
he, um, health health and house
tax.
The way I read it during the
introduction was house health
and house transportation, and
that was just a mistake on my
part, um, in fact, my sheet here
says tax, um, well, it says HTRC
and I think I just
Assumed
That was how house
transportation, which is not.
But maybe I was tired. I don't
know, but that is, uh, a
referral that, uh, I will change
at this time. How's health.
Followed by house tax on House
Bill 357.
Announcements, gentle lady from
all those counties.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, just
really a point of personal
privilege.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaker,
I would, um, ask that, uh, very
respectfully ask the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11 be sent to
appropriations we are
encumbering future legislatures,
uh, to the tune of half a
billion dollars and this bill
did not go to appropriation, so
I would request that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business. 3rd reading
of legislation.
Is the gentle lady from Santa
Fe, ready on supplemental
calendar item.
Number one.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point? that all
actions replacing Senate Bill 1
as amended on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution general lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 1 as amended establishes
the Behavioral Health Trust
Fund. It also establishes a
behavioral health program fund
and Mr. Speaker, uh, embody this
bill is really about the future.
Um, it is about setting up a
framework so that we can ensure
that we can pay for behavioral
health services, not just this
fiscal year or next fiscal year,
but for years into the future,
um, this is, uh, the legis
r ' s way of ensuring that we
have an account that will ensure
that our kids and grandkids have
access to these important
behavioral health services, um,
so that they can have great
mental health and that we can
have a highly successful
generations in the future, Mr.
Speaker and body this bill is
really about sustainability of
behavioral health funding, um,
and Mr. Speaker, uh, Bari, I
would love to point out there
this bill has been amended so
the Senate Finance.
Committee, uh, did amend this
legislation to remove the
appropriation, um, that is the,
the central thrust of that
amendment and Mr. Speaker, with
that I would stand for debate.
Torrens representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hold on,
I get set up here.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady from
is it Santa Fe County? Will you
yield your time, please.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Berna Leo in
Torrance. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, so.
I'm gonna ask, so we have Senate
Bill 12, and 3. They all work
together. So Senate Bill 1, the
appropriation was so the request
for money, there's nothing in
here that has anything about.
Appropriating money, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
correct.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
and Mr. Speaker, please indulge
me just for a sec because I know
these 3 tie together, so we
heard 3.
And so is it going to be, it's 2
with the appropriation now, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
yes, Senate Bill 2 is uh
regarding current, uh, and
subsequent fiscal year
appropriations.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so as we go through this
bill of SB1 and
If there's any part they get to,
because I don't have the amended
bill in front of me. I'm gonna
try to pull it up on the
computer. So Mr. Speaker Deli,
this is the behavioral health
trust fund that's been created
to non-reverting funds and the
state treasury and the fund
consists of distribution
appropriation gifts, grants,
donations, income from the
investment the funds should be
created to the fund of money
shall be expended only as
provided in this section. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, is this
the, the guardrails that you
have up of what the money is
going to be going to.
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
you, uh, and I, I think you
mentioned you did not have the
bill in front of you, but, uh,
section 2.
Specifies the purposes for which
this leg uh this funding could
be utilized for in the event
that appropriations are made to
this trust fund.
Thank you Mr. Speaker Deli. I
do, I have the bill. I just
don't have the bill with the
amendments which I'm trying to
pull up real quick, which I will
do.
So in section 2, when we have
the behavioral health program
fund is created in the state
treasury. The fund consists of
the same thing you just stated.
So my question is because I know
through and again.
It, it's really hard, Mr.
Speaker Deli to talk about the
bill because there's 3
components of the bill, right?
So we're still kind of going
back and forth, but yesterday,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
went through a lot of what
That bill is gonna cover and not
cover and who the boards are,
etc. so when I look here on page
3 and we see section let's see,
page 3.
Line 7, mental health and
substance abuse treatment
center. So is that what you're
saying?
That the money when
appropriated, will be going to
mental health and substance
abuse treatment intervention
prevention, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
exactly, so distributions from
the fund could be used for those
purposes specified 1 through 5.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, because I'm trying to recall
yesterday there was quite a bit
in there it was.
Mrs. Mill, do you know why they
divided it up because this is,
it makes it incredibly hard
sometimes to debate this, why
they split it up into 3
different bills, Mr. Speaker
John Lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, great
question, um, as you know,
behavioral health is an
incredibly complex issue and so
I think it's helpful to look at
this, the shorthand for this
bill as the the savings account
for the future to ensure that
these services are funded in the
future. Senate Bill 2 is what
are we doing today in Senate
Bill 3 is how we're gonna do
that.
OK, Mr. Speaker Denley, sorry,
they're looking through my book
right now to see if I have the
amended version, so I have to
look it up. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so when we talk
about the necessary
infrastructure technology
workforce. Can you explain to me
what exactly they will tell,
because I'm understanding
that'll be the technology and
workforce.
Uh, does it talk about physical
structures or buildings that
have to be built, Mr.
Speakergenling, can you
elaborate a little more on
number 2.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this could absolutely include a
physical buildings. It could
include renovations, um, in
terms of technology, you might
need a more sophisticated
electronic medical record, for
example, to track referrals.
Those are all examples of what
could be funded.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
welcome in number 3 where it
talks about the matching funds
for federal, local, and private
monies, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I believe we talked
about a little bit of yesterday
so what matching funds that
we're looking at and how does it
relate dollar to dollar to what
we have in New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker John Lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
so glad you highlighted this
because matching funds is a
really important piece of this
legislation, so, uh, primarily
through the Medicaid program,
um, if you could imagine every
dollar that would be invested
into a Medicaid behavioral
health patient would be matched
by $3.40
of federal funds and so it's a
great way. So not only are we
saving for the future, we're
actually taking those savings
and getting.
a great return because we're
able to use this funding to
match federal Medicaid dollars.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when when I'm going through
this.
Is there anything in here that
says
will not
to be included. Things that will
not be covered because we
covered a lot yesterday and
today and what is covered, but I
don't see anything like these
are things that would not be
covered. Is that gonna be up to.
The
All the people that were in all
the committees and the councils
that were talked about
yesterday, it's gonna be up to
them to make the decisions of
how this all flows. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
the regional plans and all the
stakeholders that were mentioned
yesterday will certainly uh
prioritize their top 5 projects
for each uh region, but I do
want to stress, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that the
legislature is the final
decision maker in terms of how
these funds would be
appropriated, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, there would need to
be plans presented regarding
these are the top programs, uh,
that are.
have been prioritized and our
appropriators and ultimately uh
the entire legislature are the
final decision makers.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that, that was great
segue because it was gonna be my
next question because I always
get concerned if we're allowing
other people to make all these
decisions, where do we come in?
So that would just be, Mr.
Speaker, generally, explain to
me in that one process how this
would come back to us, would it
come back to us as uh this
committee determined that we
need this thing and it's now
housebuil, etc. or does it, how,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
uh, much of that detail was
spelled out in Senate Bill 3,
but I think for the purposes of
this legislation, what you would
see is agencies presenting their
budget requests and the
justification for those budget
requests, which would include
some of those regional plans
and, and a lot of the things
that were discussed on another
piece of legislation, Senate
Bill 3. So for the purposes of
this legislation, it's really,
um, included in the standard
appropriations, uh, process
presented to LFC, uh.
Then to house appropriations and
Senate Finance.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you to our amazing staff who
absolutely love who actually got
me the amendments, um, in the
bill, so I do have a question on
page 3, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, on page 3.
It's his mental health and
substance abuse.
And that was changed to misuse.
Do you know why there was a
change in the wording, Mr.
Speaker, young lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is a sort of best practices
language for current, uh,
behavioral health, uh,
practitioners.
Thank you. That's what I
figured, Mr. Speaker, young
lady. The other question I have
on the amendment is on page 2.
Hold on one second.
On page 2.
There's no number on here, 19.
It's a strike year 2026 and
insert in lieu of thereof years
2026 and 2027. Is that because
it's going to be a two year
process or what was the reason
for changing the language on
that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
and forgive me, I should have
introduced my expert witness who
is Ms. Amanda Briding, um, our
budget director from House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, uh, legislative
staff, um, uh.
That amendment is basically to
allow us to have flexibility as
this program is being
implemented, uh, over the next
couple of years.
So Mr. Speaker, gen lady, so as
this rolls out, I know that
there was like a down payment,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
then it was the goal to get to
the billion eventually, so with
this change in here.
Is this allowing this particular
bill here to be applicable just
for 2006 and 2007 just help me
understand this one part, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
that uh uh that, uh, the two
dates there, uh, for fiscal year
2026 and 2027, that just allows
for this fund to be counted as
part of the reserve calculation
um for the next 2 fiscal years,
um, but it doesn't impact the
length of this fund or uh the
permanence of this fund in any
way it's just simply that
calculation. OK, Mr. Speaker,
generally,
a few more questions, and one of
those was, I noticed in one of
the analysis it says it's been
speculated the state budget
currently spends about $1
billion a year in state and
federal dollars for behavior
health programs.
So is the money that's going
into the fund just using the
interest rate going to be enough
for all of those programs or is
it going to mean we're still
going to use other sources to
get this other 1 billion to them
and then this is gonna be on top
of, if that makes sense, Mr.
Speaker and young lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, so the any funding that is
appropriated to this behavioral
health trust fund would be in
addition to um uh the current
funding or, you know, the
appropriators could decide some
of the uh funding that is
currently being utilized is more
appropriately, uh, located in
the Behavioral Health Trust
fund, so this preserves the
authority of our appropriators
and in the entire legislature to
make those decisions.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
since the money was removed out
of here, where is the money
going to be coming from now, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
excellent question. That is up
to our appropriations process so
you will see uh items uh in the
budget that are related to this,
um, and it, it is still going
through the process, so House
Appropriations is working the
full house will work, uh,
obviously the budget will go
over to the Senate after that
and they will continue that
process and this allows for some
creativity, um, and innovation
and how this.
Uh, behavioral health trust fund
is used.
Mr. Speaker, gentle maybe, my
understanding that there is no
more money in the budget, so if
there's not money in the budget,
then would we look at raising
taxes or look into other
reserves or what would we do
next?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
there's still uh quite a bit of
capacity for the Senate, uh, to
look at.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, like two more
questions, I believe. So does
that mean that it would come out
of reserve somewhere? Is that
where it's going to come from?
It's not in the budget and the
Senate has more flexibility.
Does that mean it's coming?
out of a reserve somewhere else.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I can't really speculate on what
the Senate is planning to do,
however, what they have the
authority to do is certainly
reduce appropriations, increase
other appropriations, move
expenses around, so, um, this,
this does not implicate the
reserve in any way because that
will be up to the appropriators.
OK, Mr. Speaker Denley, so I was
just thinking in my head how we
would move all that money around
and go from other reserves and
stuff to get to the billing and
but I guess we'll have to wait
till the senate or the other
bill comes up.
So the last question I do have,
Mr. Speaker, there I didn't see
any guidelines, so technically.
When this comes forward, even
though they would bring it to
the legislation, there could be
stuff in there like for climate
change, health or other things
that could be considered to move
forward, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally, since there's no
guidelines on what can't be in
there, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
believe that you were asking,
are you asking about the
expenditures from this fund?
Yes, uh, well, I'm asking about
another expenditures, but the,
the.
A guard rails because it keeps
talking about what we can cover
and and it's very big. There's
nothing specific, but there's
nothing in there that says we,
they could, the council comes up
with all these things and then
they could come up with
something like climate change
health because I know that we
have that here that would be
something that could be included
in the spending and in SB 12 and
3 because there's really no
guardrails of what is not
included.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
actually, uh, page 3 lines 4
through 6 with regards to this
legislation requires that the
funding be spent for services
and programs related to
behavioral health.
Um, and if you'll recall, uh, in
the debate on the previous
legislation, um, that's another
further guard rail because uh
those programs in that regional
plan has to comply with
evidence-based standards, um, so
I think we have actually sort of
double belt and suspenders, I
guess I could say, Mr. Speaker,
uh, on this.
Mr. Speaker Delaney, so the
thing I want to say is, and we
need mental health. There's,
there's, I've been saying that
for 5 years. The problem I have
is now we're trying to shuffle
some money around, take in a
reserves, trying to make this
work when I don't know if that's
going to, and then we have so
many things in here that I'm not
sure what's going to come back
to us, uh, because you could
say, well, climate change,
health is, you know, got data
and scientific data on that and
that's one of the things we're
gonna push for, which is
maybe something we do or don't
agree on, so unless I know what
the parameters are of where
we're going with this and
exactly where we're getting the
money and exactly how it's gonna
be spent. I, I can't support
this. Thank you, Mr. Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The gentle lady
from Santa Fe yield. I yield to
my friend, the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you,
gentle lady, uh.
Speaker, gentle lady, with this.
Have we ever done anything like
this for a New Mexico in regards
to behavioral health for our
state, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, we
have never created a savings
account for the future to fund
behavioral health services, uh,
to my knowledge, um, there are
certainly other trust funds that
have been set up for other
topics, but not for this very
important issue.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
Ludy. And what would, what would
the if we were able to get to
that 1 billion marker. What,
what would the proceeds from
that be, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that would be 50 million per
year.
Speaker, gentle lady.
That
That's to me that's that's
pretty incredible with the
position that we are in the the
dire needs that we have. Would
that be additional to a lot of
the funding that we already have
that we already, um, that are
that we are.
We, we've already put towards
the budget, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, it would be additional to
our current investments and it
could be leveraged for matching
funds. So Mr. Speaker General
later, that's, that's another
point. You just, I was gonna
thank you very much for
answering my, my next question.
I was gonna ask that exactly.
Um, as far as the, the budget,
um, predictability, the
financial impact could be
Positive of the revenue revenue
sources stable and growing.
However, the sponge is reliant
on fluctuating revenue sources.
It might result in a budget
volatility. Is that something
that as we're
We look at our risk management,
we look at our volatility and
our, our revenues.
Do we foresee a future of the of
sustainability for this fund,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
and, and you know this uh very
well from your work on house
appropriations and finance. The
state is in a great stable place
right now. We have very stable
revenues, um, and we are looking
to, you know, bank some of this
uh good fortune that we have
right now for the future.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I couldn't agree with
you more. I think, I think it is
um upon us to be uh responsible
and, and in creating a fund like
this for this very specific
reason for behavioral health
mental health, and all the, the
issues around um.
Around around this issue.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
What, where would, who would be
the, the, the agency that would
be overseeing this fund, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, the
distributions from this fund
would go to the healthcare
Authority. Speaker, that's
wonderful. Thank you very much.
I think that, you know, as, as
all of us are concerned about uh
this issue in our state and as
we talk and go home and talk to
our
Constituents we are able to say
that we did something like this,
and this is a a.
Productive way of of of spending
our revenues and our resources I
can think of.
Uh no better cause than to
really put forward everything
that we've done and, and, and
using our, our revenue resources
to do something like this. I
I'm not uh shy from saying I
wish this would have come a long
time ago. However, with our
revenue, uh, revenues where they
are now and the growth and the
sustainability that we see. I
think that this is probably one
of the most beneficial things
that we can be doing, and I just
want to commend all those who
came together to put this piece
of legislation, uh, together and
I urge all of us in this body to
vote for this bill.
I think that we are setting
ourselves up for a better future
and for us to really move
forward in our own districts and
and across our state to put our
best foot forward on these
issues and having the
sustainability of funding like
this in place, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you very much
for for representing this this
bill on the floor today, um, is
I don't think I have any other
questions. Um, I just more
comments, but I could go on for
quite a long time with you on
this, but thank you very much
for representing this piece of
legislation before us today.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Hill.
I yield to the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero.
Thank you gentle lady.
You're expert witness has done
her level best.
To explain this and I'm, I'm
gonna try to ask the most
respectful questions that I
possibly can to, to understand
this as a new member on
appropriation, there is a lot.
And they tell me, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, don't worry,
you know, you'll, it'll start to
sink after a while, and I
appreciate the knowledge that
they have, but um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I'm trying to understand.
What the reasoning is behind
this bill.
Because
The way it reads to me.
is we're trying to put a billion
dollars in.
And we are going, uh, so the
corpus is gonna be a billion and
then we're going to receive,
once we get the billion and put
in there, we're gonna receive 5%
of that.
So 5% of a billion is gonna be
50 million. And right now, we're
spending, I don't know, 140.
To 200 million.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So I, I do get that this 50
million would accent.
The 140 to 200 million that
we're putting in there, maybe we
can pull that out, but
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady on
the reserves. Do we get an
interest off of our reserves.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, because the state
investment council would invest
this fund as well as the
reserves.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so help me understand
this.
We're already getting the 5%. Is
that correct, off of the
reserves?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, we
do receive that interest rate on
reserves this funding, any
funding in this trust fund would
be in addition to the 31%
reserves currently contemplated
in House Bill 2.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So,
Where I'm hung up is if we're
already receiving the 5% on our
reserves, what's the reasoning
behind Senate Bill 1?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
great question.
Uh, the way that I see this bill
is we are as a legislature
putting into law our intention
to prioritize behavioral health
services for the future, um, and
we are using, uh, we are taking
advantage and sort of indicating
that we want to prioritize these
services using the one-time
money.
That we have now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the way I
understand it is.
As the appropriators, we can
already appropriate this money.
The, the reserves are already
making their 5%. I'm just, I
don't understand why we're
trying to, to open up this and,
and I know, um, I proudly sat on
the Health and Human Services
for 2 years.
Thank you, rep.
And um you know,
I, I tried as hard as I could to
be at every committee. I tried
as hard as I could to be at
every interim.
And it almost seemed to me like
every time we would meet, we
were always talking about mental
health. I understand that there
is a big need for this.
But, but as appropriators.
We can appropriate this money
any way we want.
And I know for, for the
committee that I sit on now, I
know that.
Democrats and Republicans all
feel the same way about mental
health. I haven't heard one
person say, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that, you know,
we're sending too much money
that way. I know we, we need it.
And I like the concept.
But this bill.
I like the concept of 2 and 3.
This bill here, and I know they
all kind of mirror each other,
but
I'm still hung up and I, and I'm
just gonna ask you one more time
and then I'll move on. We
already
We already have a fund or or
reversions, our reversions that
go over, so we're already
receiving 5% off of those, it
just seems like we're
duplicating something to open up
this brand new, I know it looks
good and it looks, it looks
shiny, and we have this new,
this fund, uh, behavioral health
Trust Fund.
But I just can't see the need
for it whenever your
appropriators can already
appropriate that money and we're
already getting the the
interest.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
have not had the honor of
serving on House Appropriations
and finance, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I kind of think
about this in terms of my own
pocketbook.
And the way that I would, uh,
see this is, you know, for
myself as an individual, if I
got a bonus check at the end of
the year.
You know, I could choose to just
deposit that in my savings
account or in my checking
account and that I could, I
could trust my future self and
and hope that I would make good
decisions with that money, um,
and I could also choose to put
that in my kids' college savings
account or, you know, some other
savings account that was
specific and, and so it is, it's
just, it is truly a decision
that we need to make as a
legislature is this something
that we see a long a value of
The long-term investment in this
so that for future generations,
we are saying we have a
commitment to this. Now, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I do also
want to say that this fund is
subject to appropriation. So if
in a in a future moment, we were
in need of utilizing this fund,
whether it be for behavioral
health or if we were facing some
emergency, this doesn't change
any of that, uh, ability for the
appropriators to get in there,
but I do think it's an important
at a time where our
communities are hurting at a
time where people are really
struggling with some of these
issues as, as you and I both
heard in Health and Human
Services over the last couple
years, um, that this is a this
is a moment where we can say,
you know what, this is so
important that we are setting up
this infrastructure.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from Santa Fe. And
if you ever find your way to
appropriations way I could
possibly help you. I, I
definitely would, um, I can't
wait to teach this stuff one of
these days, but I'm still trying
to learn it, um.
Has an economic impact study
been done to determine how this
fund might affect like the
state's economy that you know
of, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
not specifically on all the on
this particular fund, but I will
say there's certainly a lot of
research on behavioral health
services and how, uh, having
access to good mental health
improves productivity, it
improves workforce
participation, so in that sense,
you know, I think it is it a
support for the economy when we
make sure people get access to
services so they can get through
those rough times, um, but I
haven't seen a, a particular
study.
on this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Is there any
possible way with this fund that
it could take away from any
services that we already offer.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, great
question. I also ask myself that
question when I was going
through the purposes for this
fund, um, and I could not
identify anything that I didn't
see covered in this fund that I,
that I felt was important at
certainly for the folks that
I've spoken with either
administer these services or
receive the services. I think
they are, um, this basically
just opens up a new source of
funding for those programs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
So I guess.
I've been listening to a lot of
the budgets. I've actually
listened to every state budget
that we have, and it is a, it's
a lot.
And one budget in particular has
grown really, really big.
And one of my questions was,
could this fund grow beyond its
original purpose, leading to
increased government spending
without clear accountability.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, um,
the beauty of how this fund is,
is set up is that it is uh
direct, you know, the
legislature will need to decide
to make direct appropriations
into this fund. Unlike other
funds that we have current in
current existence which
intercept certain sources of
revenue or sort of our, um, up
to the whims of the market, etc.
we actually as a legislature
have the ability to decide what
is the right size for.
this fund.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. In my final
questions,
Have a lot to do with um.
So both the reoccurring and
non-reoccurring spending was
3.762 billion.
And I know that this is probably
gonna be to your expert and
hopefully we'll be able to
explain this, but while the
projected 2 fiscal year 26,
general fund revenue is 13.614
billion.
So in order to balance the
budget, so we, as we have a
constitutional obligation to
balance the budget, we took 148
million out of reserves to get
the budget balanced, so I'm
still trying to figure out, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, how
we're gonna put this billion
dollars into this fund when
we're taken out of reserves.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so the appropriation has been
removed from this bill, so there
is not currently anything in
this legislation that is
requiring that $1 billion be
moved into it. So that's number
one, and then, um, the second
part of your question, um, we
expect, we received higher than
expected revenue, um, over this
current fiscal year that we're
in the last.
Excuse me, the last fiscal year
and so, um, because that came in
above that level, that is the
reason for that $148 million
transfer.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I just wanted
the body to know that in order
to balance that budget, we were
running in a deficit and we did
pull out 148 million.
To balance the budget. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you,
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Appreciate the debate further
debate, the gentle lady from
Eddie and Lee Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, with
the gentle lady from Santa Fe,
please yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Eddie and Lee.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, so.
Uh, I do serve on the House
Appropriations and finance and
um I had some concerns about
Senate Bill 1.
And uh I believe I, I could not
vote in favor of it because it
was um establishing a fund
without any money to put into
the fund, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
Uh, so just to confirm there,
there is no money programmed at
the moment to go into the
proposed trust fund, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
yes. OK, thank you.
gentle lady, uh, Mr. Speaker,
um,
I have, and I mentioned this in
committee, I have for a number
of years now tried to establish
a transportation trust fund for
New Mexico.
And I think everybody agrees
there's a great need for more
money for roads and highways.
And every single time, um, I
proposed a bill, uh, the bill
was tabled in appropriations,
Mr. Speaker, because it lacked
an appropriation.
So the problem I have here is uh
Mr. Speaker, that we're
essentially um.
Starting something new here was
saying well we'll stand up a
fund, but there's no money in it
and so I just want to go on
record, Mr. Speaker, as saying
I, I do have problems with this.
And actually, every member of
this House of Representatives.
Could probably identify identify
a problem that we have in New
Mexico that would benefit from
revenue from a trust fund.
So, Mr. Speaker, if this is the
way we're going to do things
now, then um we could probably
have 70 trust funds plus 42 out
of the Senate.
Uh, so the problem I have is,
um, we're trying to do something
good and I agree with that I am
a great proponent of behavioral
health treatment.
Um, one of the reasons I came
into the legislature was on that
very topic.
But this doesn't seem to pass
the test.
That I think we've always
required in the past and that
that is that there would be an
appropriation.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, we heard someone mention the
Early Childhood Trust Fund.
That is an amazing fund in the
sense that it was started just a
few years ago with $300 million.
And it's now approaching $10
billion in value.
And how does that happen, Mr.
Speaker? It's because it wasn't
just
Money in the fund, it was that
it was established with feeder
funds.
To give it additional revenue to
boost it and so, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my next
question is how is this um
proposed behavioral health trust
fund set up with anything other
than an initial deposit.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and general
lady, thank you for bringing up
that issue and I think that's
one of the beauties of the way
that Senate Bill 1 has been
constructed because it doesn't
have uh an automatic intercept
of a certain type of revenue or
um access revenue of of a
specific type that's being swept
into this fund, it is uh.
Only consisting of
appropriations, grants,
distributions, so the
legislature will make all of the
decisions about what is
deposited into this fund and
what is appropriated to it,
which I think allows us to make
sure, again, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that it is right
sized.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think actually I would disagree
with that. I think it's actually
a deficiency.
That this fund will basically
have an initial deposit and then
basically just be spending it
down, but the, the wiser course
of action, I believe, is to make
it a fund that will grow well
into the future, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, you
did mention, and this is um.
On page one of the bill that the
fund would consist of certain
distributions, appropriations,
gifts, grants, donations.
And investment income and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Just kind of a little question
out of curiosity for me.
Would it be
Possible for, say, a legislator
to donate $1000 into the trust
fund to get it going, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, I, I believe yes, although
that probably would need to be
sorted out with the uh state
investment council, um, as the
investor of the funds, um, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
you know, this, this could end
up in a situation similar to,
for example, the rural library
Endowment Fund, um, which when
it first passed only had a
million dollars, which didn't
seem, you know, you're.
You're hoping to distribute the
interest, um, but, but the
legislature thought that that
idea and that the um cause of
the rural libraries and the, the
benefits that the rural
libraries provide to
communities, um, was worthy and
was worthy of indicating that
this is something that we should
endow for the future and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm, I'm
happy to share that that that
rural library endowment fund is
now at over 30 million and so
over the years.
Legislature has chosen to
strategically invest in that
fund, so, um, although I'm, I'm,
I apologize that I'm not totally
sure about the answer to your
question on the donation. Uh, we
think that that would be
permissible, um, and get the
gifts, grants and donations of
standard language. I know we
have some programs where we do
have uh foundations or other
charitable contributions that
are utilized for programs so
that this would allow for that.
Thank you for the um the answer.
I appreciate it, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
So given the fact that I am such
a strong proponent of behavioral
health, um.
Availability.
I'm just, I'm just still wanting
to get my hands or my, my head
around the fact that we're
setting up a fund if it's a
billion dollars at some time in
the future that ends up giving
uh birth to that um the fun in a
real way.
Um, that would produce only
about $50 million. I think
someone did the math on that
earlier and what are we spending
right now, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady on behavioral health safe
for the current fiscal year.
All, all told.
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
specifically for uh behavioral
health in state funds, we have
$200 million in the current uh
uh House Bill 2 with an
additional, uh, totaling 300
million because that includes
other state funds, so 300
million total, 200 million in uh
general fund.
Thank you for that and gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, what is being
proposed for spending on
behavioral health for fiscal
year 26.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, 200
million in general fund, um, and
another additional 100 million
in other state funds which
totals 300 million.
Thank you very much.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we all, uh, knew coming into the
session that we had a lot of new
revenue, uh, largely due to, uh,
the success of the oil and gas
industry, it uh it keeps our
state going.
I'm just, I guess the question I
had initially when I saw this
bill was.
If this is so important and it
is.
Mr. Speaker, why are we not just
doing a billion dollars. We had
all this extra money come in we
could do a billion dollars.
If we had our priorities in that
order.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
maybe you could just address
that for a minute.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
you know, I, we, uh, the
appropriators have to balance
all of the needs and gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, you pointed out roads.
There are many, many needs in
our communities and I think for
for me personally, I, I also
felt um we should spend money
now and when I understood what
the investments are that are
contemplated in House Bill 2 to
make sure services are happening
this year.
next fiscal year, um, and into
the future that makes me really
comfortable with this because I
know we're not putting off
investment uh into behavioral
health services, we have
investments that the
appropriations and finance
committee has worked so hard on,
um, to pay for, uh, the services
for fiscal year 26, um, that
does represent an increase in
those services and, and that
makes me really excited because
I know when I go home to, uh, my
district.
Um, and when I speak to folks
that work in Santa Fe County,
um, I know that I can tell them
we, we are investing in services
today and we are making a
commitment to fund these
services long term.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so I, I, I think for me this is
a very big priority, but I see
$0 in that fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
the income would probably be
about $50 million assuming that
we put a billion dollars into
the fund.
So that's that's 50 million, Mr.
Speaker, why could we not just
say for fiscal year 26 add
another 50 million straight off,
uh, HB 2, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um.
Rather than a one time
appropriation, what this is
creating is a source, a new
source of recurring revenue for
the future.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, the other piece here that is
really exciting is a potential
Medicaid match for patients that
qualify for Medicaid, um, we're,
we would not only be creating a
new recurring revenue source for
behavioral health we're also
adding this exciting potential
of the federal match, so we're
really like turning today's
money into future recurring
revenue and dramatically
increasing the ROI on those.
dollars.
Um,
thank you for that and uh so I,
uh, madam, uh, Mr. Speaker and
generally, I, I just really
question whether this is enough.
If you're serious about trying
to really solve these problems,
I think we need to make a a
better and uh deeper investment
in it.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I think we're all waiting to
see what the federal government
is going to do with.
Medicaid and other federal
programs, I think it's a big
question mark for all of us
here.
And I was just gonna ask a
gentle lady, um.
Has this matter been studied in
the interim, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, LFC hosted several hearings
on behavioral health services
and funding sources in the
interim.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
given the fact that we're
waiting to see what the federal
government, uh, ends up doing. I
think this needs to be studied
some more in the interim. I
don't think we're ready yet to
move forward with it.
Um, that suggestion is sometimes
made when we talk about bills.
And I just wonder if maybe we,
we ought to take a more cautious
approach here, make sure we get
it right.
So gentle lady, I, I just want
to sum up, uh, Mr. Speaker, by
saying that
If I tell one of my children I'm
gonna set up a trust fund for
you.
I imagine my son or daughter
would be pretty happy about
that, but if I don't put any
money in the fund, I really not
done anything to benefit. I
could say, well, in the future
I'll.
I'll put some money in, but
maybe, uh, it doesn't happen or
it doesn't happen at the level
that would be very meaningful,
so, um, just on principle on
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, if we
can't do this for other proposed
trust funds and perhaps we ought
not to be doing it for this one,
and again I want to reiterate,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm a
very strong proponent of
behavioral health.
Uh, but this one I believe
doesn't.
Move the needle enough thank
you.
There is further debate, the
young lady from Bernard Leo,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Bernalia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um.
There have been some really
interesting discussions about
this trust fund, um, including
you, you just meet, uh, recently
mentioned ROI or return on
investment. So I'd like to start
there, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um.
Actually, never mind, I'll back
up. I'll, I'll begin at the
start of my questions, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, where
would the money for the trust
fund come from?
Mr. Speaker and uh gentle lady
that will be up to appropriators
and to the legislature as a
whole.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
much are we spending on
behavioral health care, uh, for
fiscal year 26.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
is 200 million in general fund
and the uh current uh House Bill
to an additional 100 million in
other state funds, um, I would
also add that if you include
federal funds, that takes it
with Medicaid, it takes it up to
over a billion dollars.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is a huge amount of money.
That's actually quite, uh, an
injection of funding into our
behavioral health care system
here in New Mexico, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um.
The issue of funding for our
behavioral health care system.
Were there discussions in the
interim about.
What type of funding would be
needed long term, uh, for our
behavioral health care system.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
legislative finance committee
did an extensive deep dive into
gap in a gap analysis on funding
sources and what was needed.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you. And one of the things that
it seems to me that we are doing
is we're making this in.
sizable investment that we
expect to have immediate
results, um, as well as um
results that will bear fruit
over, uh, the coming years, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, a
trust fund if it um is
appropriated a billion dollars
in the future. What type of
additional annual revenue would
we be able to spend directly
into
Our behavioral health care
system.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
with a billion dollars in the
trust fund, we would be adding
$50 million in recurring
revenue.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
then, uh, this, uh, goes to the
ROI discussion, um, and.
If funding, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, of that $150 million
let's say.
You know, let's just say 50
million of it, uh, we're able to
be matched, uh, with federal
funds.
Do we have a sense, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, of how much that
could turn into.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
That, uh, initial investment
would then become 270 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, that's
definitely a lot of money, uh,
this year and subsequent years,
should we be able to uh
appropriate those funds. um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what are
the funds allowed to be expended
for out of this trust fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
the.
The the funds in uh this
behavioral health trust fund
could be used for mental health
and substance abuse treatment
intervention and prevention,
infrastructure tech, and, and
something I know that we've all
been.
Spending a lot of time looking
at his workforce supports and
boosting our behavioral health
workforce, um, it can be used
for matching funds for federal,
local, uh, and other sources of
funds, uh, offsetting costs to
comply with federal requirements
and implementation of regional
behavioral health plans
throughout the state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. One of the
things that I love about the
legislative finance committee is
that it does, uh, evaluations of
our programs, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, will we be able to
track the efficacy of our
investments that we're making
this year and then decide where
we want to invest additional
funding.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, and actually that, uh, this
is subject to quarterly
reporting, so we can actually
track it uh throughout the year.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is very impressive, I think, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, who
will be administering the, the
funds?
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
healthcare authority, um, would
be actually getting these funds
out into the programming.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so,
um, would, I can assume then
that the legislative finance
committee and the other entities
receiving these quarterly
reports we'll be working in
conjunction with the healthcare
authority as this goes forward,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is, that's wonderful, um.
The other aspect of uh this
trust fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, who is responsible for
investing and monitoring the
funds that would be in the trust
fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
State Investment council.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Does the state
investment council, uh, are
there other permanent funds that
they currently manage?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
State Investment council manages
all of our permanent funds.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
they, um, manage any funds that
are sort of similar in having a
trust fund and then a program
fund.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
the government results in
opportunity fund is one such
fund that the SIC manages.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
what's the advantage of having a
trust fund managed by the SIC as
opposed to the state treasurer
or just sort of
Hanging out in.
General funds.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
funds manage managed by the SIC
do uh bring in higher return,
uh, uh, rates.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you
mentioned there, there was a
question earlier about whether
or not the fund could accept um.
Donations from a a legislator,
for instance, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the discussion
about, uh, private foundations
also came up, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, are there
foundations here in New Mexico
that have an emphasis on
behavioral health care.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I can think of several,
um, that do have an emphasis on
behavioral health, uh,
healthcare in general, safety
net kinds of services.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you for that. And
Do, is there a mechanism and,
and I don't know if you know
this, but, um, is there a format
or a way in which the state
regularly collaborates with
behavioral health care
organizations and institutions
that are interested in
supporting those endeavors.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
know of a couple, but if you may
know of others, so health care
authority currently collaborates
with numerous providers, many of
those providers are also funded
by private foundations in the
community, so that would be one
way that there is collaboration,
um, I know for, uh, uh, a
different fund outside of the
healthcare area, there have been
certainly charitable
contributions made by private
foundations to further, um,
educational programs.
for children, for example.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. It would be
very interesting to see, um, you
know, in the interim, if there's
interest from some of these
foundations in collaborating,
um, you know, and, and
potentially supporting the trust
fund, um, so that it can raise
additional funds for investment,
um.
Mr.
Speaker gentle lady, I think
that that covers all of my
questions. Thank you so much.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna get this as
simple as I can, that expert
witness I've talked with her, I
can't tell you how many times,
and, and I still haven't got it
quite yet, Mr. Speaker. So, uh,
when we take these funds and we
put them, uh, these revenues,
let's say we're taking the
revenue and we're putting it
into this fund, will that then
be a savings account or will
that be a checking account, Mr.
Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it would
be a savings account.
OK, that'll be a savings
account.
In that savings account.
Um
And in the bill, it says that
we're only going to be, be able
to use this for mental health.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, correct
behavioral health.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
So I guess one of the questions
I have if, if this fund is
directed for that, when the
rainy day hits, we don't have
any of the language that the
early childhood trust fund has
in it. Therefore, as a body, we
can, we can take everything out
of this fund entirely. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
hope that day does not come, but
yes, yes, that, that would be
allowable.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you for that gentle lady, um.
The other part of this then that
would also be counted in
reserve.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Speaker and gentle lady, but
we're taking out of that fund.
To be used
Or are we just going to say the
monies we're putting in there
from this year is all that we're
going to be using and thereafter
it will be used just the
interest that's earned.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
and I should just clarify, so.
Only for a fiscal year 2026 and
2027 will the unencumbered
unexpected or unexpended or
unencumbered balance.
Be used in the calculation of
reserve. So just for those two
fiscal years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so thereafter it
will not be able to be used as
reserves or counted as reserves,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct unless uh the
legislature chose to change this
statute.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um
So then
If, if the body chose to to
change this next year, well, in,
in a 60 day session if they
chose to change that, they could
come back and and take those
guardrails off and we could use
that for anything we needed. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, this
is uh similar to many other
funds that are created that are
available to the uh to be
appropriated, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
would be a set of policy
decisions that the legislature
at that time would have to make
if we were facing uh a a time
where our revenue is coming in
much lower than than what was
expected, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I can remember, uh,
back in 2017.
where we have, we faced that
situation, um, and our
appropriators are our budgeteers
is our majority whip likes to
call them, um.
They were looking at every
balance and every fund, you,
you, you name it, it was on a
list that then the legislature
as a whole had to really come
together and say, this is
important, we need to preserve
this. This one we can live uh a
little leaner for a couple of
years and it was a very
complicated uh and difficult
process, but yes, this, this
could be part of that process.
Thank you, Mister Speaker and
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I, I, you know,
as I sit on this, uh, the
appropriations Committee, um,
I'm the guy that wants 40% in
our reserves.
Uh, and, and I'd love to.
I'd love to take money from a
lot of different departments and
put it into our reserves to get
there.
So with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, uh, I have some
questions about our reserves and
how we're going to be able to
use those and so Mr. Speaker, I
have an amendment.
Can you kindly bring the
amendment to the chief clerk.
Mr. Speaker, could I have a roll
call?
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom left.
Yes, sir, Mr. Speaker,
231-215.1. We'll get this
amendment passed out, as well as
It appears the amendment has
been passed out, gentlemen, to
explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, this
amendment strikes out Senate
Finance Committee Amendment
number 2.
And then on uh page 2 line 19
after period strike the
remainder of the line and strike
lines 20 and 22 in their
entirety.
And this, uh, Mr. Speaker, what
this does, uh, this test takes
out the ability to calculate
this in our reserves, uh,
because if this is truly a
checking account, I don't think
it's a savings account, Mr.
Speaker, and we don't have the
language in there to protect it.
Gent lady, is this a friendly
amendment?
Mr. Speaker, um, this is not a
friendly amendment. I'd love the
opportunity to explain. Please
go ahead.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, um.
And gentlemen, um, with this
amendment we are basically
removing the language that uh
includes this in the calculation
of state reserves and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand, um, your motivation,
which is one I certainly share
which is we should be
conservative and uh making sure
that we are saving for the rainy
day, and this really is a
savings account. Um, one of the
reasons why I appreciated the
language, um, Mr. Speaker and
general.
that that uh the gentleman is
seeking to strike was actually a
uh written up in the fiscal
impact report.
Um, and.
Basically, uh, in the, in the
FIR, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, it states that the
requirement that the trust fund
be included in calculations for
state reserves and FY 26 will
lead the council to allocate the
trust fund assets more
conservatively to ensure capital
preservation and enhanced
liquidity.
So basically, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, what the FIR is
really indicating is that the
SIC will invest these funds for
the next couple of years while
this is being calculated as part
of the reserve more
conservatively so they can
ensure that they're not gonna
lose any money on those
investments and make sure that
the investments are increasing
in value, um, once this trust
fund is not considered a state
reserve fund, uh, the SIC may
adjust the asset.
ation to focus on a higher
growth and return enhancement,
which could mean, you know, a
higher return on that
investment, but it could mean
investing in some things that
are a little more risky in
seeking that higher return. So
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
think that this, uh, inclusion
in the uh reserve calculation is
really important because it does
safeguard the investment for the
first couple of years and also
Mr. Speaker, uh, just to close
out with some
Uncertainty around federal
funding for programs and wanting
to ensure that we have
flexibility and some liquidity,
um, this allows this any funds
allocated to this trust fund to
remain liquid, unlike some of
the other trust funds that we
have that do require an act of
the legislature, a certain, uh,
you know, 2/3 majority, for
example, in one of our funds to
remove some of the money from a
trust fund in order to access
it. So, Mr. Speaker, uh, I.
uh, just respectfully state this
is an unfriendly amendment for
those reasons.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I think you've
answered my question that this
body at any time can do whatever
they want to do with these funds
and if we're truly looking out
and saying, what we'd like to
do, and I think everybody in
this, in this chamber wants to
help out if we're, if we're
wanting to do that, then we
truly probably should put some
guard rails on this and state
that we have to have an
emergency that it's just not
there and that anybody can take
it or this body can take it for
perhaps.
other reasons.
gentle lady from Berlin how
maybe Hill.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table uh
House floor Amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 1 is amended. OK,
we have roll call vote. We are
on a motion to table House Floor
Amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 1 as amended, a vote of
yes, and we would have tabled
the amendment. I would have
known we're back on the
amendment. We have a 32nd bull
clock, 32nd bull clock. The vote
is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 30 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative.
House Fuller Amendment number
one to Senate Bill 1 as amended
has been tabled. Gentlemen from
San Juan, back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentle lady, I think it's this
is a bill that, uh, is needed. I
wish to add a few more guard
rails and I wish we had a little
more savings to put into this,
uh, and to be able to keep our
reserves where I think they need
to be, but uh I think it's a,
it's a good bill. I think it's
maybe structured a little bit
wrong, but it's been a great
debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentlemen
from Donanaresentative Small.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Guild.
I yield to the gentleman from
Donana. Great, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I was, uh, I had to step out for
a few things, but I've heard
much of the debate, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, um, we've talked
about it. This connects to two
other Senate bills, one of which
we've heard in the past,
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes. Speaker, gentle lady, is it
fair to say that, uh, working
through the interim process and
with the executive with
providers all over the state.
The work has gone in, uh, to
that, that this will, we will be
seeing some fairly significant
adjustments, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, to our behavioral
healthcare delivery system.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, and
it, it's just really exciting to
be at this place,
lady, I totally agree, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that uh
extends a little bit into
continued investments that we're
making in uh workforce. Would
you agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for the behavior of
healthcare workforce. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
That is super exciting and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know,
um, a trust fund last year I'm
looking here, uh, on our general
fund financial summary, um, our,
we created a higher education
endowment fund just last year.
Is that your, uh, understanding,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Great and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the trust fund that we're
bringing here, um, is this, uh,
gonna help us or
your opinion, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, does the trust fund
help sort of create a um a fund
that is gonna support what
should be a uh higher
functioning, more efficient,
more well funded behavioral
healthcare delivery system.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
and the framework that's been
set out in Senate bills 12, and
3, are truly gonna be, I think
transformative, um, we have the
long term commitment that
resides in this bill. We have
current year investments that
were contemplated Senate Bill 2,
and we have an amazing new
infrastructure and and system to
guide all of these investments,
um, and the program work on the
ground with community
involvement in Senate Bill 3.
So truly it it's sort of a a
holistic wraparound approach to
really ensure that behavioral
health services are exactly what
New Mexicans deserve.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, it's
really good to hear that, um,
because Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, when we set out on uh sort
of a rethinking a service that
we all agree is so important,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
can be a bit of a sort of, well,
let me ask this, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, if we don't
have a way to uh increase and
sustainably provide long-term
funding, could that inhibit sort
of our courage
readjusting a delivery system to
better reflect New Mexicans'
needs.
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, because, uh, the
implementation of all of these
changes means that behavioral
health providers are gonna need
to change, uh, how they're, how
they're working with the
community. We're calling for
more comprehensive services.
We're calling for agencies to
work together in ways they've
never done before, and to do
that, you need a workforce, you
need to hire the right folks,
you need to have that long term
commitment. Um, you need to
understand that the recurring
revenue is gonna
be there so that you can make
those hiring decisions, you can
hire those new counselors you
might need or hire the staffing
that you need to do the planning
to ensure that the community is
getting the services, um, as
we've laid out here.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, that
sounds very right to me, and it
sounds like it very like that.
If we weren't able to look at
sort of longer term sustainable
funding that um our providers,
our communities would be less
willing to sort of lean into the
changes that are being proposed,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, maybe
they would be less willing to uh
look at increased staffing or
increased responsibilities. Does
that sound right, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Absolutely, um, in order to meet
the needs of communities
behavioral health providers,
agencies, they're all going to
have to make hiring changes and,
and increased capacity to meet
the requirements of what this
new system we've laid out, which
is really a very comprehensive
community-based system and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
just add that, um, and I know
that I've shared this with many
people in this body that when we
started talking about
behavioral.
Health, um, about a year ago, I
think I was at a an LFC meeting,
um, one of the first last year
and um we were looking at an
audit that said it took 10 phone
calls to receive one behavioral
health appointment. So if you
were a mom looking for a service
for your kid or or a brother
that was worried about his
sister, 10 phone calls and part
of the answer to that is that
providers need to have adequate
staffing.
And so they need to understand
all the range of services in
their community so they can say,
you know what? I can't help you,
but let me get you an
appointment with such and such
agency that can, or you need to
actually go get a medical
appointment. Let me connect you
with that. That's the system
that I believe is going to be a
result of this Senate Bill 123
package.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
that is really encouraging for
me to hear, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think it reflects
some of what I'm seeing back
home in Donana County where
there are increased providers.
There's Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the CCBHCs, the community,
uh, behavioral health clinics,
certified community behavioral
health clinics. I know those are
happening, uh, in different
parts of the state. Well this
trust fund be able to support
those CCBHCs.
In addition to the other
networks that you're describing.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
could you tell us a little bit
why those CCBHGs are so
important, please.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
spent a lot of time researching
CCBHCs, um, at which they had a
different acronym. It's a little
bit of a tongue twister, but,
but.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
are a no wrong door approach. So
what a CCBHC is uh asked and
required to establish is
actually a whole continuum of
mental health and behavioral
health care, starting with
crisis intervention.
All the way through outpatient
inpatient and ending with
inpatient treatment, and these
agencies.
For lack of better term, we just
are, are sort of the front door
for accessing the entire
behavioral health system and so
uh I'm really excited because I
talked to a lot of community
members, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that don't know who
to call or they call someone and
and they're told that that's not
the right, that's not the
service that that provider
provides, um, if we can expand
CCBHCs all over the state, um,
as we're starting to do, then we
are gonna be able to send our
community.
members to get the help they
need at one place. Any
behavioral health issue to have
one agency that can direct you
to a whole network of other
agencies that are working to
serve uh behavioral health
clients is gonna be really
impactful. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I totally agree and what
I'm hearing you describe here
is, as you point out, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, no
wrong door, one stop shop, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
that's uh what so many
we have worked towards, it's
what we all want in this body
and Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
does the trust fund, will that
help support, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the functions of a
CCBHC, uh, as we move forward
and as we, as you noted, uh, get
a few up and running and then
start adding more.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, um,
in part because there are some
startup costs when you're
establishing a CCBHC, but that
is really a drop in the bucket
when you think about needing a
recurring commitment to sustain
the staff to ensure that you
have the navigators, one of the
big pieces of the CCBHC model is
care coordination so that you
have someone who's specially
trained to sit with someone and
say, I see that you have all
these needs. I see that you need
all these services.
Let's get you connected and
The wonderful thing about the
CCBHC model is that those
clinics are actually held
accountable for that. So they
are actually evaluated based on
how many successful referrals
that they did, did the people
once they got the referral
actually show up and get that
care, um, that's something I
think is really missing and I'm,
I'm so glad we're expanding this
model, but the recurring funding
in the trust fund is going to be
a huge boon for that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Again,
that sounds very right to me and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, in
the House Bill 2, which were,
uh, we were pleased to pass out
a committee today we include
funding for so many of these
different services, we're gonna
be able to see, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the results from
this both a new, uh, and, uh,
updated approach with Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, several
years of funding that's
being built in this year, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if we
take, say, uh, you know, uh, uh,
234 year time frame, it seems
like the creation of this fund
this year and the ability to,
uh, should the legislature
choose to put money into it,
that sort of very much follows
our investment through the
budget and the creation of a
new, uh, hopefully better
system, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
it's very exciting because we
are not just looking to the
future, we are looking toward
today you, um, atmosphere as a
chairman of our appropriations
Committee have been leading the
way with all of the members who
really prioritized behavioral
health and so now not only are
we planning for the future with
Senate one, with House Bill 2,
which is the product of such
wonderful collaboration, we are
gonna see the enhanced service.
in this upcoming fiscal year
which, you know, is what our
communities have been asking
for.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
totally agree. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, if we create
this fund this year, do we have
some confidence that we'll have
uh significant non-recurring
funding next year and the year
after to look at, uh, and be
able to sort of so it's not is
it's, it's not sort of created
and then left high and dry, will
there be opportunity to
appropriate more funding, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, would
it surprise you that, um, in
fact, we're looking at, uh,
against very significant
non-recurring um funds as we go
into the next few years, um,
Base, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
on uh in large part, although
not entirely, but very much so
in large part on energy
production, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we are in a very fortunate
position.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if you
allow me to just sort of share
with the body, uh, the source of
that confidence and why I agree
with your conclusion that we
will have that capacity.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're over
100 oil 100 drilling rigs
operating in the state right
now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we're up above 60 million
barrels of oil produced every
single month, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Do those sound roughly right to
you?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Great, they, they do as well to
me, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and so even as uh some of the,
the uh uncertainty and chaos
that we're seeing at the federal
level, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it seems like we're seeing
continued strength in energy
production here in New Mexico,
so we can have confidence that
this fund's creation this year,
uh, over the next few years, we
will have the opportunity to
populate it appropriately.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
and it's, it's wonderful to hear
that, and I think um we've heard
so much, uh, commentary today
from the members who all truly
support behavioral health
services, which is wonderful to
see and so I think you'll have
your, your office full of
advocates for for these services
in years to come. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's great to
hear, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the, uh, it's also
important that we make sure and
we
uh, with these new service
delivery updated services and
now a fund that's gonna support
those services, we make sure
those dollars are spent as
wisely as possible. Would you
agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
there's so much accountability
built into this new system.
I agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and we're looking at
value-based pricing, looking at
getting the best bang for the
buck for, uh, and Miss Sriger
gentle lady, it sounds like a
lot of evaluation, uh,
particularly in that new service
delivery, you were saying it's
already there, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, we can be then uh look at
this fund as a way to, uh,
begin, although not fully yet or
not entirely, not at, you know,
the start is just creating the
fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we can look at this as creating
a new system evaluating that
system, funding that system in
the short term, um, excuse me,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and we
are creating
the, uh, the long term
guarantor, the strongest
commitment we can leave for New
Mexicans, um, that this will be
funded perpetually into the
future.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
I, I think we've left no stone
unturned in the quest to sort of
plan for today and tomorrow and
for future generations.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, um,
that is very encouraging to me,
uh, is for those reasons, well,
and uh one more thing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
Before we have sort of, uh,
we're beginning and we're, we're
walking and chewing gum at the
same time, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it might be, uh, a little
bit too much to sort of have the
full amount in this fund right
away before we've seen this new
delivery system, the new
services and been able to judge
some of those results. Would you
agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think we are going to learn a
tremendous amount over the next
couple of years with the
implementation of the system. I
personally very excited to see
the regional plans to see what
uh different regions of the
state prioritize what kind of
services are really needed, I
think, uh, as someone who's, uh,
looked at with many other
colleagues, behavioral health
services and the need for that.
I'm gonna be really interested
to also see some themes for
things that we may need.
To enhance statewide, um, or
regional issues where we really
need to focus in and say, hey,
we need this kind of service
provider. We need to enhance
this, so, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, I think over the
next couple of years we're
really gonna learn a lot about
uh the size of investment that's
needed, what the continuing
commitment needs to be, um,
which I'm excited to have that
kind of evaluation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Uh, I fully
agree, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, as you are describing
that, it really says to me that
we can judge the results of this
new approach, and it will then
have the opportunity to make
investments accordingly and then
if we need to tweak some of the
delivery, maybe we do, maybe we
don't, but that is our
confidence increases, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, in a
system that has no wrong door
that is welcoming.
all New Mexicans in that we can
then populate this fund, uh, and
sort of bit by bit, deliver a
stronger product, make New
Mexicans healthier, uh, in, in
increase their behavioral health
and expand our work for
workforce participation, all the
things lead to a higher quality
of life and at the very same
time, be investing in a
permanent fund that is gonna
support those services for the
long term.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
couldn't have said it better
myself. Well, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I want to thank you
for bringing this forward. Um, I
think it's a thoughtful, nuanced
approach. Uh, it does not
overcommit us, but it does, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, very much
prepare us to uh take sort of
the biggest step forward in
behavioral health care in well
over a decade in the state and
so I very much plan to support
it and thank you for bringing
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
for the debate, gentlemen from
Lee, Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Feil.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I was gonna go through all the
math equations on this, but
instead, I think the easiest
thing to do would be to go, to
go back to
The conversations that took
place in House Appropriations a
couple of nights ago with
respect to Senate Bill 1 and
then Senate Bill 2 as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
During that
Testimony
Uh, one of our senators,
Testified that over the last
2 years plus with what we have
in current.
Moving forward
The state of New Mexico has
invested over $2.5 billion in
behavioral health.
And the exact words were.
We haven't moved the needle a
bit.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
yes, the $2.5 billion
expenditure that you're
referencing does include all of
the Medicaid funding, so
combination of state and federal
funding, um, and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, so, so that
amount uh is roughly accurate.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
thank you for
Uh, that agreement because I
really didn't want to go through
the math equation and put
everybody to sleep. So from 2023
to
Fiscal year 26.
Is that 2.5 billion. Can we
agree there too, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, we
believe that's, uh, uh, roughly
accurate without having the
numbers right here.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
with
The companion bills, everything
together.
All the numbers that you've had
to answer questions on up to
this point in time.
Um, in your last discussion
debate.
Conversation with Representative
Small, our chair of House
Appropriations.
Two things that I felt came out.
22 statements that were made,
Mr. Chair.
Significant investments were
going to be able to make
significant investments.
And the other one was, we're
going to be able to set a
framework that would be
transformative, and so, Mister
Speaker and gentle lady,
Would you agree that
$2.5 billion is probably a
pretty significant investment
already.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
is a, a lot of money, um, and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
the, the key thing here is the
nature of the investment. So Mr.
Speaker, uh, what I mentioned
previously, uh, about people
having to make 10 phone calls to
secure one behavioral health
appointment, um, that is a maybe
a reflection of a lot of
investment, but not a lot of
coordination, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I think um uh.
Uh, certainly there's been a
long time commitment to funding
these services, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what these three
bills lay out is actually an
overhaul of the system and how
those services are delivered,
um, so that people are actually
getting access to the help they
need when they need it in the
way that they can access it, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and generally, I
appreciate your answer and I
appreciate um you letting me get
through this.
So fiscal year 25.
To the age to the healthcare
authority directly.
A total of $987 million.
According to Senator.
testimony the other night. We
haven't moved the needle a bit.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we're putting together a game
plan.
Mm
Continue to fund.
One of the worst rated.
Agencies in the state.
With and give them the ability
to continue.
On their behavioral health.
Mission
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? I mean,
I can, I can just pull out the
rankings all the way through,
but I don't think we really want
to do that today.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
while the funding from the
distributed from this behavioral
trust fund would go to the
healthcare authority. They are
distributing it to the programs,
identified, uh, in the purposes
of this legislation. So we're
not specifically growing the
health care authority in and of
itself, uh, we are investing in
the purposes of the fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
inside the FIRs very
specifically just to kick it
off.
Healthcare Authority wants 6
full-time, new full-time
employees.
At a grand total of $777,000.
And so I would say that yes, we
are going to continue to um push
money to healthcare authority.
So, and I appreciate the way you
answered that because it leads
into the next question.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you agree that in some
form or fashion right now.
Without any of this, AOC has
some level of funding.
To deal with behavioral health
issues.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there is a small amount of
funding, uh, at the
administrative office of the
courts to deal with behavioral
health, um, particularly through
the specialty courts.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
agree with that one example. I
believe there are several
others, but the fact that we
already know, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we have an avenue
to fund AOC with behavioral
health. So let's move to the
next one.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think we've already acknowledged
the fact that healthcare
authority gets a significant
amount of money right now with
behavioral health. I don't think
we need to touch that one.
the corrections department, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you agree that there's funding
from behavioral that makes it
through the definition of
behavioral health through
Medicaid, through all the
different sources that we have,
the Department of Corrections
receives funding as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the corrections department does
have a medication assisted
treatment programs that they are
in the process of of expanding,
setting up in some facilities,
uh, there's also, um,
transitional services for
individuals who are approaching
release.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so yes, we have that. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you agree that there's a level
of funding as well with the
Department of Public Service.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do you
mind repeating that question?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
with respect to behavioral
health.
Would you agree that the DPS
is receiving some level of
funding.
With respect to behavioral
health issues.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
they, there is some funding for
crisis response, uh, located at
DPS, um, that that is the only
finding that I'm aware of that
DPS is involved with with
regards to behavioral health.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so now we know DPS is
getting some level of funding,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what about you and them with
respect to behavioral health
funding from this body.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen at UNM
does have uh some behavioral
health funding.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, can you talk a
little bit about the DFA is any
funding whatsoever tagged to
behavioral health.
Within
With
uh.
Appropriated to the DFA.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'll add to that and all the
departments that they cover.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
finding in House Bill 2 this
year does have funding for
transitional housing.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
you're saying no aspect of
behavioral health funding.
Over the last 3 years moving
forward to the
Our last 2 years and moving
forward in FY 26.
The DFA has not received any
funding whatsoever to deal with
behavioral health issues,
gentlemen, I believe, uh, I'm
not to try to interject here,
but uh the DFA is the recipient
of legislative dollars. I mean,
I, I think we get the point. I
mean I'm gonna ask you to wrap
up the point so we can get to
the questions that you want to
ask. Thank you.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I will quit because
there's several other
departments.
That would be receiving funding.
Uh, should Senate Bill 2 pass.
And all of this rotates to
Senate Bill 1, so.
With that being said, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, really
confused as to why we're
building a trust fund.
When we've already proven.
That we can appropriate dollars.
To every department identified
in Senate Bill 2.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
is really about a commitment to
the future.
And identifying behavioral
health as a significant need
that impacts almost every family
in New Mexico and so what this
behavioral health trust fund is
doing is setting up the
framework so that we as
legislators can in the future
determine what the level of
investment should be to earn
interest, uh, and to provide
ongoing distributions to fund
these services in a recurring
fashion.
So Mister Speaker, gentlemen,
um, we've talked a lot about
stability. We're in a great
place with stability of our
revenues right now. And so, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, this is
an opportunity to take the
revenue that we, uh, are blessed
to have right now and invest
that into the future so that we
have an ongoing commitment to
behavioral health services, and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, to, to go back to the, the
10 phone calls to get 1
healthcare appointment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
The only way that we solve that
problem is by doing things a
little bit differently. So I
would say even though we have,
as the gentleman has pointed
out, this uh cobweb of
appropriations around behavioral
health, the framework that's
being set up here is requiring
everybody, um, maybe for the
first time in a couple decades
to work together and to really
institute services at the
community level, um, to ensure
that that folks aren't having to
make those 10 phone calls.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate, appreciate the depth
of that answer because at the
end of the day,
Within a day or two, maybe 3.
We'll be listening to House Bill
2.
Inside of House Bill 2.
This Sunday funding mechanisms.
That
Have guard rails on them.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
could do this.
Through the funding mechanisms
we have.
And attached guard rails to it.
It would actually be great, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if we
could get all 18 of our
department secretaries to work
together.
We're funding so many different
things and so many different
ways. And those are questions
that I've asked over, over, um,
the last several weeks with
respect to funding because we
send IT money here we send IT
money there we send cyber money
here we send cyber money there.
I think it would be a great idea
to be able to do that. I haven't
seen a trust fund yet set up
yet.
has successfully accomplished
the dream associated with this
one.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that concerns me, and I
understand that there's a a
defined framework.
Just as was testified to in how
appropriations when these were
in front of us.
The statement was, we don't know
if this is gonna work.
We don't know which parts of
this is gonna work and we don't
know if any of it's gonna work.
We and, and so, once again,
each, each step of this from
Senate Bill 3 last night, Senate
Bill 1 today. If, if we ever see
Senate Bill 2,
each step of this.
Concerns me because we have
existing trust funds where we
can't get departments to work
together.
We have a legislative finance
committee.
That
puts together reports every
year.
Shows us
The deficiencies of those
departments.
And we still increase funding
every year.
We don't go back and look at the
guardrails and say, Dad, gum,
you're not doing a very good job
at this.
We're not going to fund it
anymore.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's the way business works.
That is not the way our state
government agencies are working
right now and, and the concern
that I have with that.
Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady.
Leading to some questions.
With the gentle lady please help
me to understand the very
specific diiciencies.
Within the current 2+ billion
dollars that we've spent.
That this bill will mitigate.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the, the innovation here is
setting up a recurring funding
source for the long term, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, in
the other legislation, there is
a lot more specificity around
the, uh, innovation that is not,
uh, currently occurring, um, but
I wanting to stay on this
particular piece of legislation,
uh, the innovation is really in
the in the funding strategy
here.
appreciate that answer, but I
think the last 2.5, 2 years.
And moving forward is proven
that we've we can sufficiently
fund it without a trust fund.
When we look at the way that
When we look at the total
funding that we've spent in
comparison to what would flow
all the way through and maybe up
to the governor's desk to be
chaptered.
We've invested more than, than
what this plan has in mind right
now.
So,
Not sure. I understand that it
allows us to set up a trust, but
at the end of the day, I don't
see a benefit when we're
successfully funding it, what
we're successfully or not
successfully doing is
implementing it.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Since many of these programs
already exist. What do you, um,
and the bill sponsors envision.
To set as measures of success.
On these initiatives and how
long will we wait.
To fix this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so the LFC, uh, and as will be
publicly available we'll get
quarterly evaluation report. So
that will help us keep a very
close eye on how these programs
are being implemented. I mean,
ultimately, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, the ultimate outcome
is healing, hope, recovery, um,
stability, good health for the
people of New Mexico that
struggle with behavioral health
issues, um, I think we need.
To be looking at that, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, some of
the other ways you can look at
that are was someone referred to
a particular service and did
they actually go and receive
that service, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I think we will look
and see, um, for, for
individuals that have substance
abuse issues, are they less
involved with the criminal
justice system. I think those
will be some of the evaluation
measures, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, specifically on this
bill, the legislature will have
opportunity to appropriate.
Accordingly, according to
looking at all of that data,
understanding how much money
should be placed into the trust
fund and also how the money from
the trust fund distribution
should be appropriated to
evidence-based programs.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate the answer, but once
again, I
Turn your attention to volume
one, where we do that every
year.
Unsuccessfully
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, my
next question.
With all the different moving
parts within this.
How is this going to be
coordinated?
Understand, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, from your answer
that LSC will be reporting on
it.
Who's going to coordinate all of
this and what part
What answer do they have in
those quarterlies in front of
legislative finance.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so this trust fund will be no
different than uh other items
that go through the usual
legislative finance committee
process, legislative Finance
Committee can take a look at,
um, what the healthcare
authority is recommending what
other entities are recommending
for funding on behavioral health
and they'll evaluate. They'll
look at all that data and say
these are the types of programs
that fit in with this purpose,
and so we are going to
appropriate to those programs.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, thank you for that answer.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
You will have the primary
oversight and who will we be
able to hold accountable.
For
Results and the state behavioral
health system.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
ultimately the healthcare
authority in this legislation.
There's also an executive
committee that is created in
other legislation, um, that
includes uh a number of
executive branch individuals,
um, so, but ultimately the for
the trust fund, the healthcare
authority, and its expenditures
will be uh the major
accountability agency.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and
And then again,
I draw everybody's attention
back to Volume one and see and
Requests that they review the
performance record.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
This may be a bit of a crystal
ball question.
So,
um, just help me if you can. Do
we know what
The Senate may be adding or
stripping out of this bill.
Out of legislation to fund this
process.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
have long been in the habit of
not speculating on what the
Senate will or will not do.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
am much along in the same boat
with you, but I do.
appreciate the opportunity to
ask a question, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I do have a, an
amendment I would like to
introduce and I would like to
a roll call vote, please.
You've got roll call, bring the
amendment to the rostrum,
please.
All right, let's get the
amendment down here.
Is the amendment volume one of
the LFC.
Because we've all read it. I've
read it like 3 times already.
during this debate.
What is it number on the bottom
left.
Mr. Speaker, the 202 number is
0.231.
216.1.
OK, the amendment is online,
gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this proposed amendment makes a
change on page 3, line 4.
Strikes, um.
I don't think everybody got one,
Mr. Speaker.
So everybody have the amendment?
Oh, there you go.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So on
page 3 line 4.
Uh, strikes the word money, and
then inserts except as provided
in subsection B of this section.
money.
Then on page 3, Mr. Speaker,
between lines 19 and 20, it
inserts the paragraph.
The newbie
Starting with money in the funds
shall not be used to benefit the
governor.
Or any legislator.
Serving during the first session
of the fifty-seventh
legislature.
Were their family members,
including spouses or domestic
partners, children, parents,
siblings.
And children, parents, and
siblings of their spouses or
domestic partners.
And part three of this, then
asked to re-letter the rest of
it.
And ladies is a friendly
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, uh, in gentlemen,
um.
I
I am, this is a, this is an
unfriendly amendment, um, in
part because much of this is
covered in Article 4 section 28
of the Constitution, Mr.
Speaker, uh, and gentlemen,
also, uh, we have numerous
ethical statutes that already
apply. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I, uh,
respectfully.
would call this amendment
unfriendly, and I would urge the
body to vote no. I don't, uh,
particularly Mr. Speaker, just
one more thing to add,
particularly with an amendment
on the fly like this, I don't
know how this acts in relation
to the other statutes that we
have covering ethical behavior
of the governor legislators,
other public officials
appointees, cabinet officials,
so I, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um,
we would never want uh any self
enrichment to occur.
Um
I don't, I, I would recommend
that the body not vote for this
amendment so that we do not make
a mistake that would lead to
some kind of ethical lapse being
permitted, Mr. Speaker. There is
a debate on the amendment. The
gentle lady from Torrance and
Bern Leo Representative Lord.
Speaker, and hold on one second
because I just got the
amendment. So Mr. Speaker, you
want me to come back to you? No,
no, I, I have it now in my hand.
Sorry, I got, I had another
amendment and I was looking at,
so Mr. Speaker, will the
gentleman from Lee County,
please yield your.
time.
We'd be happy to yield to my
friend from Bernalilo in
Torrance County.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
the county, can you explain to
me what, why you're bringing
this forward, uh, as I look
through this smart, why are you
bringing this forward and what
was the end result of how this
would change the bill in its
entirety, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
doesn't change the bill in its
entirety, it changes who can
profit from this bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
many times over the, the almost
5 years that I've been here now,
uh,
We've seen different pieces of
legislation that have come
through that provide.
Profitability incentives for
people.
Sir, I'm gonna ask you to
refrain from those types of
comments, I think, um,
Uh
Somehow stating that legislators
vote to.
Profit or make money, um.
is not
Keeping with the decorum or
standards of this house, so
while I can appreciate your
amendment and you're welcome to
debate your amendment. Please
refrain.
From casting any type of
ulterior motive to this house.
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your
comments and your guidance with
respect to that.
When I chose to run for office
very specifically, I
relinquished my ownerships.
And companies so that as I vote
on things.
It doesn't impact me from that.
With the ability to build stuff,
to do work across the state.
I leave that to the people that
now have that ownership.
And um it's been a concern.
Um
Brought up in the past.
I think we can all agree that
when the cannabis bill was
passed, there was, there were
timelines involved with that,
sir. I'm going to once again ask
you to refrain.
From those types of comments, as
you heard earlier, there are
A lot of other statutes that
cover that type of behavior, and
I do not want to go down the
road.
Of specific
Industries or individuals that
may benefit from the work of
this chamber because I believe
that each and every one of you
is above board, including
yourself, sir. I'm not gonna ask
you again please debate your
amendment.
And that's the end of that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the
intent behind this is to define
um
Potential beneficiaries.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
treading very carefully on this.
You're saying the money in the
funds shall not be used to
benefit.
Anyone. It looks kind of like
you're saying almost all elected
officials, it's kind of what
you're saying.
And that family members,
including spouses, etc. that
they will not benefit.
If this bill were to go through.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
are you saying?
Like if they got a contract for
something that had to do with
this, that they wouldn't benefit
is, is that what you're implying
very specifically.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is one potential option.
Alright, Mister Speaker,
gentlemen, I
I took a duty to take everything
we do in here very seriously. So
when somebody brings up an
amendment bill, anything, I like
to ask questions for
clarification, so thank you on
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
There's a gentlemen from Otero
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentleman from Lee
County, please yield.
I will gladly yield to uh
My friend from from Otero
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I too was just
trying to figure out what the
amendment was about and so the
way I'm reading it, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I read.
Benefit
The governor, legislator, or
their
Close family members I wouldn't
want to read them all off. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, by the
word benefit, what are we, what
are we talking about and
treading carefully, I know
treading carefully wouldn't mean
for like if I if I needed to go
to get behavioral health
services for
My immediate family.
After this bill is passed.
And I'm currently a member of
the fifty-seventh legislature,
first session. So Mr. Speaker,
would that mean that
I would not be able to go to
that clinic or place of business
and utilize any kind of resource
that would be passed in this one
bill or could this also extend
to Senate bills 2 and 3.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
gonna answer the last question
first. Number one, this deals
with Senate Bill 1 specifically,
it does not lead into anything
within Senate Bill 2 or in
Senate Bill 3.
Um,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
with respect to your question
with being able to receive
benefits, health care benefits.
Uh, I think that's already
defined well within.
Uh, statutes on this would have
no bearing on that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Yeah, that's pretty
much what I had a question about
how that would work. And I also,
I mean, I'm, I'm torn on this
amendment actually, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, because
For me, I, I have done a lot of
research on the legislative
process and when it, when it
comes down to it.
There is, according to an
attorney General opinion from
years ago and the, the Johnson
administration.
I believe that opinion, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, said that
there is an inherent conflict of
interest because this body.
is a voluntary body.
And so I understand that I do
and I do tend to not show in any
form or fashion, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, any kind of ethical
breach even, and I know the, the
Whatever we, we swore to the 22
things that we swore on when we
got sworn in. It said even the
appearance of. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I believe
that this body, I have no doubt
that everyone in this body is
working for the betterment of
their communities and not for
themselves, and I do wanna
Stress that in a very careful
way, but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I guess are we is the impetus
for this to be, because it's
such a large amount of money.
That could potentially go into
this fund.
And I don't see many specifics,
at least for me, on the bills
that I've read when it comes to
specific programs, is that kind
of why we want to put some
frameworks or barriers to just
ensure that that oath that all
of us took.
To not even have the appearance
of unethical conduct will
continue to be.
Followed.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
That, that is pretty much all
the questions I had. I, and I
appreciate the answers, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you gentlemen
from Lee lady from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady from
McKinley, I happily yield.
Thank you, sir. I, I would like
to ask a few questions about the
amendment, please. I, I had the
same question that the gentleman
from Otero had does this
amendment, I mean, in plain
language mean that you and I
can't receive behavioral health
services administered by the
health authority should the bill
pass.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
do not believe that it implies
that in any way.
I understand that it could be
read that way.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and just in
plain language, and I'm no
attorney, but it just seems that
when we say, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to benefit that you
and I, especially after today,
you and I could not receive uh
services, uh, the other question
I had, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, when we're talking about
benefit to what level would you
be referring?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
am going to refrain from
answering that question. I'm on
a two strike rule right now and
I don't want a 3rd 1.
No, I understand, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and the reason I ask
that is because sometimes, uh, I
don't speak for, for legislators
and I've been one for a long,
long time is that there's
benefits that are indirect to
us.
That we may not have had
anything to do, but because we
just happen to be at the right
place at the right time, it
could be seen as as a benefit,
so I, I, uh, Mr. Speaker and,
and body would suggest that um.
This, uh, amendment be tabled, I
think it's a little confusing as
to what we could actually see in
in defining benefit and
particularly indirect benefits
for us as legislators. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Bern. Speaker, I move to table a
House floor amendment number 2
to Senate Bill 1 as amended.
We are on a motion to table
House floor amendment number 2
to Senate Bill 1 as amended.
A vote of yes in the amendment
would have been tabled a vote of
no, and we're back in the
amendment 32nd clock. The vote
is now open.
Well, it's about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative House floor
amendment number 2 to Senate
Bill 1 as amended has been
tabled.
Back to the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for uh the general
reminders that you gave me
today, um.
Gentle lady
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
gonna close with with
With this as we've talked back
and forth we've talked about.
The substantial amount of money.
That we have invested.
And what is still.
Projected to be invested in
excess of $2.5 billion. We've
talked about the fact that we've
already placed a large
investment into this.
We've assigned it to the
department that's.
Performances in certain areas is
Underrated.
We've talked about the
transformative portion of this
that will define how it goes
through different departments
and at the same time, the fact
that we are already
appropriating money to each of
those departments with respect
to behavioral health.
We've added
Um
With this and its companion
bills, we will add staff. We
will grow government, um.
Mr. Speaker, this is my opinion
and my opinion only.
I believe Senate bills 12, and 3
are a public relations.
Stunt
And I cannot support the
legislation. Thank you.
For the debate general lady from
McKinley, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will a
gentle lady yield, please?
I yield to my friend from
McKinley. Thank you, thank you
very much, gentle lady, uh, I'd
like to, to ask a few questions.
Uh, there's no, there's no
question about the need for
behavioral health support,
especially in places like
McKinley County, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and you're doing in
a in a way where we're not
raising taxes, um, the programs
as far as I can see are very,
very siloed.
And do you have a sense, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, how many of
the current programs are
actually evidence based.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
programs that are currently
funded in House Bill 2 of this
session are evidence based.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I wanted to
also ask a couple questions for
clarification because we had
some comments and concerns about
how how the money works and I'm
looking at your current or the
current general fund financial
summary for 2025, the reserve
detail.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
for clarification, could you
explain for the benefit of all
of those that are concerned, why
the behavioral health Trust Fund
is put into the GAA reserve
detail, even though there's not
any money in there.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
wouldn't you agree it's because
it provides extensive
accountability.
Mr. Speaker, yes, um, uh, the
gentle lady, uh, you are exactly
right, um, it is because it has
that accountability built into
it.
Correct, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when I'm looking at your
reserve detail.
Um, I'm looking at, you might
ask, ask your expert, uh, gentle
lady, where would it be? Where
would it be identified in the
reserve detail.
Gentle lady, wouldn't you agree
that would probably be listed
right under the higher education
endowment fund.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, yes, I see exactly
where you're looking, and yes,
it, it that is where it would be
long. Thank you. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, wouldn't
you agree that there'd be very
little influence on the reserve
until funds are included.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
That's correct, so, um, at least
as I read this bill for FY 26
and 27.
There would be 0 hit, so to
speak to the reserve.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from Otero
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentle lady from
Santa Fe, please yield. I yield
to the gentleman from Otero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, just a few questions here.
Uh, I did have some questions
about the change of
The wording from
Abuse to misuse.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I've
been looking up different terms,
medical journals, things like
that regarding what that means.
And I just want to make sure
that I understand what your
intention or what the intention
of the sponsors are regarding.
The word
Misuse versus abuse. Could you
just give me a little more
information about that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the term misuse is a little bit
broader than abuse, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. So, um, and it is
more in line with best practices
for identifying some of these
evidence-based programs, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh as, as
I understand the intention
behind this is just to be a
little more clear that if there
is an individual with uh
problematic substance.
use um as as stated in the word
misuse that these are programs
that uh would be falling into
this, uh, acceptable purpose of
the trust fund.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I only ask that
because I just, the way I read
it, misuse.
Tends to sound to me like
something that's a little.
More
Casual, less systemic.
When it comes to the use of
things such as substances that
Alcohol, drugs, etc. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just was
wondering.
These behavioral health services
that we will then be providing.
Could they be used for people
who may not have some kind of.
Chronic
Illness such as alcoholism, but
somebody who has occasional uses
of different things that are.
That are on and off because
that's the way I read the word
misuse, and I just want to
ensure that that is the, those
services that we're providing
would help with those people
specifically because if not,
then I think that it would be
best intention to reduce that
term back to abuse. Could you
give me a little bit more
information on that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, for
example, this could cover binge
drinking, um, and, and.
an individual who had difficulty
with that, for example, which I
think Mr. Speaker, gentlemen is,
is kind of what you're getting
at with sort of the occasional
use, but use that is completely
problematic for that person.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That is exactly
what I'm trying to understand. I
just want to make sure that if
we are passing something that is
targeting certain people, I
wouldn't wanna.
Broaden it so much as to kind of
weaken the, the main intent of
who we're trying to target,
which I, I assume and not
target, but trying to provide
services for, we wanna make sure
that the people who, who have
such large amounts of problems
that affect their entire life,
they can be rehabilitated as
opposed to somebody who's more
casual in their, in their use
of, of drugs or alcohol, so Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, would
this in any way
reduce those amount of services
to those people who need it the
most when it comes to the
planning and everything.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, and
in fact, you know, this whole
transformation as embodied in
Senate bills 12, and 3 is really
going back to that no wrong door
approach and making sure that
everyone who needs some help is
finding a place to get that
help.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that did help me
regarding that one and then
another quick quick question I
had was about the SIC overseeing
this fund, can you tell me a
little bit about.
The, because I know they they
manage, I believe, 12 funds with
58 billion assets under
management. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I know we talked a
little bit about SIC and how
they manage the funds, who is
funding.
Or which funds their funding or
which funds they're investing
for rather, pardon me, and
Could you tell me a little bit
about what kinds of returns they
get, because I heard earlier
that they make very good
returns. And I was wondering
what percentage returns on
average does the SIC get on the
funds that they do manage.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, our
State Investment council has
been, um, uh, achieving some
really great rates of return. So
for reserve funds, uh, they have
been achieving a 5% return and
for non-reserve funds, 7,
7 or occasionally higher rate of
return, uh, for non-reserve
funds.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then are, are
these funds in any way
restricted? because I know in
the on the county level, for
example,
Uh
The county treasurers, they can
only invest in certain things
like CDs, bank deposits, money
market, things such as that. So
is the SIC allowed to invest
more aggressively in stocks,
certain kinds of bonds or are
there pretty conservative
parameters on them, such as with
the local counties with class
A's, Bs, C's. I know they're all
different, but what is the SIC's
metrics on investment portfolio.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
great question. So the SIC
invests our state funds
according to the prudent
Investor Act.
Which um is uh.
Basically lays out the standards
of care, the portfolio strategy,
the risk and return objectives,
but the, the central point is
that the state investment
council must manage these assets
as a prudent investor would.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and it's my
understanding that they are
fiduciary body, so they, they
have a responsibility to look
out for the, the funds of the
state. And so does this
portfolio include
Stocks as well. So could the SIC
in theory, let's just say a
stock such as Amazon. If the
stock was
Very seem to be very favorable
to the state and also very
Safe bet, a very safe bet. Could
they potentially invest in that,
or is it more of a, a mutual
fund or a
Other kind of funds such as
that like um like a money market
fund.
How would that work regarding
those?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, so
for reserve funds, they're going
to be more conservative
investment, so it is gonna be
more of the mutual funds, um,
uh, lower risk kinds of
investments, um, individual
stocks that might be
contemplated wouldn't wouldn't
come into play for, for this
particular fund.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then when it
comes to the, the percentage, I
believe we said it would be
around 5% returns.
I didn't know if someone asked
this question before, but what
are we attempting or what are we
expecting to remove from the
fund after the first years of
interest.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, so, um,
We will be, let me get the right
version of the bill, Mr.
Speaker. OK, so, uh, section D
of the bill, uh, I'm sorry,
Section 1, subsection D does
Describe the distributions of
the fund, so for the first few
years, it's really going to be
5% of the average of the
year-end market values of the
trust fund for the immediately
preceding number of calendar
years that it's been into
effect. So after, that's for the
1st 3 years, then after the 1st
3 years, it will be an average
of the past 3 years on a rolling
basis, so each year they'll look
back and say this has been the
average value of the fund for
the
last 3 years and the
distribution would be 5% of
that.
OK, got it. That, that helps me
a lot on that and then another
question regarding that. I see
on page 3, I'm on the amendments
in context and I I think we
changed the years in Senate
Finance from 2026 on the second
line of page.
3 to 2026 and 2027. What would
that do to change whatever we
remove from the fund regarding
those years.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
it doesn't change the amount of
the distribution, so the, the 5%
would still be calculated in the
same way as described in the
previous section.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally. I think that's pretty
much all I had on the finance
side and I think a lot of my
other questions were answered,
so I really appreciate the
debate today and thank you for,
for the awesome cordial debate.
There is for the debate gentle
lady from Bern Leo,
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Hill,
please. I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Um, thank you, uh, gentle lady
and Mr. Speaker, I really do
appreciate sitting here
listening to all of this debate
over these bills, uh, Senate
Bill 12, and 3, and I, I commend
you all for bringing these
forward, um, while I was sitting
here, I had a chance to look up
some statistics and a lot of the
statistics have already been
discussed, but I just wanted to
remind us that New Mexico still
ranks number one.
a state with the worst drug use
in the nation and um I also
wanted to mention to you that
New Mexico was listed number 2
for the percentage of teen drug
users trailing only Vermont.
And
Specifically for my area of
Berlio County in, in the um
NSA, we are 10.3% or 74,000
persons aged 12 or older were
classified as having a substance
abuse use disorder in the past
year, and I raised those issues,
um, Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh,
Madam Leader.
And representatives because
When I look at issues,
especially when they deal with
finance, I often look at what
our existing conditions are, and
I see that um are my
counterparts to the right, um,
raised a lot of those questions
about uh existing conditions,
but
I wanted to bring those, those
statistics forward to talk about
our existing conditions today,
not yesterday, not 2 years ago,
not 10 years ago today, and when
we talk about our existing
conditions and we're looking at
the kind of money, uh, Mr.
Speaker and, and Madam Leader
that you're discussing here
today of investment of $1
billion Mr. Speaker and Madam
Leader, would you say that our
state is somewhat in a
Is
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
what I would say is that there
are too many New Mexicans that
need behavioral health
assistance and are not getting
it right now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Madam
Leader, and do you believe that
um Senate Bill 12, and 3 is a
solution and maybe even a new
pathway to a new methodology
that would help alleviate some
of these issues, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
and, and Madam Leader, when I
look at investments, I look at
our existing conditions, the
cost, the benefit and the risk.
The a lot of this has already
been discussed, but one of the
things that didn't uh come out
was the interest that was going
to be accumulated as a result of
investing the $1 billion into
this trust fund and that
discussion of the interest on
top of the
Federal uh matching could be uh
a really big boost to New
Mexico. Would you not agree,
Madam Leader and Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Leader and Mr.
Speaker, um, so we've talked
about the existing conditions.
We've talked about the cost,
we've talked about and we
haven't talked.
You did allude to this earlier,
Madam Leader and Mr. Speaker,
the benefits, um, could you
repeat what some of those
benefits of this investment
would be, madam Leader, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I think one of the biggest
benefits is that we are going to
be really getting serious at the
local level about a no wrong
door behavioral health system.
Mr. Speaker and Madam Leader, I
agree with you. I think that the
cost is higher, um,
Then um we want it to be because
we are going to be having more
risky behaviors because of
people are, are numbers being
number one in the, in the
country and the benefit is that
we have healthier communities,
wouldn't you agree, Madam Leader
and Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker, and um
young leader, would you also
agree that we would probably
benefit from more productive
individuals once they have
received this treatment.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
absolutely, yes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you not agree that those
individuals would probably
Still more confident to
contribute to our society of New
Mexico to help increase our
workforce to help increase um
economic development to to be
more productive citizens.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
So Mister Speaker, I, I bring
these issues up because I, I
think about, you know, if I had
a child, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Madam Leader and my child was
ill and I had a savings account
and I had to put some money to
help my child. I would
absolutely reach into that
savings account to help that
child, um, get healthy and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I raised
that because, you know, I did
have.
The ability to have um some
satisfaction as city council
president to to begin um
the gateway Center in
Albuquerque. We did have some
Um
Issues that came up later on
where we needed funding, uh, we
still do, and um I think it's
imperative that we understand
that we don't have all the
answers today, Mr. Speaker and
Madam Leader, but we certainly
are on the right pathway. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and Madam
Leader.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 1 as amended do
now pass. We are on final
passage of Senate Bill 1 as
amended the.
The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The border is now closed by a
vote of 46 in the affirmative,
19 in the negative. Senate Bill
1 as amended has duly passed
this House.
A lady from Berlin,
Representative Garrett, are you
ready on item number.
25. Yes, Mr. Speaker, please
take me to that point that
action is for placing House Bill
157 as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution general lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 157 as amended as new
school licenses would align
school leader prep and licensure
in New Mexico with the best
national standards, especially
for site leaders or principals
and our much needed uh
superintendents of schools. It
has 3 levels of license so
people can advance and with that
I'd like to yield to my
co-sponsor representative Baca
from Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
General Liddy.
Um, as a licensed administrator,
um, one of the things that this
bill intends to do is saying
that once you get your admin
license and once you get the
keys to the building, the
learning doesn't stop.
And just like we have other
tiered systems and we talk about
teachers, we talk about EMTs
with this bill basically says
that it's a different skill set
at the different levels and then
we, as we've talked about many
times, leadership matters.
And so what this is doing is
it's basically having additional
requirements so that we can have
leaders prepared for their next
level of uh or their, their
assignment and guaranteed
success for our kids and uh Mr.
Leader and gentle lady, I yield
to my colleague, um,
Representative Latta.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, to
echo Representative Baca's
words, you know, leadership does
matter and this and this bill
covers uh many, many things that
will benefit the the
administrative pipeline that we
need for our schools, um.
Extended preparation time is one
of those the strong leadership
pipeline that I mentioned.
Supporting out of state talent.
Increasing oversight and quality
assurance, that's really
important financial commitment
to education.
Investment in residency programs
and long term educational
improvement. I believe very
strongly, Mr. Speaker, that, uh.
We've invested a lot of money
into our teachers.
Into their professional
development and now it's about
time that we look at doing the
same for our school
administrators who play such a
crucial role as leadership in
our schools thank you.
Right, are you ready for debate,
and Mr. Speaker, I'll just add
that this was in a 2 year uh
process involving our business
leaders in various chambers,
nonprofits, uh, leaders across
the state and that my expert
winess today is Annie Armitage,
a senior analyst frommiliar
scene with that I stand for
questions, Mr. Speaker from
Berlin and Torrens
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle from Austin County's
plea yield her time.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the kind lady from Berna Leon
Torrance. Thank you. uh, like
I've said before, if I've never
seen a bill before, I will have
a few questions on it, so I know
it looks like it passed.
Unanimously, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, is that correct?
Um, every level, I think maybe
I'm wrong. Uh,
let me ask, go ahead, Mr.
Speaker and Representative, you
are correct it passed
unanimously in government and
health education. OK, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, is
there an appropriation with this
bill?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, it's
already covered in the budget
which passed house
appropriations today.
So Mr. Speaker Delaney, so to
clarify for me because I heard a
lot about um leadership and
administrative licenses just
briefly explain to me what
you're talking about how this
applies to you and how it does
for continued training and um
skills training, Mr. Speaker,
gen lady, Mr. Speaker and
representative will now be 3
levels of site administrator
license, uh, including
provisional initial and
professional and 3 levels of
superintendent.
licensures also having that
provisional uh initial and
professional and that will allow
training to appropriately
appropriately address the needs
of each individual at that phase
in their career.
Mr. Speaker, General Lenny, I
just have a few more questions.
So you're talking about somebody
comes in at a level there's
gonna be skills training along
the way to move them up so that
they have more training and
leadership, is that what I'm
understanding?
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
yes, and the PED will increase
the standards for leadership
programs and certify them.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, to
me, is there already a a
training that's already gonna be
used like another state. Would
they do it that way or it will
be a new training set up
specifically for individuals in
New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
they're already are educational
leadership courses at 8
institutions around the state
and they will simply be
improved, uh, we already have
pilot residency programs for
leaders.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Thank you for, uh,
expanding on that because again,
I have a very firm belief that
if we're going to pass them
through something through that
I've never heard that I need to
ask some more questions on it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There's
further debate, gentlemen from
Montero, Representative Block.
Hello there, Mr. Speaker. I was
like,
Frantically looking for my bill,
and I found it. So with the
gentle lady from Berna Leo,
please yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
kind gentleman from Otero
County.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and a few
questions on this one. I know
it, it went through government
and I did read it once or twice
in government, and I just wanted
to make sure I understood what
the provisions meant in here.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
first question is going to be on
page 5 at the bottom, starting
on line 22 to 25 and then going
to page 61 and 2,
So
Can you tell me why we struck.
Language sang responsibility
factors, and then it said
factors with 1.25 for
elementary, 1.45 from middle,
1.65 for high school.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, we haven't
changed it's moved to another
portion.
OK, thank you definitions.
Definite. OK. Could you give me
a page real quick? I apologize.
I'm not seeing that right now.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, that that's not
changed, that's already in
statute.
OK, OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that helps me with
that. And then on the next page
on 7, we're talking about, and
this I didn't ask in committee
because actually, honestly, in
the committee I tried to be as
quick as I possibly could, but I
did want to understand when
we're talking about the juvenile
detention center operated for
children, youth and by the CYFD
including the John Paul Taylor
Center. Can you tell me what
that means in regard to your
changes in the bill.
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
it's updated language.
Clean up Langley.
OK. Sounds good, Mr. Speaker,
generally. I thought we may have
had a new facility or something
because I know we, we toured
that a couple of years ago with
One of the committees I'm on, I
think it was CCJ, so I just
wanted to make sure that that
wasn't new. It was a very nice
campus, but just clarifying
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I also see we're making a few, a
few changes on section 2
starting on page 9.
Regarding
Criminal history record checks.
Can you tell me a little bit
about what we're
Amending in this portion of the
legislation regarding those.
Speaker and kind representative,
um, all of these positions
require criminal background
checks and on page 10, it just
gives the new language for a
provisional uh initial and
professional licenses were site
administrators and provisional
and uh professional license for
superintendents.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I appreciate that and so in
committee, I was going to ask
this question, which may, I
don't know if it sounds stupid
or not, but I'm gonna ask it
anyway, but, uh, it was about
the license for superintendents.
So could a superintendent
theoretically or uh
administrator of any kind,
theoretically just go for a
superintendent's license and not
go from, from an educator in the
classroom to a superintendent.
With this new license.
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
there is one exception which
many of our rural districts
have, um, used where a license
level 2 or 3 teacher can get a
provisional uh site
administrator license because
they're greatly needed.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So,
They don't necessarily have to
have a uh
Previous license or I guess the
word would be uh initial
license.
So a teacher's license, they
wouldn't need a general
teacher's license, they could
just go from
Administrator directly to the
superintendent in rural
districts are the, what size of
districts are we talking about
regarding those who is exempted
regarding that.
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
nobody's exempted for a
permanent license or initial or
professional license without
serving for a certain number of
years, the person who would get
the exemption, uh, who has a
teaching license at level 2 or
3, would have to enroll in a
leadership prep program and go
through, I believe 3 years
before they would get their, uh,
initial license and advanced
from a provisional license.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That clears that up
a little for me. And then on the
next few pages on page 15, we're
talking about as on E, I believe
we're talking about.
A superintendent license is the
highest level.
For those administrators who
choose to undertake the
responsibility of leading a
school district and then it says
the charter school governing
bodies may choose to require
head administrators to hold a
superintendent license based
upon needs of the school. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, this
language, it's pretty much a
may.
Do this regarding charter
schools, could you elaborate on
that? How many charter schools
could potentially do this or are
any of them doing it right now.
Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Representative, uh currently
this.
This, uh, legislation doesn't
exist yet, so there's no charter
schools doing it a prince uh
site administrator license it's
fine for a charter school,
however they may be larger
charter schools or multiple
campus charter schools where the
governing board of that
institution wants them to get
advanced training due to the
depth and breadth of their
campus programs.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then I
just, I guess currently, I mean,
I.
I don't really follow licensure
as close as I should, but I know
you're an educator, so you know
these questions. So currently
what do superintendents have to
have as a license? Is it just
A
A teacher's license.
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
they currently need to have a 3B
level uh administrative
licensure.
OK. And so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, would this in any way
increase.
The
Requirements for all
superintendents if they already
have a 3B. What additional
duties would be incurred upon
that superintendent because
In a
With the lack of this current
law in place now, and then the
time that it takes for it to be
implemented to the time that
The superintendent has to
comply. Are we giving them a
grace period and if there is not
compliance within a certain
amount of time, would they be
automatically?
Removed pursuant to this
legislation. Speaker and
Representative, they would be
grandfathered in.
good. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Those are
pretty much my, my big questions
that I didn't get to do in
government committee, but I
really appreciate all your
answers and thank you, Annie,
for all your hard work and uh
thank you, Mr. Speaker. I.
You're back. I don't think we
yield, but I yield anyway.
Thank you for yielding. See you
no further debate, gentlemen la
to close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move a due
pass for House Bill 157 as
amended a final passage of House
Bill 157 as amended. The vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
By a vote of 66 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 157 as amended, has
duly passed this House.
And lady from Bern Leo
Representative Thompson, are you
ready? On item number 18. Mr.
Speaker, will you get me to that
point that all action necessary
for placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the general la to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'm
gonna try and do a little bit of
overall education on compacts
because a lot of compacts are
gonna be coming through here so
this is the occupational therapy
interstate compact and what it
does we will join I believe it's
31 other states, but I could
have, I'm carrying a lot of
them. Um, so that says that if
you're licensed in another one
of the compact states you can
practice in New Mexico. We are
not giving our oversight.
our oversight over over our
licensed people but we the hope
with this bill is that it will
bring in more folks to New
Mexico. uh I will say Mr. Mr.
Speaker that the Department of
Defense, I have a letter from
the Department of Defense who
has been pushing New Mexico to
do this for some time, um, with
the threat of maybe losing
missions or not having new
missions come here because the
military folks frequently have.
Spousees are significant others
who who practice in some of
these fields and it's, if it
takes long to get them to be
licensed and able to work in the
state, so with that I will um.
Yield to my co-sponsor, uh, the
gentle lady from
Yeah
Dona Anna Hidalgo and Luna.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairal Luna Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Chair, um.
I just wanna say I appreciate
the opportunity to co-sponsor
with you. Uh, we have a, a big
effort on across he said across
the board with compacts trying
to increase the access to health
care and streamline that process
of health care workers coming
into New Mexico and being able
to practice right away and so
that's that's what this compact
is doing and yes, you're right,
it's 31 other states that
already have uh the agreement,
um, to share this licensure
process.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Mr.
Speaker, we will stand for
questions. There is debate, lady
from Berlin and Torrens
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with the gentle
lady from Bern Leo County,
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I
yield from yield to the gentle
lady from Bernal Leo in
Torrance. Thank you, uh, just a
few questions, maybe, um.
Can you explain the difference,
um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady on a
Compaq versus reciprocity or if
they're the same and or how
they're different.
A represent um Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, actually New
Mexico doesn't really have
reciprocity in terms of a lot of
these health care professionals
a compact has a governing board
and each state that's a part of
that compact has a member
sitting on that board this is,
this is a nationwide thing and
we have worked on reciprocity
without a lot of success, and
this is a more formal um.
Overseen by a board, a way to go
about it.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
there's a, there's a board and
there's a there's states,
there's 31 states in it. So each
one of those states has somebody
here that would say, I'm the
expert on occupational therapy
license and they would be on
that board, is that correct? Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
the, the, the occupational of
the New Mexico.
Occupational therapy Association
would be the one or I'm sorry,
the licensing board would be the
one to decide who would be the,
but it would be, um, I mean, I'm
hoping it would be an
occupational therapist, but it
would be someone with expertise
in occupational therapy.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so I know within reciprocity
there was some we were able to
get through when I was in
health, but some didn't. So with
reciprocity, usually what they
look at is a standard of you
have to have X amount of
training in college and all this
other things to get that is that
the same with the compact where
they say.
Some state does not have enough
training and they're not
eligible to be here in New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so in order to be um in the
compact you have to go along
with the, with the requirements
of, of all of the other states,
so there, there will be um no
one who was not who is in a
compact state who, who would be
licensed and be able to practice
in New Mexico without having the
proper credentials. I think the
answer most of my questions
because what I was trying to get
at is the equality right to
making sure that somebody from
Ohio and Nebraska is.
the same as New Mexico and that
we have the insurance on that.
01 more thing, is there, um,
recipient generally does the
occupational therapy.
board have a say so in how the
equality is set between state to
state or how does that work out?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
so first off, there is a
national board, so you must pass
the national board.
Remind me of your other
question.
Wait, I have to go back and
remember my question, Mr.
Speaker, young lady. I, I was
trying to make sure that so
there's a, there's a national
board that has a standard and I
guess what I wanna know is would
the New Mexico board of
occupational therapy have any
say so to the national board of
saying wait, we want them to
have 50 more hours of X to make
this what we want in New Mexico
speaker and gentle lady, no,
we're, we, we're going into the
compact as it's written. I mean,
of course I would could assume.
that maybe if the entire board
of the compact states makes a
decision that there is some
further increase in, I mean,
like the physical therapists all
the programs all went to
doctoral level at one point. So
if this happened before, then
they would change the law, the
rule their rules regarding that,
you know, new grads have to be
doctor doctors of physical
therapy, OK, and Mr. Speaker
Delady, is there a constant
assessment of it if let's say
suddenly one state went to much
higher levels or
much lower levels and the
graduates were not to the
standard of New Mexico is that
being assessed occasionally, Mr.
Speaker, generally, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, if you are part
of the compact, you cannot make
it less than.
OK, Mr. Speaker, that's all the
questions I had. Thank you.
There's further debate, the
gentle lady from Katherine
Sierrasoro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Bernao Yield,
Mr. Speaker, I would gladly
yield to my co-sponsor, uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
just wanted to, uh, stand and
support. We've worked really
hard, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, on
the reciprocity as was brought
up, uh, doesn't seem to be as
fluid as we would like it to be,
uh, I think that's a kind.
way to say it, uh, Mr. Speaker
kind, uh, lady, can you tell me
um how many other compacts, um,
are you looking at, um,
including this one, and, and
what that does for the state of
New Mexico when we do this type
of work.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm not sure I want to say 10
besides this, but uh there
there's a whole bunch, I mean,
everything from physical
therapist to physicians to
dentist on and on and what the
hope is, um, there's no
guarantee ever is that it will
make it easier for people. I
mean, sometimes people just come
to New Mexico and fall in love
and if we could, and with New
Mexico if they could say oh you
know I'm licensed in Kansas and
I don't know if they're part of
the compact.
But I can come to New Mexico. We
our hope is that it will be more
attractive to bring in health
care providers of all sorts and
it also opens up telemedicine
some more, um, so that, so that
folks from other states who may
want to, you know, do some
consulting here or that they'll
be able to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I would, um, stand in
favor of the telemedicine being
from rural New Mexico
specifically and how that
affects my area. Um, I
appreciate all the work and the
um uh introduction of these, uh,
all of these legislation, but
specifically this one, we have
so many um places across New
Mexico that need this. I believe
that it will help New Mexico,
uh, and all of the health care.
Um situations that we have
across the state of New Mexico.
So I just wanted to thank you
for bringing this forward and
thank the people um that did
their homework on this already
and know the answers but support
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. There's
further debate. The gentleman
from Montero, representative
block. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentle lady from
Bernna Leo, please yield. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Montero. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So like the good
representative from Bernna Leo
and
I too make sure to read every
sentence, every, every single
word in the bill. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I do want
to make sure that these are also
very thoroughly vetted as I know
our legislative process likes to
do that. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I have a few questions
starting on page 8. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, do you have the
substitute? is that what you're
working from? So we're on the
same page.
You know, I am not on the
substitute, but I do have my
computer and I'll pull it up
right now, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you for that. I really
appreciate it. I was about to
debate the wrong version of your
bill. Speaker and gentlemen, it
would have confused me and
probably the whole body, so.
OK, well, I'm finding that, Mr.
Speaker, I'm, I'm going to
section 4 if it's still in the
bill.
Regarding
Member states, I believe.
We can give you a minute to pull
up the bill if you'd like, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
the bill right here because our
beautiful New Mexico legislative
website is awesome.
Oh, Mr. Speaker, I forgot to um
introduce my my expert so this
is Linda Siegel. She is the
lobbyist for the New Mexico
occupational Therapy
Association.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So, OK, the
question I did have was
regarding member states and them
charging fees for granting
compact privileges, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you tell me
what kinds of fees apply. Are
they higher, lower, what, what
kinds of fees are we looking at
regarding our
Compact
In this regard.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the compact body, the governing
body will set those fees.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I know that other states
have already joined the compact.
Do we know what kinds of, of
ranges of fees, those are for
neighboring states or any kind
of states that have been in
there and gentlemen, no.
OK, perfect. And then, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, another
question I had, the next
section.
Regarding compact privileges,
and I believe, Mr. Speaker,
we're talking about what the,
what they need to do to get
their compact.
Privilege
To hold the license and
everything. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it says complete a
criminal background check.
Can you tell me if this includes
something that is
Like any, any offense, if you
had any kind of offense, even if
it was 20 years ago, would that
go against your licensure and
how, how are we measuring that
regarding this uh this uh
provision on section 5. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, so
actually the physical therapy
board has had that has had the
background checks in place, the
occupational therapy board did
not. It is a fingerprint, um.
Issue that's run through the FBI
and, and each state can decide
on its own, uh, you know, what,
what convictions would be
disqualifying.
OK, perfect, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
I just want to make sure that
we're not.
Telling anybody that, oh, if you
had a conviction and
Alaska or wherever it would
preclude you from having
Practice here in the states. So
I just want to make sure since
this is an interstate compact,
I'm sure there's some kind of
leeway there, I would assume,
Mr. Speaker, General lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, as I
said, the, the board of the
state decides what the
qualifications are in terms of
that or disqualifications.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And
then, uh, last question,
promise, uh, OTs, can they so if
they live in Texas and they want
to practice in New Mexico. Let's
just say they wanna be in
chaparral or Almo Gordo.
If they have a Texas license
already, this would just allow
that individual if they wanted
to practice in New Mexico with
clients in the state.
Be part of this compact would
just allow that provider to put
services in Mexico. Is that what
I understand, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if, if Texas is a
part of the compact, yes, if
not, no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, I sure hope
they're part of the compact
because they're the closest to
me down south, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker. That's all the
questions I have.
So you know for the debate
generally close, Mr. Speaker, I
move that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81 do now pass on final
passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81, the vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81 Haulli passed this
house.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo
Representative Herndon, are you
ready on item.
Number 3.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point
a necessary for placing House
Bill 56 as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution generally to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, it's my honor to
present House Bill 56 as
amended, uh, Mr. Speaker, 40% of
New Mexico's counties are
considered a maternal health
desert and since 2015 birth
centers have been licensed and
reimbursed by Medicaid. They
play an important role in
providing prenatal labor and
delivery newborn and postnatal
care to low risk birthing people
who lack access to a hospital
care.
Or who choose to birth at a
birth center. Currently, there
are 3 birth centers located in
Espanola, Santa Fe, and
Albuquerque that are billing
Medicaid. We also know
incredible work is being done by
our midwives and birth workers
throughout the state,
particularly in southern New
Mexico to create additional
birth centers that honor the
culture and identity of our
birthing people for birth
sinners to thrive, we must
ensure they receive.
adequate reimbursement from
Medicaid, especially because of
the overwhelming majority of
births are now covered through
Medicaid. House Bill 56 as
amended requires that the
healthcare authority adopt rules
to ensure Medicaid facility fee
payments made to birth centers
for non-complicated births and
newborns are comparable to those
uh facility fee payments made to
a hospital.
And Mr. Speaker, I would like to
yield to my co-sponsor
Representative Alan Martinez,
the gentleman from uh Sandoval
County Sandoval.
Mr. Speaker, uh, House Bill 56
as amended is a pretty simple
bill.
It just ensures Medicaid will
compensate birth centers with a
comparable dollars to hospitals.
Because the birth centers
perform similar services when a
child is born there.
Now, we've heard that there are
3 birth centers already billing
Medicaid, but they receive less
than half of the reimbursement
rate that a hospital does by
ensuring comparable
reimbursement.
We can only sustain these
centers, but we can hopefully
encourage more centers to open
across the state.
Mr. Speaker, this bill is a bill
about fairness and about
providing opportunities for more
New Mexico grown birth centers
to open and thrive, thrive.
I'm proud to be a co-sponsor of
House Bill 56 as amended, and I,
with that, I handed back to my
friend from
Bern Leo and lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We stand
for questions the gentle.
lady from earlier and Torrens
Representative Lord.
Thank you for giving that time
to stand up, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Berlin
County, please yield her time.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Burn Leon Torrance County.
Thank you. So some interesting
things I was looking at, um, I
did not know.
Some of the things that go along
with the birthing center and
some different levels, but
before we get to that,
Mr. Speaker, when someone goes
to a birthing center.
Who is it that refers in
themselves are they self-refered
and is there an MD OBGYN that
does an assessment to make sure
that they are not high risk, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Gentle lady, there is no
referral and the midwives do the
assessment.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady is a
midwife qualified as a medical
doctor who can assess if that
somebody's a high risk, if
there's a father or mother
that's RH or negative, um, or if
there's any other complications
that could come? Did they know
how to look for Makonum? Do they
know all the things to look for
that would indicate early on
before they even get to that
point that they would be high
risk and meconium would come
later, Mr. Speaker and Dunlaney.
Yes, they are, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and General Lena,
how many years of training does
a midwife have?
They didn't gentle lady, the
midwives have multiple levels of
certification and the
certification uh aligns with
the, the level of work that
they're doing.
Mr. Speaker, Jody, what, because
I know a lot about this because
I work for a doctor that did a
lot of births, so a midwife.
Can you explain to me the
training they have and when
they're going through school to
become a midwife, how many years
of schooling they have for an
entry level to be a midwife that
would be focusing on births and
a bursting center, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
A certified nurse midwife goes
to undergraduate school, they
become a nurse, they then become
a nurse practitioner and then
they become certified in their
field.
So Mr. Speaker, Jenny Lady,
what, how does that compare to
an uh uh somebody who becomes a
medical doctor and specializes
in obstetrics and gynecology.
What's, how many years would
that doctor have versus how many
years the midwife has.
And I
Then lady, uh, I want to remind
you that certified nurse
midwives are only low risk. I
also wish to remind you that uh
gynecologists go, uh, 3 years of
residency after going through
medical school, but a nurse
midwife also continues with
respect to their 4 years of
college and then they're uh, uh,
and then their term as uh
practicing nurse midwife in
order to get their
certification.
So Mr. Speaker, John Lady, the,
the point I'm trying to get to,
oh wait, sorry, that's not Mr.
Speaker. Sorry, hi.
Madam Speaker.
Um
Hold on, let me write that down.
I'm gonna forget.
Madam Speaker and and gentle
lady, the, the point I'm trying
to get from having worked for an
OBGYN, there's a, there's a
difference. I love midwives,
mids and wives are amazing. It
was up to me. Everybody could
have a home birth and it would
be covered. But the issue
becomes if it's not being
overseen by a medical doctor
who's an OBGYN specialist, the
issue then becomes that if
something has happened along the
way, it may get missed. So that
is my problem. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
And, and I'm also not against
birthing centers. It's not what
I'm getting at. What I'm trying
to do is differentiate that I
would appreciate that if in this
birthing center there was at
least one doctor who was
referring the cases. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady in these
birthing centers, do they have
any OBGYN who is overseeing any
of the cases or is it just the
midwives, Mr. Speaker, and young
lady.
Thank you for your question,
young lady. A nurse a certified
nurse midwife has 5 years of
certification. And remember that
they engage in low risk
pregnancies. They know the
difference between a low risk
and a high risk, and if they
were unable to uh if they were
unable to handle a high risk,
they would refer it to the
doctor. So their competency is
at a high level.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I understand what you're trying
to say. I still would feel
better if there was a there like
a second set of eyes. There is a
midwife looking at and I'm not
disparaging midwives. I
absolutely love them again. I
would love, we were all having
home births, oh sorry, um, Madam
Chair, um, that we were all
having home births and we had
that option, it was covered on
insurance. My problem is that
even with that, I would like for
there to be an OBGYN who's
monitored in the case as it goes
through, um, Madam Speaker and
representative.
Can you explain to me, so what
you want is you want the
birthing center to be reimbursed
exactly the same as what the
hospital gets, um, for a
specific code like a 98 98012.
You want them to be paid exactly
the same as a hospital. Is that
correct, Madam Chair.
Sorry, Madam Speaker
And representative
Um,
gentle lady, uh, that is correct
for the same low risk pregnancy
births that are given the
request is for the same type of
reimbursement, that is correct.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, um, sorry,
Madam Speaker, I even wrote it
down. I'm gonna say 10 times
over, Madam Speaker. Um, and
representative.
So
In our state I just saw that
Doulas are now allowed to be
covered under Medicaid as of
October 2024. What is the rate
of reimbursement if they were to
build the same as a medical
doctor and OBGYN or a nurse
practitioner or midwife, would
they be paid at the same level
for the Carbadula?
Madam Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
that is not this bill we're
talking about certified nurse
midwives at a birthing center,
um, Madam gentle lady.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I did look and most birthing
centers do have doulas and
coaches, um, so you're saying
that there are no doulas and
there are no coaches that are
working at any of the three
centers and there would be no
doulas and no coaches at any of
those ever in the future, Madam
Speaker and represent.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
there are doulas at at Birthing
centers, but they're paid at a
different rate and then a
different program not covered
under this legislation that
we're presenting to you today.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, that was one of the
things I did look up. It says so
that they would be covered, so.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, are
there
Coaches
As well as separate from doulas
the birthing coaches that are
also at these birthing centers.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
there are lots of cultures that
provide support for women who
choose to use a birthing center.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
ladies, so some of the
differences then are, um, that
there would be these coaches in
there compared to like in a
hospital setting, so Madam
Speaker and generally with these
people also be eligible for
reimbursement in the Medicaid.
Madam Speaker, a gentle lady, so
only the only the late midwives
and the certified nurse midwives
are the ones that we are looking
forward for reimbursement
through this legislation.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so then the doulas, then they
can work there, but they're,
they build on their own and is,
are they allowed to build on
their own or don't they have to
bill through.
Somebody else or they stand
alone like they could say I'm
gonna build a 90,210 and they
get reimbursed or do they have
to go through the birthing
center so that they are attached
to a facility, um.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
Madam Speaker, the doulas have a
choice. They can build on their
own or they can be an employee
of the birthing center.
And right now, um.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, how
is that going to affect what do
you anticipate the cost to rise
for Medicaid, uh, when this goes
through, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, so
This legislation is included in
House Bill 2 to cover the, the
additional costs that would be
involved in making sure that the
reimbursement rates are
comparable. If a woman chooses
not to go to a birthing center,
she would go to a hospital at
the higher rate, so there's
nothing that would be changed,
Madam Chair, Madam Speaker.
OK.
It's a part of the day, Madam
Speaker, generally, we're just
gonna start rambling off stuff
here at the end. OK, I
How many centers do you
anticipate opening in New Mexico
once this bill passes, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
legislation doesn't contemplate
that. What we are asking and
making sure is that birthing
centers are paid fairly and
equally to uh those um as a
hospital.
OK, Madam Spirin, I think that's
all the questions I have. I
think my only.
As again I go back and I, I like
the process. I mean, I like the
idea of a woman has a choice to
have a baby or if she wants,
even if she wants to have it at
home, and I should think it
should be covered by insurance,
but my issue overall, and this
is the only thing I have is that
I, for me personally, I would
rather see each one of those
centers has got to have a second
set of eyes with the OBGYN just
reviewing to say in case
somebody missed something so
that there it's like it's now
equal to a hospital setting and
there's always an OBGYN and then
who's covering the.
share of somebody so anyways,
Mr. Speak, uh, I'm sorry, Madam
Speaker.
Speaker, ma'am, speaker, ma'am
speaker, um, and that's all the
questions I have. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. There is
further debate. The gentleman
from Otero County,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker, with the kind gentle
lady from Berna Leo, please
yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Otero County.
Thank you, Mr. Madam, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Caught myself there.
I too had some questions about
the oversight on this and also
regarding what specifically
we're funding this for. So,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
I see that we're talking about
Medicaid reimbursements, can
these facilities currently bill
Medicaid?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So what
So how much on average per
birth.
Would they be getting more.
At the birthing center from
current.
Medicaid reimbursement.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
currently.
The birthing center receives
$1400 for the birth of a
newborn, an average hospital
reimbursement is $3,197.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Is there any reason
that a hospital bills more? Are
there more services provided at
the hospital versus at the
birthing center and could you
just go down the list of what
the differences could be.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
would you please repeat your
question?
Of course, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, so what
Uh, what differences are there
when it comes to services
provided.
From a hospital versus a
birthing center and how have,
how
How many changes are there
between the two. So a hospital
is more clinical, etc. but can
you just give me a little more
information on that.
Yes, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the biggest difference is that a
hospital charges a facility fee,
a birthing center does not
charge that fee.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady and.
That does help me a little bit,
and I know that the gentle lady
from Bernlia Torrance asked
about.
Supervising physicians, etc. So,
Madam Speaker, generally, how
many of these birthing centers
currently have staff that
include ODs and MDs.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
The birthing centers are run by
midwives and they always have
the opportunity to consult with
OBGYN and to transfer a high
risk present uh pregnancy to an
OBGYN.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I do see that
in the, in the bill, it says low
risk on page 2, line 2, but my
concern and my question is what
happens when there is a
complication, such as needing to
have an emergency C-section, for
example, Madam Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, how would that go
into play?
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
the clinical standards in the
birth center would be they are
set to such a level that they
would recognize high risk items
and they are prepared to
transfer a high risk pregnancy
out of the birthing center and
they would do it before it
becomes a difficult situation
for the um
mother.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, so when they
transfer the mother, would they
be billing for that as well,
because if we have to take
somebody from a birthing center
to a hospital, wouldn't it stand
a reason, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, that they would be billed
for both.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
birthing centers received very
few dollars for transferring a
birth.
OK, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, but in that situation
where there may be a
complication that they were not
able to foresee. No one has a
crystal ball. No one is always
perfect all the time. And so,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, what
What is precluding them from
billing that full birth.
If it's during a during a birth,
and they have an emergency
needing to transport that woman
to a hospital because it is
something like they could go
into septic shock or any kind of
very serious thing. What, what
happens then, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady? Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, the Medicaid rules
prevent them, them the
The birthing cinders for
charging for a birth if there's
no birth at the birthing center.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I had to check that
you were madam Speaker still. So
does Medicaid cover life flight?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't know the answer to that.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
and gentle lady, that's just
something I was wondering about,
and then I, I guess also
definitions in here in the
legislation. I, I still gonna
get back to the whole birthing
part, but I, I see that there's
no definition of what a birthing
person is. Can you tell me what
that is? I thought.
Only individuals who were women
could give birth.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, a
birthing person is the person
who is pregnant.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker. I
just have never seen that in
statute anywhere, so I, I just
haven't, I don't know what that
means, but if they're pregnant
and they can give birth, that,
that makes sense to me.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
a birth center.
It's talking about free standing
birth center licensed by the
state for the primary purpose of
performing low risk deliveries.
Can you tell me, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, who oversees
that, is it the medical board of
some kind who oversees the
administration of that center.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
midwives oversee the birthing
citizens uh centers, their scope
of practice allows them to do
so.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and then these
midwives, uh, are they subject
to any kinds of annual reviews
of their birthing centers to
ensure compliance with federal
statutes, Medicaid, billing,
etc.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
nurse midwives are licensed and
they have to meet all of the
requirements for the licensure
every year.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
So is that mostly paperwork
though, is that?
Paperwork they have to send in
regarding Medicaid billing.
Other than that, what about
other kinds of licenses when it
comes to safety protocols,
things like that. I know there's
best practices in the in the.
Profession, but who oversees
that profession? I guess I'm
asking.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
nurse midwives oversee the
oversee the birthing centers
because that is within the scope
of practice and what they do is
they visit the, the, the.
sinners to make sure that the
standard of practice is where it
should be at the level in which
they are uh are supposed to be
for their scope of practice.
And the healthcare authority
oversees that.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, so I'm just
wondering how many people do we
need per birth to be.
Helping with the pregnancy and
birthing that child because I
know in a hospital setting, we
have nurses, we have doctors, we
have all kinds of folks. We even
may have doulas, etc. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how many
individuals are included in that
one birth.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, we
have um.
midwife and we have a.
And a birthing assistant.
OK. And uh Mr. uh Nurse Smith,
I'm sorry.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, we
also have the support team that
comes with the with the
boarding, um.
parent.
OK. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle ladies, so the support
team.
So that could include.
Is it just nurses, midwives, and
who else is on the team? because
I know that with this state we,
we currently have a lot of
vacancies when it comes to
health care. Can you just give
me a little more about that.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen,
so we have the nurse midwife, we
have the partners, we have the
whole team that comes with the
birthing parent. We want to
remind you that the this uh
process uh a bird, a birthing
parent brings with them a whole
team that stays with them from
the moment that they determine
they're pregnant until the time
the baby is born.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so is.
I am not too familiar with
birthing centers in general.
The clientele of a birthing
center versus a hospital.
Is it different in any way?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
answer is no.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I, it seems
kind of a little more niche, and
so I would assume it's more of
a, no, I wouldn't say boutique
kind of practice, but I would
say something that's not as
common. And so is there
additional costs involved
because it is a it's own
facility. It's kind of like
going to a doctor who's a member
of a hospital.
Such as where I am, uh, Christi
or going to a private
practitioner.
Is it kind of similar to that
because I know that the costs
can add up when it comes to a
private practice versus that
hospital that has everything
baked into all the billing, etc.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Births at a birthing center are
low risk. Hospitals also have
low risk. The difference is, uh,
we're looking at, uh, the fact
that a birthing center is not
reimbursed it the same way that
the hospital is for the same
type of risk.
OK, thank you, Madam Mr, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I, it's hard to get that right
today. So, madam, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh,
I see, I'm looking at some
questions that I wrote down
about the for, the FIR.
And it says that there's a
financial impact. It's currently
small due to the low number of
birth centers, and I'm just
wondering how will potential
future expansion affect Medicaid
spending regarding that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, right
now all births are assumed to be
occurring at a hospital. So with
the rise and increase on
birthing centers there would be
no change in the cost.
Because they will be reimbursed
comparably.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I believe
on the analysis I saw from
Department of Health, they, they
also stated that
It would be
2.6% of New Mexico births occur
outside of hospitals, and I'm
just wondering how this compares
to other states and what, what
the expected trend could be.
Mr. Speaker.
gentleman
I don't know the answer to that,
but a birthing center is an
opportunity for.
A choice for a birthing parent
in terms of the way in which
they want to give birth to their
child. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
I'm looking also at the
healthcare authorities.
Input and I'm just wondering
regarding how, how long
Is the expected approval process
for Medicaid rate changes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
amendment took place immediately
so we don't have any waiting
period.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I, I guess
another question I have
regarding actual birth.
Statistics.
Regarding your bill, I know that
there are many different kinds
of statistics, especially
regarding Native American
populations in our state and it
looks like the maternal maternal
mortality is 129.3 per 100,000
live births, and I'm wondering
how will this bill address some
of those disparities in those
communities.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is
highly unfortunate that we do
have maternal mortality within
our within our communities and
that it is varying very
differently uh among various
populations, but one of the
things that a birthing center
does, it gives the opportunity
for someone to be with uh the
birthing parent from the moment
that they learned about their um
their pregnancy and to the
moment that the that the baby uh
is actually.
born. And what if you look at
the statistics, what you can
actually find out is a lower
maternal mortality among those
who are a birthing sinners than
those who are not because of the
close care in which the birthing
parent is receiving from
beginning until birth.
And one of the best places to
look at is breath of my heart,
which is Native American, uh,
run birthing center and the
great um.
Work that they are doing with
respect to the bursts that occur
at their birthing center.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I certainly will look that
up. Thank you for the
information. And yeah, that was
just one concern that I got, I
got emailed to me actually, and
I did wanna definitely bring
that up as well. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, one
other point on this.
portion of the bill when we're
talking about the birthing
center itself. I, I know a lot
of the times, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
A very good idea can
change into a really, really
good idea and maybe they want to
add more services to that
birthing center to add things
like just full blown OBGYN care
or adding primary care visits,
etc. So I know that this says in
the bill.
It would be licensed in the
state for the primary purpose of
performing low-risk deliveries,
but what if it turns out that
adding those services was the
primary focus in the end and
birthing center duties was.
Not 51% or more of what they do
and bill annually through
Medicaid. So I'm wondering,
would that in any way change
what these centers receive if
their business model does indeed
change midstream.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
answer is no. They would still
be billing on the same billing
code that they are proposing to
use now.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and the word the
words primary purpose wouldn't
in no way affect that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
primary purpose of a birthing
center is to support a birthing
parent in the birth of their
child, and that is not going to
change.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. That's all I had.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I mean,
um.
gentlemen, for the debate,
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Cerrato. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, or the gentle
lady from Bernardino, Bernalillo
yield. I yield to the uh to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you so much. I want a few
questions um because we did hear
this bill in committee, and I
thought there was some
interesting pieces. But first,
I'm kind of curious, why would a
person choose a birthing center
rather than going to a hospital,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
primary reason they would choose
a birthing center is the close
connection and care that occurs,
it doesn't always happen in a
hospital. Someone who's gonna
follow you from the day in which
you learn that you're pregnant
to the day that your baby is
born is a very comforting and
warming feeling, and so that is
one reason why it is chosen. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, you know,
that, that makes a lot of sense
to me because a lot of times in
birth and when you're having
contractions, uh, when you're
trying to, and especially with
new mothers.
Uh, when they're trying to egg
on the, the process to ensure
their bodies is ready to give
birth. A lot of times the stress
of, of, of the environment or
distress of the experience can
slow down that process. And so
for a lot of folks who are
giving birth, having a place
that they're familiar with,
they're comfortable with, um, is
a lot of relief. I also was
curious, and this helps too, at
these birthing centers, do they
provide prenatal care as well,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, de lady, the answer
is yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. And
that's with the, uh, the uh
midwife that you were referring
to earlier, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, lady, the
answer is yes. That makes a lot
of sense and let me ask you this
as well, um, we also have
midwives at our hospitals, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know our
hospitals up here also have
midwives. Um, when those
midwives are reimbursed at these
hospitals, are they currently
reimbursed at the rate that
hospital, that the doctors and
hospitals are reimbursed for a
simple pregnancy.
Or is it, are they the lower
amount the birthing centers
have, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
answer is yes if they're working
in a hospital facility. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, you're
saying that an urban settings
where we have hospitals,
midwives make more money
delivering the same babies than
they do in rural birthing
centers right now. Is that
correct, Mr. Spin out Make more
money. They're reimbursed at a
higher rate in urban centers
rather than in rural areas, is
that right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that is correct.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, it it
seems to me that we'd want to
have some parity in service
because, of course, I had a
complicated, I both my
pregnancies were ridiculously
complicated. Probably also with
stress, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and, and everything else,
but I will say that, um, you
know, the duties for a
complicated birth are many,
right? There's, you know, with a
C-section, there's additional
costs that are added on with,
um, you know, additional care
with the longer hours, all of
those things add up more. What
you're looking for in this bill
and House Bill 56 is just to
ensure that when it's the same
treatment.
in at a birthing center, they
get reimbursed the same amount
they would at a hospital, is
that right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Speaker, that is correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I feel
like that would also make it
easier for women that have
complicated births, so that they
could have easier access to a
hospital. I'll be honest, when,
you know, when I was giving
birth, uh, with my, I think it
was my eldest daughter, the
doctor had scheduled all of the
appointments to be around each
other. So she was going from
room to room to room, checking
in on everyone, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That's a lot of
duties for this person, which is
why these teams
we're talking about are so
important. Um, and so going to
the teams real fast, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when I had
a doula at my hospital, I paid
for that separately, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
how, uh, doulas are also paid at
birthing centers as well, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's not in this bill,
but right now doulas would be
paid separately. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies. So if a person, whether
out of a hospital or a or a or a
birthing center were to give
birth, the people that are
providing those.
services would be reimbursed at
the same rates under this bill,
is that right, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and if a
person so chooses to have a
doula, that would be funded in a
separate manner, whether at a
hospital or at a birthing
center, is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that is
correct. Thank you, gentle lady.
You know, I, I will say this, we
took birthing classes for our
first daughter, and I remember
the folks that were driving from
extremely far away and I
remember the plans to get a
hotel room the night that they
were gonna have a baby. Now this
is the.
funny thing, both of my kids
were never delivered on their
duty. They were delivered days
later. I didn't have to incur
any additional, uh, expenses,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. My
family came in from town, they
stayed at my house. My house is
10 minutes from the hospital,
um, when they, they induced me
when my induction and take, Mr.
Speaker, gentlelani, they sent
me right back, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I offer that
just for, to help folks
understand the, the, the, the
different timing that it may
take and the additional expenses
rural families may face, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, one
other thing I, I
wanted to check in with on this
um.
at the birthing centers that
you're speaking of and, and,
and.
Uh, and the teams that you're
talking about, do you see those
as forming communities in the
long run, uh, at the birthing
centers where they're at and,
and long term, uh, you know,
these families may continue to
to be around each other, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
absolutely, and it's great for
the family, for the child and
for the community. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. It is, it is imperative
that we help create more
community opportunities, um,
it's something that we bring up
a lot with uh parents that are
of my generation. We don't go
out and give cookies to the
neighbors. We're still trying to
buy homes and there's many
opportunities we can build
communities in our rural areas
and build those to thrive. I
will support and I love the
parody because then then as the
bill states very clearly this is
about.
uh, equal, um, equitable
reimbursements for services
provided, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So thank you for this
bill. I appreciate it. Thank
you. There's further debate,
gentle lady from Grant Hidalgo
and Sierra, Representative Doo.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady yield. I yield to
the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady.
How many of these centers are
there accredited centers are
there in New Mexico?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 3 license centers with more
to come.
Is license the same is
accredited.
to other
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they all
have New Mexico licenses and one
has a national, but is not a
national license is not required
for purposes of operating in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Uh, how many
Birthing centers have no license
or accreditation in the Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they
cannot bill if they are not
licensed.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what about uh
Is there is now, is there any
out of pocket expense to the
Lady giving birth.
Under Medicare.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, not for
those who have Medicaid
eligibility.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. What
about those that are using their
private insurance.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
depends on their insurance.
OK, so as usual
you.
Uh, gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
they probably pay a little more
than usually don't they, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I cannot
say that that's true.
Thank you gentle lady, uh.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady who's
mentioned early prenatal care.
How are they paid for their
prenatal care?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they are
paid on the professional
services scale through Medicaid.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, so they're they're paid
the same amount as any other
prenatal care provider, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen for the
same service, the answer is yes.
Thank you gentle lady. Uh,
The, uh, what about mid?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
were talking rural and, and, and
like the reservations and lots
of our country.
The midwives.
The in-house, in home births.
By midwives, or did they receive
any reimbursement from Medicaid
or
Insurance.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they can
be seen a reimbursement for
professional services but not
for facility fees.
Thank you. So
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, if
they
They would get the same amount
for the birth of the baby as
the.
Mm
Senator Wood, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no they
would not. They would only get
reimbursement for the
professional services, not for
the facility fee.
uh
Birthing centers and have a
facility fee also besides the.
It's
gentlemen, the answer is yes.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh
rural uh Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady in rural New Mexico,
we were talking.
with, you know, the birth.
More, more babies are are born
dead. I don't know.
actual word for that, but, uh
Where they don't have many
births.
Would they support a birth
center in say New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I want to, and
gentlemen, I want to refer you
back to my opening statement
that 40% of New Mexico's
counties are considered a
maternal health desert. So when
birthing centers are present, it
really does help out a woman,
her family.
And the process.
Thank you gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I, I agree with that
entirely, you know, even in our
area, gentle lady.
Uh,
Arte at least 45 minutes to an
hour away from a hospital that
will.
will facilitate a birth except
through the emergency room
services.
But
my question was, I, I'll
rephrase it. How many births a
year, would it take to be a
profitable birthing center.
facilities and uh
Staff that it would take to, to
run a birthing center.
these rural communities.
Well, they attract the birthing
center.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
A birthing center could run with
1 or 2 bots a month. It could
work run with many more. It just
depends on how many births would
occur.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I agree, you
know, we need to do everything
we can for the healthcare,
especially in rural.
World of Mexico is, is the
gentle lady stated we are.
I would say even maybe a greater
percentage of New Mexico is a.
Uh, healthcare desert than what
was spoken of. So thank you,
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. That's all I have.
Grant Hidalgo and Sierra
Representative Doo. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yi yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
general. I, I just, I'm still
not quite understanding the
difference between accredited
and licensed, uh, are we using
them synonymously for
reimbursement?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in the
state of New Mexico you must
have a New Mexico license. If
you choose to be accredited on a
national level, you may do so,
but that's not necessary for
purposes of operating the
birthing center in New Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. And the
other question I have is, who
defines low risk. Is that, is
that defined by the folks who
give the license.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
clinical standards of the
licensing professionals describe
what's low risk and what isn't.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. My daughter was, my
female daughter just
just had our, her second child.
Uh, my 3rd grandson, and the
baby was breech.
And she had a traditional
doctor, uh, OBGYN, and they were
requiring her to have a
C-section. That is not something
that she wanted. She did her own
research. She learned that.
Um, that less than 10% of breach
babies have any complications
and, and that it was more of a
liability reason why they were
doing a C-section. And so she
found a wife, uh, and, and it
was great. She had a wonderful
experience. There was no
problem. She went home 3 hours
after the delivery from the
birthing center. The baby was
fine born breech, sunny side up,
um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, would that have been
considered low risk in New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
a scenario that can be made
based upon situations as they
exist. I can tell you we've had
conversations with many women
who had a baby who was breeched
but chose to work with a nurse
midwife to see if they could
turn the baby so that they
didn't have to go through a
C-section.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and that, that's,
that's what she did and it was a
great choice that was available
to my female daughter who had 9
months of pregnancy and birthed
the child through her um
birthing canal. Um, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and then the
other question is, do we provide
our all women who are pregnant
in New Mexico eligible for
Medicaid.
When, when they, when it comes
to pregnancy and birthing a
child.
Mr. Speaker, generally, the
answer is no. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. So it's still, still
income-based?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do we have a higher, um,
is, is it a higher eligibility?
Or is it, is it, what is the
eligibility for Medicaid for a
pregnant woman before she births
a child, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's 185%.
Of the federal poverty level.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. I'm, I'm really
excited to support your bill,
and I, I hope that the body will
be considered of those of us who
support the intent of a bill
when there's such language
changes and no reference to a
woman in this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, Generallini.
See no further debate, generally
close.
just
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 56 as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 56 as amended. The vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative House Bill 56, as
amended, has duly passed this
House.
And a leader from Berle
Thompson, are you ready on item
16.
Mr. Speaker, I am. Will you get
me to that point that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
77 on final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 77 will
require the health care
authority to develop annual
federal sup supplemental
nutrition assistance program,
which is SNAP State Outreach
plans and the plans are to
promote access to the benefits
of the federal federal SNAP.
Each year, the authorities shall
submit the annual uh state
outreach plan on food and
nutrition service and uh the the
final paragraph is that they
shall be exempt from doing it if
there's not enough money and
with that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 77 do now pass
final passage of House Bill 77.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
It's now closed by a vote of 61
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 77 as
didn't work.
Voting yes.
How do you wish to vote?
Yes, about 40% of Alan Martinez.
But what of 62 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 77 Azulli passes
house. lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee, to
whom he's been referred House
Bill 5 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, it's Liz
Thompson day in the house. I
move it adopt the committee
report of a favorable report in
House Bill 5. All those in
favor, if I would say no.
name. Yes, a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 30.
House Bill 354 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 354. All those in
favors.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 355
has had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair,
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
355. All those in favor in in a.
name.
Yes, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, Health and Human
Services Committee to has been
referred House Bill 357.
Has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred.
And thence referred to the
Taxation and Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
357. All those in favor of C C
9.
Oppose nay, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 366 has
had it under consideration
report with the recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
366. All those in favor if I say
no.
Oppose me, the Izaic committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Joint
Resolution 5 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House resolution 5. All those in
favor say a.
I was supposed.
Yeah, SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 195 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and he referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andress from chairpeaker, I
move adoption of the committee
report.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 195. All those in
favor and I say no.
All those oppose, nay.
Mm
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
Speaker, I we go to that order
of business, announcements and
miscellaneous business is
announcements,
gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
House Democratic caucus will be
having a caucus meeting tomorrow
at 12 noon in room 317.
Members take note announcements
and lady from Berlin are
represented on Nonu.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
Economic Development Committee
will be meeting 10 minutes after
we adjourn in the usual spot.
Members take notes, gentle lady
from Dona Anna Representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
You're consumer and public
affairs committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 8 a.m.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Santa Fe, Representative
Romero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Your House Judiciary Committee
will be meeting 10 minutes after
the close of floor session this
evening.
lady from Socorro Donana Sierra
Representative Doll. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. Um, I just want to
make sure that the body is aware
that a one year old body has
been discovered in Eddy County.
This was a child that was
reported missing. They have done
DNA and they, the child was
suffering.
ated by the parents, the ribs
were crushed. They had fentanyl
in their system at the time of
death.
Also, this was a baby who CYD
has confirmed how to care a plan
through the IPA process. Um, in
addition, two girls in
Albuquerque walked out of um
CYFD facility where they were in
custody. They were picked up on
the street and they were
violently raped at a hotel and
so I'm very glad that we are
taking reforms at CYFD
seriously. There are incidents
like this that we don't know
about yet happening every day.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Santa Fe McQueen.
Mr. Speaker of the House Energy
and Environment and Natural
Resources Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 8 a.m.,
gentlemen from Reba and all
those other counties FYI for
folks,
your capital outlay forms are in
your mailbox right now. Those
will be due next week Wednesday,
close of business 5 p.m.
Members take note, lady from
Santa Fe of Lujan.
Mr. Speaker, I was just looking
at this incredible solar system.
On our desk, thank you. Members
take note.
The announcements.
All right, members, thank you
for a productive day. Uh, we do
plan on coming on the floor
tomorrow at 12:30. Please be on
time. Uh, we've got the, um,
we're gonna do some 3rd reading
and of course we are probably
gonna have community reports and
whatnot, gentlemen from Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a
note to anybody that doesn't
want those placemats. I have a
whole bunch of special ed
students in several different
schools that would love to have
them.
Members take note.
Right, any other announcements?
Seeing none, gentlemen from San
Juan?
Mr. Speaker, why did the tomato
blush?
Why?
It saw the salad dressing.
That was good.
Round of applause.
Somebody's gonna buy you lunch,
but do not eat the tuna.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to the
house stand in recess until
12:30 tomorrow.
Houses send in recess until 12
12:30 tomorrow afternoon.
