of Henry.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative small
Vice Chairana.
McQueen.
Here
We record?
We do or we don't, and we do.
Um
OK, so, um,
We only have 2 bills today.
Um
And I, I did that because I
thought the strategic water
supply might have a lot of
discussion.
Uh, that being said, um,
We, of course, as always, have
limited time. I know there are
other committees starting at
10:30.
Um, so we would like to, uh, as
usual, move through the um.
agenda as quickly as possible.
Um
For the public, uh, for people
watching at home.
I want to alert you to the fact
that there is a committee sub.
The committee substitute for
House Bill 137.
Um, it's been substantially
revised.
Uh, that substitute is available
online.
Uh, so if you go to, if you look
at on the NM legis website. Uh,
you can look it up by the bill
number or you can look up our
committee.
Uh, and there's a listing of uh
I don't have it in front of me,
you have to sort of look for it.
But uh substitutes and
amendments are listed on the
website.
Um, and you're gonna want to
look at that if you have public
comment.
So all of the produced water
language.
Has been removed from House Bill
137.
So when we go to public comment
and you object to house phone
137, um, because, ma'am, you're
gonna have to find the seat.
Um, because of the produced
water language.
Be aware that it's not in there.
So, uh, you have a little time
to look look that over.
Uh, while we deal with our first
bill.
Uh, any questions or
Uh, comments from the committee.
OK, we, we are expecting
breakfast burritos. I don't know
the timing on that. So we'll let
you know if those are right.
Um, so our, our first bill today
is House Bill 403. Oil and gas
fund distribution and uses, uh,
this is a bill that was rolled
over so we could work on it.
We've already taken public
comment on this bill, so we're
not gonna do that again. Uh, so
we're gonna go directly to the
sponsor, uh, representative
Murphy, uh, perhaps you could
tell us the differences between
uh the committee set up in your
bill as originally submitted.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you
and good morning. uh I wanna
thank the chairman, the vice
chairman for uh helping me with
these changes.
Um, I'm talking about, uh,
231-187.2.
I think the correct 202 number.
Have we passed out the.
Would someone like to move this
up for consideration.
Uh, Representative Murphy, could
you repeat the 2 231 number.
Yes, sir. 231-187.2.
Thank you. The uh the changes
begin on the 2nd page, page 2.
Beginning at line 7 through line
15.
Um, changes the distribution
formula. This is largely in
response to uh the vice chair's
comments and concerns, um, the
first year it limits the
distribution to 50%, which in
essence will double the
division's budget um allow them
some time to ramp up.
The 2nd year to 75% in the third
year to 100% uh for that year
and subsequent years.
Um, the next change is, um, on
page 2 in lines 24 and 25, um,
the committee, uh, may recall
that there was uh quite a bit of
discussion about May and Chow,
uh, the, the chair helped me go
from um from shall to May to and
then we went to May only and
then we uh actually found that
the drafters are currently using
this type of language which, um,
is appropriate money in the fund
is appropriate to the visions
for the purposes of and I felt
good about that, uh, from the
standpoint that I think it
really clarifies and supports
the legislative intent.
Um, and then the last changes
are really stylistic, um.
Or and um there is one deletion
but it had to conform to uh to
the deletion of the uh education
money and that's found on page
4.
On lines 17 and 18, there's a
and put in and then there's an
energy education changes Mr.
Chair.
OK, um, so we've already, uh,
uh, debated this bill at some
length. Is, is there any debate
on the changes in the committee.
Um, what's the pleasure of the
committee?
I'd like to move the house bill.
Uh committee sub for House Bill
403.
As they do pass
Um
So I suppose first we should
adopt the committee said.
Uh, we moved for discussion.
Yes, OK, so you have a motion to
adopt.
Any any objection to that? OK,
so now I think the proper motion
would be do not pass.
On House Bill 403 in Du Pass on
the house energy environment,
natural resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 403.
Yes, Mr. Chair. Let's do that.
Is there a second?
OK, um, Nina, could you take the
uh.
Representative Abeda.
Yes.
Representative Dixon,
Representative Garcia.
Representative Girola, yes.
Representative Henry, yes.
He represented Montoya, yes.
Represented Murphy, yes.
Yes.
Representative small.
Vice chair saidana, yes.
McQueen.
Yes.
So you have to pass and 0, and I
want to thank you for working
with uh
OK, our next bill is um House
Bill 137, and there's a
committee substitute on this
too, uh, move for consideration.
And Representative Herrera,
could you, uh, read the 231
number on your committee sub.
Yeah
0.2
And start over with the
microphone on.
OK, it is uh 231088.2.
Does everyone have that?
Um
Uh
Herbs and Pereira, whenever
you're ready, please present
your committee sub.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Good to be with you here this
morning. I first want to
introduce my, uh, two experts on
this bill. We have Rebecca Roo,
who is the head of the uh
infrastructure coordinator of
the director of the
infrastructure program for the
office of the governor, and we
have Tanya Trujillo, and she is
the, uh.
She is the deputy state engineer
and uh with those two experts, I
will present this bill.
And to begin with Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I
would like to say that.
The biggest problem facing our
state, uh.
Is not the price of oil on the
world market.
The biggest problem facing our
state, Mister Cha is that
there's no snow on the
mountains.
Uh, in the northern valleys in
the Rio Grande and Chama
Valleys, we looked to the west.
Uh, to the Hammes Mountains we
looked to the
To the east and to the north,
uh, to the sunre de Cristo
Mountains and when we say no
snow on the mountains at this
time of year.
There's
There's a reckoning.
There's a reckoning that takes
place and, and it's very real.
It's very real for uh
agricultural production in the
north.
And I remember over 20 years ago
I was at a meeting, uh, as the
director of the Lanno Foundation
at the Laboratory, John Brown
was the director.
And he was speaking to 500
managers, uh, in the room, and
he said.
He said the same thing, and he
was talking about all the
problems of, you know, uh, being
a nuclear laboratory, and he
said, but all of those problems
are small.
In comparison to this picture,
and he showed a picture of the
mountains, and there was no snow
on the mountains. The bark
beetles had come in. They had
killed all the trees. We were at
risk for a big fire, he said,
Fire is our most threatening.
Threatening damage and um sure
enough that year Cheryl Gran the
fire came in, ruined, uh, took
out 400 homes.
Uh, in, uh, Los Alamos ruined
the mountains.
Uh, it was a devastating fire,
and we keep seeing that in our
statement, Mister Chair, and I
just want to remind this
committee that climate change is
real and we're living it.
Um
I've seen things in the last 5
years that I thought were
unimaginable.
Um
After the Hannon Creek hermit's
fire, we went with a group of
uh.
Land grant, uh, officials headed
by Ed Quintana.
And we went up to the the side
of the mountain to.
To check the fire damage in in
above Las Vegas.
And we went to the top of the
mountain and only to look out
the other side of the mountain
and to see a blackened landscape
as far as the eye could see.
As far as the eye could see.
It was
It was devastating. You could
not see one green thing or.
miles
Um
I wanted to see that.
Because it was, it was just
terrible, and I, I also want you
to know that these land grant
men and women the day, a couple
of days following the fire.
Hike down that steep ravine. It
was probably a 5 or 10 mile
hike.
They hiked down that steep
ravine because there was an
age-old spring at the bottom of
that ravine, and they knew that
if any forest animals had
possibly survived this fire,
they would need water.
And they would hike down there
with, you know.
Chainsaws and picks and shovels
and.
And they, and it had to be a
very dangerous hike. They went
down there and they cleaned out
that spring so the animals could
have something to drink and
nobody paid them to do that.
Nobody asked them to do that.
They needed, they knew that that
had to be done.
And the downstream damage.
The Downstream damage of that
fire hit every community, and
I'm just gonna tell you the
story of one small community,
Dixon, New Mexico, which is
where I live.
That the floods came the
torrential rains came and it
just sent this massive debris
flow and flood down the
mountains, and it wiped out
every single.
Um, every single Asechia in
Dixon, I was home at the time.
The river I live on a small, you
know.
910 of an acre plot, the river
was overflowing on one side, the
assea was overflowing on another
side, of course I was home
alone. My husband wasn't there,
and I called him and he said,
Well, at least drive the cars up
to a higher place in the road,
and I did that, but I was just
waiting for everything to flood
and all of a sudden the Asekia
just kind of stopped and held.
It wiped out every assea in the
in the valley except ours, and
the reason was that a log had
got stuck in the diversion party
the Asechia and so it blocked
the water from coming in. We
just got lucky. We were the only
Asechia that wasn't wiped out.
And again last summer.
Last summer, um.
We had, there was a smaller
fire, I think it was a black
fire way up in the mountains,
kind of, kind of west of the
monastery of the Christ and
Abike kind of west of that area
high up in the mountains didn't
get a lot of press because there
weren't any homes destroyed.
There weren't any people damage,
but
But then one night, these rains
came, these torrential rains
dropped about 8 inches of rain
in a couple hours, and it just
Flooded this whole valley. It
came down from the mountains,
all the arroyos. It changed the
course of the Chalmer River.
It changed the course of a
river. There was so much
flitting, and all these pristine
little
Farms
That we're just destroyed. There
was one little diversion tank
diversion dam that this Asea
group had worked on with a state
Army Corps of Engineers had just
completed it.
It was
It was pristine. It was as
beautiful little place. It got
wiped out in one night.
It was the day before they were
gonna have their celebration of
the new opening of this little
dam.
So I tell you these stories
because I know these people,
they're in my district, these
stories are real Mick Trujillo
called me that morning and said
it was 6 o'clock. He said,
Susan, you better get over here.
Something something, he said our
farm is OK, he was above Abeke,
but in Minalis it just wiped
out, wiped out all those farms
along the river.
So people ask me.
Susan, why are you carrying this
bill?
You know,
You of all people, you were
protecting a sick as you were
protecting waters, it's because
I really think we're gonna need
every drop of water we can get.
We're gonna have to find a way
to, to restructure.
To do a strategic water supply
so that we can really.
Build programs and
infrastructure that we need to,
to utilize any source of water
we have.
So in saying that,
That's just kind of my
explanation for why I'm involved
in this and why I believe in
this.
Um, that this bill really does
kind of four things the new
substitute. First of all, it
eliminates, as the chairman
said, the produced water parts
of the bill.
To expands a brackish water to
include um.
Um, more, uh, shallow water
resources, it.
It provides money for the
aquifer mapping.
In this state and finally it
provides a 4 million to continue
the study of um.
um, the, um, the studying in you
that is currently looking at
produced water.
And, uh, so with that, I will
let my uh.
Expert, uh, take over from here,
Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, it's a
pleasure to be with you this
morning, uh, and I'll make uh
some brief remarks about how the
strategic water supply bill fits
into the broader picture of what
we're doing to address the water
issues and concerns that um our
sponsor just articulated for you
all. And then, um, Mr. Chair,
I'd be happy to provide a more
detailed, uh, description of the
committee substitute if that
would be helpful to the
committee.
Um, before we move forward, um,
but just so briefly, I wanted to
explain where we're coming from,
um, the governor and our sponsor
and our team in bringing this
bill before you. Um, some of you
may be familiar with the 50 year
water action plan that the
governor issued just about a
year ago, last January. A
50-year water action plan is
built upon scientific research
and study that shows that 50
years from now, we
respect to have roughly 25% less
water.
So for every 4 gallons we have
in the state today will have 3.
50 years from now.
So with that reality with that
foundation of what the science
is telling us about our water
resources. The 50-year water
plan then lays out 11 priority
actions for the state.
To address our water security
and ensure we have water
security for generations of New
Mexicans to come.
One of those 11 actions is
establishing the strategic water
supply and House Bill 137 would
do that.
The other actions in the 50 year
water plan.
Layout things we need to be
doing simultaneously.
And earnestly to conserve more
water.
To study our water resources and
to protect the quality of our
water by preventing pollution
and by cleaning up pollution of
our water resources that already
exists.
So that's broad strokes, the 50
year water action plan and this
bill as House Bill 137 to
establish the strategic water
supply is one key component of
that. And we need the
legislature's involvement and
help to make that happen, and we
look forward to the, the
discussion with you all this
morning about um what this bill
is, how it would work, and what
it means for the state of New
Mexico. I would also note that
um in the bill, there are 3
appropriations in.
Um, the last section of the
bill, section 6, I believe.
Section 6, and I'll be happy to,
um, provide some information to
the committee about not just the
appropriations that we've been
asking for as the executive
through this bill, but um how
those these three appropriations
are reflected in the current
version of House Bill 2 that was
voted out of House
Appropriations yesterday, um,
in, in broad strokes, there's
uh.
If you include all water
program, non-recurring funding
in the current version of House
Bill 2 and 3. There's over $420
million for water investments
and currently 40 million of that
is to um put initial infusion
into the strategic water supply
fund contingent on enactment of
House Bill 137. So with that,
um, Mr. Chair, I'll pause and
happy to go through more detail,
walk through the bill if you
would like that and the
committee would like that.
And otherwise we refer back to
the sponsor and you.
Mr. Chair
Thank you, uh, Representative
Ferrero, does, uh, Mr. Yo want
to make any comments? No.
OK, so we're gonna, um, we're
gonna go to the public, um, just
by a show of hands, who is here
in support of this bill?
Um, who is here in opposition?
OK. So we have, we have a lot
more in opposition. Uh, it's our
practice to do uh.
Equal time on both sides. Uh, so
we're gonna take, we're gonna do
uh opposition first.
Um, we'll take 5 in the room and
then we're gonna go online and
we'll take 3 online.
Uh, and then we'll do the same
for support. Uh, so if you'd
like to speak in opposition,
please step forward and into the
middle of the room.
And we're only doing 5.
Of
Make, make a line.
Space
OK, and you might want to scoot
back a little. You're kind of
close to the presenters.
And um
So before we start, uh, a couple
of things.
Uh, I made this announcement at
the beginning of the meeting,
but maybe people had uh logged
on yet. Um,
Keep in mind, uh, we're, we're
on the committee set.
The committee sub does not have
or produced water aspect.
Um, so, like if you have
opposition to produce water
component.
Uh, you need to take a look at
the committee so. Uh, secondly,
I ask that you be respectful,
and courteous. I asked both
sides of that, you know, there
are, there are no um
You know, evildoers involved in
this, um, so, um, you know, just
state your opinion of the bill
and why you feel that way and uh
avoid personal attacks.
OK.
And please state your name for
the record. We'll have our, uh
our.
Attendant hold the mic for you
and you have 2 minutes.
OK, um, good morning, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Julia Bernal. I'm, uh,
from the public of Sandia and
I'm the executive director of
Pub Action Alliance, um, we've
been um following the strategic
water supply since its
inception. I was at Dubai at COP
29 when this first initiative
was announced and while um there
is progress in the removal of
produced water, um, the intent
of this is uh purely based in
economic development, um,
And a pathway to commodify
brackish water without proffer
scientific understanding and
appropriate legal framework. Um,
my understanding is that, uh,
brackish water is, you know,
categorized as a public good,
and so, um, the question remains
of why there's initiative is
commodifying that that resource,
um, and so we asked the
committee to ask those uh
questions and um and, you know,
essentially oppose um this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you committee. Um, I want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill. I think
strategic water planning is
needed in the state of New
Mexico, but we, um, as New
Mexico no false solutions. I'm
Alexandria Lyon, Alejandria
Lyon, uh, New Mexico no false
solutions and I just want to
state the reasons why we are
opposed to the bill, besides the
issue that this is public waters
and we are concerned about
public waters. um, belonging to
the rights holders, um, which
includesicka and, and tribal.
communities and the consultation
needed for tribal communities.
Um, we believe that brackish
water still is not a renewable
resource. Uh, we're concerned
about Laciences. We are also
concerned about the saline water
contaminating aquifers. We need
that this aquifer mapping to be
done ahead of time is what we
believe. Um, we're also, um, we
are also concerned with the
environmental problems
associated with disposal of
rejected saline water and how
this contaminate our soils.
So, um, these are some of the
issues we still have with the
bill. We know that water
planning is needed and we hope
we can find the funding for that
specifically. Thank you.
Good morning, chair and members
of the board, I mean, uh,
members of the committee.
Um, my name is Sky Johnson, and
I'm here on behalf of YA, where
a statewide youth-led climate
justice organization with
thousands of supporters. We want
to thank Representative Herrera
and the committee for Listening
to Communities and removing
produced water from House Bill
137. There's a major victory in
public health and environmental
protection. We appreciate the
leadership shown in responding
to the concerns from frontline
communities.
We understand the desire to
explore brackish water and
respectfully are standing in
opposition today, because we
still have serious concerns
about the scale and the risks of
brackish water desalination in
this bill.
While brackish water exploration
may be worth studying. It must
be done in a way that's
Uh, scientifically, financially,
and environmentally responsible.
We urge lawmakers to amend House
Bill 137 to require
comprehensive aquifer mapping
before any brackish water
desalination projects are
authorized.
Without this critical step, we
risk.
Uh, land substance,
contamination of fresh
groundwater and reductions of
surface water availability.
We uh limit public funding to
projects that are not proven
safe, effective and necessary.
75 million is too much to
allocate for an unproven and
potentially harmful endeavor,
any investment in desalination
must be grounded in strong
technical and financial
feasibility.
Uh, insurance that I
desalination plants are funded
through this funded through this
bill are powered by 100% newly
added renewable energy and
include plans for the safe
disposable waste of byproducts.
Desalination requires a huge
amount of energy, and can
generate toxic radioactive waste
and we cannot move forward
without a clear, safe.
guards in place.
Uh, New Mexico needs real water
security strategies for that
protection of our communities
and our natural resources, not
speculative projects that could
create new risks.
Um, we urged lawmakers to
further amend House Bill 137 to
ensure that any exploration of
blacks. Thank you for your time.
Thank you for giving me this
opportunity. My name is George
Jurassic.
I'm a part-time resident of
Santa Fe and uh a retired
professor of geophysics from
UNM.
Um, I draw your attention. I
will draw your attention to a
publication that was published
last.
A month on January 7th. Uh, it
was by Harvard and New York
University researchers.
And it showed that high PIA's
concentrations were found in 6
of 8 large municipal wastewater
treatment systems.
After the renewable technologies
were finished.
In fact, it was less than 25%
reduction of pelos at at these
with this discussion describes
that quite well. This means that
it's likely that the advanced
treatment of PAs in brackish
water and fracking.
I guess the fracking is out now,
but in brackish water.
Uh, in New Mexico, could
actually make the water levels
more contaminated, then the
actual water put into the
system.
So
The statement in yesterday's
Santa Fe, New Mexican, that we
shouldn't spend money on dirty
water until the science is there
rings true.
Thank you.
Jeannette I Vinoueva, New
Mexico.
I thank the chair and the
committee.
Um, I'm here. I live in a rural
community as well that was very,
very impacted by hermit's peak
and Calf Canyon, and we've seen
the things that the sponsor of
the bill talked about, the river
flooding, the Assea. I have 5
claims open with FEMA right now
to deal mostly with the issues
with water, for those of you who
are not aware of it right now in
San Miguel County, the city of
Las Vegas is under an extreme
water emergency. There is
literally undrinkable.
water coming out of the taps.
The stuff that you are seeing
looks like
Oil
Right? Because they have had
problems with water management
in the city. They're having to
have water trucked in every day
for basic needs, and that is
today. The water wars are
already here. I understand what
the sponsor of the bill is
saying when she speaks about how
precious the water is. I passed
the ecos every day, and I look
at it and I thank you. I'm part
of a farm community, I'm part of
our CSA programs. I'm part of so
much.
The water is precious, it cannot
be sold for oil and gas, it
cannot be sold for mining, where
up in our community, we are
battling Torero and other
things. We are here for this
water. We know how scarce it is,
and a truly appreciate the
thought of the aquiffier mapping
that's integral.
It's so vital, but again, we
should not be paying for
somebody else's science. We
should not be selling our water
cheaply, we cannot afford to do
it. It is the only thing that
sustains and, you know, I'm new
to New Mexico. I've been here
only like 16 years, OK, which
means I just showed up. But
I understand how vital it is for
our communities, our support,
our land grants thank you ma'am.
Thank you.
OK, we're, we'll go online, uh,
if you would like, if you're
online, I would like to speak,
uh, please raise your hand.
OK. Um,
Pursed up
We have Athena Christoullo.
I'm sorry, sir. I actually did
not raise my hand. I am still
very, very much wondering about
this bill because I can't
choose. There are parts of it
like, like charging, um, the oil
and gas industry for the
produced water per barrel.
And I am concerned as others
about the land subsidence and
the fact that here we're trying
to do a technology that most
countries use next to an ocean
that doesn't have to be have
water extracted from deep
underneath. I'm just sorry. I
shouldn't have said anything.
OK.
Um
OK. Next step is indivisible
Albuquerque. Please state your
name.
OK, we lost Indivisible
Albuquerque.
OK, Oscar Simpson.
Thank you very much, Chairman,
members of the committee, Oscar
Simpson, representing Rio Grande
anddivisible.
For the reasons stated already
above or at during the
anti-public comments.
This bill is premature. We have
a lot of unresolved problems
with disposal and treatment of
brackish water. So please
Post,
please vote against this bill
and tell the science and and and
then.
And
Studies validate what can or can
occur. Thank you.
Thank you. And next up we'll
have Elaine Shamina.
Good morning. Um, my name is
Elaine Shimino. I'm here, uh,
representing common ground
rising. I first want to
acknowledge the collective
effort that successfully removed
produced water from the
strategic water supply Act. This
is a huge win for our
communities and I wanna thank
you, thank everyone who stood up
and made their voices heard,
your advocacy made a difference.
However, our work is far from
over, and the 75
allocated for brackish water
development still raises
concerns before we rush to
invest public funds. We need
answers. We need answers for the
techno tech.
Technical and financial
viability. Where's the proof
that large scale brackish water
treatment is feasible and
cost-effective. In Sandoval
County, that uh brackish water,
uh, boondoggle was just that. It
was a scam, and it contaminated
and it brought over 300 tons of
radioactive salts that were
illegally dumped into our
landfill. The environmental
desk.
Um, we have reports of corrosive
active uh radioactive wells. I
would, uh, send you those whole
analysis reports to show that.
Uh, the cart, you keep putting
the cart before the horse. We
need the comprehensive mapping,
please.
put this in there, that this
must happen and take that 75
million out of there. Public
subsidation uh subsidation of
pri of bad investment, that's
exactly what the 75 million is
doing. Taxpayers' dollars should
not be funding speculative
projects that benefit industry
more than the public. We need
clear amendments to ensure
transparency, independent
science and accountability for
before a single dollar is spent.
Let's not replace one bad idea
with another. Thank you very
much.
OK, thank you for that. Now
we're going to come back to the
room for people in support will
take 5.
But
OK, and once again, I would ask
you to scoot back just a little.
OK.
Go ahead. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is John D'Antonio,
former state engineer under 3
different governors, um, I find
it very, very interesting on the
testimony and all these bills
and and a lot of the
misinformation and inaccuracy of
information. The rush to
judgment is no such thing. In
2009 when I was a state
engineer, I worked with this
legislature to pass House Bill
19, which allowed and changed
the deep brackish water
regulations 7212.
25 to 28, which allows for New
Mexico to go in through a notice
of intent process, the state
engineer's office still gets
involved with any of those
notices of intent to see if
there's any effects of taking
that bracket water out to fresh
water supplies, and so there's
total protections in there, the
state engineer, uh, is
constantly monitored on the
notice of intent process, um,
the, the other thing is brackish
water desal water. I'm also
president in Mexico
desalination.
Association. We in New Mexico
are so far behind our our
neighboring states on developing
that source as a source of
water. We need it in all of our
communities, all of our
communities are dying on the
vine. They don't have resilience
and they don't have a redundant
supply of water and one pad or a
couple more bad monsoons, bad
snowpack. I don't see any snow
in the mountains this year.
We're in trouble and we're way
behind. And the other thing I
just want to add is the proofs
out there, look at the Kay
Bailey.
Hutchinson plant in El Paso.
There are 20 million gallon a
day plan expanding to 30 million
gallons a day. There's, there's
no more proof than you need and
there's hundreds of systems in
Texas that augment supplies
everywhere. We need and
desperately need this source of
water, and we don't have money.
The political will to get money
and that's where the important
part of this bill is, is the
appropriations, the $75 million
to start getting
Projects and projects in the
pipeline, uh, the, the Oxford
characterization is very
important, yes, but we need to
couple characterization with
projects on the ground and uh
and so uh I'll stop there. Thank
you.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, Debbie Hughes with the
Association of Soil and Water
Conservation Districts. We
strongly support this bill, um,
it is exciting to see that we
had young people here that are
passionate about water, but 30
years ago, we were doing
regional water plans. We've done
regional water plans, yes, we're
gonna update them. Uh, we have
aquifer mapping, um, like John
referred to with the Dal
association, we have the
science, we, it is affordable.
New Mexico is way behind and
this is critical. We need this.
Water. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino and I
represent the polos of Akima and
Taos, and uh we've had a chance
to read and review the latest
stuff for Hospital 137, and
we're good with it.
Uh, the changes that were made,
the new material addresses the
concerns that Acoma had with
regards to extraction activity
and brackish water and the
possible impact that would have
on existing aquifers and
groundwater, but as I say, we
are not opposed to this
legislation.
And if I may, Mr. Chairman,
recommend that if this bill does
become legislation that the
state reach out to tribes, um,
and consult with them. Many of
us have decades of experience
when it comes to, um,
hydrological studies and testing
and mapping and perhaps they
would consider entering into
agreements for data sharing, so
I offered that to, to the
committee for its consideration
to the state. So thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Mike Bowen. I'm the uh
Registered lobbyists for the
Pecos Valley artesian
Conservancy District and they
stand in full support of this uh
substitute bill and thank the
sponsor for working with the
concerns and that, that the
opponents brought up originally.
Thank you.
Um, members of the committee,
public.
OK.
My name is Sophia Martinez. I'm
co-chair of Los Sardines
Institute in Albuquerque. I'm
also uh landowner in Mora
County.
And I definitely support uh
water planning, especially with
the impending climate crisis
that we're facing, right?
However, I would, and I also
want to applaud the Congress for
taking out the produced uh
fracking contaminated water
because we certainly don't need
that to be irrigating our
vegetables because I'm a farmer.
However, I would like for this
body.
Basically prioritize how we keep
our water clean in Las Vegas,
New Mexico, and loving and the
uranium belt. I'm sick and tired
of folks really not prioritizing
our natural resources and our
healthy clean water. I would
also like to see more creativity
in the body of the legislature
to figure out how we're going to
get out of the slavery of the
oil and gas industry and get
creative how we can create a
budget that supports our.
Thank you very much.
OK, we're gonna go online if you
would like to speak in support,
please raise your hand. First up
we have Larry Bane.
There we go. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman Committee and the
public that is there. Uh, I am
uh chairman of New Mexico Water,
and we are very much in favor of
the uh desalination for, for
brackish water in bill 137. In
the air landscape in New Mexico,
where water is scarce and it's
enduring challenge, the
development of brackish water
dece plants emerges as a viable
and necessary solution. This
Southwest state characterizes by
its semi-arid climate and
population growing.
Faces an increasing demand for
water resources, allowing the
establishment of brackish water
desal plants would not only
address where water shortage,
are these water shortage, but
also foster economic growth,
environmental sustainability,
and technological advancement
within the region.
Deal brackish water provides a
reliable and consistent water
supply, unlike surface and
groundwater sources, they are
highly susceptible, that are
highly susceptible to climate
variability and drought. DeShell
offers a stable alternative. The
technology, uh, involves
removing salts and other
impurities from brackish water,
such as those found in
underground ocquifers. By
tapping into these often
overlooked resources, New Mexico
could significantly reduce its
dependence on freshwater
resources and enhance its
resilience against drought, a
frequent and protracted
condition in
interstate. Economically, the
development of desal plants can
lead to job creation and
regional growth. The
construction operation and
maintenance facilities would
provide
Stable long-term employment
opportunities, thus invigorating
the local economy. Additionally,
ensuring a more reliable water
supply is very likely to attract
additional businesses,
particularly in the sectors that
require heavy water dependency,
such as agriculture,
manufacturing technology. The
presence of stable water
resources can act as a catalyst
for broader economic
diversification and invasion
across the state. Furthermore,
DCL can play a crucial role in
promoting environmental
sustainability. By using
brackish water, New Mexico can.
alleviate the pressure of its
overdrawn freshwater sources,
such as rivers and aquifers,
thus aiding to its recovery and
and ecological balance.
Moreover, modern D cell
technology. Thank you, Mr. Bain.
Next step we have Marla Schutz.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
Mary show it's registered
lobbyist for Albuquerque, Bernao
County Water Utility Authority.
We stand in strong support of
this legislation and would like
to echo the comments made by Mr.
D'Antonio. The water authority
supports this bill. We believe
that it makes available new
water supplies to open up
opportunities for industrial and
economic development in New
Mexico. Communities would
benefit from diversified water
resources supported by brackish
water, particularly in times of
drought. The strategic water
supply
is an important part of the
governor's forward thinking 50
year water action plan in
preparing New Mexico for a
hotter, drier future. Thank you.
Next up we have
Alier
On
to the community. This is Robert
Valley. I'm a consulting
engineer in Albuquerque, and I
have extensive experience with
feasibility studies of brackish
water resources in New Mexico,
including the s Santa Teresa
desalination project, which was
mentioned at the beginning of
this hearing.
Also designed New Mexico's first
brackish water treatment plant
for the city of Alamogordo and
have worked on
The Kay Bailey Hutchinson
expansion, as well as a desal
plan in Fabenss, Texas.
I want to voice my support for
this bill. Um, I have numerous
clients in New Mexico who are
looking at development of
brackish water sources to
supplement their water supply. I
would also like to voice my
support for including the
shallower aquifers in this bill.
Uh, there are numerous clients
in New Mexico, municipalities,
utilities who have water that's
above 1000 mg per liter, uh,
being able to treat this water
and bring it.
and improve the quality will
certainly help their customers,
improve the resiliency of their
water supply and allow for
better and more varied economic
opportunities for those
utilities. Thank you again for
the opportunity to speak this
morning.
OK. Thank you very much. So that
that's gonna end our, our public
comment, um.
Representative Herrera, do you
have anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee?
Yes, Mister Chair, I'd like to
say that um.
People think maybe 40 million is
too much for brackish water. I
just want to say that.
The little town of Cuba that's
in my district is is involved in
a desalinization project and the
total projected cost of uh.
This project for a small
community is going to be 37
million.
So I'm just saying.
75 million.
Wouldn't be too high of a price.
Uh, these are communities that
are running out of water in our
state, and they're doing
everything they can to keep
their communities alive.
And maybe I don't know if my
expert wants to say anything.
Sorry, it was breakfast burrito
logistics.
Mr. Chair, I do not want to come
in between the committee and
their breakfast burritos, um,
just one quick, uh, follow up
remark for me, um, for, for the
committee's benefit is, uh, I
wanna, I wanna address the cart
and horse concern that we've
heard a lot about as we've been
working on this, um, initiative
over the last year and, um, and
we've heard a lot about it in
the last couple of weeks during
this session, and, uh, want to
point out.
similar to what representative
Herrera just said about the
village of Cuba, um, that they
need the water now and they've
got a project um queued up, uh,
but in the broader context, we
hearing a lot of urging around
investing in mapping and
characterizing our aquifers.
Before we do a strategic water
supply and set aside funding to
advance brackish water
desalination projects. And the
reason why we're bringing you a
bill that seeks to invest in
both of those things
simultaneously is that we see
this is not a one state fits all
kind of project or program. We
have lots of different aquifers
across the state. Some of those
have been very heavily studied
and characterized
some of them have not where we
have done the study and there
are projects ready to get going.
Let's not wait another 10 to 12
years, which is the estimate
from the team at New Mexico Tech
that manages our aquifer
characterization program of how
long it's going to take to get
us to the point where every
aquifer in the state, deep or
shallow, fresh water or brackish
is fully characterized 12 years
from now is when we have the
whole state characterized.
We're asking you to take a walk
and chew gum at the same time
kind of approach and um move us
forward in brackish water
desalination projects that
communities need now, where the
science is available and and um
and rigorous to move those
projects forward while we
continue to study the rest of
the aquifers in the state, which
is absolutely critical. We fully
agree with, um, members of the
public.
And and the body on those
points. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK. Thank you very much. We'll
go to the committee and I think
the committee is aware of the
Breakfast readers show up, uh,
so if you want to, uh, step out
and grab one of those, please
do. Uh, so first up for the
committee is Representative
Sala.
Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the presentation.
Um, this is desperately needed,
I understand, and.
The changes, change my mind is
whether to support it. I, I will
support this.
But I have questions on, I just
keep getting texts on.
This will absolutely not have
any.
I, I produced water cannot be
used in this, right?
At all.
Mr. Chair Representative No.
On your flyer on the very last
part, it says the strategic
water supply will not, and it
says involves the state's buying
and selling treated water, so
people are confused because in
your definition you talk about
treated bracket water, but
treated water, you're talking
about produced water, right?
Turn to my expert on that.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman Vice Chair, the um
point there on the strategic
water supply will not involve
the state buying and selling
treated water in this context
with the committee sub for House
Bill 137. We're talking about
treated brackish water in that
in that sentence. Yeah,
thank you.
It will not
Um, the point there is that is
to clarify some of the confusion
that there's been around the.
strategic water supply
initiative that we're bringing
forward now versus a year ago
that this bill does not involve
the state buying water and then
selling it. If Brian treated
brackish water and then selling
it to somebody else. We're not
suggesting in this bill that the
state agencies would be in the
business of buying and selling
water. So that's the point of
that, um, particular bullet on
the fact sheet. Thank you, Madam
Mr. Chairman and and uh
Representative and.
Sponsor. Um, we do, um, we do
have money in the budget. I just
clarified it with the rep.
So there is money in the budget
for mapping for all of those.
For
Thank you.
OK. Next up we have
Representativeon. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, thank you,
experts, um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, experts, first,
uh, I wanna go through Verrera,
you have worked on Aquifer
mappings or that before you came
into the legislature. Is that
right, Mr. Chair Reson
and Representative, I
I actually got involved when I
came into the legislature, I, I
told everybody I thought I'd be
working on early education and
educational issues and 80% of
my.
80% of my constituent requests
for about water, so I've been
learning about water, so yes, 3
years ago, I, uh, started, I, I
um got the um Bureau of Minerals
and Technology at New Mexico
Tech, Stacy Timmons met her,
asked her if she would. I gave
her capital outlay to come up
and start doing aquifer mapping
in Ria Riva County because in
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy and the EBID, you
know where every drop of water
is in the north, we have no idea
what the aquifer.
s are. And so, uh, and then we
got grow money last year and I
gave her some more money to do
that over a 2 year period, so,
so what I did is I funded
aquifer mapping and Marriva
County, and so far we've done
about, I would say about, um,
I'd say about 10.
Areas, uh, and what you have to
do when you do that is you have
to ask volunteers from the
community if we can go in and go
through their wells to check
that aquifer, so, so that's kind
of how you do it. You go into a
community and you get um you get
a try to get a wide range of
wells in that community and and
volunteers will let you go in
and test that water, so we've
been doing that and what we
found is.
Our problems is, is really not,
um.
In a fracking or chemicals,
it's, it's really that we don't
have wastewater projects and and
uh wastewater systems in the
north and uh we're seeing a lot
of.
Um, wastewater contaminants
during those aquifers. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, thank you
for going through that. Uh, I
know that's come up a lot, both
in, in some of the
conversations, including here
today. I know for me, it's with
you, many others from Sam
Chatfield and others who have
been really strong leaders and
as Representative Saana pointed
out, um,
Uh, Director Ruth, I think
there's $19.7 million in HB 2
for aquifer mapping. Is that
your understanding roughly?
Mr. Chair, Representative Small,
um, I know there's 19 million in
non-recurring and I assume maybe
some additional funding that
you're pointing out is in the
recurring category which I'm not
quite as familiar with, Mr.
Chair, Directors, uh, I think
that my focus is the main on the
non-recurring the Mr. Chair,
thanks for allowing me to bring
that up because
That you've helped bring that
issue wider attention and now
we're taking what would be our
biggest funding step forward,
uh, and really asking the Bureau
of Geology, how much can you do?
And we want to support you at
your highest output rate. And so
that is very much happening
here, uh, Mr. Chair, you
mentioned uh wastewater.
Uh, there's $200 million right
now going into the water project
fund, um, that is uh eligible.
Or some of that will be eligible
for wastewater. Do you see that
also director representative, Mr
Tillo as helping um
Solve some of our water
challenges.
Mr. Chair and Represented a
small definitely.
I mean, for people who live in.
Albuquerque. I, I was looking at
the, the, the cards here and I
realized we have a lot of rural
representation here, so people
understand this issue, but for
those of you who live in
Albuquerque, you know, and just
using, you know, if you live in
a city and you turn on the tap,
you really don't appreciate
water or waste water issues, but
I can tell you in the north most
of our water systems are run by
volunteers. It's a mutual
domestic water system that
provides waters to most people
in the north and in my county
are most of them are.
by a mutual, uh, domestic water
system or a well.
And, and I can tell you, um,
they're run by volunteers we
haven't put enough money in
infrastructure, I think the uh
the plan that this legislature
passed to add waste water to the
um New Mexico um trust fund uh
for water is, is gonna be a
great improvement and that goes
into effect.
Uh, this year, this year when
those grants are made, so that's
gonna be a huge difference, uh,
I know in my community a little
community like Dixon has 4
different mutual water, domestic
water associations, so we're
trying to get them together and
we did get uh 50,000 capital
outlay to do a wastewater study
what it would mean to bring
everybody together and and do a
wastewater plant in a very rural
kind of mountainous.
Are crossed with the river
running through it. So, so those
are all issues that we contend
with when we're trying to put in
regionalization plans for the
North for water. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Vetta and experts in um that
again illustrates the work that,
that you have led in this area
and is paying off in our budget,
uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Just want I'll mention, uh, I
want to thank Representative
Abeta and many others, the 50
million for uh abandoned uranium
cleanup that, that is funded in
the budget. This is the first
time we're doing it at this
scale.
Thank them and so many of the
co-sponsors and uh uh ranking
member Montoya for his
leadership there.
I bring all these up, Mr. Chair,
because Director Roos, the um,
you noted sort of a 4:30 and 40
split.
4304 Broadwater priorities and
I've, you've allowed me, Mr.
Chair, to go through a few.
40 million is an HB 2 for the
strategic water supply. Is that
the number? Is that the split
you described?
Mr. Chair and chair small, yes.
Great. Um, so,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So important that we're working
closely on water, the rea,
you're one of our leaders there.
Thank you for taking this on.
The, I think.
The budget and the policy are
moving.
Just at the right time, I sort
of representative Duncan saying
when was the last time, best
time to plant a tree 20 years
ago, next best time now.
We're doing all of these things
now.
And it's in the nick of time,
there is far more to do, but uh
I would just want to really
thank you, Director Mr Trujillo
and first folks, Mr. Chair, last
allowance, Mr. Jio has worked at
the highest levels of federal
water policy serving the entire
west.
In this time of increasing
aridity, we're very fortunate
that you're working back home in
New Mexico. And of course,
Director Roos is
So
Proud to support this. Thanks
for your leadership. Far more to
do, far more to fund. Thank
goodness we have the budgets to
be able to do that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, represent a small
represent Montoya.
That was not me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative to be clear, it
wasn't me either. My phone
decided to do that. I apologize.
Um,
thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Representative.
Um
Just briefly, an experts, uh.
Let's, I'd like to briefly talk
about the technology for
brackish water or for the
cleanup of brackish water. This
is not a new technology.
Um, so we're not, this is not
like an experiment.
So, um, just briefly, uh,
The viability of a um of a pro
of projects cleaning up brackish
water or desalinating water.
Um, this is pretty much a
worldwide technology.
Um, so can you just briefly, uh
talk on that subject.
Thank you, um
Um
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
Representative, we're gonna call
somebody up who really deals
with this.
It's not on.
Good morning. There we go.
Thank you, members of the
committee and I was anxious to
answer this question because
here in New Mexico we have one
of the leading research
institutes on brackishwater
desalination in Alamogordo. It's
been, uh, it's a federal.
Program, it's the from operated
by the Bureau of Reclamation. It
was opened in 2007.
And so that facility here has
been working on trying to make
sure we have the best available
science for this project, trying
to make sure we have
Issues we're able to deal with
waste disposal, and it is
something that is going on all
around the country, and it's
great to be able to try to
encourage more of these projects
here in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, um,
Madam Chair Representative.
Um
The
Just out of chance, about a week
ago.
Uh, just on YouTube.
Uh, I, I popped up the
desalinization program in
Israel.
And how Israel went from being a
desert nation.
To now a lush nation, uh, the
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, what I, what I
saw on on there was not just for
drinking water because of the
growing population there, but uh
It was used
Uh, to enhance the ability for
farmers.
That it went way beyond. Now,
now our immediate concern is
drinking water.
Um, and, but going forward, as
if drought conditions persist,
uh, this is a good answer for
folks who rely on aseass who
were, who rely on ditches all
across the state of New Mexico
and especially as I, I have no
idea going forward how much
we're going to be fighting with
the state of Texas over water.
Um, but this is something that
uh
It was tremendous to see all of
the
Aquifers that uh that
In other places other than
Israel that do the exact same
thing. Obviously Israel has
The ocean that comes up next to
them, and they're able to to
Take from there. But other
countries.
To have taken that same
technology where they don't have
an ocean nearby and are
Uh, tapping those aquifers. So
this doesn't appear to be.
Um
Something that we're taking a
risk on. We know we can do this.
Is that correct, uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative?
Um, Mr. Mr. Chairman and
Representative, yes, I visited
Israel about 30 years ago. They
do not let a drop of water hit
the ground. I'm just gonna tell
you they're, they're one of the
major exporters of uh produce
and flowers now to Europe. Uh,
it's, it's phenomenal what they
were able to do and uh I think
the state can do the same thing.
Um, good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Montoya, I
appreciate you bringing such a
broad perspective to this, um,
and uh you're, you're correct
about the remarks that you just
made about Israel and how um
advanced their desalination
efforts are predominantly, um,
seawater desalination and what
we're talking about here is
sometimes referred to as inland
desalination and it's not just
happening in other countries
around the around the world,
it's happening in the United
States. There are multiple.
Inland desalination plants in
the United States operating
today, including the one in El
Paso that Deputy Trujillo spoke
about earlier, um, and also
Uh, the, um,
The, there are many plants that
are getting started, so we
heard, um, that were one of the
public commenters say we we're
actually pretty far behind in
New Mexico, um, so there are a
lot of inland desalination
plants operating today and there
are many more under development,
um, and in progress and we are
so fortunate to have, um, be
able to benefit from the
research and the technology
advancements that have been
happening and this bill would
give us an opportunity to bring
some of those techno.
log ies to work in our
communities, um, for a range of
water needs. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
representative and experts, um,
how substantially different is
Uh, the desalinization
technology versus just a water
treatment plant that
All of our cities have, which
treats our wastewater and then
puts it back into our drinking
water.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Montoya. The
short answer is it's very
similar to the process involves
a treatment called reverse
osmosis, that's the primary one
that's used. It involves large
filters and water is pushed
through them at a high pressure,
and the
Water is cleaned through that
process, and that's similar for
Different kinds of water
treatment facilities that that
exist.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative, um, and we
actually are training in our New
Mexico schools.
Or to to work in these water
treatment plants. Quite frankly,
if we do this across the state
in our rural communities, we can
produce our own.
Uh, people to run these
treatment facilities right here
in New Mexico. I know in in San
Juan, San Juan College, we have
a program uh for that, and we
are exporting uh the the people
that we have, uh, to, to, um,
Run those water treatment
facilities, we at the currently
we don't have enough water
treatment facilities to take all
of the uh folks that are
graduating.
Uh, we're not keeping them all
in New Mexico and we could do
that as well.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
last
Uh
Point.
Um, uh, yesterday I received a
Text from a constituent.
of yours who I know really well.
The owner of
Choco Grill in Cuba, I believe
Danny is the mayor.
Uh, so Danny, I obviously I see
him as I go home, I see him
probably more than you do.
Um, and they've had an issue
with their water supply.
And it's been, it's been very
bad in Cuba for the last 3
years.
And it's just gotten worse and
worse and worse.
Uh, they're, they're at that
community is desperate.
So I, I'm, I'm glad to hear the
question I was gonna have for
you today was, is this one of
your first projects? Sounds like
it probably is the very first
project, that's a shovel ready
project.
So, um, would you just like to
talk about Cuba just a little
bit.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Montoya, thank
you for that, yeah, Danny
Herrera is an amazing man, uh.
Takes on a huge job. I mean, it
is not easy to be a mayor of a
small village, you know, we, we
said we ought to get paid by the
telephone call we get, you know,
by the number of calls we get
and, uh, you know, you run out
of water in a small community.
It's, it's a desperate
situation, uh, this, this
project that he got going.
Uh, the total projected cost is
37 million, um, and that's why I
think we need even more money
and in this budget because these
small communities are really
desperate and they're gonna need
help.
You can't have, you can't live
if you don't in this today's
world, if you don't have water,
electricity and internet, and
those are the things we're
struggling with in rural New
Mexico, and we haven't put
enough infrastructure money into
into our budget, but I think
this is the beginning of, of
really beginning to think about
people's lives differently.
And how we're gonna support them
in a meaningful way.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Montoya, I want to add some
something that really sticks out
for me about the Cuba project.
Excuse me.
And that is that, as I
understand it from Mayor Herrera
and their materials, they are
looking at not just a
desalination project for a new
source of water, but they're
going to create a fertilizer
plant that creates new jobs in
their community, that creates
new economic, um, driver in
their community, and that is at
the heart of the strategic water
supply proposal is that we know
we need to diversify our economy
in New Mexico. We know
communities.
especially our rural communities
are looking for opportunities to
bring new jobs and new revenue,
and, and invigorate their
communities and every time you
bring in a new industry or a
business that requires water.
You have to then reckon with
where is that water going to
come from and looking at
desalination as an opportunity
where the science supports it
and where the research is there,
it can open up these kinds of
economic opportunities for our
local communities and that is
right at the core of what we're
trying to do with the strategic
water supply. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Chairs representative,
uh, just one last thing, we had
a bit of a discussion yesterday
about
Um, maybe making a couple little
changes, uh.
To uh to the bill to take it
from
Uh, maybe make it a little
slightly more positive in the.
In the language, have you
thought any more about that, Mr.
Chair Representative?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, I did, I, I
was hoping that maybe we could
get it through this committee
and by the time we get it to the
floor, look at those changes if
that would be OK with you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and and and
Representative, I don't want
that to hold it up here.
But I would like to to work with
you on that. It's
Really just a very simple
change. And so just, just for
the sake of the committee, so
they know what.
Potentially working on.
And that is, uh, if everybody
can look at the um
Committee sub
On line 15.
Actually starting on line 14,
Mr. Chair, um, it states that uh
on, on the very first page, page
one.
On the title.
And this beginning on line 14,
um, it states and award grants
for projects involving brackish
water that reduced the state's
reliance on fresh water.
Resources, we looking to change
that to be
Um, an award grants for projects
involving brackish water that
enhance.
The state's freshwater
resources.
Just uh
Um, Mr. Chair, and, and members
of the committee, um,
Actually that was brought to, to
me, uh, from folks who are
concerned potentially about
water rights and just think that
would take away any concern that
they might have that in the
future, what we're talking about
uh reducing.
Uh, reliance on fresh water.
Um, just take it and make it
positive and take that concern
away from folks who might be
concerned about their water
rights. Um, also, um, um, Mr.
Chair Representative found that
on page 2, we would probably
need to make a similar change
there at the very end on page uh
line 25. It's the same exact
change on page 2 in the top of
page 3. So, but I do not want to
stop this here. Uh, I don't
wanna.
I I they've done, Mr. Chair
Representative, major changes
which have taken me to a point
where I can, I believe I can
fully support this because I, I
think Mr. Chair and, and
Representative before I think we
were putting together two
things.
That didn't really fit together.
And I think this is really more
specific to desalinization.
And the other, which
I heard, and I was concerned
with.
Did not want to talk about
produced water and then
potentially getting it to the
point where it would be
introduced to the to the
drinking water supply. So I,
I'm, I'm happy that that was
separated out.
But I think this is very, very
important, and I, and I support
it, Mr. Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative and experts, um.
Representative, thank you for
your leadership on this, and
thank you for, for bringing this
forward. Um,
Mr. Chair representative and
experts I, I like, I didn't like
the title of the strategic Water
Supply Act. Sometimes things are
called strategic, but they're
really not, but this is, it's
got scope, it's got scale. Um, I
think it's, it's well thought
out, um, I just have a couple of
questions. Um,
Represented Montoya, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, Representative experts,
um.
Talked about the state of the
technology.
And um
That was my recollection too
that this is a fairly well
established developed technology
and so it's not that um.
That the technology doesn't
exist, it does exist. It's just
making it large scale in New
Mexico that we do.
Uh, and, uh, and we need to make
it inexpensive as possible. You
agree with that?
Yes
Um, the next, um,
Yeah, that's good, that's good
how this is gonna go.
No, if you want more, we can
give you more.
I don't want to be between.
This committee and their
burritos either. So, um, the
next thing that I recall, and
it's been some time since I've
looked at this, but there were
really a few leaders in this, in
this type of research, um,
Arizona State had a program,
but, um, New Mexico Tech and New
Mexico State, uh, have, have
really far exceeded that if I
recall.
I'm not gonna ask you just a
couple of, uh, would you agree
with that?
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
also note that um
We have, uh, in section 6, I'm
looking on page 7.
Um, I don't have any real
questions about a
Um, I do about the, um, the
money going to New Mexico Tech.
And I look, I'm looking at lines
15 and 16 for Oxford monitoring
and improved groundwater
characterization.
Um, I note in your flyer, Mr.
Chair and representative and
experts that
There are about 60 shallow
wells, less than 2500 ft for
every one deep well.
So I assume that the charge to
New Mexico Tech would probably
be, um, basically what I would
call geologic mapping along
with, with um some information
regarding the water quality.
materials that may contain is
that a fair assumption?
take them
Yeah, um
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Murphy,
um, the, um, New Mexico Tech uh
Bureau of Geology and Mineral
Resources is houses there.
They have a um existing program,
it's called Aquifer monitoring
and mapping program. It's where
they are characterizing the
aquifers of the state and what
would be involved, they would,
they would use this
appropriation to supersize the
program that they have been
running on a shoestring budget.
It will get us not very far in a
very long period of time if we
leave them where they've been.
So this money is going to get
infused into their existing
structures and the
characterization process
involves, and I am not.
a technical expert on this, um,
so, um, with that caveat, um,
but I've spent a lot of time
talking with them about their
program, um, the
characterization process
involves drilling new wells or
utilizing existing laws, um,
gathering, um, considerable
amounts of data.
About not just how the
subsurface looks and works, um,
different layers, how they
interact with each other. Um,
this is how we understand
whether there would be
subsidence issues uh for if you
were pumping at certain levels,
they're gathering incredible
amounts of data about what is in
that water, what's the quality
and um character of the water
that's there and does it um vary
from one well to the next well,
and if so, how? And all of that
data comes together over a
period.
period of time to create what is
in plain language terms, a map
of that particular aquifer that
helps us understand its shape,
its size, its characteristics,
and the characteristics of the
water they're in.
Um, Mr. Chair,
if I could just add a personal
standpoint, um, they, they were
doing the aquifer mapping in
Dixon and in Boo of my area and
um.
And Stacy Timmons, who heads up
this, uh, program, called me
and, uh, she said, you know,
It's interesting, you all go
through it has some very old
water in it.
And I said really? She said,
well, you know, that's how water
is your head surface water that
goes then you have to, I said,
oh, I know what that is because
one year the Ambudo River, I
think about 5 years ago, had
gone down. It was this wide you
could.
You know, and I went out and I
stepped in the water and it was
ice cold and it was the middle
of August, and I realized it
wasn't surface water. It had to
be from the underground springs
that were up, you know, I know
where they are up in the uh just
about 3 miles up. There's a lot
of underground springs that come
up and feed that river too, and
I said, oh Susy, I know what
that is, yeah, because I, I that
water was ice cold in the middle
of August and we didn't have any
water, and it was, and I said,
so that's, that's kind of what
they do, that's.
part of it and that's just from
a non-technical perspective.
But that's how they examine the
water and, and figure out what
kind of waters you have, what
kind of waters are coming into
that system.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, the
The character, so
The goal, I would think.
Let me, let me do it this way,
um.
With respect to the cart and
horse question.
Representatives
There are the the process that
you've just described is that
there is, there are a number of
reservoirs that we know that
exist in.
They
That are, that are as
representative Montoy said or
shovel ready right.
What you're talking about is is
is expanding that database,
proving that database so that we
are aware of all of these.
Probably with the focus on, on
shallower water.
Being a priority because, A,
it's cheaper to access.
it's, you don't have to lift it
as far, so it's cheaper to get
it to the surface and so forth.
And so, it sounds like that's
where at least some priority
would be, would be, uh,
be put and then um with respect
to the.
Uh, New Mexico State activities.
What I primarily called Mr.
Chairman and Representative is
that they were really doing a
lot of research on, on the
processing side. What you do
with it once you get it to the
surface, whether you filter it,
whether you put it through a
cavitation process, a chemical
process ever, but the point does
remain is the technology that is
very efficient already exists
doesn't mean that there might
not be another technology that
can make it even cheaper and
better. Is that a fair
assumption?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Murphy, that's absolutely
correct. And I would make a
comment that that this committee
and the interim committee have
done a great job of bringing
those experts in directly and it
we have incredible researchers
at New Mexico State, New Mexico
Tech. They have colleagues in
other states and in the federal
agencies, and we're always
trying to improve.
One additional point I would
make is some of these projects
may not be large and
complicated. Some of them we may
be able to implement pretty
quickly in communities where,
where we can do some good right
now.
Mr. Chairman, uh, representative
experts, thank you for the
testimony and obviously support
this.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Esimal chairman and.
Thank you, Representative, and
your witnesses.
Uh, for your presentations, even
though I did come in a little
late.
Um
You know, initially I was
opposed to this legislation.
Based on the produced water.
concept, uh
But yesterday you presented the
sub.
and I, I was sold on it.
And uh
But I'll, I'll get into some
tuki.
Uh, elements.
And, and I want you to kind of.
Uh, Mr. Chair, kind of take me
through the process.
Um
Say that we have.
Rural community
Uh, Mr. Chair, and I'll make
reference.
To the community.
Uh, northeast Aua.
Uh, and I'm not saying that this
exists, but I'm using those
communities as an example.
Um
And those would be the
communities, Mr. Chair of Gaina.
Coyote.
Which are within the San
Joaquinda Rio Chama land grant.
And uh in this real communities,
Mr. Chair, um, well we have land
grants.
Uh, the leadership of the land
grant is also leadership of the
mutual domestic.
And also the leadership of the
land grant is the leadership of
the Asea commission.
You know, so it's kind of
interwoven.
In terms of the leadership
elements in these rural
communities.
But say there is an issue in
that little pocket.
At Little Valley
With uh wells.
Picking up contaminants.
And I wrote familiar with this
issue because we had this in the
Jarisco Valley.
Uh, back in the 60s and 70s, but
we remedied that.
through the help of the state
legislature.
By pumping in dedicated capital
outlay money.
Or uh
Uh, water resources.
Um, potable water.
Systems, many coming from.
the city of Albuquerque.
Which is now
Our department is now a
combination of both city and
county.
the Albuquerque Berlingo County
Water Utility Authority.
Let's say we're picking up these
contaminants.
Um
Uh
The um
The the well water.
Uh, that are showing up in the
well water.
Uh
And I know what these
contaminants arm which are.
Uh,
When we have contaminants.
From
In the well
Water, especially from.
A low water tables.
we see Jayosis.
We had that across the board and
therisco Valley.
The diocese is an intestinal.
disease.
Like a bacteria.
It causes cramping in the
intestines, causes diarrhea.
Um, another real common.
Uh
Illness
Coming from contamination of
septic.
Thanks
That show up in our water and
our water wells is hepatitis.
The clinical one.
That you can get from eating
food or from water.
Not the hepatitis that comes
from.
Using an infected needle from
the substance user.
And uh
And that has devastating
effects.
And we had met Mr. Chair.
Hepatitis outbreaks and
Bleary.
You know, um
Uh, when we were not on the
portable system.
Um, another one.
damaging is nitrates.
And uh nitrates are found in
feces.
They found in uh animal blood.
And animal manure.
You know that in these rural
areas.
Um
Uh, we do a lot of slaughtering.
Of animals to kind of feed our
families.
Or
Mr. Cha, to kind of
Stock up the freezer for the
winter time.
And uh
So this blood and the manure
find their way into the.
Why him
And uh
Nitrates are real damaging, Mr.
Chair, because
We were singing in arisco Valley
was.
The blue baby syndrome, which
is.
A higher, higher concentration
of nitrates, Mister Chair.
Uh, in the water.
Uh, chokes off.
And and if individuals are
drinking it.
It chokes off hydrogen.
it chokes off oxygen.
The brain.
So what we were seeing, Mister
Chair, was infants.
Bernie blue
Because water was used for their
bottles.
For the milk bottles, uh.
Um
And um,
Brother
Yeah
Uh, forms of.
Hydrating the child and
whatever.
And uh and we had a couple of
deaths.
Because of that.
And that is alarming.
Because it's all based on.
Contaminant water.
contaminated water.
So if we have this kind of.
Scenario in these villages.
What would be the steps of
correcting that.
Based on the legislation before.
Us
Mr. Cha, in terms of
The first step
The second step
And then the 3rd step.
The 3rd step being
We have a potable water system.
That's, that's now.
Uh, with a clean water.
component
As now er seen.
He
Households that were once.
On a, on a, on a whale.
And in particular on on well
water.
The septic is another another
campaign.
But we're talking about clean
water here.
Non-contaminated.
eliminating these three elements
that I mentioned.
The nitrates
insiders.
Jardiocese.
So how would a project look
like?
In terms of bringing clean
potable water.
To these residents in the.
communities
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Rep uh, Garcia. I'm, I'm,
I'll take the first stab at it
and then I'll turn it over to uh
to Rebecca, um.
I worked very closely, these are
kind of um projects that are out
of the range of capital outlay.
I'm going to tell you that. It
can be very, very expensive.
Another, another huge issue in
the north is the level of
arsenic in our, in our waters,
our deep waters or our drinking
water, uh, they have to really
work hard to control that too,
but I can tell you that.
I worked very closely with the
land grants, as you know, uh,
no, no, no most of my language.
Um
Leaders, uh, and what I wanna
say is I, I did extensive town
hall meetings and workshops
where I told people how to get
to the water ress board because
sometimes this involves millions
of dollars to rectify and we're
not gonna take care of it, um,
through a capital outlay. It's,
it's just too small, so I felt
very successful last year we got
30 million out of out of 200
million in the water trustboard
grants because we went in, we
taught people how to write those
grants.
We got money from the cogs to
help them write those grants and
you know, to get 30 million out
of 200 million in Rio Reba
County to do extensive water
infrastructure plans, uh, was,
was really, I thought as a good
victory. I, I was very proud of
our community, however, I'm
gonna let Rebecca take the other
part of that question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Garcia. Um, I,
I'll try to clarify a few things
about what this bill would do.
For some of the situations that
you articulated, that is, I
think, as I heard it, the crux
of your question, um,
The first of all,
To the extent that there is a
brackish water.
supply underground in the
community like the ones that you
described.
And this bill could create
opportunities for the local
entities to partner with um
technology experts and um
underground aquifer
characterization experts to
evaluate whether or not the
brackish water that's available
in near that location would be
able to be treated in a way that
supplements the drinking water
supply for that local community
or.
Otherwise provides a new source
of treated water for other
community needs, um, that may
not be drinking water or human
consumption, um, brackish water
up up the applicability of
treated brackish water and what
the best uses for that treated
water will be is going to vary
community to community, um, and,
uh, and part of the reason why I
started with the the um what if
of if there is a BRCA.
water source near our community
like you described is that it's
expensive to move water long
distances and so this bill to
advance brackish water
desalination projects is not the
panacea. It is not going to be
the answer to every community's
water problems, um, because it's
very site specific.
Both in terms of what brackish
water resources are available,
um, how much we understand those
water resources, the
characterization of those, the,
um, extent of the supply, um, so
that would be a a site specific
analysis. The other thing that I
want to bring up that's in this
bill that would apply for any
project that would um benefit
from funding from the strategic
water supply is that every one
of our existing state regulatory
protections around.
public health and environmental
protection for our drinking
water supply to treat and
protect water quality of our
groundwater and surface water
resources to effectively manage
solid waste and hazardous waste.
We have all of these laws.
Programs for environmental
protection and public health
protection in the state.
All of those provisions would
apply to these projects, um, and
so you would have any brackish
water project, it's funded
through the strategic water
supply subject to whatever
permits are applicable to that
project, a groundwater discharge
permit to protect water
supplies, treatment, um,
requirements, um, the office of
the data engineer, water, uh,
rights and appropriation permits
would all apply as well as
waste.
Uh, disposal permits for
whatever is left over at the end
of a treatment process. So the
contaminants that you were
concerned about in your
question, um, Representative
Garcia and and Mr. Chair are at
the core of what we're trying to
do in terms of creating water
security for our communities so
that there's safe water, clean
water, and an abundant supply
for the needs of every. Thank
you for that, Mr. Chair and and.
Thank you. What was your, your
name?
Mr. Chair Representative, my
name's Rebecca Rus.
Thank you, Rebecca, for that.
Uh, it kind of gives me a
A broader perspective, kind of
holistic perspective.
In terms of how this legislation
is applied.
Um, in particular to the
example, Mr. Chair, that I
shared with you.
My, my second, uh,
Kind of uh
Concept
Uh
Not necessarily a question, but
Consent, Mister Chair.
I
The use of brackish water.
Um
For the development of hydrogen.
And uh
You know, I've been sold on a
hydrogen fuel cell.
When I first came on board in
1998.
And I
I did the first
Hydrogen fuel cell project.
say property and
piece of legislation in 2000.
And uh
What it was
In terms of the concept.
I I had this expert.
And
He had, he had the the example.
Of the process
In the in the shoe box.
Mr. Chair, and uh
So in that shoe box.
He had a little solar photo
cell.
He had a like a
A distillery for lack of a
better word.
He had like a little distillery.
With water
And like a tube going down the
middle.
And what that did
had separated the hydrogen from
the oxygen.
And water.
And then it moved that hydrogen.
Into a fuel cell.
And then that fuel cell.
Then was connected to a little
motor.
And it ran the motor.
And then that motor produced ran
that electricity to a light
bulb.
And we, we lit up the light
bomb, you know, and, uh, so we
did a similar
Project at a state forestry.
Restov
Bathroom stop.
Uh
Uh, and, and to kind of power
the lighting.
In that
In that rest stop, Mister Chair.
And uh
And you know, Mr. Chair, that
kind of reminded me.
Of how the Xerox.
Machine
came about
Um
Mr. Chair, there was, I, I don't
know the inventor.
But uh
This guy that invented the Xerox
machine.
Would have this.
Contraption in the shoe box.
And you go to these corporations
and he said, I've got this idea.
And in that he had
glass,
Just a piece of glass.
He had a light bulb.
He had black powder.
And he had a piece of paper and
so, you know, he went to, I
don't know how many
corporations, Mr. Chair, and
finally.
It was Xerox.
The kind of body in to his idea,
and that's how we have the Xerox
machine. Well the same thing
with this.
The concept that we are
pursuing.
Uh, back in 2000.
So
What is
The potential and how would that
evolve, Mister Chair.
Of utilizing.
Brackish water.
To create
And of a hydrogen
infrastructure.
Technology base.
know for uses.
that are
on, on, uh
Undefined yet
You know, I think there is
potential.
In that use of.
Wreckish water
For the development.
Of hydrogen based.
Initiatives
And I know, Mr. Chair, that this
was an issue with some of the
advocates.
Uh
Developing hydrogen by using
clean water.
was just not feasible. I agree.
Now I always pushed that's an
alternative would be developing
hydrogen off of brackish water,
even back in 2000.
So Rebecca.
Can you reflect on that in terms
of.
Um
The use of brackish water in the
development of a hydrogen
infrastructure.
Or initiatives that are.
Non pollutant, noncontamin.
Um,
the, I, I, I invite you to
reflect on that. I would ask
that you do so concisely.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Happy to
do that. And I will refer to the
fact sheet that um I hope that
members have, um, the
representative Sanana mentioned
earlier, um, two things, um, to
point out really quickly on
here. One is that at the heart
of the strategic water supply
initiative is the goal of um
creating alternative sources of
water to offset demand on fresh
water for things like clean
energy production, including but
not limited to hydro.
So your question Representative
Garcia gets to the heart of um
one of the really key drivers
for the strategic water supply.
The other thing I want to point
out is at the end of the fact
sheet on the 3rd page, there's a
table, um, that has examples of
industry water needs and green
hydrogen production is on there,
estimated, um, gallons of water
needed per day is 100,000 to
700,000. Obviously that depends
on the scale of the green
hydrogen production facility.
And the water quality that they
would need is higher than
potable.
So with the bill in front of you
just in brief terms what.
Um, we would be facilitating
through enacting House Bill 137
is a source of funding and a
sort of contracts process for
the Office of State Engineer or
the New Mexico Environment
Department to enter into
contracts with companies that
have a, um, fully fleshed out
plan to treat brackish water to
standards that meet the needs of
a green hydrogen production
facility customer, and we're
lining up.
The source of the water with the
treatment of the water to the
specific needs of, in your
example, that green hydrogen
production facility and in doing
so, allowing that clean energy
to come into the market without
having used a drop of our
drinking water supply. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that.
Thank you. Thank you, Rebecca.
OK. Any further questions from
the committee before I ask?
Some of my own? OK.
Um
First off, um, I appreciate the
work that's been done on this.
Um, it's
Obviously gone through
substantial changes from as
From what was initially
announced and conceived.
Um
I, I would say, um,
Representative Marrera, um, the
The issues you described in your
opening.
Um, I don't think this addresses
this.
I don't think this fixes climate
change.
Um, I don't think this really
fixes scarcity.
Um, it certainly
This to me is, is a potential
for
Um
Limited, isolated use.
Um, it's, it's not gonna replace
Uh, our irrigation water is
certainly not gonna replace
water that's our rivers.
Um, it's, you know, it.
I think there's a really
significant potential for
communities like Cuba and Las
Vegas.
That have acute
Shortages in
Have this need.
Um, but we just.
This water is going to be
expensive.
Uh, and it's not going to be
everywhere. We need water to be.
So I don't want people to think
that.
Because we can treat fresh
water.
We don't also need to address.
I change.
Um, so that was, that's my first
comment.
Uh, I do have some specific
questions on the bill.
Um, so representative um your
your experts.
Page 2 of the bill, page 2 line
15, we talked about meeting
applicable standards.
Uh, are those standards in
place?
15 9 15.
Mr. Chair.
Yes, there are existing water
quality standards established
under the Water Quality Act
framework through a body of um
regulations adopted through the
water quality control
commission, um.
for the purposes of, so to 22
part answer, sorry, Mr. Chair.
um, those standards are in place
to protect groundwater resources
and surface water from
contamination, so those
standards apply to how treated
brackish water would be handled,
would be stored, um, and any
disposal of um water generated
through the treatment process
would be handled under those
water quality control.
commission standards through the
Water Quality Act purview,
separately under the federal
Safe Drinking Water Act and the
New Mexico Environmental
Improvement Act, we have a
potable water standards and
regulatory framework that is in
place and would apply in the
event that any of the treated
brackish water projects, uh,
funded or supported through the
strategic water supply are
achieving potable water for
potable purposes, all of our
state drinking water.
standards would apply, and those
are in place. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
And are there
Uh, are there different
standards? I would assume
different standards for drinking
water as opposed to other uses,
are those standards for other
uses in place.
you might have just answered
that, but just briefly.
Mr. Chaos
Um
Representative, uh, and Mr.
The, the way I see this broken
down is there's a category for
grants and category for
contracts. Um, can you explain
to me what
What would the contracts look
like? What do you contracting
for?
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that question. Um, the contracts
are envisioned to serve the
purpose of supporting uh a
brackish water treatment project
that is more mature, uh, has
maybe incurred some capital
expenses to build a treatment
plant and uh the contract
process would.
You know, 11 example of how it
may play out is there's two
agencies authorized in the bill
to enter into contracts under
the strategic water supply, the
Environment Department and the
Office of the State Engineer.
Let's say in this case, it's the
Environment department, um, they
have an interest in um exploring
use of the strategic water
supply to align treated brackish
water with certain end users
that help achieve our policy
goals, regulatory framework, um,
our climate change goals, etc.
so they may.
issue an RFP to say we're
looking for a brackish water
treatment company in partnership
with certain types of customers
for that treated water and those
entities would, would, if, if
they're interested, submit a
proposal under that request for
proposals and ultimately a
contract that comes out of that
could entail, um, the terms of
the contract would lay out.
Exactly who the players are and
both in terms of the water
source and the water treatment
and the um intended customers,
the contract language in the
bill requires that the
Environment department would
evaluate how the project as a
whole and those customers align
with state, tribal, or local
economic development goals, they
would be ensuring that the
project um helps to preserve
freshwater resources. They would
be evaluating the greenhouse gas
emission components of
that project and requiring that
company that would enter into
the contract to develop a
community benefit plan that
requires engagement with, with
local community members on
exactly the project.
And then the um funding that is
set aside in the strategic water
supply fund could play into a
contract like that as a set, uh,
negotiated and contracted price
per barrel of treated brackish
water that the contractor would
benefit from as the state
benefits from this alternative
water source, um, and so
essentially at the heart of it,
you've got a contract that helps
make the treated brackish water.
Cost competitive for specific
end users that meet those other
parameters in in the bill.
OK, so typically a contract.
The deceit errors into state
pays money.
The state received something in
return.
What does the state receive in
return?
What the state receives in
return is um uh saving
freshwater resources well, um,
providing a new or alternative
water resources to projects that
align with state goals, um, it
would also allow for the
opportunity that the um the
tribal goals if it's a project
that involves tribes or tribal
resources, um, those would be
met and furthered through the
course of the project and
otherwise,
that we are sort of advancing
the economic development goals
of the state and local entities
and pursuing the contract.
So I, I apologize for belaboring
this, but to me, uh, advancing
state goals sounds like
something you would achieve with
a grant.
Uh, typically, in the contract,
you would
He pays money, we would receive
services or um water.
And so I'm still trying to
understand how the contracts
with private entities work.
Mr. Chair, yes, sorry, sorry for
not being clear on on that point
earlier, um, the contract would
uh.
Entail
And in order for a contract to
be able to be executed under the
strategic water supply, the
state agency, either the
Environment Department or the
Office of the State Engineer
would be identifying benefits to
the state that are furthered
through execution of that
contract. So benefits for the
public welfare benefits for
preservation of water supplies
for the state more broadly,
depending on the project or
likely at the local level.
benefited benefits back to the
public and to the state by
enhancing public welfare and um
addressing water shortages and
water security needs.
OK, you know what I'm talking
about they like deliverables in
your contract and that still
sounds.
Um, to me, like a
Like what you would get from a
grant.
Mr. Chairman, I think what we're
trying to do is provide options,
so we do have a grant option in
some circumstances, it may be.
Uh
appropriate to obtain the water
treatment services through a
contract arrangement, but the
ultimate beneficiary would be a
community that needs those needs
that treated water for their
particular use. So I think to
your, your question, it would be
contracting for the treatment
services through this um
Arrangement that involves a
treatment company and an
ultimate community that needs
the product.
OK. Um, it, it
There's a lot of nuance here and
it sort of depends on how the
contract is written, um, the
issue goes to whether or not the
state is buying and selling
water. Um, I've heard
consistently there were not.
Um
You know, that certainly is one
way a contract could work.
Um
The, the other issue is
You know, to what extent are we?
Um, supporting public entities
versus private entities.
I
I still have concerns about
that, but let me move on.
Um
Page 3, line 5.
Uh, permit
environment or office of stage
shall notify the state
Investment council.
About new contracts or grants,
and I'm just, I'm familiar with
that process. Why is the state
Investment council
What what's their role in this?
Mr. Chair, thank you for that
question. Um, this was suggested
to us by, um, uh, one of your
colleagues in the house as a way
for us to connect the investment
in, uh, brackish water treatment
technology and projects to other
investments the state is making
through the state Investment
council, and while, um, this
isn't my area of expertise, uh,
my understanding, uh, from
working with our economic
development team, um, and the
representative who brought this
suggestion to us.
Is that the state Investment
council has a number of um.
Of funds that it supports to
create technology innovation and
startups in New Mexico, so that
we're taking some of our
investment resources managed by
the State Investment council and
using them to infuse um uh
opportunity into the private
sector for tech development and
startups. What this does is
ensures that those companies
that are already getting the
benefit of some state investment
dollars. Hear about the
opportunity for these strategic
water supply grant and grants
and contracts so that they don't
maybe miss out on the chance to
partner up with a local, a
county or a municipality, a
university, and some, um,
customers like in the clean
energy or manufacturing space
who are wanting to use water,
this brings um full circle the
opportunity to just connect the
dots between those separate but
potentially related investments
in tech development.
in New Mexico.
And
At what point are there um
opportunities for public input
involved in that process.
And what are those
opportunities?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
for one thing, uh, not general
public input by any stretch, but
tribal consultation is required,
um.
Already by the state and tribal
collaboration Act, but we have
reinforced it that before a, um,
and this is at the bottom of
page.
subparagraph F.
It provides that, um, when
preparing a request for
proposals or a grant
solicitation. So before either
of these agencies has cast the
net to um identify potential
projects the agency would need
to do so in accordance, prepare
that, that um solicitation in
accordance with the state and
tribal Collaboration Act and
also consult with the Secretary
of Economic Development, um, I
know you just asked about public
input, uh, and, uh, on that
piece there.
would be an opportunity at the
um.
If a contract is issued, this is
not applicable to the grants
process, but specifically to the
contracts process, there's a
requirement for a community
benefit plan and what this does
is it requires the agency
administering one of those
contracts to put the onus on
their partners on the other side
of the contract to engage
effectively with the community
and develop a community benefit
plan about what exactly the
project entails, what water
treated how with what
considerations and for what end
uses.
there would be public
involvement in that process. Um,
there's
Beyond that, nothing, uh,
specific about public
involvement required before a
grant solicitation is issued,
um, but our agencies would be
engaging with um local partners
and entities, they'd be engaging
with the regional water security
planning process and those
partners and players, uh, and
evaluating what the needs are as
well as um engaging with the
economic development community
and network across the state as
to what the needs are, um.
of projects that are possibly
looking to come into New Mexico
that need water, so there would
be a lot of engagement that
would go in to um developing
either a request for proposals
or a grant solicitation.
OK I think the uh
Uh, if you look at page 5 line
7, it says, and any
opportunities for public input,
um, I, I think the
The opportunities for public
input are uh
vague and
Um
To see big
I mean, there's, there's not a
clear public role in this
process. There's, I mean, I, I
don't know that there's a public
role in issuing or evaluating or
boarding contracts pursuant to
an RFP.
I, I don't recall and Miss
Trugo, did you have something
that?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
just gonna offer an example of
where there might be an
opportunity for public input in
the context of this uh
paragraph, and let's just say
hypothetically that
Town ABC is one of the parties
to this contract, they would be
holding a um
Commission meeting to approve
the contract. That's an example
of the public input opportunity
that would be associated with
this program.
So what, as I as I interpret
this paragraph, either the
Department of the Environment or
the state engineer office, which
everyone is sponsoring the the
contract, we would have an
obligation to
Notify the state investment
council about this public
meeting for the city council
that was gonna be happening in
connection with this proposed
program.
OK, I mean, I think there's
some, some public input in the
existing, you know, Open
Meetings Act sort of structure
that we apply to local
government, um,
You know, tying the open
meetings out to.
No find the state Investment
council seems
Um
Again, all day
Um
On page.
Um, 7.
The $4 million for NMSU.
Um
It was stated by members of the
audience and by Representative
Herrera.
That that is a study of produced
water. So, um,
So how are we funding a study of
produced water through the uh
The bill that doesn't address
produced water.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, to clarify,
um, what, what was stated
earlier that New Mexico State
University is involved
extensively in brackish water
treatment and research. They're
also involved extensively in
produce water treatment
research, um, the language of
the appropriation is intended to
cover both to provide additional
resources to New Mexico State
University to um support.
Uh, technology associated with
potential projects for strategic
water supply program contractor
grant since the scope of the
strategic water supply is now
limited to brackish water
projects that intersection as I
see it and understand it and
intend uh our team intends it
would be focused on brackish
water research that supports
strategic water supply projects
in the scope of the current bill
before you.
No, can I jump in with an
example?
Mr. Chairman, I, when preparing
for this hearing, I
Hold up a
Uh, presentation that New Mexico
State made to the science
technology and
telecommunications Committee in
2023 regarding brackish water
desalination efforts that
they're working on. And so I
think this would be very
complimentary to what some of
the programs that they've been
advancing previously.
OK, my, my concern here is
My understanding is there's
existing research regarding the
use of produced water, we're
essentially funding the existing
research.
But we're sort of kind of
saying, well, now you should
focus on brackish water, and I
know, um, you know, in our
conversations about this bill,
um, you still see the potential
for the strategic water program
being expanded in the future.
My concern would be the idea
that the language says potential
projects.
Could be rationalized to include
Produce water
Because potentially point in the
future.
That could be included under
this, this program.
Um
It's concerned about the
language and the funding, and I
Uh, suspect we need to look at
the language in the budget, uh,
because I suspect that's where
this funding ends up, but
Um, that would be a concern.
Uh, let me ask you some
questions about the the water
rates. My understanding is that
water rights below 2500 ft of
water, excuse me, below 2500 ft
is.
Not subject to appropriation.
Is that correct? Like can you
perfect a water right for that
kind of deep water.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chairman. The short answer is
no, there's a separate statutory
process associated with water
that is
Located below 2500 ft in the
ground.
And so I asked my question in
negative, is it?
Can you perfect water rights
below 2500 acre feet, maybe just
to state it clearly. You cannot,
OK.
So
If, if you had a
Um
Uh, treatment facility that was
drawing deep water.
Um
And it was successful.
How does the uh operator, owner
operator of that treatment
facility protect their
investment.
The issue being if they can't
perfect the water right.
Could they be impaired by
another treatment facility,
tapping into the same aquifer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There
is a process for evaluation of
impairment impacts associated
with.
New development, even in those
deep.
Aquifers. And so the state
there's a requirement to provide
notice and notice of intent to
Produce the new water, and if
In connection with any new
development, there's an
evaluation that takes place on
impacts to existing
Depletions regardless of their
source. So it's at existing
groundwater depletions or
existing surface water.
But typically impairment is
impairment of the water rate.
And
You can't have a water right
that deep.
So, would there still be that
process if you're not impairing
a water right, you're just
potentially impacting a
competing use.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes.
OK. Um,
You know, at the, at the end of
the day, like, you know, I, I'm,
I have.
Concerns and doubts about the
cost of treating the water, the
cost of raising the water, I
think there was a really good
comment made about um to the
extent this happens, it, you
know, it should be powered
through renewable energy.
Um
But at the end of the day, we're
still talking about groundwater.
Um, and you know, we have
fairly effectively mined our a
lot of our existing groundwater,
at least the the groundwater
that's fresh and easy to reach.
And at some point, you know,
mining brackish water could be a
problem that it's not uh it's
not inexhaustible resource. I
don't know.
Um
You know, the nature of the
aquifer, you know how deep it
goes, like, is there?
You just keep going deeper and
finding more water.
You know, I mean, that presents
its own challenges.
Um
I think um.
2 more comments. One,
Um
I shared, shared this with you
before. I still think we're sort
of jumping ahead of ourselves.
Um, that this is going to be
expensive water.
And I think uh I don't know the
situation in Cuba. Uh, I, I've,
you know, lost the community of
Las Vegas has had problems for,
for a long time.
Um, so, you know, I, I
definitely could see
A rule for this, an important
role for this in places like
that.
But for the most part,
It
My belief that we would still
get more bang for our bucks
spending $40 million on
conservation.
And regional planning and
infrastructure.
Um, and, um, uh, Mr. Rus, you,
you gave me a, a breakdown of
money that's in the budget and
Uh, German small stepped out,
uh, but there is a lot of money
for other uses, which, which I
think is uh appropriate and
warranted.
Um
So maybe this is just another
approach, but
Um, I, I think this is gonna be
expensive and uh you know,
Representative Herrera's
statement that the project in
Cuba is gonna be $37 million.
Uh, I think it's a testament of
how expensive uh this is gonna
be.
And my last comment, which I
also shared with you, but I'll
share publicly is
Um, I, I'll have to disagree
with Representative Murphy. Uh,
I don't like the title, uh,
Strategic Water Supply, uh, at
this point, I think we should
change the title. I think it
should be the Brackish water
supply.
Uh, because I think that that is
a.
More clearly identifies what's
Uh, what's left in this bill?
Um, so, uh, Representative
Herrera, before we go to the
committee for a motion, uh,
would you like to add anything?
Mister Chair
And when I with my opening
statement, I certainly didn't
mean to imply that this would
solve climate change. I
certainly don't think that.
I was just setting the stage at
a local level at a district
level or the problem said small
communities are facing.
And I guess, uh, to paraphrase.
And an old saying is, how do you
begin a 1000 mile journey.
One mile at a time and and I
think this is taking the first
step in that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you for that. What's the
pleasure at the committee?
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass
on house agriculture, safety and
water Resources Committee
substitute for House authorities
do not password.
do not ask for a house.
Agriculture, safety and Water
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 137 and a due
pass for house energy
environment and natural
Resources Committee substitute
for US agriculture and water
resources up for House Bill 137.
Yeah, I think that's a proper
motion, um, we did move the, uh,
The committee said for
consideration. I don't think we
adopted the committee said we
just do that quickly first.
Right.
Second, any objection to
adopting the committee said.
OK, so that's adopted and so
we'll go back to sorry now's
motion, which is the do not pass
and do pass motion, uh, Nina,
can you take the vote.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? Yes.
Resocena Cortez.
Represent him small.
Vice Jeana? Yes.
Sarah McQueen.
Yes
So you have a, do you pass,
that's it for today, uh, the
committee, uh, we still have uh
breakfast burritos in the next
room. I encourage you all to
grab them. Thank you very much.
