County Representative Wonda
Johnson.
Let us bow our heads.
work together the remainder of
this week.
To provide solutions and that we
represent our constituents with
humility Polis creator as we
So that we can do the best we
can to fulfill our shared
purpose as your renewable
servants on behalf of our
hearts creator to make a way for
us so that we can always walk in
beauty we ask this in your name
amen.
Thank you generally please
remain standing for the pledge
I believe we're going to play
ball.
Good morning madam speaker.
Madam speaker I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
See no objections is so ordered.
Thank you madam speaker on
invests today age of you should
have a
little bag of cons from CLC
do in Lee County and I'm sure
with your permission I'll turn
it over to Representative Scott
if you'd like to add anything.
Go ahead on and representative
that.
Madam speaker with the point of
personal privilege and also like
to introduce my shadow of had
the blessing of having my
granddaughter with me for the
and representative Scott and
Pettigrew my daughter eight to
those bags of comes already.
I made another one.
friend on women's month with us
at the rostrum Madam speaker is
the lotus yes.
disenfranchised populations
across New Mexico and the United
States the lotus is a descendant
of a fiscal land grants settlers
and hails from the south valley
Albuquerque public school board
member.
The lotus with the charter
member of the United States
environmental protection agency
national environmental justice
White House conference on
environmental policy the lotus
was a charter member of the
Senate contamination cleanup
citizens advisory board at
Kirtland Air Force base.
center to secure funding for
brown for.
Some programs in the state.
She has also received a number
of awards madam speaker.
Department of Justin's and
excellence and community service
we welcome her this morning
madam speaker.
Thank you welcome to the chamber
what an accomplished live thank
and the lotus mentioned to me
Madam speaker that they've known
each other since she was
fourteen years old.
Also has.
Welcome a couple of guests and
That I can use.
Welcome you always welcome nice
to see you.
Espanola day at the capitol PA
and now you have a little gift
including a journal which you
latter days of this a session
and then
Us so I want you all to know
that the money I choose are
going strong down in the right
time to and there are low rider
challenges from the water task
force that was put together by
the governor six different state
agencies worked on this all
through the all through the
water for our state and it's
about a half an hour read and I
want you to know that several
members of this body came to a
I don't have the names written
down several members of the
Senate so this was a combined
work of both state agencies with
from San Juan Representative
lane thank you madam speaker I
rise for a point of personal
privilege stage point Mr speaker
I'd like to address the body
this morning and I was aware I
organization are all familiar
with I signed up for this.
You're more than welcome the
taxing that's that's incredibly
fine I think we all expect that
but going after my children as a
that kind of behavior so just a
one of my colleagues no
What happened of the reserve
director like center for that
organization and it's not okay
thank you thank you madam okay.
thank you thank you call
response if you haven't been on
the cruise line in a low rider
you haven't lived Madam speaker
so I recommend everyone get up
there have a burger at stop any
cousins will madam chair Madam
speaker but yes happy happy
Espanola day and I'll give you
a.
Thank you gentle lady any
to completely personal privilege
I rise to remind this body how
fragile our health care system
is and how intentional in the
state with the bills we
an international pandemic and
during our own states growing
health care workforce crisis
doctors were left with only one
insurance option which was
years and the special session we
have finally faced or miss the
bill never should have passed
today we have a compromise which
puts us on a path forward.
and who it harms thank you madam
speaker.
Additionally the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you thank you
madam speaker I rise on a point
of personal privilege such a
on social media.
On the family of the minority
leader.
He's absolutely right that when
we sign up for these jobs by the
Madam speaker last night when I
got home after a long day.
She started crying.
I thought I heard him.
When I heard them.
Minority leader I apologize.
I apologize to you and your
family.
The chamber it is working and
collaborating together.
Can disagree when we need to.
Has the right to attack.
Our families to poke fun at our
families to create any type of
that and I personally want to
apologize to the leader and to
his family.
For that negativity on social
media and I ask.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you madam speaker
just acknowledge Susan
One of my state he care.
The lady that was just
neighborhoods of Albuquerque and
Many many years ago and I don't
know if she remembers or not but
we actually helped
so thank you for that the lotus
I'm sorry I was running
downstairs from from Espanola
day and on that note madam
speaker I would like to also
Espanola over it was the first
capital of the New Mexico of the
first capital was actually
signed Gubbio that you won't get
on the west bank of the Rio
nineteen sixty two wrote up the
excavations of sanggup rail by
the University of New Mexico
archaeologists and for those of
you kind of go west just a
little ways there's a bridge and
that was actually the first
capital of New of the of New
Mexico and the United States so
I just wanted to mention that
ians and could be less Padilla.
One more announcement there will
be a lot of orders today at six
PM so.
Just know that and plan
accordingly.
This was a I'm sorry to that
that is happen to you and
there's no excuse for it and.
We're just in some we're just in
of any of any sort of of type of
of of that behavior especially
in our kids as as as a mom of
myself for being my daughter
here.
often and.
entering all that we do as
volunteers and trying to even
solve some of our issues
and respect of of Espanola day
my father's a family heralds
from the great county of Rio
Arriba and Espanola valley and I
proud to be and proud to have
heritage from our little value
there thank you them speaker.
also stand here with our
minority leader thank god bless
them I you know I think every
person here has family for those
our speaker standing up and
showing that the the unanimous
support that we have on when
things like this come up it's
going to have a baby any day in
Japan and I can't be with my
daughter my first grandchild.
I've got my son and my daughter
you know we if we get sometimes
attack people think that we we
get paid the big Bucks to do
this Erica to smile and and and
in support of our minority
leader and that everyone stood
up in support because none of us
I don't care what side of the
aisle we are what are what are
My dad gave me.
His car that he bought when he
was in the navy in nineteen
sixty two for six I think about
this car and it's a sixty four
mortuary checks right those of a
working.
How's the ball I was the at that
time I was the
it's all restored and it's a fun
car so it's a it's a car that
would be me for sure fit
Espanola thank you madam speaker
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam speaker just down to a
Tecnologia Espanola de um born
and raised from the area.
I've gone to school.
my my siblings actually have
little writers.
someday I'd like to get one I
have more time because there are
a lot of work but I.
Just the.
and I say heck I am order just
just part of that and I just
want to think about that offer
for sponsoring the memorial in
honor of today thank you madam
speaker thank you never too late
Madam speaker thank you I to
rise
To give a shout out to Espanola
growing up in Espanola
I still have a lot of family
that lives there a lot of
The first lowriders the first
Volkswagen low rider in town
never seen that.
It was a picture didn't happen
it was a beautiful car.
your family I you know before
you got home.
and I miss those days it was
days of a tight community we all
center.
Play ball there
Played little league in the
fields right below the little
league B. B. for below the
surface and are.
Representative lane the minority
leader.
Representative Lane Madam
speaker reject the nonsense that
you were subjected to directed
on behalf of your family we all
Mexico but unfortunately
ignorance takes the day but
Speaker Representative lane like
leisure lane nothing we do in
these chambers is more important
than what we do in the chambers
of our own home and that's a
sacred place madam chair we've
rider would you guys text it to
me and show me.
Diana Representative small thank
you madam speaker after the last
much more important knowing that
I absolutely rise in support of
the minority minority leader the
gentleman from San Juan I found
the gentleman to be of
Has brought his family to this
body
I think is icing on the cake
Madam speaker and so this is an
important opportunity for us to
gentlemen gentleman from a total
thank you Mr speaker and I also
rise and support of our fearless
leader lane and I appreciate him
for standing up here I know a
there's a lot of people say
I grew my grandfather Johnny
block he was the governor or the
mayor of Espanola back in the
Santa Cruz so I'm just blessed
have roots there and god blesses
formula thank you all.
and Torrance reserve gusty and
thank you Mr speaker I also
rides support not only my friend
but my brother.
brother.
The other elements since speaker
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker I also understand
support of minority leader lane
of legislative solution and
through the interim I think we
all know that we start to get to
know not only each other but
each other's families as well
and it's something that
It's something that that runs
really deep so I rise in support
of the gentleman I'm also
Espanola valley day my aunt had
been a forty year teacher and
special to me and my family and
then we had a Diller said in a
up here my father was also her
campaign manager and our first
run for APS school board way
to her and her family here in
the house thank you Mr.
Thank you gentleman the
gentleman from Bernalillo
FireEye's Mr speaker to talk I
Boxing gloves are coming on.
Gentleman from Chavis said in a
in the Representative Mason.
You know there's just as use and
I really appreciate him for what
to stood up and said this
morning to this whole body.
Also.
I am not from Espanola.
Thank you for giving me my wife.
Forty six years.
Thank you.
We can drop
I know a guy.
Elated from Santa Fe thank you
Mr speaker thank you body I just
want to stand and also support
my colleague from San Juan you
on on there's a lot we don't but
there's a lot we do and standing
up for families aw is something
we should all do in protecting
all of each other's families you
know having kids hi noted Mr
that that is not acceptable in
any allies of mine are doing
that I suggest you rethink that
and contact me personally about
your feelings instead of abusing
any of my colleagues think user.
I think this also applies to
witnesses that we bring on the
floor Mr speaker they should not
be abuse as well thank you.
Gentleman from.
rise and support of my friend
leader line is a good honest man
he does a hard job and he does
it well line I really
appreciated in our families our
they should be left out of this
Willis I don't ever low rider.
Thank you Mr speaker let's drop
it will show up next year and
lowriders.
Deleted from the house thank you
not cool dude we love you.
I think we can all agree that
all roads lead to Espanola.
Well the former gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Espanola houses a lot of its
nurses to Espanola that's not a
reason to live Espanola but good
health care there Mr speaker and
it's been a lot of time low
riders going up but I don't have
Any other announcements gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman BGT thank
you Mr speaker I do rise I guess
last one to rise and support of
my dear friend from
San Juan County the minority
very close friends and and hurts
my heart to think that anybody
would go as low as to attack him
or his family politics is just
politics we're all human beings
a guy whose family was and we
drive through there all the time
and see people yes forty one
first cousins so there's no
chance that we're not gonna see
the only person here.
Not from Espanola wife after
missing allow family now for
Espanola love is been you'll go
there all the time.
but I dropped when I was in
college.
sharp.
Informally Representative
Chasey.
That's a good one well I'm glad
we stuck with one more Nelson
okay we've got a long list so
delivers you Mr speaker if you
don't have a low rider I can
gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
report seeing no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is referred Senate
conservation committee
bill fifty three of those in
favor say about us and I.
Was me yes have a good report
about the.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to has been
referred Senate bill for seventy
two has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that I do pass
and that's referred to the
Senate bill four seventy two of
those in favor say if I was in
line.
Posibles name the S. of a
committee productive.
Mr speaker your consumer public
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair this production we're an
adoption referral committee
report a Senate Judiciary
Committee substance percent of I
thirteen all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
it under consideration point it
was recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we're in adoption of a for rural
commuter port of the Senate
health of public affairs
Mr speaker Education Committee
to Lisbon for this refers
senator substitute for Senate
bill four seventeen has had it
under consideration point of
with recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
signify by saying aye.
Posibles NA the as I would would
put up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to with the referred Senate bill
four ninety two has had it under
consideration point in with
report we're in adoption of a
favorable committed for the
Senate bill four ninety two all
those in favor say if I was in
a.
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption we're launching a
favorable commuter port and
house memorial twenty eight all
those in favor sort of this and
eighty three has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're not optional for
rural commuter port house
been referred Senate joint
resolution fourteen has had it
under consideration report
saying with recommendation to
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption for adoption of a
federal committee for the Senate
joint resolution fourteen of
and finance committee to is been
referred Senate bill one fifty
three has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted and small
chair Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committed
finance committee to is been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety two has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted a
was named the aesthetically
reported up to.
Mr speaker you appropriations
and finance committee team has
been referred Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
transportation committee subject
to present a bill to ninety to
all those in favor say if I was
a nine.
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we're not optional Federal
committed port and House
memorial for all those in favor
same as recommendation that I do
pass respectfully submitted was
the Thompson chair without
supported optional Federal
committed fourteen house
has had it under consideration
point same as recommendations to
pass respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair for
production production with a
real clear for House memorial
three has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation entity pass
respectfully submitted was a top
denture production production
with a recruiter for House
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages
discussion is so ordered.
Message Representative Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
data on Senate chief clerk Mr be
entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate bill
shady lawn Senate chief clerk
offices will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in those copy of Senate bill
sixty four as amended has been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate vote
house bill seventy six as
amended by the house with
emergency clause house floor
substitute for house bill one
thirty one house bill one thirty
four as amended by the house
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
with emergency clause every turn
same here with respectfully
submitted chair table on Senate
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Bill three fifty three with the
merchants Clause House
Appropriations of finance
committees of stew for House
Judiciary Committee subsea for
House Bill three fifty seven.
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house concurrent
resolution one and returned same
here with respectfully submitted
sherry do on Senate chief clerk.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
McKinley supporters on one and
buy lands here Representative
see are you ready and item
number sixty eight.
Mr speaker from aspen notice
The record reflect that
election is replacing the Santo
forty eight is three times
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill thank you Mr
Mr speaker this bill amends six
and thirty four to seven dash
nine to be New Mexico is a
section thirty seven point seven
is out of service in order to
hand will be to Mr speaker.
This bill of these
administrations of the probate
those of those cases to go to
District Court.
It is supposed to the the
support about thirty three
counties.
We judges and by the spring for
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
So you'll the gentleman from a
total County.
Speaker German.
Mr speaker volume I'm gonna give
you a good example of just
passed to.
district and and your probate
judges all for whatever reason.
It gives of forty of a district
judge to appoint a probate do
another probate in the same
district like district my
district will point to a judge
from either abundant shows us
When the judge is missing from
your district a probate judge
you can do one of two things you
can wait for your probate or
over a hundred and thirty dollar
Mr thank you Mr speaker and
other thing want to go to
District Court.
on the journey
Furthermore people that are that
have lost loved ones need to
file a report with us but quick
as possible in order to allow
specific time that a judge is
out for what period of time
with disappointment be for.
With that being said I would
appreciate it house says in the
bill forty eight would not pass.
Final passage of Senate bill two
forty eight is three times
amended the vote is now open.
What close.
you ready on item number seventy
eight excuse me I'm sorry.
Are you ready and item number
nineteen thank you Mr speaker
bill two plans to judicial
salary increases we've seen this
before the judicial compensation
commission recommends tying the
salary of New Mexico Supreme
Court justices to the pay a
federal court magistrate judge
will become the frame our
framework upon which we will pay
subsequent levels of jobs judges
and just judges from there and
so we are changing the framework
and in many areas and with that
I want to introduce my experts
this is a pretty court justice
David Thompson and we stand for
questions there is a great the
familial yield I yield to my
friend from San Juan thank you
Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen thank you to need
justice got a question for a
couple of questions for you here
Thank you Mr speaker so they
they were not out in the budget
on the Senate side they were on
the house side or the added on
the Senate side Mr speaker
gentleman from San Juan they
were they've always been the
budget from the house side on
added to the budget.
But this is to set something in
place that whenever there's a
increases.
lady so that this is interesting
I have we do we have that
anywhere else in statute where
we are following it Hey as some
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so this year.
What exactly what the increased
be from last year.
This is German so for instance
would go from around one eighty
to two thirteen.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so just for reference do we
know what the what the federal
ninety two dollars and so right
now currently Mexico salaries
for Supreme Court justices one
hundred eighty thousand seven
hundred and forty eight dollars.
thirteen thousand dollar figure
I just quoted thank you Mr Gramm
what I'm looking for as the
previous amount I'm not trying
to see how it correlates both of
the increases but put the
Actually wondering if
Thank you Mr gently and
wondering if there are more.
areas where we might look at
reference we've had a hard time
giving dust increases a public
defender's increases pay
increases and I'm wondering if
forgotten to give our dust
increases we've had to go back
in and trying to add that and
the speaker and and and gentle
lady it's kind of it's it's
and frankly Mr speaker gentle
lady we've seen
to administrations maybe take it
out on our justices and so that
is a co equal branch of
Thank you Mr religion lady from
Bernalillo you Mr speaker I
yield to my friend from the
county.
Mr speaker German family I'm not
sure I understand your question
can you restate it please.
Speaker gentle lady
justice's salaries are fixed by
No.
Sure so.
helpful salaries are determined.
Mr speaker gentlemen so I I want
to just make a slight correction
so all New Mexico federal
magistrate judges make that two
courts has its own process
currently on how it fixes those
raises and and where they go.
View of the legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
we're doing is we are codifying
in statute that the salaries for
justices and judges in New
and judges will be paid whatever
the amount the federal changes
so we're not losing complete
control Mr speaker to amend
we're just we're tweaking that
attract folks to our judiciary
and then and help gain talent
me how those Senator salaries or
developed.
are the ones basically come up
with that fixed amount and they
do that every so often every
state every few years but I
don't believe it's every year.
since around states or just in
New Mexico Mr chairman again the
side of the fat is the fat so
this will include all federal
magistrate judges currently
date is so shifts in Surrey in
our budgeting process is going
to become an annual revision or
having served on probation
myself I imagine not we'll take
that six figure into
consideration in our budget
every year and so it will just
be put in the budgetary
framework that LFC uses and so
legislative close thank you Mr
speaker I do I now move that
Senate bill to do now pass final
passage of Senate bill to the
vote is now open.
duly passed as house gentlelady
from countries as well as you
are you ready and item thirty
four yes Mr speaker would you
give me to that point that the
record reflect that election is
a server please and Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill seven or Senate Bill
committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy is creating a rural
health care delivery from fund
to provide grants to health care
professionals and facilities to
provide and and new an expansion
help grow providers and attract
talent to New Mexico New Mexico
expanded health care services in
counties it will be only for
rural New Mexico in it will
apply to twenty out eight out of
I stand for questions you know
to be deleted close Mr speaker I
now move the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven do now pass.
Was about to close.
firm is here the native Senate
finance committee sub two
percent of the seven as we
passes house to the members of
the press and well are you ready
and item sixty one.
Yes Mr speaker will you give me
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you members of the body
sent bill for you to the
disclosure bill it requires out
of state groups spending money
in New Mexico to disclose the
candidate who loans money to
themselves from paying it back
with the rate of interest.
three which previously passed
this this house which changes
the dates and time frames for
excuse me Mr speaker will
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady I yield
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I had a couple
questions on here Mr speaker
that proof be provided the loan
was actually taken out.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm the
going by my experts here today
Mr speaker generally they don't
provide the terms of the loan of
the loan as part of the
disclosure imagine stating the
loan was taken out
Is the information then provided
to the secretary of state
that'll alone was actually taken
out I've I've wondered that Mr
speaker gentlemen I I see that
Mr speaker deli part of the
current reporting system there's
a space for for loans and for
that of the part of this bill is
additional disclosure about the
wanted to ask about fund raising
prohibition if regarding
receiving monetary contributions
during the prohibited period
we can still accept funds this
bill extinct X. includes a
prohibition on lobbyists from
lobbyists are already prohibited
from making those contributions
so it's or the other side of the
same coin not only can they not
make them we can't take them.
until after this after the
probation period starts and
sometimes those contacts are
through lobbyist so.
We just wouldn't take it is that
from a lobbyist they would have
to make that contribution before
January first otherwise is
subject to prohibited period and
they would have to either do it
Mr speaker gentle lady and being
told the the do you receive it.
Is that is the date for
reporting purposes.
So Mr speaker generally it
and incumbents or candidates so
it so another
elected official for campaign
committee or political
committee.
yes.
Already thank you very much.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
gentlemen I made a question
about
section for.
F. as in foxtrot number five
member or a repayment of such a
loan and why
sort of the reasoning of
excluding it as a donation I
just like to make sure I fully
understand Mr speaker telling
the original.
language I'm not sure I could
totally cut your question the
polling which uses the the
personal loan from a family
member is not a donation.
family member loans.
A candidate ten thousand
dollars.
Is that a personal loan
Mr speaker generally the untold
it's a little complicated but
a family member could loan you
gentlemen so the the funds from
that lone could not be used for
the campaign they would have to
be used for personal expenses.
Mr speaker gentle lady
A mental that once once a loan
is made and they become your for
your funds to do with as you
Mr speaker gentleman and that is
currently is allowed and that's
what's in the bill.
The family member Mr speaker
gentleman.
Then.
Could be a.
Third cousins.
This is only the
So as I understand what we're
trying to get at is were not
repaying that loan.
buy new car or donate your
campaign the those funds are
under your control and you have
discretion over those funds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman a family member to
make a contribution in an
unlimited amount to a candidate
for an office holder who then in
And then I make that.
I in turn contribute the ten
thousand dollars to my campaign
looking at the question you you
added on the end of that
statement is in fact correct.
Mr speaker gentleman.
gentleman for someone to
circumvent contribution limits.
Mr speaker gentle lady so is I
understand that you can borrow
money.
campaign funds if you make a
loan you to your continue for
yourself back so Mister speaker
deli I see the sort of loophole
for closing.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Is John from Travis entertainer
percent of Townsend.
Speaker a gentleman.
In my.
Part of my line of questioning
follow your previous line and I
a friend or a family of a family
member.
Of unlimited amount it does seem
like it was just opening.
The the loophole and I just
said you could accept a
contribution and that is clearly
not correct I think what we're
talking about this loans is that
correct Mr speaker John.
Rule no.
That it was alone.
It's a personal loan not
reported and then utilized I.
Mr chairman of the regulations
apply to the campaign and the
concern I'm hearing is that this
bill doesn't entirely for close
personal loans to a candidate.
But Mr speaker gentleman that's
the gentleman I guess it is I
had never thought about it until
I heard it today and I thought
well that that seems that we.
Maybe have something that we
should
kind services will perform for
non political reason Sir.
Mr speaker gentleman before I
tackle that question I'd like to
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I remember the form correctly
it.
The mid identify personal loans
Mr speaker German is the well I
mean told is it's and source if
it's for the purpose of the
campaign.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I am going to.
loan that money to my campaign
that would be a loan that was
taken out for the purpose of the
campaign that would be a loan
different than getting a loan
from say
someone who has an interest in
politics that is trying to
directly fund your campaign if
Okay Mister speaker that seems a
little cloudy but I understand I
understand your answer
what about in kind services
How does your.
Mr speaker and gentleman does
not address in kind services.
Okay and
contribution and the donation.
can you speak to that.
Mr speaker German so it is using
that page or changing a
contributor to donor
sections of the campaign finance
laws.
It seems that in statute today
you know we are encouraged to
have voluntary compliance.
And
third party.
following a complaint that would
cause further investigation of.
process more mandatory instead
of it being
so.
relied upon our self
disclosures.
Mr Chairman as is being
explained to me
you know we went voluntarily
file are campaign finance
reports.
voluntarily up front Mr speaker
chairman like if we move we miss
something we make a mistake
they're gonna they're gonna
encourage us to voluntarily
correct that.
Of the issue of.
Whether.
A donation is a real donations
about it it just seems to be a
gaping hole that we ought to try
to address some of that so I'm
sure looks like others have
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Fe of.
Mr chairman I yield.
means that I didn't even know
there is such thing as a one
hundred year R. one hundred bill
party.
Mr speaker German the.
Unclear how that's related to
asking what the heck a.
One hundred bill party is is
it's celebration for the hundred
bill on both sides of the of the
corporate donations Mr speaker
and gentleman I'm curious if
that's addressed in this piece
of legislation.
Regulation that the Mr speaker
gentleman with with this is
mostly due to going with is is
our campaign finance reports as
elected officials so to the
extent that the lobbyists are
regulated separately.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
was what I was curious about I
didn't know how the process
works if the if the money was
donated to the to the specific
and so I was just curious if
there is any relationship to
that and if by chance one of
those companies did donate
that ended up paying for that Mr
speaker German
the missions are not made
directly to the campaign if they
were they would be a violation
gentleman counter and grant and
the other will Representative
us.
So Mister speaker German is a
pretty big bill so I'm just
understanding why only family
members Mr speaker gentleman.
wrong was this was it the loans
only
can be accepted by family
members only.
on just letting you I want to
make sure you can clarify the
loan situation were from I heard
family members as a only family
members for speaker Mr speaker
Mr speaker or a little above
that for a commercially
or something like that
you know in order to.
To pull a commercially
reasonable loan that would not
be counted as a contribution
that would not be counted as
something you need to report.
personal on the personal side
some from make it.
That you can take a loan on the
personal side then you then once
you have that money then you can
disperse it to your campaign as
to do is serve provide the safe
harbor to all of us who are
system legislators right so we
still we have jobs we have
separate.
Mr speaker German at the same
time if you received the loan
that was clearly for the
purposes of the campaign you
And and that kind loan would be
subject to the campaign
contribution limits as well.
Okay Mister speaker gentleman
that you got me where I was kind
of headed so Mister speaker
alone the front for the campaign
purposes you need to report
those terms
to if you received the low loan.
of that loan to your own
campaign will have to be
disclosed and that's that's
currently not in statute so
that's one improvements in this
cannot it is and they also at
random Sliq some people to go
over there their books so Mister
speaker gentleman I mean all
purpose is to is to fix that and
so I'm not sure how you're going
to how are you going to how are
you are going to audit and and
about all the different types of
loans are are the you could say
you know what my mother let me
this money to I don't know to
and the reason I'm bringing all
these up.
Is.
In order for you to audit you
have to then jump into our own
personal finances to figure that
out.
it to a to to the candidate and
he takes a loan.
It basically just say well just
this is a long for me to go to
Disneyland that is cited to do
that is me on a personal loan
level on hand to two thousand
dollars in cash they could write
you a check they could I mean
there's a lot of ways around
Mr Chairman
You Sir that that description
with the the references on state
Mr speaker German if you are
knowingly intentionally not
being honest you cross the line
from you know diem potentially
making just a mistake in your
secretary of state's office
detect and identify improved up
front yeah that that's the that
can be a challenge
but that's the I mean that's
committing fraud if they're
being intensely dis on as the
penalties for that action go up
and that's part of how we try to
a lot of details about the the
it is it is being noted that
this isn't an audit bill the the
audit is existing law we're
worries me the most is how are
you going to let's just say one
of us wants do you have two
different candidates one lands.
doesn't have those funds and.
And takes that money whether
it's cash or the right to check
report the same.
How are you gonna tell how would
this to the the key is as an as
does is provides additional
information in additional
disclosure it I've been told
it's a response to twenty twenty
two U. S. Supreme Court case
that involve the federal
around that that's something we
should maybe look at in the
future this bill is a step
forward in disclosure in in
rigor and security of our
understand your your I mean I'm
I'm not worried about myself I
just I just I Senator my CPA he
takes care of it and I just make
sure that it's always clean in
need not to worry about it
really worried about is if they
want to audit then they start
digging into our own personal
checkbooks and we're that far of
those funds came from that's
what I'm worried about and let's
in the correct manner what would
be to audit for that money came
from noted if it came from cash
I'm not sure how that would that
And that's where I start getting
a little worried because I don't
understand how we're going to be
able to tell.
One person from the other person
one that is doing it clean I I
go and I say you know.
I just got started I want to go
of check I write it in there and
then the secretary of state's is
red flag there's a loan in hear
word how do we know that he he
funded that himself and that
wasn't it income around the
now and what is is due to what
what do that and what would this
legislation due in auditing what
doors it opening to fall outside
gentleman there's always
somebody there's always.
Some of this is dishonest and
and everything it doesn't matter
what we do it that's just
there's always going to be
someone that doesn't follow the
rules.
finances because they can't
really tell for that the you
know unless you bought it I
don't understand how you guys
gonna be able to tell because of
I mean I wanted to I could see
personal finances and that's
where I that's from going wait a
minute we're we're
I'm not sure how you handle that
The rules of how this is going
to how we how we comply with
this and how you would how the
secretary of state's office
understand that for barriers
for.
I want I'd like to know there's
very is that we're not just open
the door to in all a not it I
situation here it just I don't
know how you can tell the one
from the other.
Mr speaker gentleman if you're
being dishonest about where that
money is coming from that's
fraud that's not necessarily
detectable.
Does not do that it's not just
that Mr speaker gentleman is
just I think if we're gonna have
an auditor of Business and out
of businesses not of business
personal is a personal on it
camping out as a camping on it
down Mr speaker German to the
person who's being on the you
know either honest up front or
there or beyond it deceptive you
know I don't have to worry about
that doesn't I'm not saying that
if you could you can't tell the
difference because someone did
report properly.
What steps would you have to
take to figure that out.
I understand speaker gentleman I
just I think you're a great guy
and I know what you're trying to
do I just I just don't see it
the control itself isn't count
how how it's going to it's not
can't I don't know how you're
going to be able to tell a
person.
A Canada putting in their own
money from somebody bring in
that and and and basically going
around the rules and putting
money in there in the wrong
manner that's I I agree with you
there what I don't know and I
basically accounted.
Obviously the only way they can
get caught of the of the
get audited as the only way.
Because I just can't see I hope
real clean control and maybe
help you I can't think of how we
would do that is my problem too
I mean I can't say that I have a
the answer for that Mr speaker
gentleman I just.
you how does it handle now for
what it's faster asked experts
how they're going to you know I
I don't think I've gotten on
answer of how they would be able
to tell.
those the only thing I saw Mr
speaker that I didn't understand
how how we would be able to do
that I can see ways that people
can go around this and I don't
understand how it's how we're
understand how we're gonna
change that Mr speaker.
just I mean the only thing I
could come up with was an audit
to to figure that out and I
don't know how we would be able
to tell who were this loan came
chamber let's go to gentleman
from looked it over to the
block.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa please yield Mister
Three.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm reading
this here and it says on page
thirteen the donations deposited
accounts one for regular
business and then one for
campaign purposes Mr speaker
gentleman.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen so this.
Expenditure than Mr speaker John
I believe with these I. E.
Mr speaker German yes.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
so then my question is if there
transferred in a lump sum to the
other account how do we know who
these donors are in the new
account Mr speaker gentleman Mr
speaker gentleman that the
count so that's what this bill
is designed to prevent.
So that those donors can be
identified.
Okay thank you Mr speaker John
okay so then these individual
account and if they do that how
much time do they have to be in
compliance with this law Mr
speaker gentleman.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I'm reading the
definition HANBIDGE thirteen
with a donation is some of the
payment or transfer promise of
Mister speaker Jim could you
please just tell me why this
this definition was changed and
then what would change from the
current language of I believe
it's contribution Mr speaker.
more encompassing term is we are
allowing the elected officials
the can is to continue on in
their life that not everything
they do is campaign related the
see language like the ordinary
course of business trade or
business.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen for clearing that
up for me and I'll continue on
speaker this is the terms of a
loan.
Mr speaker genesis is the terms
of the loan the I guess it needs
to be disclosed.
contributions on the portal New
Mexico secretary state just for
the amount of the loan is what
the terms of the loan are so
is donating to the campaign or
or learning rather with that
check the to stay specifically
what the purpose of the
expenditure from that account
was Mr speaker.
in the others the check the
speaker German typically this is
terms of the loan are set out
separately from the check so the
second tell you transfer the
your campaign from including a
rate of interest.
Okay thank you Mr speaker
gentleman and I actually really
like that portion of this bill
regarding the no interest you
know I certainly think Mr
we're not gonna do any
astronomical changes however it
sounds like we're not we're just
going to try to get more
disclosure which I think it's a
good thing Mr speaker gentleman
then continuing on I believe
take some Mr speaker gentleman
let's just say I have a donor
who who really likes my campaign
what I stand for and that
individual has a monthly
that that individual could not
then give me the amendment
nation during the time that I'm
in the legislature even though I
did not disclose or I didn't
solicit that donation during the
Mr Chairman I've been told that
the if there's a recurring
monthly donation that does not
have to be stopped as long as
there is not a solicitation
during the previous period if a
citizen who is not registered as
a lobbyist they could give me
that monthly donation of a
hundred five dollars in my
campaign still could receive
that as long as I do not during
that's correct and and to the
library the country using candy
from a lobbyist the lobbyist
employer an incumbent or
candidates or campaign committee
okay thank you Mr speaker
gentleman and then on that same
vein regarding those
contributions I believe I I
asked this before in a committee
lobbyist to this employer
campaign committee Exeter if
they cut me that check and it
went to my account on December
thirty first but I don't get
back in town until let's just
complicated answer here insert
the pins on which angle we're
looking at this from yes I see
that the do you actually receive
it and the so you would be
subject to that of the lobbyists
thirty first they may be okay
but if you don't get in until
January seventh you're in the
plan for the period they are
prohibited from making a
contribution you would be
pose market as well on the
thirty first and Mr speaker I
would be prohibited during the
prohibited period period from
period then Mr speaker I would
still be in compliance because
it was outside of the reporting
ban.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This is German the bill the
answer is yes okay thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman that
clears up a lot for me and I
know one concern I had about
this legislation was also you
cannot with the committee that's
a huge loophole where Mr speaker
gentleman you may have an
associate or someone that you
know who has a pack and they're
taking these contributions from
these lobbyists and these
individuals during the reporting
concerns of potential I guess a
back channel so should we say Mr
speaker and gentleman.
step forward it's not the last
so Mister speaker gentleman the
the the situation you describe
where the selection committee is
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I think that's
something we can certainly work
together on in the future and
you know I do have a few
concerns about this bill but I
do like the a lot of chunks
debate the gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Fe County you Mr speaker
Loans from family members could
not be given that I understand
that correctly.
a lot of consternation over this
language the loss to from a
family member is part of the
sort of was described as a safe
harbor if you're going along for
some other purpose that's okay
with the intention that it's for
the campaign that you have to
report and that is subject to
the campaign contribution
limits.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
limitations that are are
available it's not a prohibition
upon loans to the campaign from
other family members.
heard earlier but once with that
was stated I I said while that
that's new to me I thought that
family members could make
campaign loans to the campaign
Thank you Mr speaker this
gentleman from Santa Fe yield
Mister chairman I yield.
the speaker and gentleman
there's a couple of.
Speaker on page six.
beginning on.
Line eleven.
Damn incorrect but beginning on
thirteen that it is a political.
the DC.
Me start on line six expenditure
value that's Mr speaker John
that seems very very inclusive
but then down here.
Under item two this is by a
public official or candidate in
candidate or ballot question Mr
speaker and gentleman isn't that
already required.
The.
be picked up by this expanded
language would be an expenditure
by by someone else that said you
campaign mailer that then see
vote for him or election date or
something like that just sort of
like here here you know sort of
camouflaging a campaign mailer
as sort of a testimonial that
Any nonprofit group that under
or what is currently considered
for educational purposes.
Mr speaker and a a for or is
Individual candidate campaigns
and to non profits
this would be considered a
political expenditures Mr
speaker and gentleman a flyer
That would have to be I'm I'm
just wondering do they currently
have to file a.
And expenditure because it
because Mr speaker and gentleman
many times they do that as a
As a as as something that is a
political mailer for a political
or even at and and events so I'm
I'm trying to figure out is what
is that what this is intended to
do.
Mr Chairman
that kind of activity and we
will you know we're not
prohibiting it or not regularly
and we just wanna know where the
money's coming from one of who's
So Mister speaker and gentleman
what I'm what I'm wondering
though is then we'll these I
want will five one C. threes and
I once the force.
Have to or let's go beyond that
If there was something said in
favor or something nice about a
candidate.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
definition expenditure that
comes for that any of these
things.
If if they're doing one of these
things
In the.
positive or presently negative.
Same same issue that yes they
would then need to report that.
So thank you miss or so the
and all nonprofit organizations
and NCOs churches.
chambers of commerce.
mailer which does cost money
then so that they would have to
disclose so the speaker and
gentleman the question is then.
Necessarily the a that or do
they now have to go and put the
a campaign a political action.
Mr chairman the the what the
activities we're talking about
or sometimes referred to as
electioneering so it's not
campaigning per se of the
restrictions of five oh one C.
thirty days of a primary or
sixty days of a general election
so if it's you know sometimes
right before November fourth you
know yes then then that these
activities could be could be
covered.
Joe Billingsley attends our
church chair and is running for
office be sure and and the jobs
a good guy and and he's a
faithful member of our church or
talk about it so let's say they
do it in September today then
have to find a list of the
member a a a list of all all of
their members because the blacks
of the money seems to be co
mingled.
which I will get to in here in a
minute in in another section but
because they had not set up a
separate account for this
activity.
I I don't I don't really have a
good answer for you thank you Mr
chairman I I I I I don't think
that's what is meant but I do
this not knowing.
so what that is a concern and
and I that's why I read it and
was wondering if that I don't
think that's the intention but I
think that in essence could be
before we leave here we couldn't
just make this clear that this
this applies to and who doesn't
apply to.
Is that because I don't think it
does that it because it says
any.
Something that could benefit a
you.
if the in a ballot question.
Of the the would have to have to
comply even though they have a a
to comply with these other
sections as well quarter the
names of of donors some speaker
and gentleman one other question
the exception five one C. threes
all of the final ones not five
twenty sevenths but all the five
oh ones
This is a good guy.
And now we're making this is a
good guy as political and I and
I think that's where we we run
into trouble with this and I
and gentleman on page nine.
I also believe something here.
Already exists.
already required anything it's
paid for Mr speaker and
gentleman
so let's say social media.
For a ballot question is an
expenditure out of a campaign
account that has to be
disclosed.
And I believe they have to
disclose I believe and I believe
A robo dial is already specific
so I I'm I'm just wondering I've
had I think.
I don't have any questions about
this as the previous section but
of page nine you'll see that the
existing says to this specific
to telephone calls.
If you just the committee
reading that session without the
addition of other of or
of of the expenditure it's also
disclosing the source of the
funds to pay for the
expenditure.
Thank you mispronounces you
mentioned that a that a.
A separate account and I'm not
there right now but let's just
talk about it quickly
organizations going to have to.
It I'm just not sure they have
monies and a certain percentage
I'm just not sure how they
disclose that it seems to me
like any dollar that has gone
into that organization that year
organization.
The Mr speaker German
setting up a separate account
the the you can use these funds
it from the general account
where you have as you is using
your example like all the
members of the church to the may
be given a little bit of money.
organization to identify the
source of funds thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
So
impractical impractical me give
you a permit practice scenario.
money quickly to say Hey this is
an issue the call your
legislator.
But
To that account for the will
they be prohibited from being
able to respond to those issues
because they can raise money for
that specific issue.
there's already rules that they
can only spend so much money on
what seems to be election
related or issue related.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This is remember the gentleman
the you are getting at the one
the main purposes of this bill
account so it's not just the the
I mean church General Fund
whether it is that they're
making expenditures from if they
want to engage in this activity
they're gonna need separate
separate countering can need to
of the federal code and because
they are already allowed to do a
certain.
amount of this as long as it's
as long as as are their not
going outside their bounds some
amendment right issues that they
they can't talk because they
didn't need all of this one
quick if we could please just
try to keep the chatter down
that this gentleman I I I'm
concerned.
That this takes away the rights
of unions churches.
they're gonna have their gonna
have problems with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman
file a report with the secretary
of state.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
there are all kinds of costs
And I want to pay
I want to pay the caterer out of
pocket.
Do I now since that's a campaign
without filing Mr speaker and
gentleman I apologize I continue
to have tighter in the whole I
could not hear your question
could you please repeat that.
otherwise required to be
reported under the campaign
reporting act.
He took that out so now
everything has to be filed in
the campaign reporting act shall
file a report within the
secretary of state.
That
That are just not required
gas in my vehicle if I have an
event and I and and the caterer
cater for I abandoned do I if I
pay for that out of pocket do I
now have to to to to to make a
specific line that that was a.
Contribution from myself to my
Kenadid doesn't make independent
expenditures for their own
account second yes you do under
systematize if you're if you're
spending money.
talk to the committee I mean
those are those are expenditures
Mr chairman we had some
discussion in the prior
drive through my community if I
stop yeah I don't say will I
turn left at the street you know
the kind of thing but yeah if
you if you're paying for cater
that's for portable.
Do I have to them.
Count all those expenses that
would be with that I mean my.
A gasoline that's getting me
All that is reportable already
that's not changed by this bill.
Speaker and gentleman I I and
we're going even beyond what
Or even in their home he put a
percentage potentially if you
have a home office whatever that
is and within square footage you
you kind of figure that out but
the speaker and gentleman.
What.
two is is is rational.
Mr speaker German.
the existing law that's existing
law that's not that's not the
door that that this bill is
opening this is requiring
disclosures from on the
expenditures independent
have asked the folks who have
worked in the secretary of
state's office.
That question and that and what
you're saying is different than
the advice that I have received
in my vehicle that is used for
personal.
Or that is campaign as long as
I'm not claiming it as campaign
really what I'm doing is I'm
claiming it all as personal.
there is a gray area I believe
there are things that you can do
the there just to kind of a
hassle to report that the
secretary of state's office is
fact that it's cold out of
pocket it doesn't change the
this so expenditure for the
purpose of your campaign.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
from earlier but the the.
Secretary segregated bank
accounts I think that is that's
going to be an issue.
that that.
run afoul of free speech Mr
speaker and gentleman on page.
On page twenty four.
incumbent for candidate campaign
committee or political committee
speaker and gentleman.
The problem that I have with
that is many people at the end
could be in their body and their
mailbox.
For an extended.
Period of time so I do have an
amendment that I would like to
and gentleman I think might get.
Might potentially.
Make this more clear.
and I and that is if we could
not within the prohibited period
it's not been requests it's not
been requested the privative
period but if there's a post
date on the mail.
Mr Chairman so couple things
again as mentioned before has
this rule applies to lobbyist
Mr speaker German if it's
postmarked before the session
and you you can either during
the session it does apply under
current law to the predators.
when we first on legislation
you know some of us not me you
are far from home there could be
a check sitting in your mailbox
opportunity opportunity to make
this more clear speaker and
gentleman I know that as my kids
were young that time between
Christmas.
that situation so even if the
check could arrive.
After and by the way during
Christmas just because
something's been male doesn't
mean you're going to get it
right away and the speaker and
think that makes this very
clear.
That it wasn't solicited.
During the prohibited period and
it wasn't sent to the during the
prohibited period just because
like to move house floor
amendment one.
Two Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill forty two as
hand written amendments in it is
being passed out and even be
online shortly.
And the speaker I'd like to ask
for a roll call vote.
It can rule.
Can you allow her to go through
please.
correct good explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the
amendment
basically states that if the.
Mr speaker that that would not
that that would be allowed in
the speaker I believe
that this.
That the check was requested.
Properly or the the the donation
or contribution was requests
properly and Mr speaker and
earlier that could be due to
the the post office putting in
the wrong mailbox and it takes a
while then to make its way back
around the speaker or just
accept that check because it was
requests properly and it was.
Given properly determine
understood and before I go to
the sponsor on whether this is
this one it's Senate bill one
instead of Senate bill forty two
and that just creates the hassle
of problem for the staff back
here we'll let this one go in
the event that it is adopted
will make sure that it is
friendly amendment like to
explain all why please go ahead
Mr speaker gentleman first of
all this this issue is covered
prohibited people as such as
everyone it's not as gentleman
from Otero said the recurring
donation it's not if you send
out the fundraiser before the
before the session starts and
you get you know some of your
bill is that we don't want
people accepting money from this
during the prohibited period
this Mr speaker and gentleman
started I don't want the.
The debate on the amendment
gentleman from someone thank you
does your man apply to all.
Contributions Mr speaker and
gentleman that is what I was
hoping to do here this would
clarify the M. you get it them
the duty that exists with all
there it is very unclear so if I
do receive a check from someone
canister and I receive it during
the privative period even that
for every one of us very
specifically with no ambiguity.
When we if we can receive a
I file this I received it can I
put in my bank account it's over
a thousand dollars or have to
reported today can I even
accepted Mr speaker and
gentleman I think for us as
This takes away any confusion on
our part.
And it keeps us from any
potential of being accused of
doing something improper and I
and miss with that I I do
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment Iran a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
two as amended a vote of yes the
representatives okay she's being
tended to by the medics drinking
water and they're they're
checking her out
please be careful.
I can always reopen the vote.
Thank you gentlemen.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I for the for the
debate I I do believe this is an
issue that.
could use more clarity
generally what we want to do
especially as we're getting
close to the end of the session
the agency speaker and and and
gentleman and body I believe
this is an issue that more
Gentleman from Santa and Santa
Fe you please Mr speaker German
the yield.
Between reporting requirements
for.
Political committees directed
toward a candidate.
And those organizations that
are.
Guests.
Issue.
Organizations.
Gentleman
Quickly or simply summarize
different entities are regulated
differently
you know the political action
committees and when the have
if thank their conduct
specifically triggers that
that the provision that the
regulation that form of speech
clearly political introduce a
more comprehensive regulation
and some other entities that
engage in some advocacy some
some education you know the sort
in law or in this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman short
answer would be.
There is some of I believe
nurses for advocacy
organization.
Generally speaking the actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman a yes
that engage in some advocacy.
Okay.
Gentleman.
contract for one of these
politically active advocacy
organization without returning
Yes or no Mr speaker German yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
For sure.
organizations continue to
receive their compensation
during their period of service.
Mr speaker and gentleman so your
person serving in the
legislature that during the rest
of the year serves in some
The Mr chairman interesting
question
you know as we discussed before
we're we're basically and
legislators we have jobs we get
receive their personal paycheck
in the ordinary course I believe
the answer is yes Sir excellent
certainly can be yes they might
Mr speaker and gentleman on my
disagree because those.
Expenditures are compensation
does serve.
Mr speaker German.
If one of us worked in an
industry this isn't for the
legislature and we continue to
this bill dresses the rules.
Call potential conflicts of
interest such over council or
some.
Mr speaker gentleman that is not
part of this bill.
Okay speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman as
stated before the nation is a
more inclusive term that
contribution and we're cleaning
up the language change
preferences to contributions to
references to donations.
that concludes my questions
thank you so you know for the
digital and closed
down and members of the thank
you for all your questions I I
know in this is one of those
personal loan issue if a
personal loan from a family
member that for personal purpose
that is not subject to this act.
and that's a pretty clear
dividing line I mean you know
whether or not you're going
along for the campaign or
whether it's you know the fix
you know fix the fix your car or
pass through something like that
substitute for Senate bill forty
two as amended to the past world
final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill forty two as
amended the vote is now open.
Close the please don't run.
It does not close by one of
thirty three in the affirmative
three season the negative Senate
You Mr speaker.
The to read the record reflect
that election is server places
Senate bill forty two as of I'm
sorry.
The record reflect that election
of real property by the General
Services Department of
approximately four point one
acres and Bernalillo county at
four thousand three its
Boulevard Boulevard northeast
questions there's a regional
approach others Andy and a total
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
Mr speaker John and I'm actually
gonna take this opportunity to
first introduce my expert Anna
Silva from the General Services
Division and basically all we're
I'm sorry sell the property good
thing this is I don't sell the
property for various activities
that Bernalillo county would use
it for.
Is this vacant property or is
this a building.
Mr speaker gentleman the
property is currently vacant any
is that right Mr speaker John
yes we are.
Alike ballparks thank you gentle
lady.
Able
The gentle lady my friend a
cancer center right now
McKinley.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I when I looked at
the FIR I saw that there was a
Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley so the appraisal the
price and they're gonna just
adjust it from there.
Mr speaker gentle lady what's
the source of revenue from for
Brandt Bernalillo county to pay
for this.
is appropriating the money from
one of their funds however we
are unsure which one.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
just curious because I thought I
saw on the capital outlay bill
and I don't have in front of me
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
interesting we're unaware of any
such appropriation.
Mr speaker will the delay from
Bernalillo county correct
concealed Mr speaker gentle lady
Bernalillo county that's correct
I yield to you thank you Mr
speaker delayed must my
questions were answered so it's
utilizing the baseball field
okay and Mister speaker delay
those other question about the
funding so it's this is a ready
funded by Albuquerque.
Mr Donnelly from what we
understand today Bernalillo
county has the funds all of it
Mr speaker gently the only other
question who are we buying this
So Mister speaker gently so it's
owned by who was out again Mr
speaker telling Mr speaker
gentle lady it is owned by the
general services division of the
state.
of that land okay Mister speaker
dealing Dino approximate how
long ago did they purchase that
land.
Mr speaker to lady it's been
decades okay Mister speaker that
Bernalillo Representative dela
Cruz.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
county and my friend.
Mr speaker I yield to my a
Mr speaker I'm somewhat
disappointed that it wasn't just
simply transfer over and that
there wasn't actually a money
exchange I just feel like it's.
Kiki Saavedra was an assistant
director at the City of
Albuquerque parks and recreation
there was instrumental in this
all valley that belong to the
some people find that with
Representative assistant
director to consider a.
Thank you so that I was able to
convince the city council to
just simply turn it over to
Bernalillo county.
It's it's just I think it's just
unfortunate that there has to be
Food is about to close.
Three in the affirmative one in
the negative Senate joint
resolution thirteen duly passed
sixty as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill thank you Mr
said Mr speaker system about one
sixty what this does is Trancers
to focus on utilities and
without a stand for questions
there is a regulated from
earlier Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you Mr speaker does my my
simplify various functions of
government entities it's doing
some cleanup and it's helping
PRC do what it was meant to do
verses what it has been told to
bill one sixty as amended the
vote is now open.
Food is about to close.
No closed by a vote of sixty six
in the affirmative zero in the
negative.
Senate bill one sixty as amended
has duly passed this house.
Provided you already on item
Senate bill one thirty six as
amended on final passage has
been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment for substitution the
gentle lady to expand the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker as Senate
too is doing for judges.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
going to be set at and it is
that is that in
House Bill to.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
going to be it has been set up
by the governor's office at one
ninety they're feeling that this
is what will attract qualified
Twenty twenty four.
Thank you Mr speaker in July so
it is not in the budget for this
year that is correct Mr speaker
and gentle lady that.
paid I am understand is also
that it is they're they're
looking at changing the
structure just the way they are
with the judges and so they're
wanting to once again get
lady
The PRC commissioners now serve
our appointed by the governor
so much speaker gentle lady what
would we be setting something
gentle lady so it's starting at
that one ninety number but miss
and gentle lady what does an
increase to an is it tied to
just be one thirty six codifies
the public regulation
commissioner salary is equal to
the district judge sorry and so
the bill that we heard earlier
the new PRC
and nominating committee needs
to be able to to continue to
work together on on that pay
They're already at the amount
and we're just setting so
basically the speaker jelly this
is not changing the amount it's
just setting it to track with
District Court judge salaries.
Thank you Mr speaker heated.
Would you mind introducing your
expectantly I would love to my
expert is Senator Steven P.
Neville.
gentlelady yields of Mr speaker
kind gentle lady ideals thank
you so just some clarifying
questions Mr Janet what is the.
Since the governor set the set
the the salary rises then
gentle lady she said at one
ninety because it's currently at
ninety and she was not able to
get people to come and work for
the PRC.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
to be clear again whenever the
of salaries change for the
courts the judges than there the
PRC sellers will change in
bill one thirty six as amended
do now pass.
Final passage of Senate bill one
thirty six is amended the vote
is now open.
Was fifteen ninety for Minnesota
native Senator one thirty six is
amended as we passes house.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
fifteen on final passage has
been taken as amended has been
taken apologies let the record
reflect that collection is there
for places in the Judiciary
Committee subs to present a bill
protection bill creating the
crime of **** uniform with forty
nine other states and with that
I stand for questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
Senate Judiciary Committee
substantive reasonable to
fifteen as amended the vote is
now open.
Is Your vote the vote for
Representative small.
house deleted from earlier
percent of Chasey.
Mr speaker I will be going to
that order of business committee
reports.
To no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to ms been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventeen has had it under
Judiciary Committee substantive
Senate bill seventeen all those
present of this and I.
The supposed in a test of the
committee reported up to Mr
speaker health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
we are option available Canadian
port on Senate bill one eighty
one all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Elizabeth Thompson chair
reduction we're an adoption of a
federal committee for the Senate
bill two zero three as amended
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thomson chair reduction we're an
adoption of a federal committee
report on Senate bill two thirty
referred Senate bill three
twenty eight as amended has had
it under consideration point
same as recommendation to do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thomson
Supposedly the as of the
committee reported out.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to it's been
referred Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty seven has had it under
consideration point seems
tax business transportation
committee substitute presented
the one fifty seven all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Supposing the as of a committee
reported up to.
point seems recommendation that
it to pass respectfully
submitted during the chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're on
adoption of a federal computer
for the Senate bill two zero
five all those in favor signify
under consideration point things
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted directly
at the chair Mr speaker move
adoption and optional Federal
committed for the Senate bill
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to ms been referred
Senate bill two fifty one as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted that the
favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles healthy as a committee
for doctor.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
We're in the dumpster Federal
committed for the Senate finance
committee supposed to present a
bill to seventy five of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
under consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
directly and the chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're
adoption of the federal
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker taxation revenue
community was been referred
Senate bill three ninety six as
amended has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation to do pass
Supposing a test of a committee
for doctors.
Mr speaker and rolling in and
grossing Committee too is been
referred house bill four as
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Eleanor Chavez chair Mister
speaker move to adopt we are on
adoption of federal committee
report on house bill four as
amended house bill two twenty
six house labor veterans and
Was supposed to be as of the
committee reported opted that
the record reflect that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
house bill four as amended to
House Bill three twenty six
Mr speaker we go to that are in
business messages in addition is
signed by the officers of the
Senate in open session in
requests to signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted sure do
calendar item number two.
Gentleman from you.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
house bill two added of about a
hundred and thirty eight million
dollars of new recurring
spending Mr speaker this is
mainly for the opportunity
keep reserves at thirty percent
will have over a five hundred
million dollar track transferred
to this severance tax permanent
fund and the additions in the
scholarship airports and Mr
speaker that I stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Could you talk a little bit more
about that how we get to thirty
percent when we have reoccurring
spending an additional hundred
thirty million thank you Mr
a little bit Mr speaker gentle
lady because some bills may not
pass Mr speaker gentle lady
those reserves continue based
upon the reserves that we've had
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
talk a little bit about the
financial summary and what makes
up the reserve.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
gentle lady the.
The Mr speaker gentle lady we
the reserves my understanding in
house bill two we are not going
to be used tobacco settlement
funds for FY twenty four Mr
speaker gentle lady that's
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
and house appropriations and
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Calendar year twenty for FY
twenty five.
Mr speaker that's correct so we
are not going to be able to
financial summary Mr speaker
gentle lady that's I'm being
told by Max for Mr speaker Mr
Abbey is my experts that that's
incorrect Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady sorry
that we have the operating
reserve Mr speaker gentle lady
we have the appropriation
contingency fund the state
Mr speaker with the legislation
that we had just passed
regarding the rainy day fund a
couple days ago how does that
affect that the amount thank you
Mr speaker the gentle lady that
Mr speaker gentle lady the are
you I don't know which five year
average in which from which
rainy day fund or the tax
stabilization fund is based on a
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm being
told that it's the two point
eight five seven billion dollars
was speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman in terms of
the reserve I'd like to know
million Mr speaker gentle lady
in H. B. out of HB to speaker
gentle lady is your call we
passed or we will pass the bill
Mr speaker gentle lady that
lady conservatively at least
five hundred and sixty million
dollars this year into the the
severance tax permanent fund Mr
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm being
twenty five for twenty four
those will also go there Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman what what
those reversion amounts be.
unspent general funds that we
budget but are not used Mr
speaker gentleman I thought they
were from federal funds that
were used first by the state
agencies and then the general
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We have made the are pro the
opera revenues are contained
considered part of.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do
recall that yes.
Mr speaker gentleman when we
talk about the one percent pays
that across the board for all
Mr speaker gentle lady plus
another twenty seven million for
public schools.
Please.
By my experts.
million dollars Mr speaker
gentle lady.
that go thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady roughly a hundred
million of that went to the
opportunity scholarship speaker
gentle lady roughly twenty two
they propose Mr speaker gentle
lady another two point nine
million for Medicaid match
including for rural federally
qualified health centers Mr
speaker gentle lady about four
percentage of of growth in
spending for this year over last
Mr speaker gentle lady roughly
fourteen percent.
Mr speaker gentleman what was
last year.
make just a couple comments I
didn't get called on when you
put the budget on I did want to
thank you and I wanted to thank
the committee for all their hard
work I think they did a good job
close to that I am
Mr speaker I'm get a lot of
chatter over here.
You know I just like to say
something about that Mr speaker
stop the chatter Mr speaker
gentleman
like I said I thought you guys
did a good job of certainly I
think the staff particularly LFC
staff and of the HSC staff did a
to the debate and I listen to
some of the members concerns
from the from the committee
itself and it was not good.
impression of what happened in
the other chamber.
I think that it was not handled
properly I've talked to
different members that are on
that Senate finance committee
you may not know about that we
don't know that for sure that is
what I heard when I was
listening to debate I'm
concerned about transparency a
hundred thirty million dollars I
I question that and not being
there not being part of those
negotiations are not being as
bold and open as I am with the
hope that helps of stands its
ground and doesn't roll over for
the other side I was kind of
hoping that you would not
concur.
appreciate it hurts my heart for
being on the HSC committee for
twenty two years and shepherding
LFC for the last X. number of
years to see that kind of
activity without I appreciate
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from Lee
F. excuse me from of that all
Chairman of Mr speaker I I'd.
I would like
if you would if you could.
Explain to me.
When you presented the budget.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for the question Mr speaker
gentleman we monitor it closely
Mr speaker gentleman I monitor
many things daily including oil
the speaker gentleman while at
the same time using general fund
for capital outlay the speaker
gentleman ultimately I am
comfortable with this although
Was particularly troubling to me
two Mr speaker gentleman so I
think were this is
over twenty years that we've had
this particular practice Mr
speaker gentleman we're also
as I go through the list.
the sentence in on the governor
add ons and subtractions to the
house.
Was that something that was
particularly troubling.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
there is
roughly twelve to fourteen
million dollars for attendance
success initiatives for special
education and it was initiatives
and some other pieces Mr speaker
added on there's a number of
those
The and and the first one is six
million dollars for the law
enforcement recruitment
employment I think we talked
that seems like a pretty stiff
left thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman Mr speaker German
you're right it's a hundred
million dollars Mr speaker
gentleman the house bill three
speaker gentleman and the House
did time our funding to that
that that bill which I think is
a credit for us Mr speaker
things of a much bigger
gentleman there's there's a ten
million dollars
for the San Juan County energy
transition can you go into that
purposes from two as as we've
all heard Mr speaker gentleman
to help the community through a
particularly challenging time
bipartisan fashion including
additional funding that goes to
workforce solutions and others.
Of which it is what it is.
But Mr speaker and gentleman I
become increasingly alarmed.
To for us to figure out exactly
where we're going to get those
dollars when oil and gas is is
is not prevalent.
speaker I've I've not on this
bill but as you well know I've
had a house memorial in your
committee sitting for two three
weeks.
This continuing increase in
spending at these rates.
It's very troubling to me.
I don't think we can sustain.
At wait wait we're gonna have a
real problem Senator later and
In either of figuring out.
How we are going to live.
With oil and gas for a number of
years probably decades.
And and to speaker we're spend
and.
A lot of money.
For transition.
That we really don't know where
I chose the Mexico tech just
because I chose to Mexico tech
but somebody's got to figure out
where we're going to get this
money from if we're if we really
are going to go down this path.
side obviously and we need to be
grown up and figure out where
our revenue streams are going to
come from Santo later so Mister
speaker I still am concerned
with the level of spending I
on the tax bill both really
troubling to me so much speaker
Jim I appreciate thank you Sir
for the debate on the motion the
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from the.
This is so.
Spending concern is now.
is correct for what is in our
previous fiscal year.
Mr speaker gentleman it was
roughly about eight point four
billion dollars
vast majority of the new revenue
that we have this year is not
going into new recurring
spending spend about a third of
it roughly.
Roughly seven point four five
the speaker Jim Hemphill so
Mr speaker and gentleman the
percentage increase care over
here between twenty one and
and Mr chairman historically.
How much.
Able to increase spending
sustainably.
talked about in the speaker
gentleman with Senate bill
twenty six that we passed off of
this house floor that is at the
executive which dedicates excess
never done before is to save
like we're saving now Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
severance tax permanent fund can
you tell me by how much.
Gentleman the the the funds
going in the severance tax
permanent fund were reduced
through rebates that went out to
additional New Mexicans Mr
speaker and at a higher rate
million dollar fund that we set
up for the hermit's peak calf
canyon fire Mr speaker gentleman
so what we sent over which was
about five hundred and sixty
little over five hundred sixty
million Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
dollars was speaker gentleman
but again I would point out that
we are sending almost six
hundred million into the
severance tax permanent fund
percent reserve which is so.
Adequate given the volatility in
the commodities market so how
and we also delayed by one year
the movement of the tobacco
settlement permanent fund out of
reserves Mr speaker gentleman.
it is included in reserves
gentleman we excluded
immediately Mr speaker gentleman
this budget will exclude it for
scholarship I was another bank
that number hundred and forty
five point nine million with a
hundred billion that.
kind increase that is over FY
twenty two thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
gentleman that is a very
significant increase from FY
twenty three roughly about two
trucking certificate to your
associates are a four year
degree is growing Mr speaker
gentleman.
The cost increases throughout
our university system.
Mr speaker gentleman those are
separate from what we do here
Mister speaker gentleman these
are constitutionally created
schools in most cases governed
by independent boards of
directors.
believe some institutions of
raise tuition Mr speaker
gentleman can I would emphasize
important for the body that
those are independent
constitutionally created schools
all the number of students use
in our her institutions holding
steady the last information I
heard was that was actually on
percent in some cases slightly
more depending upon the
institution but Mr speaker
gentleman higher education
enrollment again whether it's a
Thank you for the Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Of two sixty billion dollars.
Four billion to fund and forty
any substantive plan to
accomplish that goal.
Gentleman I believe that might
have been seven bill seven that
we just passed off of this for
Mr speaker and gentleman and so
those first two is inverted it
was the numbers belong in the
other piece for speaker
gentleman so it's increase
general fund
Mr speaker gentleman and so
Gentleman I really want to see
the description of the plan
Austin dental.
One.
yes I fifty million dollars of
this form was supposed to
provide income for the legacy
conservation program fund to
fund is that accurate.
Everything is accurate Mr
speaker gentleman but for the
the funds that can be use those
use over a four year period and
are capped at a certain amount
The common for this permanent
fund being used to important
business conservation activities
fifty is now an employee of
permanent fund increases Mr
speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr chairman one last
question fifty million dollars a
I was going to be accomplished.
This gentleman that was added in
the Senate will go through the
Human Services Department
similar to other programs that
of rolled out over the last few
County.
With the process that was
developed over.
Two budget together was open
approached the body not to
concur with these changes thank
you Mr speaker thank you Jim
thank you for the debate from
German from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
and I'm not sure who's the
discussion was with
But you said that the reserves
should be above thirty percent
Mr speaker gentleman and there
is some spending in this budget
that is the contingent upon
legislation for it not to pass
you stated that you expected a
number of reserve reversions to
to to go back in no thank you Mr
speaker gentleman I I Mr speaker
gentleman yes of reversions
that we have and we finished
last week with a hundred and six
rigs we have we're supposed to
keep eighty to eighty five which
keeps production where where
it's at is what we're told by
do hope that continues so for
the foreseeable future Mr
speaker and gentleman
At the end of the the the last
so Mister speaker gentleman the
estimate for for FY twenty three
before the administrator
to forty nine point three
percent.
Thank you Mr gentleman and works
the acting.
Similar Mr speaker gentleman I
at thirty percent now and will
very likely be above thirty
percent when we look at actuals
after everything is come in Mr
for FY twenty two.
Gentleman I'm cert I'm told by
my ex for a course many of those
were federal funds but three to
four hundred million dollars Mr
were sort of the time driven Mr
speaker gentleman and not driven
by an agency not using funds for
their intended purposes thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman so
little better for us to use
potentially forecast Mr speaker
gentleman I think that's fair I
think we reversions going
forward outside as we as we wind
down move out of the public
Police of the budget over to the
Senate obviously we sent over
with a thirty percent reserve
reserve
and.
thank you Mr leader gentleman
that Mr Chairman is I've talked
about the recurring spending the
vast majority of that was for
the opportunity scholarship
lot more for a one percent pay
increase thank you Mr chairman
what was that amount for all of
those items you just stated Mr
speaker gentleman roughly about
Count on the tobacco settlement
fund to
to get to to keep us at at the
thirty percent reserve so we're
covering a hundred that hundred
gentleman that is our intention
some speaker and gentlemen so.
if we're gonna trying stay at
thirty percent with the.
Actually five percent the
we send over a budget to the
Senate will probably have to
target a thirty five percent or
so reserves budget for it to
come back depleted from the
Senate the way it did speaker
send that over I know I asked
the question in committee as to
whether or not we left enough
money in there for the Senate.
take to make sure that we leave
enough for their priorities Mr
speaker and gentleman because
otherwise we'll be coming back
in here to kick the can down the
the discussion earlier.
About the reversions the speaker
and gentleman
The number of the FTEs the
fifteen twenty percent on
average the.
Speaker and gentleman I would
like to see us put dollars in
the budget to beneficial use
their budget for two to.
be used at with the discretion
of the secretaries of those
departments I would prefer and I
think many of the members would
that this is coming back with
such a substantial increase from
the Senate so much so that we
had to kick the can down the
road with the tobacco settlement
fund
I believe going forward need we
earlier so that
we're not left to to expect
money back in reversions support
to have to re
was a.
A reliable no vote on so many
things during the budget process
this year
I know surprised everybody
depleting.
our reserves for putting more
money into year over year
spending there are plenty of
projects Mr speaker and
gentleman in each of our
debate the gentleman to close on
the motion to concur thank you
Mr speaker Mister speaker the
body I very much appreciate the
chance to have this conversation
investments in public safety and
Mr speaker and body we are
saving more money than we have
ever stayed before we are on
track to do all three things
thirty percent reserves and Mr
speaker body to save for the
long term with almost six
hundred million dollars going
into the severance tax permanent
fund satires the body Mr speaker
because I was a nine.
Was me yeah I just have it
we have been committed to House
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate tax business and
transportation committees
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty three as amended request
a concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted sure do
go on Senate chief clerk message
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty three as amended and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
amending the medical malpractice
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three as
amended.
The tax and business and
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Bernalillo Representative
Trujillo is fine she's back.
don't plan on coming back for
some light third reading this
evening
so please plan accordingly.
Some of the leadership of both
you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will meet a
at
for fifteen and also members we
are going to have a hopefully a
going from the back rows no hi
boo to I'm doing also do you.
sandals on the fifth Mr speaker
that house Energy Environment
natural resources committee
after not having meetings for a
couple days will tomorrow at
and public works and capital
improvements committee will be
meeting tomorrow at ten AM.
For.
you Mr speaker your house
commerce will meet today at four
fifteen and we will also be
having a morning meeting
probably about nine thirty
tomorrow.
heard a rumor there's Blake's
lot of order being delivered to
desks at six PM
the web is going to give me hers
and she's already eating lunch.
this.
Deliver you.
Mr speaker of the house doing
