Members, please come to the
chambers, roll call is now open.
No
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from Bernard Lee,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Please
join me in prayer.
Our Heavenly Father, we really
thank you for this day on this
March 1st we are beginning the
final 3 of our 60 day
legislative session we pray to
really do our best. We pray to
craft legislation and policies
that can really benefit each and
every one of our precious New
Mexican residents. Heavenly
Father today Ramadan starts and
on Wednesday, Ash Wednesday will
begin the beginning of Lent. We
that all of the fasting, the
praying.
The personal sacrifices that
people are going to make over
the next month to 40 days can be
meaningful for those of us in
the body doing them and for all
of our constituents. We thank
you for the privilege of serving
the people of the state of New
Mexico in this body.
Thank you for us to gather today
to do work.
That is informed by compassion.
Expertise, love and goodness.
Amen.
Generally from Leena Cortez with
the Pledge of Allegiance.
lady from Santa Fe Cerrato with
Play ball, your lady from Santa
Fe,
we go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good afternoon members.
Good afternoon members.
It's great to see all of you.
Everybody partied out. Everybody
danced out.
The sergeants looked a little
sluggish this morning. I wonder
why.
Her Cheeto was out there on the
dance floor.
Till 2 a.m.
Announcements
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of
announcements today, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I do want the members
to know that the house dominated
the floor last night. The dance
floor.
Mr. Speaker, it was awesome to
see, uh, so many reps from both
sides of the aisle out um with
their dancing shoes on, but most
especially I loved seeing our
sergeants, our IT staff, our
clerk staff, um, just getting
out and enjoying themselves and
having fun, um, it was a great
party and I wanna congratulate
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
who put in my opinion, the best
100th bell party together, uh,
that I've ever been to. And
gentle lady, correct me if I'm
wrong.
But usually 100th Bill parties
are
Sponsored by the sponsor of each
chamber of the 100th bill. Was
there a Senate? There was. Who
was it?
Mr. Speaker, your Senate sponsor
this year was Senator Nicole
Tobiasson.
Senator Tobiasin and Senator
Enard and a great job on an
incredible party. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you all for coming. It was
so nice to see you and have a
good time with everybody.
And Mr. Speaker, we have a
birthday in the house today.
Uh oh, whose birthday is it? Mr.
Speaker, it is the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Representative
Andrea Romero's birthday today.
Is it within the rules of the
house to wish happy birthday and
sing happy birthday during
announcements or is it point of
personal privilege? When should
it happen?
Mr. Speaker, if you could just
unanimously consent my bills
through today. I think that's
the gift I'm looking for
actually. no objection to this.
Mr. Speaker, I think we should
sing to her.
Gentlemen from San Juan to sing.
Go to need a lot of help here.
OK, here we go. Happy birthday
to you.
Happy birthday to you. Happy
birthday, dearre.
Happy birthday to you.
And Mr. Speaker, we will have
cake and Little Debbie's in the
lounge to celebrate.
after party after floor session
at the Romero compound.
It's not quite a compound, Mr.
Speaker. I live in a cracker
Jack box that I can afford in
Santa Fe, so housing is
expensive along with eggs.
Any other announcements?
All right, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business committee
reports. It is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 277 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Gander from chair.
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report. We adoption of
a favorable committee report for
House Bill 277. All those in
favorina.
Also supposedly, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 433.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Gander
chair adoption of the committee
report adoption of a favorable
report for House Bill 433, all
those in favor, signified by say
I.
All the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 75 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Ganrao chair, I move
adoption of the committee
report, adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
75 as amended. All those in
favor, say 5 by say 9.
Aponey
I just haven't committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 163 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andres, chair, I move adoption
of the committee report of a
favorable report for Senate Bill
163 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Proposena, the habit committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 408 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
thence referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
Rent adoption of a favorite
report for House Bill 408. All
those in favor in but I.
Bona, the eyes habit committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 420 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Move adoption. We're
adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
420. All those in favor of C5
C9.
Of the supposed nay.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to who
has been referred House Bill 439
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
439. All those in favor see5 by
saying I.
All the supposed need.
The ice habit can be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee, to
whom has been referred House
Bill 441 has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption.
We're an adoption of a.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report for Allsville
441. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose nay
Yeah it's committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 461
has had it under consideration
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and he referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair
adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report for us 461. All
those in favor 75 by say 9.
Although supposed name, yeah
have it report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 6 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
6 as amended. All those in favor
abbaya.
I suppose me.
The ISA committee reported out.
Mm
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to whom has been referred House
Bill 233 as amended has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation,
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Doreen Waallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption for 233 as amended. All
those in favors 5 by 9.
I was a Bosna, the IA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
team has been referred House
Bill 281 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Dorian Y Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 281. All those in
favor say aye.
I suppose nay, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 346 has had it under
consideration in reports saying
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but that House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 346 do pass and
thence refer to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y Gallego's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable community report for
house about 346, but a favorable
committee report for House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 346. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All the supposed nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House,
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 370 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted, Doreen Waalgo's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house, Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
370. All those in favor signify
by saying aye.
All the supposed nay.
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
421 has had it under
consideration in reports and
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 421 do pass and he referred
to the Taxation revenue
Committee respectfully
submitted. Doreen Y. Gallego's
chair. We adoption
favorable committee report for
House Bill 421, but a favorable
committee report for House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for housing 421. All those in
favor.
signified by saying I.
Although suppose nay, the eyes
have it be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
447 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the taxation
and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted. Doreen Y
Gallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
447. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
I suppose, nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and finance committee to him has
been referred House Bill 15 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption report for House Bill
15. All those in favor are
signified by saying I.
I suppose nay, yes have a report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 17 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption.
We're an adoptional favorable
committee report for Os bill 17.
All those in favor of saying 5
but say aye.
I suppose nay, you have a report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 63 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are an adoption of a favorable
report for House Bill 63, as
amended. All those in favor
signified by say I.
All I suppose nay, the Isabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 158 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption of a
favorable report for House
Labor, veterans, Military
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 158. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
Although suppose nay, the abic
can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 289 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan S
small chair. Mr.
Speaker, adoption for House Bill
289. All those in favor
signified by saying aye.
I suppose nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Bill 31 as amended,
introduced by Senator Campos, an
act relating to public finance,
providing zero interest loans to
political subdivisions of the
state and electric cooperatives
that have been approved for
federal public assistance
funding from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for
a federally declared natural
disaster requiring reimbursement
contracts, providing for
enforcement of the terms of the
loan contracts, creating the
natural disaster revolving fund.
Providing an annual transfer
from the appropriation
contingency fund to the natural
disaster revolving Fund.
Providing that the state
reserves shall consist of
certain funds, creating the
federal reimbursement revolving
fund, making appropriations,
declaring an emergency. Senate
Bill 31 as amended.
Santa Bill 31 as amended, have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 143 as amended,
introduced by Senator Munoz, an
act relating to public
utilities, creating the utility
oversight fund, increasing
certain fees and changing
distribution of collected fees
and penalties, providing for the
enforcement of fees by the
public regulation commission,
Senate Bill 143 as amended 3 as
amended have been read twice by
title is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 128, introduced by
Senator Doig, an act relating to
transportation, prohibiting
special registration plates from
displaying certain characters.
Senate Bill 128.
Senate Bill 128. Haven't been
read twice by title.
Is referred to house
transportation public works and
capital improvements Committee
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 158, introduced by
Senator Schendo, an act relating
to economic development
incentives requiring the
economic development department
to compile and present an annual
report on projects funded with
public support pursuant to the
local economic Development Act
requiring the economic
development department in the
Workforce solutions department
to provide information to the
staff of the legislative Finance
Committee for purposes of
evaluating economic development
incentives requiring the
industrial training.
to report certain development
training data to the legislative
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
158. Senate Bill 158 haven't
been read to us by title is
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 345 introduced by
Senator Figueroa, an act
relating to school personnel,
allowing the use of a teacher
portfolio for Level One
licensure, allowing reciprocity
for levels 2 and 3 New Mexico
licensure for instructional
support providers who are
licensed in other states. Senate
Bill 345.
Senate Bill 345 have been
written to us by title is
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 101 as amended,
introduced by Senator Munoz, an
act relating to livestock
increasing fees for services
relating to livestock. Senate
Bill 101 as amended.
Sen a bill 101 as amended,
haven't been.
Read twice by title is referred
to the house, agriculture as gas
and Water Resources Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Memorial 47, introduced by
Representatives Mirabel Moya and
Baca, a memorial requesting the
legislative education Study
Committee to study public school
employee compensation. House
Memorial 47 been read to us by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee.
House Memorial 48, introduced by
Representative Matthews, a
memorial requesting the
legislative education Study
Committee to convene a task
force to study the feasibility
of making all educational
activities offered by high
schools free and recommend
strategies for providing free
educational activities to all
students. House Memorial 48.
Is Memorial 48 haven't been
written to us by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, we're going to take up
some 3rd reading, um, and then
be done for the day after said
3rd reading. Any announcements
before I move on, gentle lady
from Karen and Socorro Valencia,
he had a Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I just wanted to brag
on my brother-in-law Randall
Major a little bit. He's having
a book signing. He actually
wrote a book, uh, called We Were
Cowboys, and it's a book signing
in Magdalena, New Mexico today.
I'm missing that unfortunately,
but that's OK. I'm
took this job for a reason. And
uh the book We Were Cowboys is
an intimate and heartfelt
collection of stories written by
Randall Glenn Major, a 4th
generation rancher with deep
ties to the rugged beauty of the
southwestern New Mexico. This
memoir takes readers on a
journey through Major's life
offering a blend of personal
ancestral and family history and
a tribute to the land and the
lifestyle that shaped him.
So it's on Amazon, uh, we were
cowboys. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Very cool. Congratulations.
Gentlemen from.
Curry debaca Guadalupe
Roosevelt, San Miguel
representante Samoa Mr. Speaker,
thank you. I'd actually like to
brag on my grandson today.
He pitched a game yesterday in
Rio Rancho for the close
Wildcats, and they held down, he
pitched the whole game and they
held down the other team by 2 to
1.
All right, congratulations.
the announcements, lady from
Berlin. Mr. Speaker, I want to
announce that the Lobos just
beat Air Force 92 to 71. All
right, lobos.
Everyone's a little.
lady from Santa Fe. Uh, thank
you Mr. Speaker. Just a quick
point of personal pri privilege.
I, um, just want to express my
full, um, solidarity with the
country of Ukraine and the
freedom fighters who are still
fighting a war for justice and
for democracy there, um,
President Zelinsky visited the
White House yesterday, um, and
we're in a sort of unknown place
at this moment as to where we
may end up and I just feel that
it's extremely important to
continue our solidarity with
that country that has been at
the front lines of, of fighting.
this war, um, for again, uh,
democracy and justice and that
and um we just condemn Russian
aggression and um stand with
them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Any
other announcements?
Right, gentle lady from.
Santa Fe Mister Speaker, I move
we go to that order of business.
3rd reading of legislation.
It's an objection. It is so
ordered. Members will call your
attention to item number 33 on
the regular 3rd reading
calendar.
Gentle lady from.
Dona Anna, are you ready on item
33. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, if
you can get me to that point the
record reflect that all action
replacing House Bill 339 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate, amendment, or
substitution, the generally to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 339 adds income-based
tenant protections to the New
Mexico Human Rights Act with
that I stand for questions.
There is a beat. The gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
I will yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
gentle lady, can you tell me why
this bill was brought forth and
what, what we're trying to
accomplish with this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um,
thank you, gentlemen. The reason
that we're bringing this
legislation forward is because
there are um tenants right now
across our state who, um, have.
income that supplemental income
to their regular income that
sometimes they're denied um any
opportunity for housing because
the landlord may choose um not
to provide them that opportunity
because of that source of
income.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, are we talking
about Section 8 housing HUD
housing here.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yes,
we're talking about Section 8,
Social Security anything that um
is supplemental to anybody's um
uh regular income that is, that
is the source of income that
we're, that we're talking about.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I think, I
think it was last year we heard
a similar bill to this. We heard
a bill about, uh, Section 8
housing. And so that's why I was
wondering if this was something
similar to that, um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you, uh, as I recall, there was
800 apartments that were
available in Bernaleo County
alone for Section 8 housing.
Um,
can you tell me statewide how
many we need.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't have that data with me at
the moment, but there's
definitely a significant amount
of housing that we need at the
moment. This bill would help to
provide assistance to folks who
are, um, who have access to
that.
who could have access to the
housing that is available.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I, I mean, I guess
my question goes back to that
same question I just asked. Is
there a need? I mean, last year
we had 800 available and we had
in the committee hearing we had
um a couple of different uh big
owners of, of real estate that
came in and said we have lots
and lots and lots of property.
One was 800, I think the other
one said over 200, so I'm just
trying to figure out, is there a
need here or is this just, we're
going down another path.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, just so
that you all know, um, my expert
is here and her name is
Elizabeth Elia. She's the
co-founder and secretary of the
New Mexico Center for Housing
Law, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, there is not an
abundance of housing at the
moment here in New Mexico, um,
what right now we actually need
um um representative the gentle
lady from Santa Fe just pointed
out to me that we have about, we
need about 35,000 units of
housing for lowing.
people here in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, are
we talking 35,000 HUD?
Apartments or houses, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, 35,000 units
of housing.
In general.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, can you tell me
where you got that number?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
Office of housing.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen gentle lady, um, can
you walk me through the process
then on what it takes for a
person to um.
Let's just say I'll take myself,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
let's say I, I owned an
apartment or a duplex, and I
wanted to become a HUD housing,
uh, or to for my duplex as for
HUD housing. Can you walk me
through that process, what I'd
have to do?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, so if you were to
decide that you wanted to
provide housing to Section 8
recipients. What you would do is
you would go through your
typical um application process
where someone would come in they
would apply you would take, um,
you would decide that you want
to accept Section 8,
then you would have to go
through a process where you
would do an inspection, you
would have to sign an addendum
to be able to provide that and
then um
Um, once that goes through, then
you'll be able to um start
receiving that monthly
supplemental income to help pay
help uh the, the, the tenant to
be able to pay for their
housing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Let's take this one
step further. My duplex is 50
years old. Is there anything
special I need to do for that?
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, great question.
There is no issue with the, with
the year that the home was
built, it, it all of the
inspection has to look at is the
condition of the home. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So can you tell me what
condition means?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and, and just to be
clear, this legislation is for
multiple types of supplemental
vouchers in the case of Section
8 under HUD, there is a defined
definition related to um your
question where it gives clarity
on the specifics around what
that condition needs to be.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. It's not in the
bill, as I understand it, so
that's why I'm asking the
question, um, that's I have a 50
year old duplex. I inherited it
from my great grandfather and
I'm not good at maintaining it.
So the reason I'm asking that
question is if so you're saying
that this is all voluntary then
I don't have to go down that if
I don't want to. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
legislation, if passed, and the
changes are made to the Human
Rights Act. What it does is
that, um, it will create, um,
it, it, it makes it essentially
that a landlord you cannot deny
somebody housing because of
their source of income. So if
you already have that
established, great, there's a
lot of good landlords across the
state who already received
supplemental income, they're
fine with it. If this is
something that you wanna
pursue obviously that is we
welcome it, but what we're
saying is is that with the units
that are currently available for
housing, um, there's landlords
are, are if somebody comes up to
you and applies for your unit,
um, you can't deny them.
The opportunity to
To apply just because of their
source of income. You can still
have them, you can still do
credit reports, you can still
check their history, you can
still do all of the things that
you're doing already for
tenants, um, when you're looking
for tenants, but you just cannot
deny them just because of their
source of income.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So this is going
to be not voluntary.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, right
now, landlords can legally
refuse to rent someone simply
because they're they use a
housing voucher. Our bill would,
would not allow that.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
young ladies. So let's go back
to that 50 year old apartment
that I have.
A duplex needs work.
If this law is enacted,
Then I'm under the gun to fix
that. I'm on a fixed income. I'm
70 years old.
Can you tell me how I'm gonna be
able to afford this to fix it
without getting into trouble.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no, you don't have to
make the repairs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So if I don't make the
repairs, then I'm gonna be, will
I be charged with this crime if
this bill goes into effect?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill is, is only provides an
enforcement mechanism for when
you deny someone housing because
of their source of income.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So that's what I'm
trying to get at. So if I don't
fix my apartment up.
And I don't go voluntarily on to
Section 8 red housing, then I'm
not going to be held accountable
to this new law.
Mr. Speaker, no.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. If, if you go through
the process of the inspection
and HUD comes back and says, you
know what, your, your house,
your, your housing has not
passed the inspection, the heart
inspection, uh, that doesn't
mean anything in the sense of
you being, uh, being punitive
towards you, um, they will just
say this isn't, this isn't
proper housing for this section
8 recipient.
And there will be no violation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Is that somewhere that
somebody could actually look in
in HUD housing somewhere.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you. That's what I wanted
to know because my apartment's
50 years old. I'm 70. I don't
have the money to fix it, put
the double pane windows in, put
the solid doors in.
Who knows what else I'd have to
do in order to pass the
inspection.
And that's my concern with we
have a lot of uh Mr. Speaker, we
have a lot of folks that have
one apartment or one duplex or
one little house, and my concern
is making sure that those folks
aren't obligated to do this
because they don't have the
finances to do it in the first
place and we're OK with that. If
they don't, if they don't pass
that inspection, they're not
going to be held up to this law.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Thank you, thank you, um.
On page
24
Um, remember before you
continue, there's been requests
for folks to remove their
jackets if you wish to do that,
you may do so at this point.
Excuse me. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Um, on page 24, starting with
line 2.
And that, uh, through 10.
Can you tell me what that
complaint would look like.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So this section,
section one, it's, it's exactly
how it's stated, um, what will
happen and it happens with
consumer protection issues when
somebody has a complaint and
they submit it to the AG's
office. There's a form, all of
this stuff will be filled out
and, um, and the process that's
here in this section that
mechanisms within the Attorney
general will be similar to what
we see already with consumer
protection, uh, complaints.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, can you give me um
a little help with any further
action line 9, can you, can you
tell me what that would entail
then or what?
What, what does that mean? I'm
not a lawyer and so I'm just
trying to figure out what that
means, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um.
I am not a lawyer either and so
uh I appreciate the question,
but, um, so that section is so
that um when the whole process
goes through with the Attorney
general.
Um, and, and where, where it
talks about any further action
is provided in the section, um,
usually what happens is, is that
if there are findings based on
that, um, section, then what'll
happen is that they'll move on
to making the investigation. So
right now there is no
enforcement mechanism when it
comes to issues related to
tenants in this capacity and so
this section allows for the AG
to be able to move forward with.
that investigation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, can you tell me,
um, would you ever envision, um,
a 70 year old that, um.
Had been uh offering HUD housing
for.
You know, a number of years and
violated the law unknowingly in
this.
Instance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no.
OK, thank you. Um, online 16 in
section 2.
Mhm
Can you tell me what constitutes
public interest.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So, um, if, if we
read the, the, the sentence in
its entirety, um, that, that
last sentence means that the
person would be a the proceeding
against that person would be in
in in the public interest, so in
the.
In the betterment of.
The community.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So you're saying it
would be in the interest of the
individual that felt like he was
discriminated against.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no, this, what this
does is, is.
It provides an enforcement
mechanism for the Attorney
General to be able to further
investigation if it deems
necessary, um, again, uh, uh,
the person who was applying for
housing if they're applying to
your um rental, um, if you
explicitly deny someone the
opportunity to apply for that
housing because you have issues
with the the voucher that this
person is using that then would
be
for the AG to to to look into
whether or not that was that was
done.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
I, I think I understand what
what you're saying there. Can we
turn to page 25 and I'm, I'm
glad that it says the Attorney
general may instead of Shell,
um, I fear, Mr. Speaker, that
and gentle lady that um.
Uh, you know, when you've got a
75 year old that has a duplex.
And their kids don't live in the
state of New Mexico or even in
the same town as them. I fear
that perhaps one of them will
make a mistake and and so I'm
glad to see that it, it says may
instead of shell. Can you tell
me, um, the last um 8 line 1819,
it says in addition to any
equitable relief imposed by the
court. Can you tell me what that
means?
I think
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so the 5000 is the
civil penalty, um, it's the cap,
but then, um, it also provides
um the discretion for the judge
to be able to make any
additional, um, if necessary.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So that would,
would that, um, and, and again,
I'm I'm not an attorney would
that be punitive damages then?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Yeah
It would, it would be the, it
would be equity.
So usually equitable equitable
um
Relief is, is our, our.
Injunctions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I guess I'm, I'm
not quite following you there.
If, if you have, um, a, a, a, a
corporation that has violated
this. I, I substantially, I can
understand that and I'm trying
to figure out for the, for the
mom and pop that have one or two
apartments. I'm just trying to
figure out how bad it could be
for them, and that's why I'm
asking you the questions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. It really just
depends on each each case, um,
like I said, it's the 5000 cap
on the violation if, if it's
ruled that they um did
discriminate on the source of
income, but then the equitable
relief imposed, it doesn't
necessarily have to be monetary.
It can also be, like I
mentioned, um, an injunction or
um other things that the judge
might implore in order to
Uh, to finalize this specific
case.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady. Um, can you, on the
first page, we're talking about
an inval invalid screening
process. Would this be a
process, uh, when somebody
walked into or called me on the
phone when they saw my 4 rent
sign in the window and are we
talking about that type of a
screening or what are we talking
about in there?
Can you direct us to the page
that you're at, sir? Yes, ma'am
thank you page 1 line 13 and 14.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So whenever um you
put out a sign that you're
looking to um have a renter, a
tenant, um, you would then ask
them to do an application you
would ask for their, how they're
going to pay for it, you would
probably run a credit report,
all of that. That is, that is
part of that is that is the
screening.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
generally that's I, I, I thought
that would be it, but I just
wasn't sure so I'm gonna, I'm
gonna put out a um
Um
A for rent sign and then I'm
gonna run an ad in the paper and
in the paper I'm gonna say, um,
for rent, I don't accept accept
HUD housing because my
apartments are not up to HUD
standards. Is that legal, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, why
wouldn't it?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
if we pass this law and it go if
it it goes into law that would
be considered discriminating
against a person's sources of
income.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
I am, I'm not gonna fix my
apartment up to standards.
To meet the HUD housing
standards.
So then how come I'm going to be
held accountable for this.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I mean, maybe don't rent. I
mean, I don't know what else to
tell you.
OK, now, now.
Wow, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, my point again is if I
don't meet the HUD standards.
And I've been reading, renting
that for the for the last 40
years and it's 50 years old and
I don't have the money.
To get it up to HUDD specs.
Who's going to pay for that?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so the, the violation
is if you put up the sign that
says that you are not accepting
HUD housing. If you put up a
sign that says you're renting,
um, then you would go through
the entire process of of
checking every all of the
applicants, um, if your house or
your rental does not meet up to
standards through HUD standards
then.
Then it, it doesn't meet the
standard, you're not violating
any
There's no, there's no
violation.
And, and furthermore, this also
um a lot of, of what the the the
process in terms of getting your
house, um, uh, reviewed in in
order to see if it meets
standards. It doesn't, it's,
it's typical to other types of,
of, um, it's very
What's the word? It's, it's
pretty much every, every single
process is very similar, so it's
not more work than necessary.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So as I
understand this, I can't post
that I don't accept HUD.
Vouchers
Um, but when they come and ask
me and say, I have a HUD
voucher. All I have to do is say
I'm not qualified for HUD
housing and, and I can't accept
it. I'm sorry.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
You, you are, you are required
under this bill to be able to,
um, you should not deny somebody
their source of income, you
should be willing to go through
the process if you think that
this person would be a good
renter.
Um, you can't just deny them the
housing by saying that, you know
what, I can't do the inspection
or I don't have time to do the
inspection, the, the, the whole
point of this legislation is
that if you have several
applicants and one of them is
very, very good. You really want
them, but they have a voucher.
You can't deny them the
opportunity for that housing
without considering the pro
going through the process of
what that entails.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but that whole
process you're talking about
then would be me updating my
apartment and spending thousands
of dollars in order to
accommodate the one person
that's coming in and asking me
to rent my apartment.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
mentioned earlier, you're,
you're not required to um update
your, uh, the, the, the facility
or the housing that you're
renting, you're just, you need
to just be able to pass the um
the HUD inspection.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but I'm not going
to pass the inspection and
that's my point. I'm not going
to pass the inspection. I don't
have, I barely have enough money
to live. I don't have the money
to fix up the apartment. HUD
isn't gonna give me the money to
fix up my apartment, so I'm
going to put a full rent sign in
it. I am going to say when that
person comes up and says, um,
rep, I'd love to rent your
apartment. I've got a HUD
voucher. I'm gonna say I'm
sorry, but I am not HUD
qualified. I cannot accept that,
and I am not.
going to be in trouble when I
say that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
under this bill, you are not
allowed to preempt somebody the
opportunity to um to get
housing.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
my, my apartment is 50 years
old. It is not up to HUD
standards. I'm not going to get
it up to HHD standards and I got
lead paint, I got single pane
windows that that leak like a
sieve. My roof might leak. I
don't know, but that's my point.
If I am not had up toUD
standards, then why would I go
through the whole process?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Hud will
HUD is the, the entity that will
make the decision on whether or
not your housing passes
inspection.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and then
ladies. So I'm gonna, I'm gonna
call HUD if I, if I wanna get on
HHUD, uh, the housing list. I'm
gonna call HUD. I'm gonna have
him come out and inspect this.
If I don't qualify, then I'm off
the hook.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, in this, in these
scenarios, the tenant is the one
that's receiving the voucher,
the tenant is the one that is
talking to the section 8 and uh
folks and telling them, listen,
I found a, uh, I found a place
to live. This is where I, I'm,
I'm looking to, this is where
I've applied. Can you please set
up an inspection so that I can
be considered for so that the
voucher can start working in
that for that specific place.
The landlord is not expected to
do that other than to
participate in.
The inspection, but the tenant
is the one that's required to
have to do all the due diligence
to get all of that done.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So I'm gonna go
through the whole process, maybe
a day, maybe an hour, whatever,
and at the end of that hour
we're gonna come to the same
conclusion.
I don't pass the hut inspection.
I'm not going to pass the hut
inspection.
And, and so I'm just trying to
figure this out. So with that in
mind, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I've got an amendment for
you and I'd like to have a roll
call vote.
You've got a roll call.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, will you
kindly read the number on the
bottom left. Yes sir, Mr.
Speaker. 231-565.1. We'll get
the amendment passed out to the
members and we'll get it posted
Does everybody have the
amendment?
Looks like we do, and it is
online, gentleman from San Juan,
to explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, on
line 26, line one strike the
closing quotation mark on page
26 between lines 1 and 2 insert
J nothing in this section shall
require a person to apply to
participate in, or meet specific
quality standards established by
a federal, state, local, or
tribal housing assistance
program for which participation
is not mand mandated by federal,
state, local, or tribal law.
Gentle lady from Donana, is this
a friendly amendment.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I've never done this before,
but, um, we have some language
to actually, I think it's just
more of changing of the language
within the amendment that we
might be willing to consider.
OK, so, um, wow, this is new for
everybody,
so I've never done this either,
so we're good. That makes 3 of
us, uh, so here's what we'll do.
Um
I see your expert working on.
OK, it looks like we have some
floor agreement between the
leaders to get this amendment
redrafted.
Uh, so if you'd like to withdraw
the amendment we can continue
with your debate and wait for
the, the, the minority leader to
come back with the.
Freshly drafted amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, I'll
withdraw my amendment is
withdrawn,
gentlemen from San Juan, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
My concern, and I think for
everybody in here that has one
apartment that's 50 years old is
the concern that I'm going to
have to fix it up. I'm gonna
have to rehab it at thousands
and thousands of dollars at my
expense.
And, and then I'm, I may or may
not get in trouble with the
Attorney General. I may or may
not get fined $5000. I may or
may not, um, have other, um, I
think was the term, um.
Impose other imposed as well, so
that's my concern with, with
this bill. We are forcing people
To fix up their apartments that
they cannot fix up because they
don't have the money in the
first place. They're living on
the income. They barely get out
of these apartments as it is.
That's my concern, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, was
sorry was there there a question
about that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
I, I think I was just making
more of a statement that, you
know, as we have this
discussion, my fear is, uh, as I
mentioned, uh, that list of
things, that's my fear.
Mr. Speaker, I could tell a
joke.
If you if you make a knock knock
joke serve like a housing.
theme here.
Right, we can, we can send in
place while we get that
amendment down here.
Shouldn't take too long.
It's a simple amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and, and
since we're waiting and just for
as a point of clarification
regarding, I think part of what
you've amended and just some of
the changes to the language, I
think that's something that we
can.
We can figure out.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. I think
that's great.
It's like an awkward first date
we really things to talk about.
I do have a joke about housing.
Well, you got the floor, so.
Mr. Speaker, how many real
estate agents does it take to
change a light bulb?
How many gentlemen? None. The
light bulb was in excellent
working order and comprised of a
beautiful retro teardrop
illuminator offering original
glass and metal features located
very centrally in the middle of
the room.
Local amenities abound on the
property is serviced by a newly
refurbished power cord
connecting it to the ceiling.
Nearby is a tasteful power
switch to enable the purchaser
to switch it on and off. Lee
sold with a share of power
supplied with lovingly improved
wattage by the current owners
would suit a professional couple
or family looking for more
light.
All right, no offense taken by
any real estate agent who is a
member of this house, I'm sure.
Mr. Speaker, I used to be a real
estate agent.
Mr. Speaker, amen to that.
OK
It looks like I've completely
lost control of this chamber.
Won't be the first time.
Mr. Speaker, we could offer Rep
Hernandez and Rep Colle again.
That
I second that.
Informal motion.
I wonder where they were
yesterday. That was a wasted
joke, Mr. Speaker. I don't know
where they went.
Alright folks, I've been
informed that it's gonna be a
little bit of a while to get the
amendment down here, maybe
upwards of 40 to 45 minutes. Um,
I suggest we continue with
debate what we could do.
I, uh,
If once we have the amendment,
gentlemen, I, I can come back to
you for a second time.
At which point you can propose
the amendment, um, and, um, that
way you don't lose your
opportunity to do so. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. That'll be great.
Do you want to yield the floor
at this time?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll yield,
uh, Mr. Speaker, we could also
recess until Monday.
We could also sign in motion
no, it's out of order. Sorry.
Uh, all right, very well. So
we'll come back to the gentleman
from San Juan a little later
once the amendment comes down at
this point I'm gonna move on to
the next debater general lady
from Bernard Leo representative
Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
lady from
Donana Donana County Yilt.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will yield
to the lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, I have a few
questions regarding this bill.
I previously before this worked
in housing and homelessness and
worked extensively with these
specific kind of vouchers, um,
with our city vouchers, with our
federal vouchers.
And I was wondering, you know,
and I'm sure you have
situations, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but what is the
specific situation that we are
talking about that this bill
would apply to.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle ladies. So right now,
um, when someone goes in.
And um.
Uh, let's say we have a land uh.
We have the person who receives
section 8 or Social Security,
um, they would go in, they would
apply, um, generally speaking,
they have about 30% of their
income from their regular um uh.
Some regular income and then
they have their supplemental to
help with their the which is
their voucher, um, they would
apply the landlord would then
decide um if this person meets
the criteria to, to, to live in
their housing and um and then
the voucher would then go to
that landlord every month to pay
for the, the, the rental amount.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I've, we've heard now from uh
different gentlemen about uh
scenario where they put a sign
outside that said for rent but
no vouchers accepted. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, have we
seen this situation in New
Mexico?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
uh, we see it, we see it quite
often.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So in cases like that, is
there anything that we can do
right now under current law, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, so at the state
level, no, there's very little
uh enforcement relief to support
tenants. Uh, what we've seen
right now though is that there
are 4 different uh
municipalities across the state
that do allow for um um some
protections for tenants to be
able to um be able to to have uh
some enforcement, um, if and
when they run into any issues in
in their own localities.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
I understand there are other
municipalities in the state that
have done it. One of them being
Ber Leo, uh, the county that I
am from, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
in, in Bernalillo and in
Albuquerque, where we've passed
these ordinances, what have we
seen, uh, in the market, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so what we've seen,
um, particularly in Bernalillo
County is that there have been
uh tenants who have been able to
find housing because of their,
because of this um this
particular ordinance in their
own locality, um, but also
landlords very interested in
participating in the program,
um, the only issue that we're
seeing is the enforcement piece
and part of that has to do with,
um just us needing to do some.
at the state level to help
supplement a lot of what the
local communities are already
are already trying to do.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
can you explain that enforcement
mechanism. Some of the
criticisms that these um that
these laws have been, uh,
have been subject to has been
that it is really difficult to
enforce, uh, myself, I worked as
a paralegal at legal aid, um,
and we dealt with many, many
eviction cases, uh, many, many
eviction cases that were
certainly written into law that
should not have happened, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, to
name one, for instance, uh,
painting your mobile home to
different shades of brown, um,
under current law that is OK,
Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady, but this person is
being evicted for that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies, so,
uh, you know, could you talk a
little bit about the enforcement
mechanism why it's so important
to have it at the state level
and not just in the
municipalities, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
and gentle lady, so it's really
important to have enforcement so
I can give you an idea of what
happens now, so, um, and then
what this bill could do if it
becomes law, and so right now,
um.
Landlords could refuse the the
the voucher if, if they wanted
to. And unfortunately for a
tenant, it would, there, there's
very little that they can do in
other parts of the state where
they um could report to someone
and say, hey, my income wasn't
accepted, um, in places like,
um, um, if we were to pass this
bill specifically, it would
allow for uh the tenant to be
able to um report to the
attorney.
Attorney General's office, go
through a process where they
would have to prove that they
were um discriminated against in
terms of their source of income
and the AG would then have to um
The tenant would have to be able
to prove that there is enough
evidence for that, for the AG to
then trigger an actual
um investigation.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
That is exactly my next question
actually is, you know,
With a law like this, uh, could
I, for instance, when I was
applying to an apartment, um, I
remember that they were
requiring my monthly income to
be 8 times more than what the
rent uh was and um so if I got
denied and I said, oh but my
income is that way could just
anybody go and report to the AG.
What, what would be the burden
of proof that somebody would
need to bring in order for this
to uh actually.
in, in a penalty for them.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so, um, so when a tenant
believes that they have been
discriminated against because of
their source of income.
They will then report to the
Attorney General's office.
They'll fill out the, the
paperwork that um goes along
with that, and they are the ones
that are going to have to have
the burden of proof and usually
with that burden of proof could
be and it depends on the
different types of scenarios,
but sometimes landlords could
explicitly write a note that
says, no, I don't take HUD
housing or I don't take Section
8 or um Social Security, um, if
it is in writing, that's usually
some that's, that's usually.
The proof that they can provide
to the AG, um, but it's also a
case by case in terms of um
whether it's civil or criminal,
um, and so that that would also
be another layer that would have
to go um that this tenant would
have to go into that process as
well.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think that is a really, really
important part of this bill and
uh in my experience, uh, what I
have seen in the housing market
and trying to get folks vouchers
and trying to place them into
housing units, there are so few
units, especially in
Albuquerque.
At the moment that a unit
becomes available, there are at
least 15 different applications
going in for that single unit.
And when there are so many
applications going in, there can
be so many different reasons why
a landlord chooses to rent to a
single person. Would you agree,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
absolutely.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what I have seen is that, uh,
many landlords will, will say,
well, I'm sorry, so sorry we
couldn't take your client, but,
uh, you know what what we really
wanted is we wanted this other
person to have the unit because
they're related to my theo and
my primo or uh because uh you
know, I, I know them because
they went to UNM with me or
that, you know, there's so many
reasons why a landlord might
wanna choose uh one person out
of those 15 that really has
nothing to do with income, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you?
say that's true.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
absolutely there's a, a variety
of different reasons for why
they would what they would
choose a particular tenant.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what this, what I understand
that this bill does is the only
thing that it it still allows
landlords to make a choice.
You're not bound to accepting a,
a voucher, someone on a voucher,
but what I understand that this
bill does Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, is it restricts the
landlord from saying or writing,
please do not apply. We do not
accept vouchers. Is that right,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I think that is quite, you know,
a small bar of decency just to
be able to say, you know, we
will consider everybody's
application, uh, and we'll
consider you for income. We will
consider you for does this, I
mean, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
does this prevent a landlord
from doing a background check on
someone, for instance.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
um, it doesn't, um, a landlord
will still have every right to
review the applications to do
credit checks on everyone, um,
to check the, um, to check their
income and, and all of that,
check for references, all the
things that a tenant has to go
through. I'm still a renter and
so I've uh they would all of the
things that I've had to go
through to, to be able to rent
when I first rented my place,
um, it would be the same, um, it
would be the.
same process.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you for clarifying that
because I think when we see a
bill like this and, and
certainly when we saw it in, in
Albuquerque City Council in our
county levels, there was a lot
of concern that landlords still
wouldn't be able to, uh, a
protect their asset, B, be able
to make a decision about who
lives in their asset, um, and
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
know a lot of these units, um,
there are many units in our city
that we've already heard, uh,
right are owned by Ma.
Pops that are owned by, um, you
know, maybe a family in the case
of the gentleman, uh, a unit
that was passed down through
many generations. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, it's important
for me to also ensure that um
that you know this kind of
legislation isn't necessarily
encumbering those uh small, um,
those, those smaller landlords
who are renting out this, this
part, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
I, I see there that the AG is
able to investigate these kind
of cases is there also the
ability to or can other people
investigate these uh kind of
claims, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, as
the as the bill is written,
it's, it's on the AG would be
the uh point of contact in terms
of investigations for um
enforcement of this um this law.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I've uh, I, I know that the
human rights Act often the
complaints are directed to the
workforce solutions department,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
does this change that process?
Does it make it faster? Does it
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle ladies. So because of
the, the particular um uh.
Because how specific this issue
is, um, it is carved out
specifically so that the
attorney general is the entity
that is responsible for the
enforcement mechanism and um I
know that there has been um
notes taken by the workforce,
for example, the Department of
Workforce Solutions, they've
pretty much said that it's fine
because it's not in their
wheelhouse to be able to handle
these types of cases that the AG
under the Human Rights Act would
be appropriate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, so.
Just to make sure I understand
like what is in the Human Rights
Act, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
can be brought through private
action.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady for your
question. So on page 24, um,
section 2 starting on line 11,
um, that entire section
provides um the mechanism in
terms of the enforcement where
the AG would be involved in the
enforcement piece, um, when you
look at the Human Rights Act in
its entirety, um, there is, um,
work for there on on things
related to labor discrimination
around on.
on, on other issues, um,
definitely it's what the
department uh workforce
solutions, um, but in this case
it's through the AG's office and
then um other things with um.
Settling this issue in district
court is also an option later on
if, if the issue comes, if the
issue has not been fixed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So
I'm hearing that.
You know, there are avenues for
folks who have, for instance,
gotten a letter back from their
landlord who said, I'm so sorry
we don't take uh folks who are
on vouchers, uh, if you'd like,
you can apply to this list of
housing, that's what I've seen
at least, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um.
And that then somebody would be
able to, for instance, go to a
legal aid, uh, or go to um
another lawyer and say, hey, I
think, I think I was denied
inappropriately here, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
um, like we could use an example
of somebody who's living with
disabilities, for example, if
they applied for housing and
they were, they were told that
their voucher wasn't going to be
accepted as a way to supplement
their income if they had that
bur that burden of proof to be
able to share. They thought that
it was very explicit. They could
easily go to a uh legal aid, um,
and go through the process and
you, and because of the work
that we that a lot of our
advocates.
Have been doing a lot of the the
legal folks who've been doing a
lot of this work, um, there's
processes that that they've that
they're very familiar with that
they would be able to support
this individual.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
with that process would be the
same that, for instance, if you
received a letter back and said,
I'm sorry, our apartment
complex, uh, does not rent to
Asians, which, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, it's an
experience that has happened in
my family many years back.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
um, that, that's very much in in
law at the moment and um it's,
it's not necessarily specific to
this um particular language in
in the bill which we're trying
to pass, but this is part of why
we want to be able to include
this because um it, it's, it's,
it's in that seriousness that we
believe that we should really be
taking this, these matters so
that they're so critical to
address.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we've talked a lot about
vouchers and I understand, you
know, when a landlord uh is
accepting voucher, uh, folks who
are on vouchers, there are some
requirements that come with the
way that uh that the facility is
maintained, for instance, um,
but we also are talking about
other things.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, not
just vouchers, we're talking
also about Social Security
income, is that right Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, are we also, uh, what, what
other, what other areas are we
also talking about, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
there is a lot of different
types of, of, um, supplemental
income that folks use, um, it
could be their disability
checks. It could be, um, if
they're receiving child support,
um, if there, we, if there's
receiving veterans vouchers, um,
uh, there's a number of other
things, um, also I know with the
pandemic, we had a lot of um
supports in terms of.
eviction, um, assistance and so
things like that would be part
of this so that people would
have to all of the supplemental
income that they're receiving,
um, would be allowed to be used
to pay for their, for their
rent.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so with this, for instance, if I
was a, well, I am a student at
UNM but if I was a student at
UNM that had no housing and was
applying to different rental
units, um, and my source of
income was, um, for instance,
the I was working at the library
and Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would the landlord be able to
discriminate against that source
of income and say um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I can't run to you because
you're a student and you um your
source of income is not, does
not appear that stable. I'm not
sure if you're going to be
working at the library for very
long.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you General lady under the the
way that the law is written at
the moment,
yes, the landlord could
discriminate against your source
of income and deny you um the
opportunity to apply for that
housing, um, in, in this bill
339, it would make it so that
they couldn't do that because
you're um the income that you're
receiving through, um, you going
to school and and getting paid
at the library um that is seen
as a lawful source of income.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady that definitely clarifies
for me and and that sounds
really great, especially for
folks who have districts with a
lot of students living in them,
for instance, um, I know many of
my friends have struggled to
find housing, um, many of our
undergraduates even at UNM and
I'm just speaking of UNM because
uh uh that is very, very close
to my district and it's the
closest one, but Mr. Speaker and
um general lady, that seems like
this, this is not just
Um, about folks who are
experiencing homelessness or are
on a voucher or our elderly and
have a Social Security income,
but this is really is also about
young people in our state and
their ability to find housing,
is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, I think that's just a
really important point, um,
because it's, I think, I think
we initially did this because
yes we are facing a crisis when
it comes to um supporting people
who are unhoused, but I think
really ultimately what's, what's
really a big part of this bill
is that it's, it's not only just
fair, it provides economic
stability for a lot of us, and
it's protecting a lot of our
working families, our seniors,
um, and.
I think preemptively we're
preventing homelessness in the
future if we can really build
upon, uh build upon this
legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And so to really
drive home here what I really
want to ensure is, is, um, that
I get across.
Is
Does this bill still make it
legal to discriminate against
income period, not your source
of income, just income, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker, gently to
clarify the amount of your
income. So for instance, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if I
applied and like for instance,
in this case where I had this
rental agreement, my monthly
salary had to be 8 times higher
than what I was renting, and
that, that is what the landlord
required in order to rent that
unit, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
if I had that amount and I got
it from Social Security and I
got it from a voucher.
And I also worked a small job at
the library, for instance, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, could, could I still be,
could the landlord still say,
uh, you know, you don't make
enough, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady for that
question. So, um,
If, if the tenant has a
requirement around um the amount
of income.
The landlord has has a
requirement on the amount of
income that can be paid towards
the, the, the, the.
The, the space, uh, they have to
be able to treat your, the, your
income, um, the same as um.
As as everyone else.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
And that's really what I really
wanted to get out here is that
this does not limit the landlord
from putting the value that that
they see on their unit and
asking for that amount in.
The market.
Mr. Chair and gentle lady, what
I understand from this bill is
it limits only that the landlord
when they are assessing the
income that they take into
account all the sources of of
income of that person.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, is
that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Yes, and I
think you, your questions are
raising a really important point
in that, um, it's, we're not,
we're not minimizing the amount
of rent that
facilities or or landlords can,
can rent out their spaces. They
just have to treat the income,
um, equally as to the other
applicants.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, that is that I think
is really the really important
part of this bill that that
should not be obscured is
really, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that, that if you are the
landlord has the right to say,
you know, there's not, you don't
make enough and I just don't
feel comfortable renting to you
because you don't make enough.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if that if the sources, all the
sources of income, Social
Security, for instance, and um
the little library job.
um, you know, that's not enough
for a landlord, the landlord can
say, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
you know, I, I, I'm gonna have
to rent to somebody who will pay
a little bit more, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and, and to wrap
up, I just wanted to make a
comment about, um, HUD and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, in, in
the form of a question, which is
that Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if a landlord is deemed to
not comply with HUD standards.
Um, because of the voucher.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
does HUD then do?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I'm sorry, could
you repeat that real quick?
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so if, uh, let's say a landlord,
he or she, uh, or they, uh.
Mr. or uh our Berlingo County
or.
The gentleman from.
San Juan County if.
That individual, you know,
doesn't want um does does
removes the sign that says Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
That they will not accept HUD
vouchers and they take into
account all the income and, and
they actually find someone that,
you know, they like, and the HUD
voucher income is good, it's
steady, uh, they also have a uh
another stream a little social
security stream and HUD comes
and does an inspection and says
this unit is not good, uh, it
needs to comply with our HUD
standards.
What happens then, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle ladies. So if, if, if
the um tenant requests that
there's um that they want to
live in a particular in this
particular space and they
request that of the inspection
be done on this space, if the
inspection is not passed, um,
then, then, then, then the
tenant gets to go and look for
another space. The this isn't a
violation towards the, the
landlord. It just means that,
um, that space.
just not fit for this particular
tenant.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I understand
we're trying to clarify this
language with an amendment, uh,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady in
my experience what has happened
with landlords who aren't up to
date or are new to using um the
HUD vouchers, for instance.
That landlord can no longer rent
to someone with a voucher, and
that person must take their
voucher somewhere else.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I would, although I think it's
implicit in the law as it's
currently written that no there
would be no requirements for
that landlord to make um their
house better or to comply with
the standards. I understand that
there's some concern that um
that would be imposed. However,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe that.
In the process of that HUD
voucher, then the landlord would
go to the next, um, individual,
right, that they were
considering to rent towards, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so, uh, and, and I understand
the, the, the necessity to
clarify in my experience, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady with
those HUD vouchers, the person
with that HUD voucher which, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady is
very hard to acquire. Many
people wait many, many years to
be on the list with the voucher.
There is a complicated.
formula to distribute the need
for who gets that voucher, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
That person will not want to
lose their voucher. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe in the
real world, what would happen,
although we are here discussing
this in in theoretical terms the
individual would take their
voucher and would go to the
next, um, apartment that they
would be able to find Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
agree with that, that process or
has that been your experience?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady, yes, and, and
just to be
um, very clear because um there
isn't a there aren't a there
there there are people who, um,
there's only 14,000 section 8
vouchers in the state of New
Mexico.
Most of these are already being
used by the tenants who applied
for them, and as you mentioned
before, if you are on Section 8,
it took years for you to be able
to have received that voucher.
It's not something that you just
go in and apply and it just, it
gets handed to you. There's
people who have waited almost a
decade if not more to receive uh
a voucher for Section 8, so the
problem is that because there's
very few applicants in the
market at any given time, um.
Uh, I'm sorry, very few
applicants in the market at any
given time will be paying with
the voucher, and so it's not
gonna be completely widespread.
And so, but for
People with vouchers, more than
1/3 of them can't find a place
to use their vouchers before
they expire, so they're also on
a very like their their sense of
they have a sense of urgency,
not only because they're they're
searching for housing, but they
wanna they they they they have
to, they, they want to be able
to work with the landlord to
make sure that if this is the
place that they want to live,
they're gonna do their very best
to try to figure it out because
they're they're also on a
timeline.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you so much for clarifying that,
and I would agree with those HUD
vouchers and specifically, you
know, the, the section 8
vouchers that had distributes,
those are umUD definitely has
more restrictive requirements
for the way that the housing
needs to be when a person is
living there, um, because
they're federal dollars and um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
that, that, um, the rareness of
that voucher is.
certainly something that we see
in the community and and Mr.
Chair and gentle lady, I agree
that that person would um would
be pressed for time to find a
unit that is um that is good Mr.
Chair and gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Chair and gentle lady, I also
have seen that many of the
landlords in our community,
especially mom and pop
communities, you know, they are
offering um rates that make
sense for the folks who are
living there and I think Mr.
Speaker, general lady.
What I understand also from this
legislation is that this
legislation is also for really,
really large apartment complexes
that may have standardized
something like this, they, you
know, they may not even be owned
by New Mexicans, um, New Mexican
developers, they may be from
somewhere else and are making
these really excessive
requirements on our folks who
are trying to find housing, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
um, they're, they're, I, I think
you just pretty much just shared
why um these vouchers are so
important and why they've been
systematically just um
streamlined already because
there's already a number of
places that already take them,
um, take them, it's just a
matter of them not having a
we're, we just don't have enough
supply for everyone.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so just to wrap up, um,
I, I'm really blessed to have
been able to work in housing and
homelessness before, um, coming
here and that's a large part of
why I ran, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, as I saw the
suffering that was happening in
my community, um, especially
the, the, the working in a
homelessness shelter that was
giving out vouchers and how
difficult it was to place, um,
the folks who we
we're trying to place, how many
rejection letters we got, um,
saying that, you know, they had
selected someone else, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and so
the, this legislation, I think
really codifies an important
value of really important value
for us, Mr. Speaker, and, um,
gentle lady that as New
Mexicans, you know, we
understand that landlords, uh,
need to make a profit or that
they need to manage their asset
in a way.
Um, that they maybe this is for
a lot of folks this is their
whole retirement package. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, but
we're not telling our landlords
that they can't, um, that they
can't.
Charge what they mean to charge,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what we're asking is that we
codify into law that the source
of the person's income should
not matter as much.
As
Uh, that the source of the
person's income should not
matter as to the selection
process. Sure, if a landlord
wants to do a credit check, they
may do that. If a landlord needs
to verify the background of the
person and go ask a few
neighbors of, of that person,
the the landlord can do that,
but when it comes to the source
of the income we don't wanna be
discriminating um where that
those dollars who are dollars
that are if they're legal
dollars, where are those dollars
are coming from Madam Chair, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle.
Thank you.
Right there is for the debate,
um, gentlemen from Sandoval, I
don't see him in the chair.
So I can go to the gentle lady
from Donana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will
yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and to the
lady from Donana. Um, I just, I
have a few questions. Um, so I
noticed that we're going to task
the Attorney General with making
sure this is done properly,
properly. I also noticed that
there is funding for housing
civil legal services and another
bill. Uh, who pays the legal
fees for the landlord if their
property is destroyed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, there
would be the same it's the same
legal remedies that they have in
general. They have the social
their their deposit that they
can that the tenant put in that
they will use for that, but then
can also um um have their other
legal remedies to be able to to
to deal with that situation. you
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
for this purpose, I'll use the
example given by the prior
debate. This is a senior
citizen, a husband and wife.
in their 80s, this is how they
pay um for their prescription
medication, um, they both are on
fixed income, their
supplementing their income with
this rent, and they go to the
senior mill site to eat because
they can't find afford groceries
beyond their prescription
medications. So this is a low
income, elderly, vulnerable
population who also qualifies
under the Human Rights Act, you
know, they're protected class.
So it's my understanding of what
you're saying is that
they would follow the same
remedies. So let's say this
section 8 housing folks are
placed in Section 8 housing. And
because I've helped place a lot
of people in Section 8 housing,
I believe these are still the
standards, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, if someone
stops, if they
Um, we're able to set their own
rent, this tenant could afford
to pay the difference between
what Section 8 paid and the
rent, if they could afford the
deposit first and last month's
rent, pet deposit, whatever else
the landlord, um, came up with
and in 30 days, they could not
meet it. They couldn't pay it.
Um, then they, it takes 30 days
to convict, to evict 45 days in,
in court on average, 15 to 30
days in the court to, to get a
court date and then they usually
give him another 1015 days to
evict. So now this senior
citizen who has been going to
the senior mill site because
they can't afford food and
prescription and they rely on
that rent. They are now 3 rents,
3 months behind. And let's say
in this scenario there is $3000
worth of damage. The landscape
was ruined. There's urine on the
carpet, um, the the window
covers were torn, the shades
were or mini blinds were torn
and um
Now the screens are now torn.
Section 8 housing requires those
screens to be in shape to be in
good repair. Um, so now they
have, uh, let's just be
conservative and say $1000 in
damages. What is the remedy for
the senior citizen who has
before done Section 8 housing
but couldn't afford to do it
anymore because they've had this
experience in the past, and they
had damages that the Section 8
housing person could correct.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what is the remedy for the
senior citizen, um, for the 3
months' rent and damages. How do
they get that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this,
it's this bill is specifically
related to the initial process
of folks applying for, um,
housing, so, um, it's they're
just not allowed to decide to
preemptively not allow somebody
to rent a space because of um.
Because they're on, they're
using other forms of of income.
Mr. Spiker and gentle lady. So
when I looked at
If they were to go to court to
find this remedy in with the
Attorney General be defending or
the um funding from the Housing
Civil Rights Services, who would
be defending the tenant who
after 3 months, what might have
been evicted.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. There's, it's,
it's this they have the same
legal remedy I mean.
Each tenant will be it's they're
treated the same amount, so the
same way they don't, they will
have their own um legal
representation or they just
won't have any legal
representation.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, if a single, let's say this
citizen is female and she wants
to do a background check and in
her, uh, lease agreement. It's
not regarding being section 8,
it's regarding having a firearm.
Could she say no to a section 8,
person if they have a firearm.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
bill specifically is to not,
you, you, you, you have to be
able to allow everyone to apply
without preemptively denying
someone housing because of their
source of income, Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies, so this
person's source of income is
section 8. They qualify. They
were first person to apply. They
don't want a firearm on their
private property. Can they deny
the person, um, based on
ownership of a firearm.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. If they deny
the applicant, um.
Uh
The opportunity to live in their
house because of the firearm,
then they have the right to do
so, they just can't do it
because of the source of income.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
know that in some cases section
8 housing prohibits someone
who's a sexual offender, has a
conviction of trafficking, has a
felony or violent crime on the
on the
Property. The public housing
that's, that's either owned by
the state or owned by the feds
can't be private land owner,
this person that qualifies for
Section 8 housing, can they, can
they prohibit someone with a
back, can they conduct a back
they're the section 8, they're
eligible. They're the first
application approved, but
They have a criminal record, sex
offender trafficking, felony,
violent background in the
background check. Can they deny
them then?
Thank you, madam, uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, thank you, gentle
lady. The landlord can deny
somebody the the right to live
in their, their house, their
housing, um, with all the other
issues as long as they're not uh
discriminating against any of
the Human Rights Act or the
source of income.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
they can say no to someone
because they have a pet or
children.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. So yes, the
landlord can decide um if they
don't, they can't accommodate uh
an animal or a child, if the
housing isn't just fit for any
of that if any of those um
scenarios, um.
But they just can't preempt
preemptively deny someone just
because of their income.
I'm gonna stop us right there
because that is a good point and
what we are discussing is
discrimination based on source
of income, um, so if you all
want to continue to be, that's
fine, please do, but let's just
try to focus on that piece, um,
I think questions regarding
firearms and, you know, other
types of things while fair, fair
points.
We are discussing source of
income and I would appreciate
the responses focus on source of
income, uh.
Please, thank you.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady.
Um, so if the house has, um,
does
How long does it take for
Section 8 housing to come and do
an inspection. If someone posts
their house up for rent. My
house is for rent. How long does
it take for, uh, housing
inspection. They, they are doing
a, a list that several people
provide applications. Everybody
can pay now.
Everybody can, can qualify right
now one person section 8.
Section 8 housing is one of 10
applicants. How long does it
take for the housing inspection?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle ladies. So if, um,
the tenant, um, if, if the house
if there's several different
applicants already ready to go
and let's say that the landlord
can't wait for, um, if, if it's
gonna take 24 hours or longer,
um, for the inspection to come
through that that that that's
the landlord can move on to
other, other applicants that
they don't have to wait for this
person. It's, it's just, it's
It just goes back to the source
of income, just ensuring that um
that they're giving an
opportunity to to apply for that
housing. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Can you
point me to the section of this
law where it explains that they
don't, it, it, it, it can be
first come, first serve if
someone else is eligible.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it's
not mentioned in there
explicitly.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
considering that we're going to
involve the Attorney General. Do
you think it should be listed
explicitly?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, the, the whole
point of the legislation is to
ensure that there is no
discrimination on the source of
income of an individual who is
applying, um, we don't believe
that it should be in the in we
don't believe that that piece
should be, it's not necessary in
the in the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, on page 18 on
uh number 10, section A, line
10, section A, a state or public
subdivision state government
entity or public uh contractors
shall not. Um, it goes on, um,
down at the bottom on line 21,
refuse or otherwise limited
putting conditions of service as
an individual because of it
includes age and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I have seen senior
citizen.
programs only where, you know,
they may be fine with Section 8
housing or any other, you know,
federal voucher, but it's only
senior citizens. Um, can you
explain to me, and, and also
pregnant, the, the condition of
pregnancy or childhood. Um, so
if it's a senior sinner, I, I
suppose there wouldn't be a
pregnancy, and then otherwise
limiting people based on age.
Can you explain that to me, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, and just
so just in terms of the data um
right now with the folks who are
on Section 8, um, 72% of the
people on Section 8 housing or
vouchers are senior citizens,
and so, um, they also include
people who are disabled and, and
others, and so, um, this was an
important piece to put in, um,
specifically related to seniors
because of that stat here in New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, but in a senior
And they're in a community
that's for seniors, it, I'm
reading this to say that they
could no longer say no to a
young family with children.
Before we get to that question,
um, or to that response, uh, I
believe we have a deal on the
amendment and so what we will do
at this point if it's OK with
the sponsor, we will pass the
clock.
We'll pause the clock we will
pause debate. We will move on to
a different bill while that
amendment gets drafted, once
that amendment gets drafted and
that other bill is complete,
we'll come back to this bill on
the clock. I have a minute, uh,
sorry, I have an hour and 30
minutes, uh, so we'll continue
the debate with the same people
on the list.
And leave off just where we
started, but we'll have an
amendment.
Is that OK with you all?
All right
I'm gonna take a picture of
this, make sure I don't lose it.
All right, everybody take a
break.
We'll be back to this bill.
Gentle lady from
Resili San Juan Coto Valencia
representative Abeta, are you
ready?
On item number.
One on the supplemental
calendar.
Yes, speaker, thank you. Can you
help me get to that point? That
reflect that a necessary for
placing.
House Bill 149 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
generalator explained the bill,
Mr. Speaker,
supported decision making allows
the decision maker to retain the
power to make their own
decisions while being legally
allowed to bring in the people
that they trust to help and
support them. This bill gives
New Mexican families the option
to keep government out of their
lives and without that speaker I
stood for questions. There is
debate from Eddie Ann Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady, please be so
kind as to yield.
Yes
Yes, I yield.
Thank you so much. um.
Mr. Speaker, we, um, heard this
bill, I think it was yesterday
actually in House Appropriations
and Finance Committee where, as
you know, we usually deal with
budget issues and where's the
money in the House bill too and
all that.
But Mr. Speaker,
and gentle lady, I think we had
a really good discussion.
About why this bill
has been proposed.
And so I just like to go through
just for the sake of everybody's
understanding, just talk a
little bit about what this bill
does as opposed to some of the
legal instruments that we
already have at our disposal so.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I think let's just, if you
wouldn't mind, talk a minute
about how
This, um, proposal differs from
a power of attorney.
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
thank you for that question. I'd
also, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to
introduce my experts sitting on
the floor with me, Miss Alice
Lou McCoy, executive director of
the New Mexico Development
Developmental disabilities
council and secretary Emily
Coltenbach of the New Mexico
Department of Aging.
The difference between the
supported decision making and
A power of attorney are that a
power of attorney is in the
middle of the most restrictive.
You have guardianship, power of
attorney, and then you have
supported decision making.
In the power of attorney, you
have the ability to sign away
your right to making a decision
to someone else, which means you
don't have to be in their
presence, you don't have to be
present with them when they make
that decision with supported
decision making, the individual
still retains that right and
autonomy to make that decision,
but with the supporter present
to help them.
Thank you Speaker. Thank you
Representative.
Gentle lady from Eddie and Lee.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, so, um, I think most of
us are familiar with powers of
attorney.
Uh, they're pretty useful
documents. They can also be um
dangerous if you give that right
to someone who's not
trustworthy. Uh, so Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies, so we have,
you know, various types of
powers of attorney we're we're
used to mostly seeing the
general power of attorney which
covers a whole range of subject
areas where the um holder of the
power could transact business on
behalf of the person who's given
the power, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Excuse me
Um
The power of attorney also can
be a durable power of attorney
meaning if the person who grants
it is incapacitated for whatever
reason or passes away then the
power of attorney fails to um.
And this is under the general it
fails to have any effect anymore
and so that's why sometimes.
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, lawyers
at the behest of their client
will draft a durable general
power of attorney.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I, I think we had some
discussion that guardianships
are very structured and
sometimes not to the liking of
the person who's being, um,
given the, the service.
And so, uh, what you're
proposing, uh, gentle lady and
Mr. Chair is sort of what I
would call an intermediate type
of instrument where the person
could receive assistance making
decisions from someone again who
is considered trustworthy and
the example that I gave and I
know this from um some previous
work I've done that.
Someone needed to go into the
hospital. It was a is a um a
younger person.
And that person um really felt
uncomfortable making any kind of
medical decisions for herself.
And so she asked an aunt of hers
to go with her.
And speak for her and the
problem was, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the hospital didn't care
to have that individual there
interceding on behalf of of the
young person.
And so Mr. Speaker, in
instrument like you're proposing
would actually be a bit of a
solution where the hospital
would have to, uh, listen to the
advocate who who has this um
this new type of instrument, so
I think it's very useful, could
be very useful, and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, would you just
explain, um, how a person would
go if this bill passes how a
person would go about getting
one of these um new types of
documents.
Thank you Speaker and gentle
lady that was a perfect
explanation of why this bill is
so important and how it will
empower individuals to use
supported decision making under
this bill, individuals will have
the ability to access the
template from Ms. McCoy's
office, the office.
The New Mexico Developmental
Disabilities counsel Office and
that template can be filled out
quite easily and that can be
hand delivered and taken with uh
either the supported decision
maker or the person who's asking
for the supported.
The support system to be present
with them at the time of the
decision.
Thank you for that, um, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentle ladies,
so, um, with the supported
decision making instrument or
document have to be notarized or
witnessed by anybody, Mr.
Speaker.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes, it
has to be notarized.
Thank you. And that's a
safeguard right there that I
think is very important as well.
So, um, anyway, I, I wanna do,
I, I do thank you, gentle lady
for bringing this. I think it's
a good idea and uh the
availability um on, on the web
from the secretary's office will
certainly help this uh um become
available to people who need it,
uh, so again thank you so much.
um I will be supporting your
bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker further debate, the
generalator to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move the House Bill 149 as
amended do pass. We are our
final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 as amended, the vote is
now open.
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 as a mandate has really
passed his house.
Gentle lady to sing.
Are you ready?
Some of you have the lyrics.
Let's go.
I
have a brother.
That
we all need.
to
No
be
When
Oh
you
It
won't be long.
to
Yeah
Congratulations, gentle lady
from all those amazing counties.
There is a long held tradition
in this house that for a first
bill passed, everybody votes no
until the end.
And I'm the only one that's been
following it.
And Representative Valente, I
think he's just 100% block, but
I think maybe sometimes he
doesn't mean to.
Do we have an amendment? Do we
have an amendment on the other
bill.
Gentlemen from Donana, are you
ready?
On item number 13 on the regular
calendar.
I am, Mr. Speaker. Can you get
me to that point? At the record
reflect that actually replacing
House Resolution 12 on final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentleman
to explain the joint resolution.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Joint Resolution 12 is a joint
resolution, uh, Mr. Speaker,
that will provide better
financial standards and
accountability for our boards of
regions and Mr. Speaker, ensure
that our higher education
students get the best value for
their buck, uh.
with that, I stand for
questions.
There is a bit, Jo leader from
Chavez, Kerry Roosevelt,
Representative Reed. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentleman
from Donna yield. Mr. Speaker, I
gladly yield to the gentle lady
from Chavez, Curry, and
Roosevelt.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, I just had a
question about your bill on page
5, line 6 stating that uh the
action seeking removal of the
member is filed in the district
court by the Attorney.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, and
gentlemen,
Can you clarify which district
court that would be.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I believe it would be the
district court in the
jurisdiction where that higher
education institution is. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and that's
what I wanted to clarify, um,
Mr. Speaker, I do have an
amendment which I'm hoping it is
friendly based on that
statement. I would just ask for
a roll call vote.
All right, you have a roll call.
And the amendments on its way.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left.
Um, McKinley, Mr. Speaker.
Uh
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is
0.231567.1, Mr.
Speaker and the sergeants will
at this point pass out the
amendment and we'll get it up
online and then we'll come back
to you to explain it.
Looks like the amendment's been
passed out and it is online
generally need to explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentlemen, um, House floor
amendment number 1 to House
Joint Resolution 12 proposes
that on page 5 line 6 before by
insert in which the institution
for which the member serves is
located.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
my um purpose for that is I just
feel, as you stated, it should
be in the district court where
the actual um university or or
whatever institution we're
dealing with is located.
Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, is this a friendly
amendment Mr. Speaker, I'm
pretty sure that it could be a
friendly amendment, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
Yeah
I just set a high bar there, Mr.
Speaker. So now if I say no,
we're all gonna be very
disappointed.
Uh, but Mr. Speaker, I just like
to ask the gentle lady a couple
of quick questions. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, your purpose, are
you concerned that this could be
filed in a different district
court if we don't insert this,
Mr. Speaker, John lady? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, um, gentlemen, um, I
feel that I don't want every,
um, action to be filed in Santa
Fe or Albuquerque, I think it
should be filed in the local
jurisdiction where the judges
and the community are all
involved in, in the jurors and
everybody is familiar with, um,
that universe.
I just don't think we should put
like something that happens in
Portalis, New Mexico, let's say
at EMU. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
filing it in Santa Fe. I just
don't think that um would be
something that would uh go over
very well. So I'm just trying to
clarify, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that it it should be
filed where the university or or
place is located. Great. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, your first question was,
uh, in answer to that, this is,
I think the implied sort of
venue. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I don't have a problem
with making it clear.
So wait, is this a friendly
amendment Mr. Speaker. This is a
friendly amendment.
Even though Mr. Speaker, if I
would have known about it
before, it would have been an
even friendlier amendment.
I apologize.
All right. Is there objection to
adopting the amendment?
See none. We haven't amended
bill.
And lady, you still have the
floor? I, I have no other
questions, Mr. Speaker. General
Lin, I'll be happy to support
your bill with this amendment.
Seeing no further. Oh, there is
further debate, gentlemen from
Les Sam Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Donana Guild, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
just have a clarifying question
for me.
Do our current board of regents
have a responsibility to report
to the executive.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they're appointed by the
executive, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, there's nothing
out there that says that they,
uh, report to the executive.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Following that
Question, then whose
responsibility is it to report
Issues right now.
the executive.
We, we are pulling a board.
Um, obviously the executives at
the college.
Um, are part of those meetings,
how does this information not
get passed currently, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, up
the chain like on a quarterly
basis or something.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if
we're talking about, um, sort of
the finances or, or things like
if we're speaking about that,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
my answer to your question was
related to the executive as in
the governor, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the executive
appoints, uh, the governor
appoints the boards of regents.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
Individual institutions are
going to have their own
processes where those
executives, the leaders of the
institution are uh selected by
the boards of Regents. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, in
This is making sure that the
board, the regions themselves
have a clear fiduciary duty to
the institutions that they serve
in order to uh make sure that
they're serving the best
interests of those institutions
and the stu students who attend
them.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that answer. So,
If I understand correctly right
now, our regents don't have a
fiduciary responsibility
whatsoever. So that would mean
that when they meet.
Say on a monthly basis, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
They're not reviewing expenses
and detail.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they, they may be in in many
cases, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
know that they will be
reviewing, uh, a great deal of
information, including that. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this creates
a legal standard of
responsibility to the
institutions that they serve, so
it's less interested in
Sort of a month, it's not going
into Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, a
month to month process of how
they conduct their business
rather, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
it's making sure that they have
a clear fiduciary responsibility
to that institution, um.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, when
When people apply to become a
Board of Regents and it goes,
they go through that whole
process, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, is there nothing
within the application process
that identifies that part of
their rules, roles and
responsibilities are oversight
and governance over the finances
of the school.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's a process that goes
through the executive through
the governor's office, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm not
familiar with what materials are
required or not. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, as a body,
we're now the number we, uh,
we've uh received very good
support and think it wise to
create that just this clear
responsibility to their
institution, uh, should they be
selected as a regent to serve
that institution.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
With respect to this amendment,
should it, should it pass or
this resolution joint resolution
should it pass.
And make it to the November 26th
election, how would the
attorney, state attorney general
be involved in this.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if this,
um, uh, joint resolution is uh
makes it through the process, is
adopted. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
the Attorney General along with
a majority of the board of
regents for that institution
will be able to initiate the
district court proceeding should
sort of an extreme circumstance
arise where uh a board member uh
uh Board of Regent members
clearly
Uh, violating at least their,
their responsibility to that
institution or allegedly
violating their uh
responsibility. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, right now, that
process is entirely unclear.
We've seen one instance where
the current governor, um, simply
demanded resignation of uh en
masse of the border regions.
This puts together a process,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, also
again keeps that local control.
With the um
A majority of the board of
regents who are able to initiate
such an action. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, it goes through
the district court process and
through the gentle ladies'
amendment will be done in
wherever that higher education
institution is.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So, is there any part of this
That
would allow the attorney
General, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, to start this process
on, on his or her own, depending
on who the attorney general
general is at the time.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
should this, uh, should we adopt
this bill and it be adopting the
Constitution, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the Attorney
General's office will be able to
initiate a process, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that process
goes through uh the independent
court system. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, very
clearly, the Attorney General
cannot uh remove a board of
Regent member. They can initiate
a, uh, court proceeding, but
that
goes through the court, Mister
Speaker, gentlemen, the Attorney
General cannot do that by
themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
I'm, I'm just struggling with
the need for this.
We've all witnessed several
different governors over our.
Or, uh, life span that has um
terminated presidents of
universities that have um called
for, uh, retirements or
resignations from boards, uh,
from one governor to the next,
it happens quite often
throughout many of our higher
education, uh, facilities, so.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
I find it hard to believe right
now that there is no review
process.
From either higher ed or the
executive or our 4th floor
executive, not the executive at
the school, um.
That doesn't have this
responsibility already to
Um
Be reviewing this and have a
responsibility of fiduciary
responsibility to be reporting
it to us on a on a quarterly
basis or whatever it is.
The, the situation that's most
recent is unfortunate that it
happened, but I would think, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that we
already have the checks and
balances in place without
changing our constitution. Can
you talk on that a little bit?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I appreciate the perspective,
but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in
the current, uh, in our current
system, there really are few
checks and balances, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this, it
really does sort of two big
things. One, the Speaker,
gentlemen, after as a state.
we've invested a great deal more
in higher education, where the
second, uh, leading state for
higher ed student investment,
uh, per capita in the entire
country. It clarifies Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that the,
uh, Board of Regents, those
regions have the fiduciary duty
to their institution. That's
not uh in uh law right now.
That's not in the Constitution.
That's a good step, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we think, and then,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
there is sort of
really no process for that on
that removal side, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it sets forward a
clear and orderly process, but
one that has checks and balances
legally that goes through the
district court system, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so I would
uh say that this actually puts
in important checks and balances
and makes clear that there's
this fiduciary responsibility to
the higher education
institutions that doesn't exist
now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, just for, hold on
just for a sec.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if,
if our governor is, uh, whoever
that is at the time is
responsible for the appointment.
Why would it go to the Attorney
General for the review.
And, and, uh, the process.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in
these constitutionally created
higher education institutions,
uh, the reason that we're
introducing two different
mechanisms, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if a board member is
sort of is accused allegedly
violating their core
responsibilities to that
institution, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the Attorney General
is an impartial, um, sort of
their, uh, the chief legal
officer for the state of New
Mexico. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, setting up
a legal process of removal makes
sense that they would initiate
that. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, as we've talked
about, it stays independent
through the judiciary. The
Speer, gentlemen, think this is
also good because it allows a
majority of the board of
regents.
To also initiate that
proceeding. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the way we have now
is a governor gets the entire
ability to appoint the Board of
Regents and then it's sort of,
it's very unclear, uncertain,
and there is no clear, uh, sort
of check and balance or process
after that should there be
alleged acts of, of malfeasance
or what have you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um,
I'm, I'm not a big fan of
constitutional amendments.
And, and, uh.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as,
as
You thought about this process.
What kept us from legislating
this instead of
Doing it on a constitutional
basis. Can you talk on that
please? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this must be done
through the Constitution because
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, our
higher education institutions
are created constitutionally.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we can't, um, we, any sort of
changes, modifications, addition
in this case of checks and
balances and responsibilities
must be done through the
Constitution.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that answer, but
Are you saying that unless we
change our constitution, we
couldn't write a piece of
legislation.
It says financial reports and
disclosures will be submitted to
legislative finance on a or
higher education on a quarterly
basis.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for
the constitution created higher
higher education institutions,
and they're constitutionally
created boards of regents, their
directors, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, we cannot, we, we
can certainly do other things
through sort of just budget and
funding with the clarity about
where money goes and and that
kind of thing, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, adding
responsibilities, clear
responsibilities.
to the Board of Regents, the
fiduciary responsibility in this
case can only be done through
the Constitution.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I've
seen the application process for
what it becomes, takes to become
a board of regent.
On the board of regents for
different schools.
It, it talks in depth about.
Having a responsibility on the
fiduciary side to review that
and to understand it and that
you have an obligation to report
anything that you find, so.
I feel like there's a split here
with respect to what we just
what I felt like I just got it
as a response versus what I,
I've seen with respect to how
the process works with um
becoming a board, uh, becoming a
region at one of the schools.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, each
governor, I imagine maybe has
their own process, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this is making clear
the responsibilities that that
member of a border region has
and then setting up a process
where if they're alleged to have
violated some of those core
responsibilities, a process for
their removal can be initiated,
which doesn't exist right now,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate the, the conversation
back and forth trying to
understand why you feel like
this is the, the best way to
accomplish this. I'm still not
100% confident that
The constitutional amendments,
the correct way to do it. I
think maybe we should have
looked at some other options
before we went to adjusting our,
our constitution. Uh, I would
say I listened to the rest of
the debate, but I'm pretty sure
we're at, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you gentlemen, I move that
House joint Resolution 12 as
amended do now pass. We are on
the final passage of how's Joint
Resolution 12 as amended, the
vote is now open.
What about clothes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. How's Joint
Resolution 12 as amended has
passed this house.
Gent lady from Bern Leo
representative onion Arnu, are
you ready on item 35.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent of the House
that the rules be suspended and
the records show that all action
taken for replacing House Bill
99 on fall on final passage has
been taken and is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Generally to explain the bill.
OK
OK, maybe I was running a little
bit, Mr. Speaker, members, um,
House Bill 99 creates a process
by which insurance companies
obtain salvage titles for total
loss vehicles.
After a vehicle is declared a
total loss, the salvage auction
industry takes possession of
those vehicles from insurance
carriers, but sometimes
insurance carriers are unable to
obtain the titles from the
previous owner and have trouble,
um, transferring ownership after
the insurance claim is paid. So
the state had a process for
doing this for several years and
then decided that enabling
language was needed and this
bill creates a standardized
process
with you.
After a vehicle is declared a
total loss, the salvage auction
industry takes possession of
those vehicles from insurance
carriers, but sometimes
insurance carriers are unable to
obtain the titles from the
previous owner and have trouble,
um, transferring ownership after
the insurance claim is paid. So
the state had a process for
doing this for several years and
then decided that enabling
language was needed and this
bill creates a standardized
process with the fantastic.
I now move that House Bill 99 is
twice amended, do not pass. We
are a final passage of House
Bill 99 as amended, the vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
Gentle lady, have you had to
sing yet? No one back here can
recall
and I have been asked the boy is
not closed by a 6 from the
affirmative 0 in the negative.
House Bill 99 is amended Azuli
pass his house.
gentle lady.
To
Sing. Well,
I don't know. I don't know what
to sing.
Aretha
Oh
Please
See, find out what it means to
me.
A yes.
I don't
Suck it to me, suck it to me,
suck it to me, suck it to me,
suck it to me, suck it to me,
suck it to me suck it.
Just
A little bit
Just a little bit.
Every once in a while, some slip
through the cracks, but you
know, 2.5 years later we still
remember.
Is there an amendment?
Is there an amendment on?
3:39.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
I do some committee reports real
quick Mr. Speaker, I move we go
to that order of Business
Committee reports to read.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 9 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report from
Alice Bill 9. All those in favor
signified by say 9.
I suppose, Nate.
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 72 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 72 to pass.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
unfavorable report files Bill
72, but a favorable committee
report for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 72. All those in favors and
if I was saying a.
Post Nate
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 171 as amended, has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it deep pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption for 171 as amended. All
those in favor signified by say
I.
I suppose Nate.
Mhm
That was a unanimous vote. The
ICE have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 256 has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that House
Judiciary can be substitute for
House Bill 256 do pass and he
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. We're adoption of
a non-favorable committee report
in house with 256, but a
favorable committee report on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 256.
All those in favors by saying I
I
supposed.
name. The guys have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committed to him has been
referred House Bill 258 as
amended has had it under
consideration in report same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
House Bill 258 as amended. All
those in favor signified by
saying I.
Although supposed name
Yeah I saw that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 284 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 284 do pass. Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption favorable report for
House Bill 284, but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 284. All those in
favor are signified by saying I.
All the supposed name.
I, I, I got the joke. That was a
good one.
Yeah, I have reported often.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 308 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 308 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.avorable reports Bill
308, but a favorable committee
report for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
through 08. All those in favor
25% 9.
All the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 5 has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption for House Bill 5. All
those in favor send by say 9.
All the supposed nay, the I saw
that committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 203 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We're adoption of a
favorable report for House Bill
203. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
I suppose,
yeah, I saw that committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 205 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that House Judiciary
can be a substitute for House
Bill 205 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
about 205 but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 205. All those in
favor signified by saying no.
All the supposed na.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 364 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
Is Bill 364. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
All the supposed nay.
Yeah I have it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Joint Resolution 5 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of a favorable report for House
Joint Resolution 5. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Although suppose nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 371 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Do want to Johnson, chair?
Mr. Sicker of adoption adoption
of a favor committee report for
House Bill 371, all those in
favor signified by saying I.
All the supposed nay, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 372 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted to Wanda
Johnson chair. Move adoption. We
are in adoption of a favorable
committee report for 372 as
amended. All those in favor
signified by say 9.
I suppose nay.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 448 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and he referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson
chair?
adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report for
house 448. All those in favor
signified by say I.
I was supposed.
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 453 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair. Move adoption We're an
adoption of a favorable report
for Alvie 453. All those in
favor of 759.
I was supposed.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 526 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Do Wanda Johnson,
chair?
Moverson
We're gonna adoption of a
favorite committee report for
House Bill 526. All those in
favor of signified by saying I.
I supposes name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 109 as
amended, has headed under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to you Wanda Johnson,
chair? Move adoption. We're
adoption of favorable committee
report for Senate Bill 109 as
amended. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose Nate.
You guys haven't come committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
to Senate Bill 135 has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to Wanda Johnson,
chair.
of adoption. We are an adoption
of a favorable committee report
for Senate Bill 135. All those
in favor 5 by saying I.
I was a supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 457 has
had it under consideration,
reports with recommendation that
it do pass as amended, and
thence referred to the commerce
and Economic Development
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen,
chair.
We're adoption of a favor report
for House 457. All those in
favor of 59.
I supposed the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 458 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen's share
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable report for housing
458. All those in favor saying 5
but say 9.
I suppose nay
The ISR that committee report
adopted.
Gentlemen from Donana. Mr.
Speaker, I move, we move to the
next order of business.
Uh, read messages.
So an objection to this order,
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 41 as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submit
and Sherry De Luhansson and
chief clerk.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to that next order of business,
3rd reading of legislation.
Is there an amendment?
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Are
you ready? an item.
Number
42
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point? reflect that
election is placing House Bill
128 as twice amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is subject to debate amendment,
or substitution to general la to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh.
House Bill 128 as twice amended
proposes a grant fund at the New
Mexico Finance Authority to
support the planning and
implementation of solar and
storage projects for local
public buildings and
infrastructure, um, Mr. Speaker,
this, uh, legislation, uh, would
make this funding available for
municipalities, counties,
tribes, pueblos, and nations,
land grants and public school
districts, um, there is funding
in the budget for uh the local
access fund, um, and the uses of
the fund include uh planning
grants, implementation grants,
um, and.
Mr. Speaker, projects that could
be funded through this program
include buildings, uh, local
buildings like community
centers, schools, fire stations,
police stations, libraries,
infrastructure that could be
funded includes water and
wastewater systems and street
lighting, Mr. Speaker, um, there
have been a lot, there's been a
lot of interest in solar uh
powered lighting, for example,
and that's an example of a
project that could be funded
through this program.
Um, Mr. Speaker, the, the last
thing I'll say is one of the
major reasons that we brought
this bill forward is to improve
community resiliency and so
improving the ability of local
governments, school districts,
and the like to have buildings
that are resilient in emergency
situations, um, and Mr. Speaker
with that, I would stand for
debate. There lady from Bern Leo
and Sandoval, Representative
Cates.
does the gentle lady from Santa
Fe, uh, yield.
I yield to my friend from Berna
Leon Sandoval. Thank you very
much. um, thank you very very
much bringing this uh
legislature forward. uh, I just
want to clarify some things. Um,
is there outdoor lighting
involved in these sort of
projects?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
there could be, uh, it depends
on the local government
proposal, but certainly, uh,
solar street lighting is a
possibility or so solar lighting
for these projects.
OK, thank you very much and how
much um
Where, what kind of uh
What kind of community outreach
are these projects required to
do?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
each of these projects would
need to go through, um, the
local government planning
process, whether that be a
school district or uh a local
government like a city or county
as they're prioritizing their
infrastructure needs which often
includes community input.
Uh, I thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and thank you, kind lady, um,
how will a qualified entity, how
will they know about how to
apply for this type of projects,
uh, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so the, the, uh, grants will be
administered by the New Mexico
Finance Authority, so certainly,
uh they are very skilled at
placing, um, descriptions of
grant opportunities on their
website there are, um, certainly
a lot, there's certainly a lot
of information distribution to
local governments that advertise
these opportunities to make sure
that that folks are avail uh
taking advantage of all
available funding.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, and, and thank you my
friend when uh this is such a
great uh opportunity uh in NMFA
as an experienced lender in our
state, the, these projects will
go through the same sort of uh
standard rigorous lending uh
processes that they do for all
their projects. Would that be
true, um, my friend from Santa
Fe.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, and a lady
from Berna Leo and Sandoval, um,
I will stress that these are uh
not loans, they are grants, um,
however, uh, often they may be
used to match other
opportunities whether that be
other federal funding
opportunities or other
opportunities that could be
available which those other
opportunities could be loans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you for that clarification, um,
madam leader, uh, I just have a
couple of other questions. Will
these projects, could they, um,
Uh, are they able to have a
battery storage, will there be a
square footage requirement in
some of these, uh, projects.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, and I'm glad you brought up
the storage element of this
because that's a very important
piece of the resiliency um that
we're trying to build in and
boost for local governments and
so having that battery storage
means that um you not only have
a building that is partially
powered by solar, um, you're
also allowing for that storage
to help that power last through
the night, um, in the case of
like an emergency shelter or an
emergency.
emergency operation center that
needs to be resilient, um, Mr.
Speaker and lady, and actually
in the House Energy Committee we
we took, um, I mean, excuse me,
House Appropriations and
finance, we accepted an
amendment to ensure that
projects that include storage
are prioritized.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, kind lady. Um, so I'm
trying to get an idea of all the
different types of uh projects
that could be uh eligible for
this, um, so we're talking about
they could be projects that
might require energy or light
where there is no necessarily
infrastructure in place, would
that be an adequate description,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you kind lady. I
think I'm done.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Colfax, Gerry
Harding, Quay, San Miguel and
Union Representative Chatfield.
Mr. Speaker as a gentle lady
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you.
Uh, do these projects ever
connect to the distribution
center. In other words, uh, the
distribution lines that run
throughout the area.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
they could be interconnected or
they could be off grid as well.
Is there any requirement for,
for those distribution companies
to accept that project if it
wants to connect to their
distribution lines.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
but these are projects that are
behind the meter, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, this set
of local projects is not
intended to replace any existing
solar generation or other forms
of power generation on the grid,
so it would, it's the equivalent
of just adding that solar
generation at the project site
so on just on the building.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
many, many solar projects are
behind the meter. They buy, uh,
energy when it's dark.
And they sell energy when it's
light.
Uh, is that the case in this
instance?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, it
would depend on the specific
project.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
they bought energy when it's
light and solar energy when it's
dark.
Uh, do they provide some
some compensation to the
distribution company for the use
of its lines.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
would depend on the
interconnection agreement that
they had uh with the with the
utility.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
those interconnection, uh,
agreements are not standard.
They're negotiated individually,
uh, at, at various times by
different, uh, entities.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, and,
and let me just pause, forgive
me, I neglected to introduce my
expert witnesses that I have
here, um, I have Ms. Alicia Shaw
with Public Power New Mexico and
Thomas Gray with Positive Energy
solar, um, and so Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I am informed
that those are standardized.
So Mr. Speaker, General A, did I
understand that they are
standardized.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, some
distribution entities have
policy that uh that they do not
want solar projects connected to
their lines, uh, is that, uh,
something that's legal or
honored with these projects or
not?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so in this legislation, we do
call for energy, minerals and
natural resources department to
consult with the New Mexico
Finance Authority on the
projects and um Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, one of the things
that we found in doing the
research for this legislation is
that there is a huge demand, um,
that probably far outpaces, um,
what we, what we might.
even expect. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I would suspect that
if a project came forward where
the local utility had a concern,
um, that that project may not
rise to the priority level, um,
and the prior prioritization is
set out in the legislation, so,
um, there does need to be um
consultation with energy,
minerals and natural resources
department that has a lot of
expertise in that area and so I
think that that would.
factor into the selection of the
projects?
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for that answer. uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, one of
the problem is that many of
these distribution entities have
millions and millions of dollars
invested in lines and poles and
meters and
All the things that go with it.
And uh when they carry more
electricity and they have more
customers, uh, it costs more
money to maintain them. And, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, who
would perform the maintenance.
Who would, who would be trained
and able to perform the
maintenance on this project and
the things that come with it for
the distribution company.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
it could be the solar provider
that is uh engaged to build the
project, um, it could be a local
maintenance team on site with
the uh uh.
Local government or eligible
entity that's selected.
Um, so it, it's kind of depends
on the project.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
would that have to be made clear
before the project was
attempted, who's going to
maintain it and whose
responsibility it is to maintain
it, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, um, we believe that it that
would be addressed in the
rulemaking process, um, NMFA and
Energy Minerals and Natural
Resources, um, we'll, uh,
establish rules by the end of
this year if this legislation is
enacted, um, that would include
how
they evaluate some of these
solar systems, uh, are they, how
they evaluate all of these
proposed solar energy systems
and how they will prioritize
them, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and it would also
establish what all is required
in the application process, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what would be the maximum size
of a project approximate maximum
size, is there, is there any
intended, uh, size for these
type of projects.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
there is not a maximum size
specified in the legislation,
however, um, the intention of
this legislation is to find
specific uh local building
needs. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
you said counties and
municipalities are, are the only
entities eligible subdivisions
of the state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, yes,
in addition to counties and
municipalities, school
districts, land grants, and then
Indian nations, tribes or
pueblos are the eligible
entities.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
this is, uh,
the local solar access fund and,
uh, I suppose it, it pertains
only to solar or if somebody put
up a wind turbine, could they
participate in this fund.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this is,
uh, only specific to solar, um,
we did look to see if there if
there was such a thing as as a
rooftop wind. I did a little
research on that, but it is only
for local solar. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you know, uh, up in
the area where I come from, they
had rooftop wind long ago, long
before the, the REA was put in
in the 1930s, all those little
homesteads had the wind
generators and that's, that's
how they got a little.
a light at night and I have to
laugh when I
travel around that northeastern
New Mexico and I see these tiny
little wind generators and you
can look on the horizon and, and
see the huge ones that are at
work now and it also some major,
major solar projects.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
thank you for your time.
There is further debate, gentle
lady from San Miguel and
Torrance, Representative
Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, the gentle lady from
Santa Fey.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from Torrance
and San Miguel, um, thank you so
much, gentle lady. Um, I do
appreciate this legislation, but
um I do have some questions,
particularly, particularly um as
to how it would affect
communities like mine
specifically rural communities,
um, could you maybe expand a
little bit as to how this
legislation would affect rural
communities or maybe just just
elaborate on that a little bit
more for me, please. Thank you,
gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, this legislation
directly benefits rural
communities. Um, we have built
into the prioritization that the
majority of the funding must be
spent in rural communities, um,
and Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that is in part because um we
want that energy resilience for
critical infrastructure, so, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
uh, infrastructure like fire
stations, water treatment
plants, um.
emergency shelters that are
needed in time in in those times
where those natural disasters or
other issues occur, um, and the
other thing that we heard, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady is
that there's a huge desire from
smaller communities and rural
communities to uh install solar
projects on their buildings,
however, they don't necessarily
have access to the technical
assistance you need to plan, um,
or to act.
access other sources of funding
and sort of create that funding
stack for a particular project,
so that's one of the reasons why
technical assistance granting
was allowed in this bill.
Thank you so much, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, um, you talked
about prioritizing the rural
communities, which is much
appreciated, especially from
district district like mine, um,
and you also talked about where
you can maybe find some
information on these grants. Um,
are there any other priorities
like how will the grants be
prioritized when you're actually
distributing them.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle ladies, so um.
Uh, number one is the uh uh the
number one in the prioritization
is, you know, what is the need
for this funding, um,
specifically, and, and I would
imagine that as we look at some
of these critical infrastructure
projects, those would rise to
the top, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, it goes on to
prioritize the percentage of low
income households in the
community served by the project,
um, building.
and infrastructure that are used
to provide community services or
emergency shelters, um, and
again, the majority of this
funding is required to be
allocated to rural entities, um,
the.
We're also looking at the long
term operating cost reductions
of the solar energy system, uh,
how we can make sure that this
money is being spread all around
the state, so maximum geographic
disbursement, um, and diversity
of that and then ensuring that
the uh those grants are reaching
as many locations as possible
and not just being concentrated
in one specific region.
Thank you for, for that, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, um, so
thank you for elaborating, um,
on some of those, um.
With that, you talked a lot
about community resiliency. You
talked about some of the
benefits, um, but putting it
into terms, it's also was
mentioned that, you know, rural
communities may not have that
experience or expertise with
these projects, um, but how much
can communities save putting
that into something that is more
tangible, um, you know, maybe
what are the benefits monetarily
or what can communities expect
to save if they were to
implement projects like this.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
we have had a, a lot of research
done on this and so, um, in
addition to those resilience
benefits, um, we're looking at
projects can save on average,
uh, for communities up to $10
million over 25 years for a
single megawatt solar project,
um, and that'll vary just
depending on uh utility rates
and, and the performance of the
system, um, but these are long
term savings for communities.
using um these, this one time uh
funding.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, um, just a
couple more questions, um, you
know, you talked about these
projects being again in schools
and you know, different types of
buildings, um, but again, maybe
just elaborate a little bit more
on what an eligible project look
like looks like if somebody from
my community wanted to apply for
this fund, um, what would be a
good project that could be
considered for this grant, uh,
maybe just elaborating a little
bit more as to what that would
look like.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, so a huge variety of
projects and actually in talking
with local communities a whole
number of projects came forward,
things like community centers,
libraries and schools that are
interested in this, particularly
those that can also serve double
duty as emergency shelters, fire
stations, police stations,
hospitals, uh, that need to make
sure that their operations are
are running um 24/7. Water and
Wastewater treatment facilities
and street lighting, um,
particularly for, um, those
places that are really concerned
about public safety we know that
improved lighting can really
assist with public safety, um,
so, and again these projects
have to be owned by the eligible
entities, so these are local
government owned, um, uh,
projects, but you know we're
really looking at places where
we can boost resiliency and also
save money long term for these
entities.
I'm thinking, gentle lady, Madam
Speaker, just one last question,
um, I did note in going through
some of the analysis that there
was um an amendment in a
committee particularly
highlighting the New Mexican
workforce. Um, are you expecting
that to, to increase some of our
New Mexicans going to work
possibly with assistance from
this program.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um, so we are
really wanting to uh we are
wanting to boost local workforce
and so um one of the criteria
for the prioritization of
projects includes plans that
support workforce development.
So hiring local workers, um,
participating in apprenticeship
programs, uh, these are things
that we hope, uh, if a if a
project is proposed and it
It requires and includes those
kinds of local workforce
benefits, um, that is something
that can be considered as the
project is evaluated and funded
uh for prioritization.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, um and thank
you for answering those
questions, um, specifically as
it, um, applies to my community.
I really do appreciate your
responses and with that I yield.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Katrin Sierra
Socorro, Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
Yield.
Thank you Madam Speaker. I
kindly yield to uh the leader
Armstrong, the gentle lady from
the largest district, Katherine
Secora Socora, Sierra, and
Valencia.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you kind lady. Uh, the previous
questions, a lot of mine were
answered with that, so I
appreciate that, but the were
rural co-ops, um, at the table
and in and included in all of
these conversations.
Miss, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, there was
consultation in particular from
one of the rural electric co
ops, which was Kit Carson, Roy
Electric Co op, um, and, uh,
we've been working on this
legislation for a couple of
years. I think this is the 3rd
year, 2nd or 3rd year that we've
introduced this legislation, um,
and so, uh, certainly there's
been robust debate over the last
couple of years as well. Thank
you for that, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I, uh, I
appreciate.
that because all of my districts
are rural electric co-ops, um,
but I also know that for sure
one of my co-ops does not
participate in the, um, being
able to sell the the energy back
into the grid. So these would
all have to be projects that are
self-sustaining and, and, and
whatever you call that, I'm not
a a a solar expert, um, and so
that, that's a, that's a uh a
little bit of a downfall for,
for my rural electric.
up, but maybe encouraging as
well that they would.
Choose to to opt in, so, uh,
maybe it's a carrot, um, the
other question, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady that I had a
question about is, is there an
apprenticeship program in New
Mexico that is where solar
participates.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, yes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and where is that
apprenticeship program located?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, it is called ABC and is
based in Albuquerque.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, so that's associated
builders and contractors. So
that's, that's good. I didn't
know that solar was a part of
that. So thank you for that
information. Um, one of the ques
other questions and, and just
something that I want to bring
to everyone's attention is that
hiring local workers.
The neck, uh, so it's on page 5,
of the amended bill so energy
systems that support workforce
development, including hiring
local workers, paying prevailing
wage.
Or workers participating in
apprenticeship programs, so you
don't have to pay prevailing
wage.
If you hire workers that are
participating in the
apprenticeship program.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I think all, uh, that clause
starts with including, so I
think it is and it includes an
oar, so it's basically
suggesting a number of factors
that could be considered and
what uh would constitute
supporting workforce
development, um, but it is an or
so it's listing uh these items
as as things that would be
looked at uh as positives in
addition to um the other items
above.
starting with um section 2,
subsection 2A, um, so that's all
included in in letter I.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. So the
way you're reading it is
including by hiring local
workers.
Pain prevailing wage.
So those two are, are, uh,
concurrent.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I would see this sort of
as a list, so I think it's items
that it's solar energy systems
that support workforce
development, including by number
one hiring local workers, #2,
paying the prevailing wage, 3,
or hiring workers participating
in apprenticeship program. So
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, it, it, the intention of
this is not requiring all three
of those, um, and it's including
so I think projects would have.
the ability to propose here's
the way that we're supporting
the local workforce, um, and
maybe it's none of those three
items, but it's, it's some other
uh program that they have, for
example.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind lady. Um, I, I appreciate
that that the way you're reading
it because in rural New Mexico,
We, most of them aren't gonna be
participating in an
apprenticeship program, but we
do have local companies that,
um, that could be bid these
projects. So, um, that was my
question and uh thank you Madam
Speaker, kind lady.
Thank you. There is further
debate. The gentle lady from
Berna Leo, Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
we're gonna play uh speak behind
the flowers.
game, uh, will the, um, gentle
lady leader from Santa Fe,
please yield. I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you. Uh, so I wanted to
rise um in complete excitement.
Uh, of this bill, this
legislation.
Because for the past, oh my
goodness, I don't even know how
many years now, but since I was
elected.
For sure, um, we've been
engaging in the realm of um.
Community solar.
Um
Our transition to healthier and
cleaner climate.
Um, we've entertained lots of
discussion around our natural
and renewables that are
available in our state and
abundant actually solar and wind
being uh two of the most, um.
Uh, abundant natural sources and
I'm excited.
Gentle lady because in those
discussions and it it it.
Refers back to some of the
questions that have previously
been asked of you, um, to
further explain.
When we were entertaining all
these discussions, madam
Speaker, there were quite a few
working groups over the past few
years that assisted with the
passage of the energy transition
community solar and other such
legislation.
And Madam Speaker, they were
very excited because they talked
about.
As we progress and move with one
piece of legislation to another
piece of legislation we actually
are going to begin a domino
effect because the more our
communities become aware of how
beneficial, how accessible.
These, um, renewable energies
are to our communities, the more
they will be able to um access
and have the opportunity to
develop.
Particularly um Madam Speaker,
gentle lady in our public arena,
all our public, uh, local
communities and um public
facilities.
And Madam Speaker, I'm even more
excited because I've been a
member of the New Mexico Finance
Authority since I was first
elected.
And I've seen.
How the department has grown and
grown and how they have stepped
up and responded.
To
Uh, our communities and
providing technical assistance
in um outreach of the many
different grants and loan
programs they have available and
how they.
Most recently under our
pandemic.
We're able to.
Set up programs to respond to
the incredible needs of our
communities around the state
based on uh facing one of the
most horrible times of our
century in terms of the
pandemic.
So coupling both this.
Piece of legislation all that
we've done together with.
Uh, what is available through
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and how they will assist our
communities gives me a big sense
of pride and uh a sense of
comfort knowing that we will be
managing um these programs and
grants in the highest um.
Accountability and transparency
that we can ask for.
So
I wanted to mention that I also
had a question about the
apprenticeships, but you've
addressed those already and I'm
excited about that as well
because often times when we've,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
when we've been entertaining,
um, legislation around in the
area of renewable energy and how
we need to address, uh,
mitigating our climate crisis
that we're facing not just
globally uh.
But in our nation and in our
state, um, oftentimes we've been
told.
This is not an arena where jobs
are readily available.
But we have seen in the past 10
years I would say, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady that the
notion, the basic.
Notion of um.
Of
Market
Um, of capitalism we would say
is the higher the volume, the
lower the cost.
And in this case we've seen in
the past 10 years how making.
Solar accessible.
And providing the mechanisms in
place, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, such as these grants.
Um, making them available to our
public and local communities.
have actually increased the
interest.
And the pursuit of these
projects and the more we.
Make these accessible thus I
love the name the NMFA local
solar access fund, the more we
make them accessible.
The hope is there will be
increased volume which will
contribute to lower costs and
that jobs.
Will be made readily uh more
available in our local
communities, so um I just have.
Based on that, um, a question.
Concerning.
How the um.
This particular
Access fund, solar access fund
will meet.
The current demand.
If we have an idea of how this
will meet our current demand at
this time.
gentle lady
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, you know, we
have, uh, been working with
local governments across the
state, um, with, uh,
understanding what their
programs that they're interested
in, um, installing uh the
projects that they're interested
in installing are, um, I think
there's tremendous demand. I
think this is just the
beginning, um, and we'll have to
evaluate that, you know, each
year, as you will as part of the
New Mexico Finance Authority
over.
Insight committee to understand
uh how this is being rolled out?
Is it being rolled out quickly
enough and what are the future
needs and how do we meet those?
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and that's why I'm
excited to have NMSA involved
because they have the capacity
to track.
Uh, as they're doing outreach as
they're responding to the needs
as they're responding to uh
technical assistance, um,
concerns in our small rural
communities they are also
gauging um how to address all of
those 3 and.
Constantly looking at ways to
enhance their programs so that
they can meet these needs, so
thank you for that. I also, um,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, throughout the years that
I've been, uh, in the pursuit of
um the environmental.
Just transition to a cleaner um
energy world and uh cleaner
transition.
I want to just point out several
things that make this.
Um
Bill, so important to.
The children and our future
generations and I had the
pleasure of speaking to a 12
year old today.
And uh he was sitting in the
house energy uh committee this
morning bright and early, uh,
with his parent and grandparent,
and he was really intent
listening to the discussion and
I was sitting in the back
watching him and his body
language, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I was beat.
Beyond um curious as to why he
wasn't fidgeting, falling
asleep, playing on the phone or
an iPad or anything else he
actually was sitting there, uh,
paying attention to the
discussion.
Which was I found quite
admirable, so I.
At the end of the committee, I
asked him.
What he was most interested in.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, with the community this in
the discussion.
And he said in it almost broke
my heart because it was, it made
me so sentimental but also.
Um
Filled me with pride.
And he said, because you all are
taking care of my future.
This was a 12 year old.
Sitting at 8 o'clock in the
morning.
Intently listening to what
turned out to be probably about
4 or 5 hours of committee.
Discussion and debate over
several bills.
This is why, um, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady.
I joined you and I will continue
to join others.
In
Furthering our efforts in the
state.
To ensure
That solar access.
Solar is accessible as well as
all of our other abundant
natural resources in our state
as we aim to.
A just transition to the future
and I will point out just in
closing um.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
That the major benefits of solar
and solar access.
One
It reduces greenhouse gas
emissions.
There is no.
Greenhouse, there are no
greenhouse gasses that are
emitted.
Via solar energy thereby no
toxic materials associated.
Second
Solar energy reduces dangerous
pollutants.
Like nitrogen oxide, sulfur
oxides, and particulate matter.
And finally,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
which makes it even much more
exciting in our state.
Solar energy reduces the amount
of water that needs to be
withdrawn and consumed.
These are all benefits that are
most vulnerable communities such
as our rural communities are
most in need of.
Not just under emergency
circumstances to build a
resiliency but every single day.
That these smaller rural
communities face the many
challenges.
Of meeting
Um, their educational goals and
their local economic goals in
order to continue to sustain
their small populations who
choose to live in those smaller
rural communities, so Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, thank
you for stepping up. Thank you
for always being a champion.
thank you for um.
Opening the door for many, many
others, uh, to come and to fill
your shoes as we continue to
move forward in our state thank
you Madam Speaker. Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee County Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll,
uh, gentle lady yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Lee.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
just a few questions. I have a
A few, uh,
Are these grants, you said
they're all grants, are they
only for
Like city, county, government
projects.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, so only counties
municipalities, school
districts, land grants, or
Indian nation, tribe or Pueblo.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, so no single
family housing.
Will be included in these.
Grants
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
it would, that would only occur
if it was the local government
was proposing um to install this
on like a public housing
development but not privately
owned residential housing, no.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative.
They uh
Another thing I haven't, and I
may have been missing it, what
is the uh
Process or
What are the metrics of applying
for or
proprietor prioritize the
distribution of these grants. Is
there a certain process?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, um, in, uh, on page 3 of
the legislation, we start to
list out the metrics for
prioritization and that
includes, you know, what is the
need, um, who is the project
going to serve, um, in terms of,
uh, uh, community need or
low-income households, um,
emergency shelters and community
services are prioritized, um,
probably the biggest one to
note.
is that the majority of this
funding must go to rural
entities, um, but then there's
also a number of uh other
criteria that include making
sure we're getting a good deal
on these projects that the
pricing is consistent, um, with
statewide price agreements and
opportunities that support local
workforce.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, for that I did see that, but
I guess our
We're gonna
We have an application process
where they have 4 months and we
get all the applications and
then they're prioritized as far
as funding, I don't see where it
says thing about how the process
is gonna unfold as far as giving
out the, the projects.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
the applications will be
developed by the New Mexico
Finance Authority, um, and there
are a few elements required in
the legislation, for example,
the cost, uh, the cost savings,
uh, what the community benefits
are going to be, um, and, uh,
that will also be developed in
rules, so the New Mexico Finance
Authority and energy, minerals
and natural resource wills have
to spell this out fully in
rules.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
As most people know I'm, I like,
I like to make the rules.
But, uh, you know, the main
thing is I'd like to see where
we have a, I'd like to see
someone that will.
September the first they have to
have their application.
I just want to make sure that
every project gets started on
day one and not a running deal
so somebody comes in there and
spends all the money before we
know what the projects are.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I love that you want to be the
rule maker
and the rules have to be made by
December 31st, 2025.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, one
other thing and I think I saw it
in there, but, uh, can these
funds be used for any projects
outside of New Mexico?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no.
So none of the tribes, Pueblos
or nations can apply for this
fund or grants.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, a
native nation tribe or Pueblo
could, um, however, the project,
uh, would need to be located in
New Mexico.
Excuse me, uh, Representative,
what was that last statement?
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
the projects are just for New
Mexico.
I know, but, but then you said
that the nations in Pueblos
could use these funds also.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes.
Are they not sovereigns nations
themselves.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
absolutely, um, but they are
geographically located in New
Mexico.
I have any problem with them
using them, but
You know, in one part it said
only New Mexico and.
I hear all the time, you know,
they are sovereign nations, they
are not.
But uh
Also, and it might be in there,
the uh
we went kind of gave me an idea
of the metrics on the
application project project.
What, what is in this bill to
monitor the
The effectiveness and of the
program. Are we going to get
reports or?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
uh, as the gentle lady from
Bertollio described, um, the New
Mexico mortgage mort the New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversight committee, um, is an
interim committee that receives
reports directly on all of the
operations of NMFA, so NMFA, um,
will need to provide reports,
um, to that committee as it does
on all of its programs, um, and
they are, they do a really
great.
job of doing a deep dive in the
interim.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair
Representative, uh,
We, uh, I think that's all my
questions. I'm, I'm really still
not undecided, solar is a great
thing. My house, I have 35 solar
panels runs it.
But I cannot be independent.
I still have to spend the money
to be on the grid also if I want
electricity 24/7.
Solar and wind and all those are
great sources.
They're expensive sources.
Cost per kilowatt is quite a bit
more expensive, but
weather and everything we, we
have to
We cannot discount our
traditional sources of
electricity either with that I,
I yield. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, the gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does
he, uh, gentle lady from Salmon
County healed.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
My, my apologies, Madam Speaker,
renewable energy gets me
excited, um.
Madam Speaker, um, gentle lady.
Uh, as, as you know, um.
There's, there's a long, long
history of the importance of uh
Access to to renewable energy
and tribal communities first
off, Madam Speaker, uh, in, in,
and for your um experts. I also,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
just want to let the body know
about my small background on
renewable energy, uh, I served
on the New Mexico climate change
Task Force technical advisory
member. I served on the tribal
community solar task force. I
was awarded the uh national 2021
vote So doctor.
but so justice award and uh
Madam Speaker, you know,
Having you carrying this
legislation means so much to so
many people all across New
Mexico, not just our tribal
communities, but especially our
rural communities. My, my
question, Madam Speaker, um,
gentle lady is, uh, we have some
nonprofit organizations that are
doing some wonderful jobs in our
tribal communities, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, like
native renewables, which is a a
women-led organization.
Uh, Navajo Power, Sean Dean
renewables will these.
Um, organizations benefit from
this legislation, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker, uh, and gentlemen
from San Juan, um, they, it, it
depends on the local government.
So if the local government is
working with them to install
that solar, um, or to work with
them on the planning, absolutely
this this would work with that,
um, it's up to the local
government to propose that.
Madam Speaker, thank you for,
for that reminder because uh
these organizations are doing
that work. They're in the, uh,
chapter communities they're
working with the different
Pueblos tribes and nations on
building out the the uh solar
projects before it was, it was
such a struggle, Madam Chair,
um, um, a gentle lady because,
uh, we used to always, uh, hear
about this, um, organization.
Up in uh North Dakota called
Lakota Solar Enterprise and it
was run by Henry Red Cloud. He
has trained a lot of people from
New Mexico on uh tiny on, on, on
soul insulation, Madam Speaker,
uh, gentle lady, I also want to
acknowledge, um, our tribal
institutions that are getting
involved in the training
programs, Madam Speaker, general
lady, thene College has a solar
tech
program and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, Nava Technical
University has a 2-year
photovoltaic wind generation uh
training program to your
associates. Well, these
institutions benefit from uh
this legislation.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I'm so
glad you brought that up because
I think those educational
programs will be a great
pipeline for the workforce for
these projects and actually
those students could probably
get go out and get real world
experience on these kinds of
projects depending on how that,
that, uh, local government
structures the project.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I want to close
with this, Madam Speaker,
general lady, the access to
clean renewable energy is so
critical in our tribal
communities rural communities,
um, to this day I still can
count the number of homes in my
community that don't have any
electricity.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and that is a human right. Thank
you for that, Madam Speaker. I,
I, in, in my questions, y, I
yield back.
OK, there is further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker.
Can I have a brief second. We've
been working, I've been working
with the sponsor on an
amendment. I have it just came
over.
I like to show it to her.
Before I move forward because I
believe unlike uh Representative
Smalls, um, bill earlier. This
one will be a really friendly
amendment since I worked it out
in advance.
Yes, gentlemen, uh, we're going
to go to Representative to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, will
the gentle lady from Santa Fe, I
yield to my friend from Santa
Fe. Thank you, um.
Thank you for yielding, uh,
questions.
The value of this uh this bill
and the purpose of it being at
NMFA.
Um
His for me has been um one of
the, the gaps that we have had
in solving the, the, the issue
that we have regarding our
renewable energy and, and the
prospects and the development of
it.
Madam, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
gentle lady, can you expand on
why this is the, the importance
of us having this uh and move
this these projects through
NMFA.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
one of the wonderful things
about NMFA is that it is a
trusted organization by many
local governments, many local
governments are really familiar
with the process because they
access other programs at NMFA,
um, so adding this project, the
local solar Access Fund to the
slate of projects that they're
already working on local
governments with um to us seemed
extremely efficient and that it
would be an effective use of the
funding.
Thank you Madam Madam Speaker,
uh, gentle lady, and
The cost of of expanding our
renewable portfolio how does
this further develop that.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um,
this does advance, um, uh, the
energy transition at the most
very local level, um, and it
also boosts our resilience, so
in terms of disasters,
emergencies, um, floods, fires,
you know, all of those things
that our local communities are
on the front lines of this
boosts our ability to help
support those local governments
have spaces that are ready to
manage those emergencies.
Madam Speaker, General, thank
you for that. I think that that
is one of the most important
things that I think this body
has been working towards is
really that resiliency, um.
Uh, expansion for our state as
we know that we've, we've
encountered many wildfires and
um
in the foreseeable future, we,
we know that there are going to
be other things that come to us
in um for emergency management
this provides an opportunity,
especially at the focus of, of
what this bill does and working
with those local governments and
really
Putting our best foot forward if
you will, madam, uh, Speaker,
General Lady as far as
Um
Prioritizing in those
communities, do you foresee,
madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that, that those needs in those
communities that are most
vulnerable that this funding
will um.
Go to them in uh amount of time
where we're seeing that these
needs are, are, are critical.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
um, in part because of the, we
worked really hard on the
prioritization criteria in the
bill, and so I think it, it is
very likely that the funding's
gonna go exactly where it's most
needed.
Thank you for that answer again,
um.
One of the issues that uh Ern
it's not really an issue, but
one of the things I like about
this bill and why it Madam
Speaker, generally, I signed on
to this bill, uh, last year and
again this year was all these
things that we're talking about,
but really integrating and
having the local government
control over where they know
there's, uh, they know they have
their resources where they know
that they, what they need to
develop them and giving them.
Their ability to develop the
their um
The renewable portfolio, if you
will.
One of the questions I think
that came up was whether this
could um this would be um uh the
distribution level, would it be
on the, the bigger scale of, of
the grid management or could
this be used uh for those local
communities to develop
microgrids and I'm speaker
gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
these are smaller scale
projects, um, could be used to
develop a micro grid, um, or for
a very specific small project.
They can thank you, um, Madam
Speaker Ju leader, and again
that goes to the resiliency and
the needs that we have.
Excuse me
I think that this is, this is
really this really pertains to
this issue.
And
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
would just say the benefit and
the cost that's associated with
this.
What do we foresee that the, the
cost um for the energy use for
the ratepayers would go down
when we have more rela
Mm
When we have more.
Renewable energy available,
Madam Speaker and gentle ladies,
so this won't impact uh other
ratepayers, but certainly for
the local governments that
participate in these projects
long term their cost will go
down because they will have
significant savings, um, in
their energy costs.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
generally, I think that that's
really important to mention and
how we are progressing and
building a renewable energy
portfolio. Thank you. I yield
back.
Back to the gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe. I
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentle lady.
Um
In uh reviewing uh this bill,
um, I thought there might be
some language to be a little bit
more clarifying.
And so, uh, Miss Speaker and,
and gentle lady, um, on page 3
on line 6 on the original bill.
Um
There it it reads um that.
Providing grants or to provide
grants for technical assistance
to apply for federal and other
funding to plan, design,
construct, purchase, install and
equip solar energy systems. So
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady, I,
I believe that in layman's
terms, that section is to
provide a grant to the eligible
entities to be able to get help
with grant writing is that?
Uh, uh, a fair statement, um,
uh, Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So, uh, to make
that a little bit more clear as
to where, um, the, they could
get the help from in grant
writing.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
To get that technical
assistance, um, I, I worked this
language over with you and I
hope it, I hope it is uh.
It is correct and so before I
move the amendment, I'd like to,
to, to review the language, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, but on page 3 line 6 after
grants.
Insert
To eligible entities or New
Mexico councils of government
and Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the reason I wanted to include
councils of government is
because Mr. Speaker, in
generally, that's kind of their
purpose is to help some of these
smaller
Political subdivisions if they
don't have that grant writing.
Uh, expertise that they can
provide that. However, there
would be some costs associated
with that and so this language
would essentially read to uh
allow for that technical
assistance to come from the
cogs.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
as in our discussion, obviously
we do not want to exclude.
These eligible entities, if they
can do this grant writing on
their own.
Um, they still, there's still a
cost associated with that which
would be uh administrative, so,
uh, in I I believe that is a
conversation we had if, is that
your recollection as speaker
generally, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes.
So Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, I have an amendment.
And uh Madam Speaker, uh, the
amendment.
Uh, the number of the 231 number
is 0.231573.3.
Thank you gentlemen, uh, it has
been passed out.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um,
What do you think?
Mr. um, gentlemen, I think you
need to move the amendment.
Miss Speaker, Madam Speaker, I
moved uh House Amendment.
3
I'm looking up, this is it's
been mended twice, is that
correct?
Or is it floor amendment one.
Thank you. I move Amendment 1 to
House Bill 128 as twice amended.
Gentlemen, uh, you've already
explained the amendment, but you
want to just explain it real
quick again so everybody knows
what you're talking about. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, once again, uh, on
page 3 line 6 after uh the word
grants, we would insert to
eligible entities or New Mexico
councils of government and the
Speaker and gentle lady, all
that would do is describe who
can help these eligible
entities, uh, in grant writing
if they don't have that
expertise in their in their uh
own office.
Gently.
Is this a friendly amendment?
Madam Speaker.
It is a friendly amendment.
Well, that is cause for
celebration.
And Madam Speaker, I wanna thank
the gentleman for bringing me
the language um before this we
got into debate on this bill so
that we could correct a few
things and work the language out
together so I appreciate the
gentleman from San Juan very
much.
Is there objective objection to
adopting the amendment, seeing
none. The amendment is adopted.
Alright, gentlemen, you still
have the floor. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. I, I appreciate the
gentle lady working with me uh
cause um Madam Speaker, it might
be a surprise to everyone in
this body that even though this
is my 11th year here, I've never
been able to get an amendment
accepted as friendly in the
past.
I'll allow it. I'll allow it,
gentlemen to sing, gentlemen to
sing.
Sing.
No gentlemen, to not sing.
Madam Speaker, I think it would
be the benefit of all if I did
not see twice in one evening.
OK, see no further debate.
Oh, we do have further debate.
So sorry. That was not, I wasn't
casting aspersions, the
gentleman from Otero County
Representative block. Thank you
so much, Madam Speaker, just a
few questions, I promise with
the, with the gentle lady from
Santa Fe, please.
I yield to the gentleman from
Otero. Thank you, Madam, Madam
Chair, Speaker, and gentle lady.
So just a few questions just for
my understanding.
So when we're talking about
these eligible entities, madam
Speaker and gentle lady, so is
this kind of all inclusive when
it comes to municipalities,
schools, land grants.
And controlled governments
because I believe Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, we did talk about a
bunch of different entities, and
I'm just wondering, is anybody
left out at all when it comes to
this language, when it comes to
eligible.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
not that I am aware of, uh, we
did, um, work with our land
grants last year to make sure
they were included, um,
gentlemen, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, that,
that helped me on that. I just
wanted to make sure and then uh
I see on the second page on line
12, it says safely interconnect
the system. Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, are, are there any
rules currently that show what,
what's safely interconnected is
and or is that defined somewhere
so that I can understand and so
people can understand when they
get these grants if it is safely
interconnected, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that is contained
within the interconnection
manual.
Of New Mexico of 2009.
OK, thank you so much, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, that's
all I had. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Seeing no further debate, the
general lady to close.
Madam Speaker, I move that House
Bill 128 has thrice amended do
now pass. We are now on final
passage of House Bill 128 as
Vote's about to close.
Hurry up.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 43 in the affirmative, and 22
in the negative, House Bill 128
All right folks, um, I believe
we have an amendment for.
House Bill 339 as amended.
I believe that is the case.
So
We will go back
To House Bill 339 as amended.
We're, we've reset the debate
clock to 1:30.
And gentlemen from San Juan,
we're gonna go back to you on
the debate to introduce the
amendment.
There were, and then there were
other folks on the list if you
if you still wish to to debate
and, and I can announce the
names here. It's uh
Um, Alan Martinez.
Dela Cruz skates.
Andrea Romero, if you wish to
debate the bill, uh, gentlemen
from San Juan to
Move the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
withdrew the other amendment,
did I not?
You did, but now you have a new
one, right? Thank you.
Um, Mr. Mr. Speaker, I move
Amendment number 2.
OK, can you read the number on
the bottom left?
Yes sir, 231579.2. OK, that's
what I have. Has it been passed
out? It's being passed out as we
speak. It is online.
The gentleman too, explained the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, what
this does, we've, we've, uh,
changed the language in it a
little bit and, and Jay, it says
nothing in this section shall
require a person to repair or
improve a housing accommodation
or real property to meet
specific housing quality
standards established by a
federal, state, or local
assistance program for which
participation is not mandated by
federal, state, or local law. It
shall not be considered an
unlawful discriminatory practice
for a person to maintain a
housing.
accommodation or real property
that does not meet specific
housing quality standards
established by a federal, state,
or local assistance program for
which participation is not
mandated by federal, state, or
local law. All right, let's go
back to the bill sponsor.
Gent lady from Donana, is this a
friendly amendment?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Yes
Friendly amendment.
Is there an objection to
adopting the amendment.
See none. We have an amended
bill. Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
That's all the questions I have,
so I now move that, or have I
already moved it? Good. Mr.
Speaker, that's all the
questions I had. Thank you. Uh,
just go to the gentleman from
Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
That would be me, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, does the kind lady from
Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yes, I, I
yield to the, to the whip.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
could you, um,
Move over to page 19.
Lines 7 through 11.
Uh, especially focusing on line
9 talks about.
Credit rating
Am I reading that correctly when
it says that we if I am uh
renting a, a piece of property.
I'll, I'll read the line for
you, Mr. Speaker. We, we're just
clarifying, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, so this is only
um this isn't related to
specifically to our bill. This
was just moving around the
paragraphs, um, this is related
to something that's already in
the Human Rights Act.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, it's
underlined language is that not?
An addition to existing statute.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when we
made the, um, when we were a
adjusting the language on the
amendment, the underlying just
um.
Uh, it's, it's in terms of just
putting everything in its in its
order.
things back into their, their
order.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
But since it's underlined, I'd
like to read.
Starting at line 7, it shall be
an unlawful discriminatory
practice for any purpose to whom
application is made.
Either for financial assistance
or for any type of consumer
credit that would tell me that
it's unlawful for me to pull
somebody's credit.
On a rental application.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a
gentlemen, so, uh, on section
55-9-102.
Um, this is already, um, this
for a person who, to whom
application is made either for
financial assistance or for any
type of consumer credit, that
is, um, that that's already an
existing law and it pertains to
all the, the, the following
paragraphs for individuals that
they can't be discriminated
discriminated against for this
specific.
Type of consumer credit.
Including the financial
assistance.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I, I.
Um, was listening to somebody
and I missed your explanation
that underlying piece it says
it's unlawful to discriminate
against somebody for a.
Um, any type of consumer credit
including financial assistance
for the the acquisition of any
consumer good as defined by the
section that you.
Read off the way I'm reading it
because it's underlined.
It's new language being added to
this current statute.
My question is, is it illegal
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, just
again, it, it's current law.
We're just trying to figure out
Um, where the sections start and
end from the previous from where
it was previously done to now,
that is why it's underlined, not
because it's new language but
because there was a shift in
And where in the in in the
statue.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so recompiling everything.
I'm, I'm still confused, is it?
Illegal for me is a is a.
Um, rental homeowner.
Is it illegal for me to pull
somebody's credit rating.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, I, uh,
I worry that
When this is put into into uh.
Statute that people are gonna be
getting in trouble for that.
Um
Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
Is the purpose of this new uh
House Bill 339 to.
Increase the opportunities for
lower income.
Renters to find rental homes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, and
what we've been what what folks
who have been receiving, who've
been on vouchers.
For a very long time have had
just a lot uh uh have had a lot
of difficulties finding housing
and so it's to help address that
issue as well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I, I
I, uh, fear that if this goes
into law.
There's gonna be even fewer
people willing to.
Uh, risk their investment.
If they're not able to.
Um
went to to whoever they want,
um, and I understand basically
what you're trying to do, you're
trying to protect those people
who have a section 8 voucher.
Earlier mention was made.
About veterans who might hold
housing vouchers. I know in
Albuquerque we've had great
success.
Uh, in finding veterans stable
housing with with some of these
vouchers.
But my fear, Mister Speaker,
kind lady, is that.
people are gonna start selling
these homes because.
This really restricts um.
An owner's ability to rent.
To who, uh.
Who they would like, um.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um.
Does this seem like imminent
domain to you because the, the
government will now be
requiring.
Um, a private property owner to
It, it seems like a mandate to
that property owner that they
have to do this.
Am I, am I incorrect in that,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady?
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no, it isn't, um.
Again, the legislation, all
we're, what we're asking is that
a a a landlord didn't do not
preempt a decision about a
person.
Um, applying to, uh, uh, a
housing.
Um, application because of their
source of income.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kindly,
um, I understood that from
previous debate, but
Are we not now gonna mandate.
Uh, a homeowner's ability to
rent to whoever they want. We're
now going to mandate that they
rent their house to somebody
presents a voucher.
The way I'm understanding the
the legislation that's proposed
is they're gonna be required to
accept that voucher.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
The, the situation is is that if
there's several applicants and,
and I know I've said this in
previous, previously already in
this debate is that when there's
a number of applicants applying
for the same, um, property that,
that this landlord is renting
out to this law is specifically
just ensuring that the landlord
is not
Allowing this person to be to
for their application to be
denied solely because of their,
their source of income. It, it's
It's that's, that's what the,
the bill is doing.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, in light
of that.
Uh, let's say I have.
Two applications for a rental
home.
I go on a 10 point.
A 10 point scoring system.
And they both score 8.
Am I gonna be mandated to, to
rent to the, to the holder of
the voucher.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as long
as you were providing, if as
long as you were um asking for
the same thing from both
applicants and that you're not
denying that one applicant
because of their source of
income it's OK to choose the
other person.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So I, I
have an application. They fill
out the application, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I score the
application.
They both score 8.
On my ranking system.
And I decided to rent to the
person not holding the voucher.
Am I gonna be, um,
held liable for that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
earlier there was discussion
about.
We needed a state law because
local communities are passing
this this type of regulation.
But they're not able to enforce
it so.
What is currently happening.
is the is the regulation then.
Becoming null and void because
they can't enforce it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this,
what this legislation does is
that it clarifies and and puts
everybody all on the same
playing field across the state
so that there's just the one.
The one, the one.
Law that everybody can really
apply to these circumstances.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so for those.
Local communities that that
don't adopt some type of housing
regulation.
Are we taking away local control
from that community.
By passing this Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, no,
we are, we are solely
modernizing the human rights,
the Human Rights Act to allow
for for income uh source of
income you kind lady, um.
I've heard that term a lot this
session. We're modernizing.
Uh, current statute.
Are there other states that have
enacted this, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady that that's a statewide
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there are 25 states
right now who have adopted, who
have adopted this.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and did they adopt it as a
human right.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. uh
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
since the 1970s, these states
have either incorporated it um
in a variety of different areas
and statue, but mostly in their
human rights,
um uh statutes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I'm
sorry, did you say since the
1970s? Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and
they've, they've.
Uh, included in their human
rights legislation.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady about.
Income verification correct? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you kind lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Um
Can you show me?
Mr. Speaker, kind lady in.
This bill where it talks about
the the enforcement.
Aspect of this legislation. Mr.
Speaker, you have to, once you,
once the tenant believes that
they have faced a form of
discrimination because of their
um issues related to their
source of income, they will
contact um the attorney
general's office and much like
uh the process with any type of
consumer protection related
issue, um, they will apply, um,
page 24, section 2 is the, the,
the steps.
That one must make in order to
make that um uh make that.
Make that complaint.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, what line was that? Page
24, section 2 starts on line 11.
I think Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so it would it be a civil, uh,
human rights violation or a or a
consumer.
Protection violation.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so when
they, they make the complaint to
the um attorney General's
office, it is handled much like
the it is handled within the
consumer protection jurisdiction
and um
And, and it's, but it's done
with, with the understanding of
the of the Human Rights Act.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um, could you explain to
me?
Your last statement with the
understanding that it's a human
rights violation.
So, Mr. Speaker, if the, if
we're, we're talking about
making these changes in the
Human Rights Act. So if a
person um feel believes that
they have been um discriminated
against because their source of
income, they will go to the
attorney general's office. They
will file the complaint they
will go through that process,
the process that currently
exists under the AG is is um is
is related to the consumer
protection that is already part
of their, their
Efforts as an attorney general
this law makes it so that it
would fall under the Human
Rights Act.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, uh.
that whole line of questioning
just confused me even more.
Whether it's a consumer
protection issue.
Or a human rights issue, but all
I'll make a closing comment by
saying this.
Sometimes we do um.
We, we try to do the right thing
here in Santa Fe and there's
unintended consequences and my
fear is that the unintended
consequence of passing this
bill.
Is that there's gonna be fewer
and fewer people willing to.
Um, gamble their life savings.
Um
And not be able to run to who
they'd like to.
Um, and instead be charged.
With the human rights violation.
I don't think anybody really
wants to violate anybody's human
rights, but now.
Passing this legislation would
make that.
A human rights violation, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, so.
I, I would hope that.
People keep that in mind.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate, young
lady from Ber Leo and Sandoval,
Representative Keats. Thank you
very much Mr. Speaker. Does the,
uh, gentle person from Donna
Anna Yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yes, I'll
yield. Thank you so very much
for bringing this, uh, piece of
legislation forward um this has
been a very unique debate. And
so as we've stopped and started,
so just so for clarification if
I can go in.
So a voucher is a letter or a
contract.
That
Um, tells a landlord that a a
government entity will obligate
itself for a certain percentage
or a certain amount of the rent,
is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
gentle person, yes, so it's just
like a third party guarantee.
Thank you very much and the, and
as we've uh so eloquently put
with Representative Peron, it is
a, a very, uh, tenuous uh
process to be able to get a
voucher. In fact, many um wait
for over a decade before they
can get it and go through all
kinds of qualifications. Is that
correct, uh, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes,
thank you so much, um, I also
like to talk about you chose to
create this protection in the
human rights Act, so now you've
expanded our protected classes,
is that correct with this piece
of legislation?
Mr. Speaker, General Person,
yes. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you, uh,
gentle person. So,
The, the, uh, the Human Rights
Act in the in the state of New
Mexico started one year after
the fair housing Act in the
federal government in 1967.
It was to expand the protected
classes, um.
Do you know why we needed to
have protected classes at that
time, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, general, general
person, um, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for your succinctness,
uh, gentle person. So yes, we,
uh, have found that there were
many judgments and stereotypes
regarding certain races,
religions, sects, and where
people made broad judgments
based only on those and
determined housing is that your
understanding of why we enacted
these laws in the late.
60s. Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
person, yes, so things like
gamble life savings and trash
your apartment based on one.
Type of such as income source
would also be qualified as one
of those judgments that we are
trying to mitigate with
expanding this protected class.
Would that be correct, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle person,
absolutely yes. Thank you so
much. Now we've talked about
section 8 vouchers, but there
are many different kinds of
vouchers, correct their tribal.
We have city, we have county,
um, we have all different kinds
of housing vouchers to insure,
um, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes.
And
Uh, Mr. Speaker, general person,
why do you think our government
feels that it is important to
help subsidize the housing of
our citizens. Um, do you think
it might reduce on crime and
healthcare, um, and also help
our communities as well. Why do
we, why do you believe that this
is an important investment for
our government.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes,
I, I, I mean, I've been working
a lot on housing. It's a very
important issue for me. Um, we
believe that I believe that it
is um really the, the thing that
if we're able to stabilize
something as simple in my
opinion, as housing, everything
else, there's cons positive
consequences to that.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and thank you very much, gentle
person. You know, when I was
working, I was working on the
same bill last session in the
Human Rights Act as well and
our, uh, a great colleague, uh,
Representative Sarayano came to
me and showed me several emails
from active military.
Who said that they were also
having a hard time finding
housing due to the fact that
there was full housing on base
and they had to use their
military vouchers and they also
were concerned that they were
being denied rent because the
landlords were fearful of
whether or not they would be
able to fulfill the obligation
of their lease as they may be
deployed. Are you aware that
that is also a situation with
our active military.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes.
Uh, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker general person for
bringing this forward. I know
that I want to protect our
military and help secure our
community and help reduce our
health care and law enforcement
costs. Are you aware of what are
the requirements from HUD for
you to be able to use your
voucher in that rental. Do you
know what they are, Mr. Speaker,
general person?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, um,
um, please feel free to, to
share what you know.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
General Verson, of course, uh,
my old thumbs are having a hard
time opening up my phone here,
but they are basically, they
have a big generalized statement
on HUD that says whatever you
rent, you must maintain, Mister
Speaker, General Person, so if
you are renting a facility
without a hole in the roof and
with a working stove, you must
maintain that.
If you have a
The rental in a place that
requires air conditioning you
must maintain that air
conditioning. Mr. Speaker,
General Person, are you aware
that that's what it is basically
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes.
So Mr. Speaker, General Person,
I do know, and I've been a
landlord before and I'm also in
full transparency. I'm a
licensed uh realtor. I also work
very closely with the property
manager, and I hear all the
horror stories of uh tenants,
um, have we have any statistical
data that individuals who use
voucher housing are more likely
to um destroy property than
those who don't.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person,
actually, I don't, I don't have
the numbers with me, but it's
actually better in the situation
for a landlord to rent to
someone with the voucher because
of all the things that you've
just laid out on how third part
there's disagreement between
this third party and the
commitments that need to be
made, it is the responsibility
of the tenant to um to, to.
preserve that relationship,
especially for the long term.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle person. I can only
imagine that if it is essential
for me to be able to live in a
safe place by using a voucher,
and I uh have to maintain a
certain criteria to get that
voucher, and I've waited over 10
years to get that voucher and I
have a social worker or a case
manager who's visiting me no
less than once a year that that
is going to.
be an important asset that I
must maintain. Would you not
agree, Mr. Speaker, general
person? Mr. Speaker, general
person, I, I agree.
Thank you very much Mr. Speaker
and thank you, gentle person.
So,
Um, so the requirements now I
will say as a as a landlord, um,
I've rented to individuals on
Section 8 housing, and when they
inspect my place, oh boy,
sometimes they can be picky.
They'll say there's a, there's
these little holes in the screen
and you're renting a screened uh
window so the screen must be
repaired. Uh, have you heard
complaints like that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle person.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, I, I
mean I've, I've heard a lot of
different things.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Person. I only bring it back
because we've heard testimony
today that it's going to cost
thousands of dollars to get
their 50 year old property from
people on fixed income up to HUD
standards and so I wanna make it
clear that HUD does not require
fresh paint. HUD requires to, if
you are renting something with
the working stove and oven that
it's maintained if you're
working with something with the
air conditioning. They may
require
that if outlets don't work or if
um
There's holes in the screens,
they must be repaired, but I am
not aware of, uh, Mr. Speaker
General Person of thousands of
dollars required to be able to
rent a property that
Really would be the property
that I would be most proud of
renting. Um, uh, so I'm, I'm
sorry to go into that, but Mr.
Speaker, general person, are you
aware that formerly we used to
call it MFA. We now call it
housing, New Mexico has a grant
program for landlords about the
situation, Mr. Speaker, general
person.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, yes.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
person. I am so proud to be part
of a legislature that
understands that, you know,
landlords are hardworking
individuals as well and um and
they have scraped together to
put together a piece of property
often or even a 4 plex and they
need to make their mortgage
payment as well. I can't.
Think of a more guaranteed rent,
then uh guaranteed by the
government voucher can you think
of any more guaranteed rent, Mr.
Speaker, general person?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, um,
for now, yes.
And thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle person. So,
um, so landlords, if for some
reason they have their uh place
uh inspected, and they say
there's some holes in the screen
or these two outlets don't work.
There is a process in which they
can access funds through New Mex
Housing New Mexico to be able to
do those repairs so that they
can bring their tenant in. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
General Person. Speaker, gentle
person, yes.
So thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and, and general person.
I'm so proud that you've been
able to bring this and to bring
this as a protected, you know,
as a single mom with children, I
know that it wasn't that long
ago, 23 years ago, landlords
would not rent to me because
they assumed because I was a
single parent, I would not watch
my children. They assumed that
my children would destroy the
rental property.
These are prejudices based on
what I am and that is why we
have law today to protect them
and thank you so much for
bringing this legislation
forward.
There is further debate. The
general lady from early on
Torrens representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, will the
gentle lady from John your honor
please yield your time.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I have a question. So on
the application now, will they
have to remove the part where it
asks about income or jobs or
without stay on all
applications. Tell me how that
would look if this bill went
forward.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it'll,
as long as the um process stays
consistent throughout all of the
applicants, um, yes, that stays.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, young lady,
I wanna make sure that I
understand so I have two
candidates are applying for a
house that I have for rent. One
fills out the paperwork, they
have a job, they make 3 times
the amount of the rent, we're
just going off of that.
The other person, um, I was
gonna say that they have a cash
job they can't verify what they
have, but or I could say a
voucher, but it only pays for
part of that, and they state I
have no other income, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so that
landlord cannot discriminate it
for what I'm understanding, even
if they have a voucher, they
have a job versus cash, they
could not say, well,
You only have enough of a
voucher to pay half the rent.
They wouldn't be able to deny
that person. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, general, uh, gentle
lady, the, the applicant would
still have to be able to um show
that they can, they can make
rent.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what if they came and they said
my other source of income is uh
a cash payments that I get my
ex-husband pays me uh cash on
the side or I work a cash job,
so Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you're saying that that would
also be totally OK.
Miss
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, all of
the income that is being
reported to the landlord needs
to be verifiable.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they, they could technically
call the ex-husband and say, and
he goes, yeah, sure, I give her,
you know, 50 bucks a month or
whatever. So that would be
something that would be
verifiable, even though there is
no way to verify it really just
a simple phone call would say uh
if that person was saying even
if that wasn't true, that they
get that much. There's no way to
verify that, but that would just
be by that phone call. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, General lady, as
long as the whatever the um the
applicant um lays out as their
source of income as long as it
is verifiable, um, that is
acceptable as lawful.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, could it also include
somebody who works because there
are people who work for cash and
they say I have a business. I
work for cash. How would you
verify that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
um, when it comes to issues like
that, um, a lot of the, the
people can have to report that
in their, in their taxes and so
you, they would be able to use
their tax returns and um and and
those types of items.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle laia,
are you saying that in this in
this documentation that we have
here for this bill when it talks
about verification, there's
something that says in here
specifically that if somebody
makes a cash income that the
verification process would be
through a um income tax report.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker
Delaney? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, whenever somebody applies
for uh housing they have to
report where their income is
coming from. When, what, what we
are saying
is that there are, there are
traditional forms of, of, of,
um.
Uh, there's traditional forms of
income that we always uh have
have consistently produced, and
then there's the non-traditional
what we are saying that there
are non-traditional forms of
income that people currently
have access to that that was
will also have to be verified by
the landlord.
So Mr. Singer, gentle lady, my,
uh, kind of my last question, so
if somebody is renting a house,
this is my big question. The
rent is $1500 a month. I have
someone that comes in who makes
$4000 a month they can pay that
that's, you know, we, we're
always looking for a third if
someone comes in and they can
barely make the rent, is that
person still qualified to rent
that house, Mr. Speaker, young
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if you
are very clear about what
you're, what the rent is and
there there is an applicant that
can make that rent every month,
then that's, you have the
liberty to be able to, to choose
whichever um uh applicant you
believe you, you
Like you have that opportunity
to to make that select that
applicant. What this bill does
is it's just not allowing you to
preemptly deny someone the
opportunity to apply. They have
to also show you just like the
other applicant that they can
afford to make rent.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I wanna make sure I understand
this, so the person comes in,
one person's making, let's say
$5000 a month or $4000 or $1500
a month rental. The other person
comes in and their exact income
is $1500 so you're saying just
because they show that they can
make the rent amount and they
don't have any other income over
that they still have to be
considered for that rental
property, Mr. Speaker and young
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so the
every landlord has still the
opportunity to do their own
screening when it comes to um
selecting their, their tenant.
What we're, what we're saying is
is that.
You're gonna look at all of the
information that's in front of
you whenever you're making this
decision, the part of this, what
this bill is saying that is that
you're just not going to deny
someone the opportunity to to um
apply just because their source
of income is a voucher.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
if they went ahead and that
person applied and they make
$1500 a month, which we know is
not going to be enough to pay
for all of the bills, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
that be discrimination then if
they are not chosen for that
particular rental or does that
landlord still have the right to
say I want the person who makes
more money, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, there lies
my point.
There lies my point because when
you have a rental, you have to
take into consideration what
somebody makes in their totality
because things happen in life if
they can't afford their food,
they can't afford the medical
care, they can't afford other
things if they come in at 1500
and somebody else comes in a lot
more money than they can for
that to me that doesn't seem
fair to the landlord because
you're going to run into
situations well, there's a
reason why they say you should
make 3 times the amount. It's a
reason why when you
you go in, you should be making
more than that. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I, I cannot
support the bill because I'm not
going to lock our landlords into
um entering into lawsuits and
violations because Mr. Speaker
John Lady, there's nothing to
stop anybody who doesn't get a
rental for all eternity of
saying it was because of my
income and that's what I see
happening because if I got
denied for rental I'd
immediately say it because of my
income and then this poor person
has to prove that it wasn't, so
that's all I have, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Bernalillos
representative de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. It is a
gentle lady from.
Donana
I actually went to school there,
gentle lady General Speaker.
So I, I want some clarification
for myself and for the body
because if I'm incorrect, I
wanna be enlightened, Mr.
Speaker.
So, here's the question.
If I am a landlord.
And I am not registered with
section 8.
And a section 8 voucher
individual.
Come to see the property or
calls me and says, I'm on
section 8. You have a property
for sale.
And
Can I tell this individual I am
not registered with Section 8,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the way
that it works is that, um, any,
any person with a section 8
voucher, if they're searching
for housing and you have
something available, they can,
they can, they can go in and
apply with you even if you're
not um registered yet as a as a
as a section 8.
Provider per se.
Mr. Speaker, lady, I, I
understand that, but in the
event that I have no interest in
becoming a Section 8 landlord,
there is nothing that forces me
to be a section 8 HUD landlord.
Is that correct, Generalini, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under
current law, I, I mean, you're,
you're allowed to do that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
wanted to make that clear for
the body because there was a lot
of discussion about repairing
properties.
If you're a Section 8 landlord,
now granted, if you are a
Section 8 landlord, you must
meet the standards that HUD
requires and by extension the
municipality or the county
that's conducting that that
program, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
The
Discussion that was discussed
earlier in an amendment to the
effect in reality is not.
is, is irrelevant if you're not
a Section 8 landlord and you
don't have to be ever a Section
8 landlord if you don't wish to,
Mr. Speaker, General lady, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there is
no registry, so there's no,
there's nothing that a landlord
can register to become something
it's if a if a person, a tenant
is looking for a place to live,
and they happen to have a
voucher.
They're that they're going to be
searching for housing, not
specific to whether or not
Uh, the landlord belongs to
anything specific, a landlord is
a landlord.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
submit that.
If I am not.
Pre-registered
Now the operative word, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is
pre-registered because maybe the
word registered is incorrect.
Pre-qualified by the entity
because you don't just say, hey,
I have a house for rent.
And I'm gonna rent to some of
the, with the voucher. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
You can't do that. You have to
go to your local agency.
OK, well, I, I read it online.
Maybe it's wrong. It was, it was
there. It said you have to be
qualified. In fact, when you,
when I read,
Is that you have to, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, go to
your local housing authority or
whoever is administering the
housing program, you then become
a Section 8 landlord and then
the come and inspect your house
and then you have to meet that,
those guidelines and then you
can you can rent it. But if you
elect not to do that, then you
never have to. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker General Le? Speaker,
gentlemen, the only thing that
you're required to do is to sign
the housing assistance.
contract.
and be inspected.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
General? Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Thank you. So for the body, it's
important to understand that you
don't have to ever be a section
8 landlord if you elect not to
be. Now there are other, there
are other programs that provide
housing, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady, I looked at a
couple. I looked at the veterans
housing. I looked at yes
housing, yes housing has become
kind of big in New Mexico. Most
of them.
Operate under the auspices and
qualifications that are outlined
by the regulations of HUD. Now
there may be other programs, but
I think it's important to
understand, Mr. Speaker, body
that
You don't have to be a section 8
landlord. I think that's
important.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, last,
I'm, I'm not gonna believe in
fact.
But I would encourage the body
to go online, see what it takes
to be a section 8.
Landlord
Mr. Speaker
I, I kind of like the, the line
of questioning from
Representative from a lot of
counties.
And I'm gonna kind of look it
up, Mr. Speaker, that's OK. Just
previous to to to my speaking at
this moment, Mr. Speaker.
It becomes a very, very
difficult and subjective thing
that makes it difficult, I
believe, for a landlord, if you
do have two individuals with
income they both have income.
And one seems to have a much
firmer footing related to their
income than the other.
Is this bill saying that I must
always go with the lower income
person if all things being
equal, Mr. Speaker, General.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill solely.
Tell this bill is only for
guidance in terms of you should
never preemptly deny someone the
opportunity to apply for housing
because they're source of income
is not traditional.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, I don't
disagree with that notion and I
don't disagree with the notion
of of uh any kind of
discrimination, including,
including what this bill
attempts, Mr. Speaker, but
I, I'm just going to close with
this, Mr. Speaker. I encourage
everybody the body particularly
and the sponsor to go online,
look at the requirements, and
unless I'm totally off off.
Section 8 requires first that
the landlord.
Make sure that they are
qualified as a landlord and
inspector. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is for me, gentle lady
from Santa Fe, Representative
Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady for, um,
so valiantly defending this
bill, um, and I'm so grateful to
have you bring this forward. Um,
why I'm co-sponsoring and why I
think this is so critical, um,
and timely for where we are now
as New Mexico is that we are
without question in a housing
crisis in our community, in the
city of Santa Fe, over 50% of
the workers here have to commute
in because they cannot afford to
live here.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, our
state has spent millions of
dollars, our federal government
has been subsidizing housing
during COVID at the tune of $11
million a month to help folks
meet their rent in New Mexico.
That money is gone.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we are looking at the crisis
that we're in, we are trying to
help people support their own
lives, their own livelihoods
when we're having these
exploding rents, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and folks still are
trying to make those ends meet
when they are spending over 50%
of their incomes just to own,
just to rent a place, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and in our
community when they're go
through the hoops and they apply
for these programs to ask for.
subsidies humbly to try to
qualify to make these ends meet.
We're talking about the people
in our neighborhoods we're
talking about our cousins, our
friends, the people that are,
that we represent over half,
excuse me, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I understand that over a
third of people in New Mexico
are renting today.
And it's harder and harder to
find those places to rent. And
if I come before, uh, uh, a
landlord as somebody who's just
asking, hey, can I have a place
to live? And I found this
support, and I have this voucher
that maybe helps me out for the
next year or the next month or
the next few weeks just to be
able to make that rental payment
or hope maybe in perpetuity,
maybe I'm on disability, maybe,
um, I'm a veteran that qualifies
for that in perpetuity, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
What we know right now is that
folks are being denied the
opportunity even to apply for
that housing because of the
situation that they are in
financially.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
why this is in the Human Rights
Act is today, people of color,
black and brown people, are the
folks that are actually
providing the wherewithal for
folks to find these vouchers at
record rates in this state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I don't know what that says
about whatever it might say some
things, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but the reality is that
discrimination is happening.
It is happening in the state and
it's happening direct to the
vouchers that folks are getting
in this state and across the
country. And that's what we're
trying to prohibit here, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, while
we're absolutely in an
exacerbated crisis while we're
trying to wrestle with
affordability and all of this.
It starts with your home. It
starts with the place that you
get to rest your head every
single night. And most people,
and we learned this through the
COVID pandemic, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that when folks
got a, a COVID check, when folks
got a subsidy, when
books are looking at the check
that they get first. They were
putting that directly into their
rents, directly into their homes
and directly into the places
that create that sustainability
for the rest of their lives, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they
weren't going to the lottery.
They weren't going to win big at
the casino, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. They were investing it in
the most important essential
asset, which is their home.
And that's what this bill does,
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, is
it ensures that folks are not
discriminated based on the right
that we have to safe housing.
This is a value that we've had
since the Roosevelt.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
President Roosevelt said there's
a 2nd Bill of Rights, and in
that 2nd Bill of Rights is the
right to housing. This just
bases upon that principle,
something that we can do in law
today to make sure that this is
in perpetuity that we cannot
discriminate based on where you
get your income. And if you need
some help for today or maybe for
the year or maybe for a longer
term, but you cannot prevent
someone from being in that
rental household. I'm so
grateful to be a part
of this, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for, for
bringing this forth and for
protecting the rights of
individuals, just seeking the
very basic need, which is a safe
and and stable home. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you everyone for the debate. At
the end of the day, every New
Mexican deserves a fair chance
at a home right now too many
families, seniors and veterans
are being turned away from
housing, not because they can't
pay, but because of outdated
biases against housing vouchers,
disability benefits, or other
lawful income sources HP 339
closes this loophole in our
Human Rights Act ensures that
all renters are judged on their
ability to pay, not where their
money comes from. This.
is about fairness, preventing
discrimination and making our
housing market work for
everyone.
With that, Mr. Speaker, I now
move that House bill 339 as
amended do now pass passage of
House Bill 339 is twice amended.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 42 in the affirmative, 24 in
the negative. House Bill 339 is
twice amended as duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo,
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Are you ready on item number 6.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you take
me to that point the action
replacing House Bill 89 on final
passage has been taken and it is
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution the generally to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 89 amends the graduate
scholarship Act to do a few
important things. First, it
requires recipients to be in New
Mexican residents. Second, it
requires them to have a bachelor
degree and maintain at least a
3.0 grade point average. Third,
it requires them to enroll in at
least 6 credit hours to maintain
the scholarship Fourth, it
removes the requirement that
students serve in unpaid
internships or assistant ships.
5th, it gives priority to
students from underrepresented
groups in graduate education.
6 it allows the award of the
scholarship until completion of
the terminal degree or um if
that recipient has received the
scholarship for up to 8
semesters. 7th, it removes the
funding cap and replaces it with
an award not to exceed the full
cost of tuition and fees and it
updates and modernizes language
throughout the legislation and
for that we stand for questions.
Valencia representative Mirabal
Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle uh gentle lady,
sorry, uh, from Bernalio Yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, um, I do like a
lot of the changes that are
happening in in this bill, um, I
definitely like that we have,
uh, specified that this is for
New Mexico residents, um, I also
like that that, you know, the
the, the, I personally am OK
with the, the GPA and um and
especially removing the
requirement for full-time
students and that they just need
at least 6 credit hours,
especially those that are
carrying full.
time jobs when they're going to
these graduate degrees, um, it
is kind of difficult to take
that full schedule.
Um, I also like um the the
removing the requirement for
that paid unpaid internship, um,
even though it is just 10 hours
a week, uh, often people that
are getting in their graduate or
doctor degrees have full-time
jobs, children, everything else,
and that's just, it's difficult
and I would hate for them to be
uh put out of that so that those
those things I really like. I do
have a few questions though. Um,
and when we're at we're
requiring recipients to be in
New Mexico residents. I didn't
see a
definition of what a New Mexico
resident, what is it, what
constitute as a uh as a New
Mexico resident is it someone
that just moved here a couple of
weeks ago and, and, uh, and move
their, their driver's license
here and now they're in New
Mexico resident.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, no, um, actually to
qualify as a New Mexico resident
under this act you have to have
a New Mexico address for at
least one year prior to even
applying for the scholarship.
Thank you uh Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, gentle lady, is
that somewhere in some part of
uh uh some other statue because
I know I don't think I saw it in
here.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, so this is the
same rule that's within all
agency rules for both the
opportunity scholarship and the
lottery scholarship.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, so my other question
is, um, in
Let's see on page 2 when it
talks about um the graduate
fields that we are going so it's
master's and doctoral.
Right now we're just uh
excluding a doctor of medicine,
um, is there, is there any other
exclusions so this should um is
this can be any degree the um,
you know, master's or doctorate
that anyone chooses that um that
qualifies for other stuff
otherwise.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
there's not.
All right, thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
Um, let me see what else in
here.
I think that's those are a
couple of things, um, that, oh,
really quick.
And I know I asked this
question, but I know many people
didn't hear this in committee on
um the lunch or sorry, page 2,
line 25, and then going into uh
page 3 on line 1, you remove
that they have to the
requirement of being a citizen
of the United States, um, um, or
a permanent uh visa or resident
visa, uh, why did we remove
that?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady from Valencia, so
that language was removed
because it was redundant because
any uh student that wants to
qualify for a scholarship for of
this type has to meet the
requirements, uh, federal
requirements that are require a
student to have the immigration
status to allow them to study in
the United States, so it's uh it
would just be redundant language
to have it here to.
Thank you, thank you, Ms. uh,
Mr. um Speaker and, um, gentle
lady, uh, with that, I do have
an amendment.
So I would um and I.
And I would like a roll call
vote, please.
You've got a roll call.
Will you kindly bring the
amendment to the floor, make
sure it's signed, otherwise you
have to make two trips.
I got it signed Mr. Speaker,
even.
Good job, sir.
Gentlemen, uh, I'm sorry, gentle
lady, what is the number on the
bottom left?
Mr. Speaker, that number is
0.231582.1.
All right, let's get the
amendment passed out and posted
online and then we'll come back
to you to explain it.
Right, the amendment's been
passed out and it is online. The
generator explained the
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, my
amendment, uh, does, uh, just a
couple of things, um, on page 2,
on line 8 before the comma, it
inserts in a field related to
education, science, engineering,
technology, and mathematics.
And then on page 3, line 1,
after degree, um, it inserts at
a New Mexico institution of
higher education.
And then, um, and then on page 3
line 3. It strikes holds and
then put has held.
And then this is uh and then on
page 3 also on line 4 after
activities it it inserts.
Add a New Mexico institution of
higher education for previous 2
years. So basically what this,
uh, what this amendment does is
again, two things. It uh it is
uh having preference to those
degrees that are in great in
great need in New Mexico, which
is science, uh, and, uh, and
engineering technology,
mathematics, and education
because we are in a teacher
shortage. So if we're gonna be
paying for master's or
doctorates, um, those are the
ones that we should be focusing
on and then 2.
Um, it is, it is further
solidifying that these are
people that are grounded here in
New Mexico and, and have either
gotten a degree their their
bachelor's or undergrad here or
we're teaching at a facility or
research facility here in um in
New Mexico for at least 2 years,
so it just it just further makes
sure that if we're going to be
paying for education, we are
doing it for New Mexicans and
for doing it for um for those
fields that are in dire.
need in the in the state.
Gentle lady from Laos is a
Friendly amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, I'm
gonna take this moment to
introduce my experts sitting to
my left, this is Victor Reyes.
He is, uh, the student Regent at
the University of New Mexico.
He's helping me today and Mr.
Speaker, this is not a friendly
amendment.
Alright, is there a debate on
the amendment, gentle lady from
Donana Sierra Socorro
Representative Doo. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. You know, my freshman
year, I introduced a bill to
amend the lottery scholarship to
be for, uh, a a a grant a loan
with deferred no interest that
was forgivable as you served in
New Mexico and all the
universities came and opposed it
and, and, and hi, hi to Victor
Reyes, nice to see you. Um,
anyway, so all the student
regents came in.
Those are the student government
association students came and
opposed it. And I didn't
understand why because I'm like,
is this a um
Is the bill that we have for,
for the opportunity and now we
also have the lottery. Is it to
increase graduation rates from
college? Is it to increase
enrollment at universities, or
is it to, to build a workforce.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you seem focused on building a
workforce.
Uh, yes, uh, gentle lady, I, I
definitely am and, and, and
these, these, um,
areas that I chose, those are
the, the, the major, I mean
it's, it includes health care.
It includes all of our
engineering, petroleum
engineering, and like, you know,
that what is in dire need uh
here. It includes, like I said,
education. We have 700 vacancies
uh around the state. And so this
would then incentivize people
that are, uh, maybe wanting to
go further in their education or
we have a high turnover rate
for, for uh for our principals
in our in our superintendent so.
If they want to go higher into
administration, at least they
know that they can get their
education paid for. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and thank you,
gentle lady, and, you know, we
heard a presentation from Higher
Ed. I'm sure you heard it too,
that, um, of the freshmen who
enroll less than 50% are
graduating, and when you look at
those that are graduating, the
highest number of degrees is in
the humanities and liberal arts.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
lowest is in tech and sciences.
Mr. Speaker and the lady.
Um, the, you could take the
other together and it was, I
can't remember now, but I don't
even think it reached, it was by
far, uh, humanities and liberal
arts. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, those aren't high demand
jobs, are they?
Mr. Speaker, uh, general lady,
um, exactly, I, I kind of want
to be able to, if we're gonna
pay for someone's higher
education if they're gonna get a
doctorate and and and and we're
gonna pay, you know, for
possibly 4 years of, of their
tuition that it is something
that is going to benefit our
state, not like interpretation
of music or something, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady and, and
someone, this could be someone
who already got their bachelor's
degree paid for by the state of
Mexico.
Definitely, uh, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentle lady this is well
and, and actually with this uh
with this amendment, um, it
would be, it would require them
to have their bachelor's degree
in New Mexico, so.
Yeah, so they would, they would
be here, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if I move from out of
state and I can't and with a
bachelor's degree and I chose to
get my graduate degree here.
Does this bill require any
service or work experience in
New Mexico at the completion of
the graduate degree.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, right
now it does not.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so now we're going to um let
people choose their own degree.
It doesn't have to be high
demand. Uh, they do not have to
have any service or work they
don't have to work in New Mexico
after they leave. Um, one of the
things that I noticed is how
hard it is to place, uh, the
people into programs where there
is loan forgiveness or there is
work experience required. The
the take-up rate in that is less
because we have been so
generous. Um, it was interesting
to me.
I had always heard people say
that K-12 public school is a
public good, but it was good to
me to start hearing that.
Uh, undergrad and now graduate
degrees are just a public good,
because if they are not required
to give back.
Either in service or in work,
they are not required to stay in
the state. It does not have to
be a high demand job, then, then
why are we funding it?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
a very good question because I,
I, I personally, if we only have
a certain amount of scholarships
because this isn't an unlimited
fund, you know, or unlimited
scholarship if we only have a
certain amount, it should be to
that what is going to benefit
New Mexicans and New Mexico and
fill these jobs that are in high
demand first.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. I, I
look forward to supporting your
moment.
Alright, there's further debate
on the amendment. The gentleman
from Burn Leanna Romero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Yeah, yes, I, I yield to the
gentleman from Bernao.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady for the
amendment, um, on number 4, page
3 line 4.
You're saying at the New Mexico
Institution of Higher Education
for the previous two years.
Could you explain that portion,
please?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that one is, um, because it it
uh it says if this amendment
passes, it'll say or who has
held a paid position supporting
a faculty teaching or research
activities, uh, and then we're
just requiring at a New Mexico
Institution of higher education
for a previous 2 years. So, so,
um, um, right now it doesn't
require it um anywhere. It
doesn't require in New Mexico
and we're just requiring it for
a New Mexico institution.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm reading it to be that, um,
the candidate has to have worked
with um
As a paid position for faculty
for
2 years at least and then they
can receive the scholarship. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, and this is just
establishing that these uh
further that the this is someone
that is already established in
New Mexico and not just someone
that that is, you know, um,
right now there is no, uh, there
is no time limit, so they could
have just been working for them
for a couple of months.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
long does it take typically to
get a master's degree?
Um, typically, Mr. Speaker, and,
and gentlemen, um, I, uh, it,
but it's supposed to take 2
years. It depends on if you are
taking 6 credits because it is,
uh, it might take a little bit
longer.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I mean,
I guess that's part of the
problem with um my view of the
amendment is because if you're
going to require 2 additional
years to have worked supporting
faculty, then you're already
through your master's program,
and I think that goes against
the intent of the gentle ladies,
um, actual bills that we're
further narrowing the scope of
the possible candidates into
that can utilize this fund. So,
so for me, it's defeating the
purpose of this.
fund, which is to help folks go
through graduate school and help
them complete it. So with that,
I cannot support your amendment.
Thank you, gentle lady. There is
for the debate, the gentle lady
from Sandoval Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind like a gentle lady from
Valencia yelled.
I yield to my friend from
Sandoval.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
are you familiar with the brain
drain?
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
somewhat, yes.
Well, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it took me 2 seconds, um,
I'm very familiar with the brain
drain, but I took a, just a
quick Google search of brain
drain New Mexico and right away
something pops up from UNM on
the
Workforce and STEM new
symposium.
And it talks about the brain
drain and it goes into um
Excuse me, um, it talks about
how our sealed workforce truly
wants to stay in New Mexico but
cannot due to the perceived lack
of opportunities for highly
skilled STEM workforce.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
definitely want to keep our
students here and I think this
is a way for us to be able to
keep them here in the workforce
that gets uh some STEM degrees,
you know, with the brain drain
which um is some negative
repercussions to our state is
loss of tax revenue, loss of
future entrepreneurs, a shortage
of important highly skilled
workers, lack of confidence in
the economy and lack of
innovative ideas and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady from Valencia.
This is actually takes 2
seconds, you and Magee talks
about the brain drain. So we
know it's an issue here in the
state it has been for many, many
years. I've talked about it when
I served on the parent
association of University of
Mexico as well as the school
board member, Mr. Speaker and.
Kind gentle lady, we need to
keep our students here this is
one way that we're able to do
that to break, we're trying to
bring more technology
engineering here in this state
and this is a way to keep them
here thank you.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen, from Donana Ruins.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the
gentle lady from Valencia you.
I will yield to the gentleman
from Donana. Uh, great. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I have a few questions,
um, the, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we can all agree that we
have challenges within CYFD, for
example, and one of those
challenges, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is related to the
workforce. We don't have enough
social workers, for instance,
and CYFD. Would you agree, Mr.
Speaker, generally?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I
do. Great, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I do too. I
recently just had uh students
come up from New Mexico State's
universities, uh, school of
social work. They're, uh, there
were a couple of bachelor's
students there, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, a couple of
them were considering going and
getting their masters. One, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, wanted to
work with families and kids and
I was like, hey, no, it's a
tough time, but it really would
encourage you to look at this.
It's
important thing in our state. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
reading of this is that your
amendment would exclude those
social workers from uh the
graduate student scholarship.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
just wanted to focus on um the,
the, the high demand which
social worker uh social work is,
but right now, what, what the,
the main jobs and the main
things that we cannot feel is in
the education and maybe they can
do us a um um um I there is
masters in education social
work.
Uh, great. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, uh, I'm glad, you know, we
agree on, on the, the, the need
to high support high needs, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady leaving
out social workers, I think is a
key, uh, sort of, uh, yeah, just
not something um if we have
money right now and if we're
redoing these, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, in my opinion, we
should be supporting that.
There's a couple of other things
here, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, I think we can all agree.
that nurses, occupational
therapists, uh, those are also
really high demand professions,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
those are New Mexicans or people
who could be here in New Mexico
with, after they get that
graduate degree who would really
help us as a state. My reading,
Mr. Speaker, Joan lady, also, I
guess maybe it's the same
answer. They're not covered in
your amendment.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
actually, when I was bringing
forth this amendment, I looked
up the the STEM fields and uh
health sciences does fall in
there.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
that would include an
occupational therapist, for
example, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is health sciences,
yes.
Great. OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we've left out the social
workers, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm glad that we have, uh,
the occupational therapist. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I want to
go now to sort of a uh another
uh instance with constituents or
folks from back home I've
encountered. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, somebody, whether
they're stationed in New Mexico,
whether they come here on their
graduate degree, uh, or for work
purposes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, sort of fairly early in
their, their lives.
Uh, but they have a spouse, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
spouse may be looking for work,
maybe a graduate, you know,
wants to go continue their
education. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the pro, if that spouse
didn't graduate from a New
Mexico higher education
institution, then they wouldn't
be eligible for this graduate
scholarship, no matter where,
uh, no matter the field that
they're, they graduate degree,
uh, they're looking to get their
graduate.
degree. Is that, am I reading it
right, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I'm,
I'm really just focusing on
making sure that New Mexico
residents come first.
Uh, because I think it's New
Mexico residents that we need to
rise up and take these jobs
because they're the ones that
are more apt to stay here and
work and, and, and, and fill
these jobs and provide a service
for uh for the New Mexicans, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I hear
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I, I, uh, support that. But
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I can
think of a few different
examples in my mind that I can
connect to folks back home. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, that's
folks who are in the armed
services.
who are stationed in New Mexico,
their spouse, this is an
opportunity for them to continue
their graduate work. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, another
example is somebody who comes
here maybe uh medical residency
or sort of the, the end of their
professional accreditation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, their
spouse, those are all real world
examples where at this time when
we have more students who are
interested in higher education,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
the opportunity to help.
them get that graduate work done
here in New Mexico, um, and in
doing so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think serve really
important needs that the, uh,
your amendment uh appreciate
very much the intention, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the time
when we have strong resources
and people who are coming here.
One last question, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Um, right now,
we're sort of still in, in sort
of flat population, much of the
state,
few places increasing, many
places decreasing. Would you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would
agree, yes.
Greater gentle lady, that's my
understanding as well. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what that
tells me is that um in addition
to serving and supporting New
Mexicans, uh, going through high
school and into higher
education, Mr. Speaker, general
lady, if there are folks who are
outside of our state who we can
educate here, uh, you know,
whether at that undergraduate or
graduate level, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, whether they're
coming for their workforce
certification in things like
trucking or welding and other
things. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we want them here.
We want their families to be
here, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and we want them to become sort
of the newest New Mexicans and
so for all those reasons, I
appreciate very much uh this
conversation, but I can't
support the amendment, uh, for
those and other reasons. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady on the gentleman
from Valencia, Representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Valencia yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
for your amendment, um.
Are you aware of the House Bill
375 that went through the
education committee, uh, this
week.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you tell me what the focus of
that?
A graduate scholarship was uh
intended for.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
honestly believe that I was not
here that day. I was familiar
with it, so you'll have to
refresh my memory.
Mr. Speaker, generally, House
Bill 375, which is why I think
with your amendment limits it,
there's already legislation
currently working through this,
uh, that has passed the house
and is now sitting in
appropriation so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, by you.
Putting forth this amendment to
limit it to the stems.
There's also other um
legislation that's working is
through uh through itself
through this body so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
You're, you're, your amendment
here really is these high
Areas of need, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, the
high demand, um, these are the
ones, this is what we need, we
need, we have two labs here, so
we need stem-filled jobs, um,
that they're having a hard time
filling a lot of our
engineering, we don't have, we
don't have enough, um, with all
of the other parameters that are
in this bill, giving, giving
preference to uh to those in
underserved uh areas, we could
possibly get a lot more women in
STEM.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
thank you for that because Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this body
and this legislature has made
huge investments in STEM K-12.
And Mr. Speaker gentle lady, I
see.
Your amendment
Having it as a continuation of
that and focus in an initiative
that we have made a huge
investment.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
do understand.
The intent of your amendments,
and I will be supporting your
amendment.
There is for it to be a lady
from Torrance and San Miguel
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Valencia yield?
I yield to the gentle lady from
Torrance in San Miguel.
Um, first off, I do wanna thank
you for your attention to STEM
fields. This does cater to my
stem heart more than you know,
STEM in education, um, but I do
also want to point out, um, as
was previously mentioned, some
other high need areas that are
critical right now in our state
besides STEM, although I wish we
could focus entirely on STEM all
the time, um, just in education,
um, I believe we held a bill for
archaeologists and the need for
archaeologists in our state, um,
can you?
Can you gentle lady, please
explain to me as archaeology
always a field that would be
considered in your amendment?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
it, if it falls within the
sciences.
Thank you, gentle ladies.
Sometimes that sometimes that
degree can go within either
Master of Arts, Master of
Sciences, that is one I need,
um, another high need area that
I do want to bring attention to
is accounting, um, I believe
there might be some other
attention later on in this
legislative session, but um
right now working with my
municipalities thinking about my
people back home, anyone that
may be behind on audits, um,
accounting right now has also
been determined a high need
area. Um, does this amendment,
um, did you, did you think about
maybe including some other
Maybe be masters in business
degrees or other graduate degree
programs, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, right
now my main focus is education
and STEM. Those are your high
demand, um, jobs, those are,
those are, and then those are
the hardest to fill, and I would
really like to see since we
already have, we already have a
pipeline for our New Mexico high
school students to get their
undergrad paid for. I would like
to and, and especially if they
go in these high demand fields.
My focus is more on education
and STEM.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and again I want to just
call, uh, I appreciate the
intent of this bill again more
than you know, I think there's
many, many fields that we are
considered high need in our
state, um, and I truly the
comments on brain brain drain
the comments on um retention are
all very valid to me, um, and we
also want to go on to number 3
on your amendments, um, where
it's holds versus has.
Has held, um, as you mentioned,
if you can again clarify maybe
the intent of 3 in your
amendment, please. Thank you,
gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's just it doesn't have to
be someone that currently is is
in that research field, it could
be that they have, have done
that for, for 2 years in New
Mexico institution.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um, I do
want to point out that the
students I work with on a
regular basis, um, often are of
lower income and a lot of times
getting them into these higher,
um, higher degrees, um, a lot of
times it's really a financial
constraint if they want to be
GAs, if they want to continue
their higher education.
Oftentimes these scholarship
opportunities, these financial
incentives are the only thing
that allows them to continue in
higher education, um, so I just
really want to make that point
that.
Sometimes waiting for 2 years to
be able to receive financial
assistance really deters these
higher education degrees.
And so again, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, I truly, truly
appreciate the intent of this
legislation. Um, I know you and
I are both really towards that
STEM pipeline, but um I am gonna
have to respectfully disagree
with this amendment as I do
think there are other students
that can truly benefit from this
piece of legislation. Thank you
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Speaker,
gentle lady, really quick, uh,
just to clarify, there are two
ways that they can do it. So if
they did earn a bachelor's
degree in uh in uh New Mexico
institution.
The that and then after that
there's or, so they don't have
to uh uh they, if they didn't
earn their bachelor's degree in
uh New Mexico institution but
they have started this, uh, or
they, they have held this
position in in research at a
higher institution in New
Mexico. It's an or thing so it's
not they don't have to.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, General, for that
clarification, um, but again I
just wanna reiterate that
statement that sometimes even
that or um does keep them from
continuing their education if
they did want to come in here,
if they did want to study, um,
any gap in financial support can
sometimes mean getting that
degree or not getting that
degree. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you,
gentle lady from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
I will yield to my friend from
San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I find, I find
this interesting, um, one, we're
going after New Mexico kids.
Mr. Speaker, everybody's a kid
to me nowadays. They could be
40, um, so we're going after New
Mexico, um, educated kids and we
want to keep them here in um.
Committee the other day, Mr.
Speaker, we passed out of our
committee either 1 or $2 million
going after recruitment for
people who had been educated and
were now no longer living in the
state of New Mexico.
I wish the um
Um
Mr. Speaker,
You can, you can gabble me down
if this is not appropriate, but
I wish the original bill would
have gone after more so that
that, um, of these and it would
rely more on New Mexico as your
amendment did, and so I support
your movement in that. um I
think it's important that we
keep our kids here and uh keep
them from Arizona and Texas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate, gentle
lady.
Frommy MacKinley.
Brent Leo San Juan Socorro
Valencia representative Babeta
thank you Speaker as a gentle
lady from Valencia Yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
all those wonderful counties
including Valencia.
Thank you I appreciate you
bringing this amendment to our
attention. However, I do have
some concerns that I want to
express to you. I do represent a
large area with 6 counties, very
rural, and one of the first
things that steps out to me is
the uh disregard for the legal
industry in my small community
there are 2 to 3 of us who are
law trained and any time that
community members experience a
legal issue, they run to my
house and my husband's and ask
us immediately for legal help if
you can just consider District
69, there is a legal desert
there and that's primarily why I
switched from environmental law
to family law because so many
families needed that help and
with this amendment I see that
that's lacking. Can you help
elaborate why the legal fields
left out?
Mr. Speegle General Speaker
lady, um, um, I again, I'm, I'm
focusing on our high demand, uh,
jobs across the state, um, so
definitely education in STEM and
STEM degrees are the, are what
uh we need in many of our areas
all over the state, not just in
one area.
Thank you Speaker and gentle
lady. Another concern I have is
that the Navajo Nation in
particular, you've heard about
the capital outlay that's been
backed up in Navajo Nation and
so many of our tribal
communities which I represent, I
represent 3 Pueblo tribes or
excuse me, Pueblo, um, this
pueblo Vlataueblo of Laguna
Pueblo of Acama, 9 Navajo
chapters, and some of the
concern is that our capital
outlay is not flowing because of
project managers, the lack of
project managers. We're working
with Danette College and Navajo
Tech Technical
university to get programs like
this for students so that they
can help carry the resources
that we're trying to send from
the state to our rural
communities. Can you expand why
project management and anything
construction related is not
going to be included in this.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
again, my focus is on STEM and
education.
Thank you, Speaker and gentle
lady, I apologize, but this
amendment just does not help my
district and a lot of my area
and I'm I'm respectfully gonna
have to decline from support.
Thank you. There's further
debate on the amendment, the
gentle lady from Berlin and
Sandoval, Representative Cates.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Does the gentle lady,
uh, yield, please?
Yes, I yield to the gentle lady
from Bernal Leo and Sandoval.
Uh, thank you very much. So I
very much, um, I, I wanted to
ask just for some clarifications
on here, um.
Let's see, so, um, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what is
Is there an occupation in New
Mexico that we have too many
skilled workers for.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
couldn't tell you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle person. I, this is,
um, uh, my concerns about the
amendment that you uh presented,
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, is
that we, um,
Uh, there is in an assumption
here that some degrees and some
occupations are better than
other degrees and other
occupations, so Mr. Speaker
General or, can you tell me, um,
So if we have no abundance of a
certain occupation or certain
worker. Can you tell me why
would an individual
Uh, try to achieve a master's
degree, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
that's a good question. Why
would they?
So thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General person. Now, I am not
the most educated person in this
chamber, nor am I the smartest
person in this chamber. I'm
first generation college.
But my uh my, my father told me
it was to be educated.
It was not to necessarily get a
job but to be educated.
To get a job, we went to trade
school and proudly went to trade
school.
But to be educated, you went to
higher education.
And so that would be the
difference, Mr. Speaker.
And my, my general colleague
from, from water. Do you know
that in uh 2022, it just in the
state of New Mexico.
Uh
Our economic activity on arts
alone was $740.9 million here in
the state of New Mexico?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I'll take your word for it.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, to a person. I, you
made a disparaging remark about
a master's in interpretive
dance.
I wanted to joke with you and
tell you I have a master's
interpreted dance, but Mr.
Speaker, general person, I do
not. Um, but we have, uh, in
2022 we had almost 27,000 jobs
here in the state of New Mexico
in only arts programs, Mr.
Speaker, gentle person, were you
aware of the economic impact to
our state in the arts.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
think that we have a lot of big
huge gaps. We don't like right
now in education, we have 700
vacancies for and, uh, for
teachers. I don't think we have
700 vacancies that are highly
needed in order to change the
course of New Mexico in arts,
Mr. Speaker, general person, it
is also my understanding that
many teaching positions cannot
occur.
without a master's degree. Are
you aware of that, Mr. Speaker,
General person?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, you can, you need a
bachelor's to get, uh, to be a
teacher, but if you want to go
up to a level 3, you do need a
master's. Yes, thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker, gentle
person, and I would say even, I
mean, in my, in my bachelor's
degree.
I am not making any money from
my bachelor's degree. Mr.
Speaker to a person, and I know
many people uh like that as in
it is, it was a degree to
educate me, uh, and so that I
can provide those skills that I
learned in the university and
apply them to almost any
position I've had throughout my
career, Mr. Speaker, General
Person, that's my understanding.
So I, I am not gonna be able to
uh support this.
Uh
Although I am very much
appreciative of you
specifically, uh, gentle lady
from Valencia, your dedication
to public school and for the
sciences, we very much need that
and I very much appreciate it,
but I will also, I would never
let someone disparage your
occupation as I wouldn't allow
the interpreted dancer to be
disparaged as well. Thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker.
to meet you from earlier episode
of Torres Velasquez.
Mr. Speaker, will the gentle
person from Valencia County.
I yield to the gentle lady.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I so very much understand where
you're coming from.
And I so very much appreciate
all of the comments and your
dedication that you show on how
Education Committee.
Um
And I saw very much appreciate
your co-sponsorship and the
Uh, a bill that we are sharing.
I, I would like for you please
compassionately to consider.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm your 2nd Amendment. I, I do
understand why you are wanting
to insert out of New Mexico
institution of higher education.
Um, I would very much like you
to consider something though.
Um, I don't know how much you
know about Spanish market.
And we'll get to the point in
just a moment.
But it used to be that in order
to compete in Spanish market,
you have to be born and raised
in New Mexico.
You could not compete unless you
showed that lineage.
But there were so many.
College graduates who were going
out of state.
Starting their family in other
states.
And their kids which were
grandkids of the people who
maybe had been working on
Spanish market wanted to compete
in Spanish market.
Even though they had not been
born and raised completely in
New Mexico.
And so we now have um artists.
Who can compete in Spanish
market who were not born and
raised in New Mexico and that
was a huge, huge cultural
change.
Um, in my experience with
graduate students.
A lot of times our New Mexico
graduate students go to other
colleges for their bachelor's
degree, um, they are recruited,
especially at schools like Trico
Heritage or um, um, next en
Academy.
Or places where there's some
incredible science.
Things going on and they're
highly recruited at major
universities and, and they go.
And they want to come back.
And, and they do come back.
And so I would simply ask that
you extend your kind heart,
which I know this is coming from
your very kind and generous
heart if you would please think
about.
Um,
How that has an impact on our
culture and how we certainly
want to welcome them back.
As, uh, when I first saw this in
the bill.
On page 3 that.
You have, you are wanting to
admit, I thought the same thing
that you did well they should be
from New Mexico institutions.
But I totally understand how
that.
Doesn't always happen when we
are really promoting STEM fields
with our brightest students we
want them to come back.
And they want to have that
degree that very prestigious
degree.
From whatever university they
have been attracted to.
You know, the top 10 students at
Orisco Heritage, they go on and
get some incredible
scholarships.
And I would not want them to
turn that down.
Um, if it were something that
was going to really
Support them. And so that's all
I have to say, gentle person
from
Valencia County.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 89. We are on a
tabling motion to house for
Amendment number 1 to House Bill
89, a vote of yes, and the
amendment would have been
tabled. It would have known
we're back on the amendment.
There is a roll call, 32nd book
clock, the vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote's not closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 1, to House
Bill 89 has been tabled.
Gentle lady from Valencia, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, um, my
focus is just, I just wanna make
sure that these, if we're paying
for education, it should
definitely be to people that are
established here in New Mexico
and 2 that it goes into these
high demand jobs and um and the
the things that are um which,
which although I do appreciate
uh education to just be educated
but our education should be uh
bettering our community. Thank
you. Thank you, young lady.
There is further debate, but
I have an announcement to make.
I'm gonna go out of order.
There's cake in the lounge in
celebration of Romero's
birthday. So go get a piece of
cake in the lounge. There is
further debate, gentlemen from
Valencia, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from representative
Romero.
He said Brego, but thank you
anyway.
I think, I think the, I think
the chamber has established that
I said Romero by uh unanimous
vote.
Almost, almost unanimous vote.
69 votes in the affirmative, 1
in the negative that I said,
Romero.
Gentlemen from Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Borneo yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
For the sake of the body, I will
say that um.
The gentleman from Otero County
bet me that I couldn't run out
the clock on this bill, which I
emphatically denied.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, he
then double dog dared me, and
according to playground rules
and movies like the Sandlot and
The Christmas Story, I now have
to do that. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, let's get ready to
go. 2 hours and 12 minutes to
go.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I do have some, some questions
about this, this, uh, that I'd
like to bring your attention.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, page
2.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, basically section E or um
letter E 678 when you talk about
a doctor of medicine, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Does that also exclude doctors
or pharmacy, doctor of, um,
As far as
Um, or the, what's that or
osteopathic. Oh, I got it now
talk about brain and we have
that right now, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, does this also
include other uh degrees that
have doctorate, uh,
requirements.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it, it
does not.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
you know, I was a little bit
kind of thrown back by the kind
of end after medicine and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I kind
of thought that maybe this
wasn't a full and exhaustive
list.
Where was this the requirement
that there were going to be
other um.
And again it's online 8 that
there were going to be other
degrees that were specifically
listed in this, uh, section, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentleman from
Valencia, uh, the reason for
this language is um there are
other very specific scholarships
for doctors of medicine and
because there is a plethora of
resources for that particular
degree, we no longer, we did not
need to list that degree in this
particular scholarship.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
One of the um questions that I
have, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and also on page two, letter F.
When we talk about Mr. Speaker,
generally, do we know right now
how many, what is the percentage
of people in New Mexico that
have the graduate degrees,
master's or doctoral degrees,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I
don't know and I don't know how
that pertains to the four
corners of the bill that we're
on right now.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
it, it does because when we're
talking about that I, I think
the percentage is about 25%, so
then that saying, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, that many of these
groups in here are where many of
the Mexicans are
underrepresented due to the fact
that we have, you know, so few
of doctoral or um
Graduate degrees, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
When we go down the same page,
uh, page 2, line 20.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I will
read students who are in New
Mexico raise with the greatest
financial need.
And students who are residents
from first underrepresented in
graduate education.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
will we determine the, the need
of the, um,
Of the applicant, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's the
institutions that make those
determinations, looking at all
of the application data that
they get for each scholarship
application.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I guess
when I'm, I was saying is that
we're fast, we're gonna be a
requirement for this, um.
scholarship, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I,
yes, it is a requirement as
stated online. Let's see here,
uh.
section F
when
Lines 11 through 13. No, I'm
sorry. I'm sorry, uh.
Section 2, subsection A, lines
20 through 22.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, if
you're talking about that,
that's where you're saying that
the fast food is a requirement
for that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that is a very specific
requirement for the scholarship.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so on
page 3, it talks about the.
Uh, the 6 credit hours, um, and
then later it talks about the 8
semesters, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally to do summers count
with the in the in the number of
semesters that a student may be
eligible.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
believe so. I think that, um,
our higher education
institutions are on a semester
system, so 2 semesters per year.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
I chose to take classes during
the summer, that would be on my
own, out of my pocket and not
necessarily from this, um,
scholarship. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, it
would not be out of your pocket.
Those summer classes would be
covered.
So again, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so those summers would
count towards the 8 total
semesters that are covered in
this bill?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
also on page 4, when we talk
about the.
Um
About the amount of the
scholarship, let me, let me get
to that specific.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we talk about this, and I did
reference another bill that's
working its way through the
legislature, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, and it is House Bill
375, which is the behavioral
health bill for graduate
programs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that bill, Mr. Speaker,
does cover some fees, books, and
otherwise, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in your bill, what exactly
is covered under this
scholarship?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Valencia tuition.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so no,
no fees are covered in this as
well.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, most
fees are incorporated as part of
the tuition figure.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, I'm now on page 5.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, generally, this
is actually regarding the
eligibility for the continuation
of the scholarship, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, how, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, will this data be
collected to ensure that a
student is it is it collected
Mr. Speaker, generally by a
higher ed or by the university
itself, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I imagine by both and that the
institution has to keep track of
who stu what students are
actively enrolled in their
institutions and then that data
in itself is, I reported back up
to higher ed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
What
higher ed institutions in New
Mexico are all of our
institutions covered or, or
what's uh specific institutions
would be we're talking and I'll
just help you out.
New Mexico State, are we talking
about?
You and I, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, can you, can you tell me
which would be covered and which
wouldn't.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and all
accredited higher education
institutions are covered within
the purview of this bill.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, maybe this is your expert.
How many of those do we have in
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, on
our best guess about 10, but we
can get that information for you
here just a little bit.
Mr. Speaker, generally, that's
OK. We can, we can talk outline
that's not.
Uh, that we can, we can
definitely get that information,
um, I guess, Mr. Speaker, I just
want to make sure that those are
so it has to be in New Mexico
higher ed, um, you could be
Grand Canyon or others, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker,
Generalleti? Speaker, the
gentlemen, that's correct.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
I know the body's gonna be sad,
but this is my last question, so
I will not run the clock for 2
hours. So, um, it's gonna be OK,
but I do, this is a serious
question, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Is this scholarship transferable
among colleges. I may start a
program at UNM. I may transfer
to New Mexico State or to
Highland or interview Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Are these scholarships
transferable or would I have to
go through the whole process at
my new institution, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 7 institutions, we just
figured it out and uh Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, they
are all credits are transferable
and the scholarship is
transferable amongst different
institutions.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and just for the body's
information, uh, should they
need a ride, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I could debate for 3
hours, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I yield my time and thank
you for your answers.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Good
evening. Uh, with the gentle
lady from Bernna Leo, please
yield. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Lee County.
Thank you, gentle lady and I'm
also proud to claim Eddie
County, of course, so, um, but
thank you very much County.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so I'm looking at uh the
constitution of the state of New
Mexico and just I'll fill in the
blank a little bit about which
institutions uh would be in view
here, uh, Mr. Speaker, um, the
bill says on page 2 line 1 and
then after that that eligible
institution means.
A graduate degree granting state
university enumerated in Article
12, Section 11 of the
Constitution of New Mexico, so.
Uh, and these are, um,
accredited, so Mr. Speaker and
general lady, we have the
University of New Mexico.
Uh, New Mexico State University.
It says near Las Cruces, uh,
that's of course all kind of
outdated language, um, we also
have New Mexico Highlands
University we have um Western
New Mexico University at Silver
City. We have uh New Mexico
western College.
Um, which, um.
And they also make reference to
a normal school, but anyway, we
also have eastern New Mexico
University that's in Portales
and um.
The New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology, um, New
Mexico Tech at Socorro.
And I'll just note just kind of
as a little footnote because
it's fun, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady that this listing of
State educational institutions
also includes, and I quote,
New Mexico military institute at
Roswell, formerly known as New
Mexico Military Institute, so I
don't know why that's in there,
but anyway, these are the ones
that we're looking at and um.
So I wanted to ask, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so I
take it any of the branch
colleges would not be where you
could get a graduate degree. Is
that your understanding, Mr.
Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lani, that's
correct. You can't get, uh, uh,
an advanced degree at a branch
college.
Yes, I, I thought that might be
true, um, so the bill also says,
and I'm looking at page 2 line 9
this is um section F.
Um, there's a definition of
groups underrepresented in
graduate education and that
phrase shows up a little bit
later in the bill, near the
bottom of page 2 and so anyway,
the definition of that is, um,
groups underrepresented and
graduate education means women.
Minorities, persons with a
visual impairment or other
physical disability.
And other groups that have
traditionally been
underrepresented under excuse me
underrepresented in the specific
area of graduate study or
profession for which the
scholarship is awarded.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
is it possible that those
demographics could change over
time, perhaps in institution
becomes minority women, uh, uh,
so they wouldn't be here in this
definition or say minority, um,
uh, majority as well. Um, is it
your understanding those, those
things could change over time,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speakerlini
from Eddie and Lee, the way this
language is written, yes,
absolutely they can change over
time.
And Mr. Speaker, um, gentle
ladies, so my guess is that the
higher education department or
the institution would have data.
I think they're pretty good at
keeping data and that that would
all be um factored into
scholarship awarding. Is that
correct?
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that is
correct. OK thank you.
Well, I have just a little tiny
bone to pick, um, it's on, um,
page 2 starting at line 18 and
the bill.
Uh, reads priority shall be
given to New Mexico.
Students who are in New Mexico
residents with the greatest
financial need and students who
are residents from groups
underrepresented in graduate
education.
And so the, the freezing that's
tripping me up a little bit is
students who are residents from
groups.
Residents from groups.
So General ED, I thought about
possibly making an amendment
here, uh, but I decided not to,
not to do it. We've had quite a
few this evening, but I think
the phrasing there is um not
very elegant, I guess, and might
even lead to some confusion
because now we're talking about
New Mexico residents and then
there's this reference to
residents of of groups that are
underrepres so I'll just point
that out and um let me go on to
the next thing as well.
Um, and then kind of along the
same lines on page 3 gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker.
Um, this is amending section 21,
21 G6 and it's caption
conditions for continuing
eligibility.
And it says acceptance and this
is line 22.
Except as provided in
subsection.
be of this section a scholarship
may be re-awarded to a student
who
And I'm just gonna um mention
Mr. Speaker, that the word
reawarded even though it's, it's
adding a hyphen from what was
considered one word in the
original or the status quo bill
uh reawarded is, is subject to
interpretation, and I think
there's you could just say
awarded because the next line of
the bill says.
Was an award recipient.
The previous year.
So the word rewarded, I think is
a bit um.
troublesome to me in terms of
WorkChoice.
So
Madam
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and generally,
I just point that out because I
think there could be a little
bit of um clean up on the bill
when it goes to the next uh
stage of the process.
And then I'll just close with um
just a comment that
Part of what troubles me about
the bill is it's, I think most
New Mexicans when they think of
the text taxes they pay.
And the giving of the state
scholarships that people would
expect a nexus to exist between.
The taxpayer.
Of New Mexico wanting to help
New Mexico students and I think
what this bill does is open it
up to.
Uh, people who really don't have
a great nexus with the state,
yes, they've established
residency where they couldn't be
considered, but I think um
thought that some of this could
go to um non-permanent legal
residents would be troublesome
for a lot of people if they knew
this, this is what's um um being
proposed, so, um, that's all I
have this evening, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you for the time.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Hello, Mr. Speaker, does the
gentle lady from Bernna Leo
Yale.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr. Speaker.
So I wanted to start off with,
uh, page 4.
And it's gonna be line 19
through 21.
I guess it could go a little
further, 23.
So by removing the $7200 cap, is
there a risk of unsustainable
spending that could lead to
future costs or possible tax
increases and could you explain
to me why you took that 7200, he
struck it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you um so much for the question
actually. So there were a couple
of main reasons why this
language was changed. First, I
want the body to know that over
just the last 2 years that this
scholarship has existed. There
was $10 million appropriated to
um the corpus of the scholarship
to be awarded to those that
apply and um meet the
requirements and neither year
that were was that 10 million?
dollar figure spent.
Um, and so that was actually
what led to the change in the
amount and allows us to expand
the scholarship to include 100%
of tuition and fees so that we
could again expand all of this
money to ensure that all of
these deserving students are
able to get as much help as they
need, uh, because the money is,
is there and it's for that
purpose.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so I guess I, I
want you to explain to me on the
10 million, so how will the
state fund the increased
scholarship, and I, you're
telling me it's already in the
budget.
So, um, we've, we've taken
The $7200 cap, and we have
opened it up to 100, a full 100%
tuition fee.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
correct.
And gentle lady, so I, I have, I
have an, I, I mentioned this in
um education and, you know, I
just had a, you know, should
taxpayer money be used to fund
scholarships for non-citizens,
especially when resources for
existing students are already
limited.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm so
sorry. Can you ask that question
again? I had there was some
background noise that was
distracting me and I have ADHD
and it was kind of like squirrel
over here, so. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady from
Bert Leo, I, I think I have some
too. So, um, my question was,
should, should taxpayer money be
used to fund scholarships for
non-citizens, especially when
resources for existing students
are already limited.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so,
um, again, I wanna make it very,
um known to the body that the
residential requirements for
this bill are very clear. The
these funds are available only
to students who meet the
requirements of the scholarship,
one of those requirements is
that you must be a New Mexico
resident for at least one year
prior to applying for the
scholarship and under federal
requirements under which this
this law has to um meet because
again, it's
preempted, um, for the federal
requirements you have to have an
immigration status that allows
you to be a student in the
United States of America and one
of the reasons why many people
from around the world want to
become students in the United
States of America is because we
have one of the best educational
systems, especially higher
educational systems in the world
and we also know that in a state
like New Mexico with 2.1 over
more than 2.1 million people,
uh, and lots of opportunities
for folks to come to our state
and contribute in many ways, um,
I, we, someone mentioned the
brain drain earlier, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and um I
actually want to try and rename
this bill. This is the, the, the
brain wa bill because um this is
actually encouraging folks that
are again meeting the
requirements of this scholarship
and deserving.
of these assets to come to New
Mexico, they already have to be
here, remember they already have
to have the status to study in
the United States of America, so
our taxpayer dollars are not
funding people from other places
or um funding, you know, uh,
foreigners who are just coming
to New Mexico looking for a free
ride. These dollars are funding
people that were already here
and they're finding people that
already have the legal status.
to study here and if we do
everything right, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, these folks are going
to get jobs here. They're going
to start families here. They're
gonna contribute to our economy.
They're gonna help grow and
diversify our revenue sources
here in our state and those are
all the good recipes, all the
good things that we want to
happen and occur in New Mexico.
I think that's why a lot of us
come here and do this.
Free unpaid job that we work at,
um, you know, hundreds of hours
a year because these are all
good things, and these are all
people that will benefit our
state and so it is not us giving
others a free ride by our hard
on hard earned tax dollars. It's
us helping them join us in
making the state a better place.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. I appreciate
that answer. And so while we're
on that, if you could explain to
me, because it, it is confusing.
I, I keep reading New Mexico
resident, so.
What I heard earlier was a New
Mexico resident has.
The status to be a New Mexico
resident is that you have to
have lived here for one year.
Can you be here undocumented? Do
you have to have a visa?
Would you explain that to me,
please?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
um, so again, it's not
specifically mentioned in the
bill because it would be um
unnecessarily redundant, but in
order to qualify for the
requirements of this
scholarship, you have to have a
federal immigration status, a
legal status that allows you to
study within the United States
of America, and there are many
different things that
A person has to go to in order
to get that status. So you
cannot even be considered. You
would not meet the
qualifications of this
scholarship in less and until
you can prove that you have that
federal immigration status.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. So, the
other question that I had was,
was
Can, can New Mexico students
that's been just say uh a
student has been here their
whole life. They were born and
raised here.
And uh they're on a list. Can
they be overlooked.
From somebody else coming in.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I mean,
I, um, I, I, I think, I, I think
the question really has to be
one, what are their
qualifications and 2, how did
their qualifications compare to
all of the requirements that our
state out in this stated in this
bill, right? So we are giving
preference to folks that are
underrepresented. We're giving
preference to folks that um may
have not
Be as well resourced or um
may not have the same
educational background as
others, but can still meet the
requirements of the scholarship.
So I think that's why it's
really important, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that each applicant
for this program is looked at
individually by a person whose
job it is to assess that
particular person's application
and weigh it against another
person's application. So if they
are from New Mexico.
I'll take myself for as an
example, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I was born and raised in New
Mexico. I went to high school
here, but I went to college
somewhere else, and I spent some
years in other places and then I
decided, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
to boomerang back and come and
do graduate school here in New
Mexico. So, um, do I meet some
of those underrepresented
factors, I'm not sure. I don't
know, but I do know that I, um,
in a native New Mexican and I
did my
my best in school and I'm a
woman and I'm interested in a
lot of, um, you know, a lot of
subjects in addition to the
other stuff that is still
included within the purview of
this bill, thankfully, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, and so
I, I think that um.
Being in New Mexican is probably
a factor that's considered, but
it's just one of many considered
factors.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I appreciate that
answer, and I want to give you,
um, a testimony that I heard in,
in, uh, education.
And the testimony was there was
a uh lady from.
Um
Representative Chatfield's area.
And she was wanting to get her
MD, her doctorate.
And she was passed over by
somebody that come over here,
uh, because maybe they were what
you were explaining
underrepresented.
And she ended up having to go to
another state, New York, to be,
to be exact, and she finished
her doctorate over there and
like a lot of us do when we go
to college is we fall in love
over there, and then you end up
getting married over there, and
then you end up staying over
there when we could have kept
her here.
Since we have such a shortage of
doctors.
And that's what I'm concerned
about is our local homegrown
and, and I, I don't know how
many times I've heard grow your
own, and we're trying to grow
our own, but this bill, it seems
like it might not.
It might not give our, our girl
your own an opportunity to use
this scholarship, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I, I would disagree, so I think
that this bill in addition to
allowing us to grow our own
because of course you're from
your if you're from New Mexico,
you're gonna meet the one year
residential requirement, but
we're also within the scope of
this bill considering other
might be future New Mexicans. So
again, we have, I always tell
people, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when I travel, um, I
tell them I'm from New Mexico.
It's such a wonderful state
because we have room to grow.
And there's so many wonderful
assets that we have going for us
and because of scholarships like
this that again have not been
expended, um, uh,
representative, uh, the
gentleman from I think Valencia
over there spoke about um House
Bill 375, which was another, um,
which is another scholarship
opportunity every opportunity
that that we create and we make
available to
folks within our state is
another chance for them to
either come either be here and
stay here or come here and
remain here. So it's not a
zero-sum game, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and they're not
mutually exclusive, so every
opportunity that we create is
just one more chance that we can
bring someone here who's gonna
fall in love with it the same
way all of us have, realize what
an amazing place this is and
stay here and if this, this
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, was one
factor that helped that happen,
I think we, we've done our job.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So I'm just gonna ask you
directly, is there a possibility
that one of our grow your owns
could be passed over for someone
else, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, I mean, again, you have to
be in New Mexico resident just
to even be considered, so no.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
is, is there a rating? How would
I know? Say, say I'm from.
Somewhere and I come in and I
have my visa.
And let me just put you in the
scenario, you're a homegrown
girl and you love New Mexico and
you've been here and you're a
great student, and, um, I come
over here.
Is there a Grady? Is there
something, what, what is gonna
constitute you from getting the
scholarship over me or me over
you.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, um,
and again, I, you know, we're
really getting into kind of
speculation land here, but, um,
again, looking at these
underrepresented factors. So for
instance, um, you know, if
someone has a disability, um, if
someone has a really interesting
family history. I'll, I'll share
with the body, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, you know, many
people know that I lost my
parents when I was quite young
and put me through some
adversity.
that um made me kind of have a
different life than many other
people my age, and so, you know,
I look at that as a strength
now, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
other people would call that an
adversity. I would put that in
on this application, maybe
that's a factor that they would
consider, I don't know, um, you
know, maybe neurodiversity is
another factor that could be
considered maybe um someone that
has a really interesting family
of origin or um someone that
ended up in New Mexico because
of a
A really strange story again,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this is
all speculatory, but um, you
know, there's no magic formula
in here, and I think that's on
purpose that, you know, if you
have one eye and one leg and
half a tongue, you're gonna be
put in line in front of
everybody else. I just don't
think that's, that's how it's,
it works.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I appreciate you
explaining that and uh I did
know about your parents, but I
am sure they would be very proud
of you. Uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, tell me what
underrepresented means.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
think it's a little bit in the
eye of the beholder, but I think
that when you look at um the
specific people who are applying
for this scholarship, let's say
if we have uh a larger number of
folks that are applying from
urban areas as opposed to rural
areas, I would call those people
underrepresented, um, I think
that if we have a larger, I
mean, we're kind of seeing this
now, um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I'm speaking in a
body that is now majority women,
right? Which didn't always used
to be the case. So, um, and at
one point we could say that
women were underrepresented and
maybe now we can say it's mid,
um, I don't know, it just
depends on what the pool looks
like for the, the folks that are
applying at that time. So, um,
again, underrepresented is just
who is applying and, and it's in
the eye of the beholder what
they're looking for at the time.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. I don't know
if I've ever been around so many
powerful women, but I like them
all, so thank you guys for, I,
I, I'm very proud that there's
lots of women in the legislature
because, uh, you know, behind
every good man is a way better
woman, I'll tell you that from
my in for me. So, um,
Thank you for, for explaining
that to me and I'm just
wondering if the institutions
have a clear definition of what
underrepresented means, and I'm
not going to belabor that, but
I'm just wondering instead of
being in the eye of the
beholder, I would like to have a
specific definition that
institutions are looking at so
that they know what
underrepresented means because I
might have a definition and you
might have a definition, and
that's in the eye of the.
older, but we need a definite
definition.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, my expert tells
me that um this actually
underrepresented can be better
defined depending on the area in
which you're considering. So if
you look at the stem area, who
is going to be underrepresented
in that area is gonna be
different than uh people that
are going into education, right?
or people that are going into
law enforcement or history or
um, you know, the, the arts,
economics, business.
Just kind of depends and I, I
think that is a little bit of
the guiding light specifically
for our higher education
institutions is they're gonna,
it's programmatic, um, and
they're gonna take that into
consideration as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. So I'm gonna
move on to page 3.
And lines 1 through 4.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so if I get this scholarship,
and I don't hold true to my 3.0
grade average. Do I just get
Released from the program? Do I
get put on probation? Do I, is
there an academic probation? How
does that, how does that work
for me to keep my scholarship
valid.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, um,
if you fall below the 3.0 um for
that particular semester, you
will lose the scholarship, um,
for the remainder of that
semester, but you would then
then have the opportunity if you
bring your grade point average
back up to um get access to the
scholarship again, but you would
need to be able, you would, you
would need to um demonstrate
that you had brought the grade.
an average back up again to meet
the requirements of the
scholarship.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, that clears
that up. And then the last thing
that I wanted to ask is,
Whenever we send, say, say, uh,
a student gets his scholarship
and they become a doctor.
And we've paid for all of it
100% of their tuition is there
any, I didn't see anywhere in
the bill where there's a hold
where they have to go to a
community and maybe do some
community work to maybe pay off
some of that debt. And I would
love to hear that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
first of all, I agree with you,
and I think that a lot of the
stuff that we've been
considering in terms of how to
make New Mexico more desirable
for folks to discover what we
already know, and if we are
gonna be offering benefits to
folks like like let's say
tuition remission or a loan
payback that there should be
some sort of condition that
people should make, right, to
commit to the state because the
state committed to them, um,
however, I'm gonna go back to um
what
You just said a few minutes ago,
Mr. Speaker, gentleman, and that
we know that if you go to school
someplace and you're in your
twenties and you're having the
time of your life, you're
probably gonna meet someone,
you're probably gonna fall in
love with them, and then, you
know, first comes love, then
comes marriage, you know, the
rest of the song, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and so, um, that's
one.
One method, one way that we know
that this scholarship could be
helpful to um
Keeping people in New Mexico and
helping them, um.
Commit to the state the way that
we would like to see them
commit.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and you
know, the last thing, the last,
this is really the last thing
I'm gonna say, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from Bernal Leo is,
you know, I'd love if, if, uh,
if we were gonna pay for people
to go to school and just say
that person became a doctor. I
would love to see them be able
to uh go around to some of our
really rural areas and practice
medicine, uh, for maybe 3 to 5
years. And while they're falling
in love and getting married.
In establishing, you know, their
lives, you know, they could
benefit a lot of New Mexico
because we all want New Mexicans
to have good access to medicine.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
So you know further to debate on
whether you're close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, B for a great debate. It's
been a wonderful evening with
you all per usual. And with
that, I move that house Bill 89
do now pass.
own final passage of House Bill
89, the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 40 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative.
House Bill 89 has passed the
House.
The gentleman from Curry debaca,
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel, are you ready on item
number 23.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
Let the let the record reflect
that all action necessary for
replacing House Bill 154 on
final passage has been taken and
that it's now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution,
gentlemen, to explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 154
allows kids 17 years and younger
to have raffles to raise money
for their schools and their
extracurricular activities with
that we stand for questions, Mr.
Speaker.
There is debate. The gentle lady
from Bernardino and Torrance
Representative Lord. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen from a bunch of
really cool counties. Will you
yield your time? I will yield to
the gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is
this bill about being
I
I N U.
Yeah.
I.
No, Mr. Speaker, this is not
about bingo.
And bingo was his name. Oh thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Otero
Representative B block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentlemen from all those
amazing, beautiful and really
cool counties, please yield. I
will yield, Mr. Speaker, to the
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I heard this bill
in our committee and I really
liked it. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you tell me a
little bit about how this will
help these local raffles when it
comes to high schools and making
sure that these clubs can be
able to have these raffles and
raise money for their causes.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, what
it does is it it makes it legal
for them to hold the raffles.
So that they can gather money
for their extracurricular
activities, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I, I think that's a
very good purpose of your bill,
and I will not sing like the
gentle lady from Torrance and
Bernal Leo, but I definitely
support your bill and I
appreciate you both, both of
your expert witnesses for being
here for this very robust and
critical debate. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, I now move House
Bill 154 for a due pass.
We are now on final passage of
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
The vote is now closed by.
By a vote of 63 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
House Bill 154 has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
See an objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, there are still
cake in the lounge. Do you lady
from Santa Fe with an
announcement Mr. Speaker, there
is still cake in the lounge.
Members take note announcements,
gentle lady from Donana.
Excuse me, it's too much cake,
Mr. Speaker, um, I just wanted
to just remind everybody about
tomorrow at 1 p.m. Violet Crown,
um, we're gonna be doing a Q&A
with the Downwinders and then
watched the film afterwards.
Hope you can make it. Thank you.
sick note announcements,
committee meetings Monday
morning, gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr. Speaker, forgive me, I had a
whole piece of paper that I
somehow threw away, but we are
gonna be having a meeting of the
aerospace caucus on Aerospace
Day that is on Monday, um, it'll
be at 9 o'clock. I think it's in
room 317, but I will have an
opportunity, I'm sure another
opportunity to clear up that
location, but please come
support Aerospace on Monday.
Thank you. Are there more
members other than you in the
Aerospace caucus?
And your block.
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to
report that our last aerospace
meeting had, I think, at least
15 people in it, but I think
that's because we had breakfast
burritos from Blake's. That's
probably right. So Members take
note, announcements, young lady
from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your house government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee will meet on Monday
morning, room 305 at 8:30 a.m.
take note any other
announcements last call.
gentle lady from Santa Fe. I
just wanna say thank you Mr.
Speaker, to everybody who made
my day so freaking special and
lovely and wonderful. I feel so
loved.
think it go.
And we even passed one of your
bills. Look at that. Just one
though, Mr. Speaker. Well,
there's a lot of other really
good ones, Mr. Speaker.
They're making their way through
the committee process which I
appreciate. Thank you.
Any other announcements.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker,
This will be my last one on this
uh topic. Why did Beethoven sell
all these chickens?
Why, gentlemen?
Cause all they ever said was
buck buck back.
That might have been your best
one yet, gentlemen.
Very good.
All right, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
The house was set in recess
until 10:30 Monday morning. Have
a good Sunday.
