Because we have a quorum.
Please rise for the prestige of
colors.
ROTC students from gas and high
school children Mendoza
Christopher but is juggling a
lot of pro but I sent it to the
commander mark Representative.
The lady from McKinley is in one
receive Johnson because in the
pledge of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
Montoya for the pledge New
Mexico flag.
The flag.
Mexico is the assemble a perfect
friendship among United Nations
troops.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison for
today's implication.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm gonna
pray in my native language first
and that all interpret.
The.
Condolences over by units in a
sentences will continue another
to go quiet us with the slide
completes and you could just go
home the.
As part of the day where I think
it's a real quick and hot sauces
he can.
On that on the basis of the US
casualties the table quite a.
Where provided the Indian day
hopefully in the the honey
Education Committee day.
I
think it's a.
The latest on that than he can
handle the NMAA Condoleezza
Condi near the hall of quit.
The storm that the.
It's a funding this US economic.
The petition Act where it can
come to talk to you with a.
The report to the household so
the facade of the table revenues
in this.
Thank you senator.
Position because of the loss of
continuity and Hundley seven
after the initial signs from
second so you can.
One.
That us kids don't think
question Mr the international
committee of the.
Miss Iglesias
is is it in any which is the
latest on that that salon ninety
four.
Some Republicans.
Was on the list for us it's a
lot of the.
Us delays because of this thing
because of the state because of
the state because of.
his for the central for all the
blessings that has Polis with.
For the person's safety has
brought us together today.
Whether indigenous leaders from
France to celebrate our
legislative Indian day.
Last four blessings as we
continue to work for our fellow
man our communities our
constituents and our nation.
From all corners of the group
and Syncrude managing Chapman we
can.
And zero eight a better New
Mexico.
With different ideas and
mindsets sister father.
Right those ideas into one line
one plan to progress one New
Mexico when he said.
Just blessings upon our families
those we left behind to allow us
to do our legislative
responsibilities.
Our health care workers as they
continue to be our frontline
defense against.
And other illnesses.
Less our public safety officers
first responders.
Important there should locally
and nationally.
The school fourth with before
us.
This all around us.
Senator the above us in building
those finish in this footage
in this village.
This finish yes this through
Christ our lord amen.
Thank you.
Please remain standing.
Hello color guard.
The point is.
Thank you color guard.
Members may be seated good
morning.
Julie from Santa Fe reserves the
Penske.
Good morning Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered.
Members just by way of a time
keeping we will come together in
joint session with the Senate
committee today to celebrate
American Indian day here at the
legislature but before that we
do have some housekeeping and
we've got some celebrations here
on the floor today and for that
I'm gonna go to gently from
Katrin said a supporter
Environment CM.
It Armstrong thank you Mr
speaker I wanted to recognize
some guests that we have here on
the rostrum this morning budget
okay Mister speaker I'd like two
year olds to other
representatives that have guests
as well all with on co op day
here at the state.
house and so with that Mr
speaker I would like to yield to
Representative Alcon.
Gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley percent of New Mexico
and thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
It is my honor to introduce to
the house a great man.
Addressing that we are cool at
all Mr Keith Gottman is a
president of a.
Our continental divide
cooperative in.
Our area so what kind of this
young man to our chambers
everybody.
Welcome to the house.
Mr speaker thank you I'd like to
yield to terra Representative
how to meal.
Gentlelady from you a student
support or representative Adam
you.
Mr speaker madam Representative
today I would like to welcome
Joseph headed up from the
Chicago County co op Joseph is
there for many years and psycho
and bringing electricity to
rural health care thank you so
much Joseph for what you've done
welcome to the house.
Catcher and all those beautiful
County Representative Armstrong
I'd like to yield Mister speaker
to Representative Castellano I I
I will choose for you gentle
lady the gentleman from senator
as a person because you know
thank.
I like to source for less who is
the director of the Sierra Club
I like well communities works
very hard for our club in which
I'm a member of as well Mr
speaker and ladies thank you Mr
for being here welcome to the
house Mr Montoya.
Thank you again even catches
eleven incidents of coral Mr
speaker Representative had at
all.
The lady we yield to the gentle
lady from three of us on the
face on the violence house
representative Cadena Mr speaker
and kind lady I'm proud to stand
today and recognize Debbie
months and not as from northern
Rio reva electric coop what
could we do without you thank
you welcome any equipment and
that is to the house.
Thank you Julie to get this in a
support of religion.
Mr speaker the gentle lady from
McKinley County.
To do is look we can observe on
a little strong thank you very
much Mr speaker and and gentle
lady I'd like to in order to
reduce Joe Hoskins director
continental divide electric coop
thank you for being here today
welcome Joe Hoskins to the
house.
Thank you Judy Mr speaker I'd
like to yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Representative
Romero the lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker we are with us today
is the CEO of the hem is
mountain electric coop keeping
the lights on for all of us in
the Pojoaque valley Michael
Hastings welcome relations of
the house.
Thank you lady Mr speaker I'd
like to yield to the gentleman
from coal sector Colfax more a
priori both San Miguel inTaos
Representative Sanchez Jennifer
Lopez wanted any of us and we
get Intel's reserve center it's
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady had like to
introduce Mister money boost us
who's a director and respond to
the metric in the my neighbor
from five minutes away welcome
Mr off many post office welcome
to services to the state house.
Mr speaker I'd like to yield to
the gentleman from curry to Baca
Guadalupe Roosevelt and San
Miguel Representative Zamora.
Gentleman from.
Read about the little bit
Roosevelt and some again
representative of someone.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I have the honor today to
introduce Antonio Sanchez from
farmers coop there in Clovis
thank you welcome Mr sentences
that house.
That the delayed Mr speaker I
now like to yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley Sapporo.
And all those other counties
representative Garcia.
Leo Cibola McKinley supporters
of funding but instead
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I have an honor of
introducing the CEO for a cuddle
divide but operative in my area
and grants Mr Robert Castiel
with his dealership Mr speaker
we have just gotten a brand new
facility from final divide up
there I appreciate that and
that's good for the economy the
city and thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady welcome to
the state house.
Digiliti thank you Mr speaker I
now would like to yield to the
gentleman from San Miguel and
Torrance Representative
Castellano to deliver some
Illinoisans Representative
Castellano thank you thank you
madam I want to correct myself
Mr Montoya is the scene or
general manager of my call I was
reading off the papers Mr
speaker madam.
Thank you gentleman he's the big
boss welcome Sir.
Activity thank you Mr speaker
I'd now like to yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker today on
the rostrum we have Mr Robert
called the who is.
The county electric suppliers of
some of the least expensive and
most reliable power the state
thank you Mr speaker local to
us.
Diligently.
Thank you Mr speaker and and so
I'd while also wanted to let
everyone know that they have the
call option here on their desk
from myself and others and with
that Mr speaker I'd like to move
that house memorial twenty one
be removed from the speakers
table and made the next order of
business.
It is so ordered that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing.
House memorial twenty one
available as it has been taken
that is a subject of debate
amendment a substitution the
gentle lady to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker this is a
memorial for the New Mexico
rural cooperative day in the
house of representatives and
would you please have the clerk
read the memorial.
Morial twenty one introduced by
representatives Armstrong
Townsend brown Representative
Allen Martinez and
Representative these L. Hey
memorial declaring February
third twenty twenty three Mexico
rural electric cooperative in
the house of representatives.
Where is New Mexico's rural
electric cooperative
cooperatives provide electric
power to eighty percent of New
Mexicos landed twenty two
percent of New Mexicans were
more than forty two million
residents across the country are
members of one thousand electric
cooperatives in forty seven
states and for as New Mexico
rural electric cooperative
members and owners include
seventeen percent of New Mexicos
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos.
And we're as New Mexico rural
electric cooperatives employee
more than nine hundred New
Mexicans and provide more than
sixty five million dollars in
annual payroll contributing
greatly to the economy of this
real state.
And we're as New Mexico rural
electric cooperatives have
invested more than one billion
three hundred thousand dollars
in infrastructure which includes
more than forty six thousand
miles of distribution lines of
serving an average of almost
five customers per mile and
compressing more than eighty
percent of the land mass of New
Mexico and we're as New Mexico
rural electric cooperatives
provided more than fourteen
million dollars in higher
education scholarships to more
than eight thousand nine hundred
New Mexico students over the
past twenty years and were as in
New Mexico rural electric
cooperatives are active engaged
leaders in our communities by
providing educational
scholarships and participating
in the national government
inaction youth toward sending
New Mexico students to
Washington DC to observe
government in action and learn
about the importance of electric
cooperatives and whereas New
Mexico rural electric
cooperatives in partnership with
the generation and transmission
cooperative will meet the
requirements of the state
renewable portfolio standard of
fifty percent by twenty twenty
four six years earlier than the
estimated time of arrival
mandate and more as New Mexico
rural electric cooperatives are
using new technologies to ensure
reliable and affordable
electricity including broadband
service to underserved areas
within their service territories
hoping to connect rural New
Mexico and stimulate economic
development now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico February third twenty
twenty three declared Mexico
rural electric cooperative day
in the house of representatives
and it further resolved that
rural electric cooperatives
knowledge for immeasurable
contributions economic benefits
and commitment to rural
electrification in New Mexico
and further resolved that copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the board president and chief
executive officer of the New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
The debate on house memorial
twenty one.
I
see none of the deleted close
thank you Mr speaker I move that
house memorial twenty one do now
pass I ask unanimous consent of
the house that the record show
that the rules been called in
all those present voting in the
affirmative.
Mr motion show that all members
of the house present voting in
the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered we
are on final passage of house
memorial twenty one the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed one of
seven in the affirmative none in
the negative house memorial
twenty one has duly passed as
housing graduations New Mexico
rural electric coops.
Announcements the gentleman from
me Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker and today I
have the honor and pleasure of
introducing my hometown.
School board.
That is here today they've been
adopted in Santa Fe have a
meeting so continue to have
those meetings through today and
tomorrow doing the work that
progresses our most valuable
asset which is our children are
use.
That Mr speaker I like the honor
of being able to introduce them.
Pam key elements of most
affectionately known as Mrs Q.
of monks for students tions are
superintendent.
The Nestle Robbins.
Thank you very much.
The memory maker.
One of our school board members
thank you.
Still Dunlap.
Bradley bishop.
Andrea Gonzales.
Betty Ann Ansell.
Mr speaker I'm so proud of our
school district
what they do for our students
everyday the commitment that
they have the fight that they
continue to give to make sure
that our students get the best
education possible I'm so
thankful for this board and the.
Collaboration that they do the
the fight that they continue to
do to make sure that our
students get the best very
thankful for you all to be here
today and I'm so honored to be
able and in addition to that
thank you thank you for joining
us and welcome to our state
house of representatives.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola McKinley supporters of
one of and as a representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker I'd like to
were I have a three guests
arrival but to give up owner
does three of them and we grieve
Division honor I'd like to
introduce Randall be sent to the
governor of what will that come
on which is in the rostrum.
The governor Wendell Chino
Pueblo back with the right next
to me.
Fences Johnson gravel secretary
but rule act among sitting right
next to me that is the general
no flaws thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Julie from McKinley is a wonder
percent of Johnson thank you Mr
speaker today it is my privilege
to introduce my guests from
Gallup McKinley county who are
representing the Gallup inter
tribal Indian ceremonial
Association and they are Kyle
Tom president.
Hilda Bowman vice president.
Linda and deadly Byerly
ceremonial coordinators.
And Carol Bowman former McKinley
County commissioner.
You will also see on your desks
you will find a sheet of paper
colleagues that explains the
purpose and the history of the
Gallup inter tribal ceremonial
Association we are going into
our one hundred and first year
celebrating and showcasing our
local artisans crafts dancers
every culture rodeo athletes
parade tradition and cultural
culinary foods and much more our
elders and children are a great
part of this and we are raising
our children in McKinley county
to be skilled and talented in
the humanitarian needs of the
cultural heritage I also have
other guests that I'd like to
introduce Theresa may hands is
the director of the health and
Human Services of the public
Aqaba.
Women control junior come on
hello.
Engine at Salvador and come up
Pueblo senior center director.
Also I would like to welcome
many of our Navajo Nation guests
here today from the Navajo
Nation office of the president
and vice president our council
chambers are Navajo Nation
chapters and community members
of McKinley and San Juan
counties thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady welcome to the
house.
Jenny from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman BGT thank
you very much Mr speaker today I
have the honor of introducing my
guest she's been with me all
week she is a UNM and turned
from the political science
department her name is Jessica
Knox and I am very proud to tell
you Mr speaker that she is an
incredibly interesting person
I've had the honor of getting to
know her all week to the very
driven students and she's
currently pursuing a double
major in poly science history at
the university of New Mexico
the for this internship she had
an aspiration to work is
congressional staff but after
the Senators ship she live up
with even more options and has
no idea what her future now
holds with a passion for
understanding the world around
her Jessica spends much for time
diving into books when not
studying just enjoy the creative
outlet and sewing and painting
now it's time to socialize she
loves joining friends once a
month for a night of board games
where she brings homemade
desserts to compensate for
crushing them in trivia sounds
like someone that I absolutely
would love to know and keep
around Mr speaker so it is my my
distinguished are to have just a
here and on the floor with us in
the house and thank you so much
for spending the week with me.
Welcome to the US.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I have the honor of introducing
the young lady that allows me to
spend time with you of the time
is my wife Evelyn Allison and.
My grandson Caleb and my niece
Kristin Carl.
Mr speaker I also have
supporters Senator Smith tenants
move and Gilbert but Dhoni.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Julie and and and
thank you family and into
everyone's families for the
sacrifices that they made to
allow us to serve in this body
thank you very much it's great
to see you.
Other announcements Kelly from
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker I
just want to introduce my shadow
for today I have the honor and
privilege of having ms lily good
marker on hanging out with me
today she's from Cleveland high
school she's in tenth grade and
she's interested all the things
that we have going on here at
the legislature and there's a
lot Mr speaker she's already
been to committee and heard
about all things going on so I
am she also her dad you know in
the hallways that's Charles good
marker who us who brought her
here today to see everything
going on so please come say hi
to us and welcome to lily.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative.
Mr speaker I am proud to
introduce my special guests
today they came here all the way
from Gallup McKinley county and
we have with us the one and the
only the amazing president of
the indigenous women's resource
center right here in our
chambers today her name is some
Montana Jim Martin she is also
the founder of some more
learning center and the owner of
the corn pollen mobile trailer
in addition C. has brought with
her Mr speaker pro amazing
daughter and her doctor is that
I made.
Introduced a community organized
a community organizer her name
is as far GM and to see is a
graduate of color springs in
Colorado.
Colorado I'm sorry she received
her bachelor's degree from
Colorado College in Colorado
springs and she's majoring in
southwest question majored in
southwest studies and double
minoring in indigenous studies
and field media studies the good
thing about this Mr speaker is
that she brought her talent back
to New Mexico so my special
guests I'm proud to introduce
them thank you gentle lady
welcome to the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola McKinley supporters on
one environments here
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr speaker I don't have a bunch
against I'd really dropped the
ball one of them and she's
sitting right next to me so I
could get a great honor to
introduce the first female state
treasurer zero I'm on the oil
which is sitting right in front
of me.
Madison treasured thank you for
joining us.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I also have in the gallery the
students from Navajo preparatory
school along with the head of
school Sean of this anti.
also on the rostrum seated
review as the first female vice
president of the Navajo Nation
chair rail Montoya.
Welcome Madam as president.
The delayed from Balenciaga
Representative made a lot of
more yeah.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
point of personal privilege
state your point.
Thank you Mr speaker I was
reading an article in a
searchlight that showcased an
incident that happened in
December it was with to
children that were being taken
care of by CYFD a fourteen year
old and a ten year old what
happened with these two children
is that one ended up abusing the
other while the war of being
taking care of in of with that
within CYFD
with the specifics of this is
that these children are being
housed in the offices of CYFD
which of several years ago they
promised they were going to do
that anymore so that I wanted to
showcase but my thing is as an
educator we are required and we
take great pride in trying to
protect our you our young people
and we know with when they
should be constantly supervised
and this the fourteen year old
that was abusing the ten year
old had several a incidences in
which they knew he had an issue
and yet they were properly
supervised so my question to New
Mexico my question to this
chamber is when is enough enough
when are we going to stop
continuing need to hurt these
children that were already hurt
by the people that they trusted
so that is my question to you
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan thank you
Mr speaker I have with me today
a young friend that I'd like to
introduce a Mr Adam Joan Begay
Mr today served on the school
board at the age of twenty he
was president of the school
board he also served with vice
president Leiser as his us staff
assistant these currently the
executive director of the
national nonprofit organization
membership and Education
Commission then as a bright
bright future in politics and I
just like to recognize in this
house thank you.
The gentleman from really was on
the one is and one
representative Lente thank you
Mr speaker good afternoon good
afternoon members I have the
distinct honor and pleasure of
introducing the honorable
lieutenant governor from Sandia
Pueblo my best buddy Michael
Montoya he's actually my elder
by two months but we went to
school together we went to high
school together he's part of the
Bernalillo public schools and
super proud of this man and
super honored to be able to
edges into the house of
representatives lieutenant
governor Michael into a from
Sandia pueblo welcome lieutenant
governor.
I think we know who the better
basketball player is in the
governor.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
recognize the gentleman from
Santa Representative Harper
today is his birthday and I
think when he found out I was
going to make the announcement
fled the chamber.
Is Dr Phil's gonna have to sing
Happy Birthday that is right
there.
So Mister speaker
I think we should sing Happy
Birthday gentleman from San Juan
to seeing.
That bureau date to have bureau
they choose you have the
birds date do Representative
Harper.
B. by the to move you to
activate.
One is in his eighteenth or
nineteenth birthday.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative little thank you
Mr speaker it is my pleasure if
I may introduce my guests with
me today you would like to
introduce my aunt's Marcela
Gomez and Tina Gomez from the
Pueblo of taus my aunt Marcie
was a rural and are in at U. N.
M. as in retired from their
might and Tino was a dental
assistant to the public of tasks
and provided service for many
many years I also have with me
my husband Joseph little from
the public server killing gay
and Mescalero Apache tribe.
And I would love to also welcome
our dear friend known to many of
us here of an Warren the former
cabinet secretary of the office
of any of the of the department
of Indian affairs and to if you
would please Mr speaker also
recognize if you would please
recognize my family from the
public has who are sitting in
the gallery the Trujillo family
I would appreciate that welcome
to the state house three oh
family for public accounts thank
you for joining us on this very
special day.
Folks we have other folks in the
gallery as well guest of
Representative Lara and I'm
gonna read off some names to
that I have of superintendent
the gassing dependent school
district Travis Dempsey out of
lotus on the side of school
board president for the guests
in Independent School District
gladly at this school board
secretary for the Gadsden
Independent School District
alright then we you'll school
board member from the gas than
Independent School District and
Danny goes to your school board
member for the gas Independent
School District welcome to the
state house of representatives.
It's.
Gentlelady.
From Canada Johnson.
Mr speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that the
speaker point a committee to
invite the honorable president
pro tempore and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the house in
this chamber for the purpose of
being addressed by leaders
representing our native American
nations tribes or pueblos in New
Mexico.
There's objection the chair will
appoint Representative little.
Present Representative and
representative Duncan to invite
the honorable president pro
tempore and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the house for
the purpose of being addressed
by our distinguished guests.
Mr speaker chair recognizes
Representative Johnson.
I ask unanimous consent that the
house stand in recess subject to
the call of the chair and that
the rules be suspended to allow
the seating of guests in the
chamber during the joint
session.
It is objection the house was in
recess subject to the call of
the chair.
