Roll calls closed. We have
quorum.
lady, um, gentleman from
Valencia to lead us in today's
invocation Representative Baca.
Thank you. Please join me in
prayer.
Father, we come before you and
give you thanks. Too often,
Father, we come before to become
before you with the requests.
And many times we don't thank
you for what we've already
received.
So Father, I come before you
today and I thank you for all
the blessing that you have given
this entire body.
Lord God, please grant us the
strength, the courage, and the
wisdom as we enter into these
last few days.
To do what's right for you and
for our citizens.
Lord God, I ask for blessings on
all everyone here for their
families or loved ones during
this time.
Lord, let us never forget that
we are all connected and we are
one body.
Lord, let us approach these last
few weeks with love.
Compassion and understanding.
We pray for the courage and
strength to do your work and the
work of those that we serve.
We thank you, Father. We ask all
this in Jesus' name. Amen.
Gentle lady from Brittany
Representative Thompson with the
Pledge of Allegiance.
lead it from Chavezento Mejia
with the pledge to the New
Mexico flag. We.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Good afternoon members.
Mm
Happy legislative day 14.
We're almost there.
Gentle
any announcements?
General lady from Donana
Socorro.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
today is Foster Parent Day at
the Roundhouse. We're past
memorials, but they did have a
celebration in the rotunda, and
I did want to introduce a couple
of guests on the rostrum today.
Um, the first one is Courtney
Ketzler and Courtney is the new,
a new foster parent. So she has
been fostering for almost 4
months, and she has a very
special guest with her today,
who has been placed with
Courtney on the very day
that Courtney received approval
for placement. Um, Courtney is a
graduate of Redoso and MSU and
UNM College of Phar Pharmacy.
She originally signed on to be a
volunteer foster parent for
restless only, um, recognizing
the need and support to lift up
our caregivers, um, she was
surprised when she received the
call. She is here before us
today reminding us that we have
2 weeks to make important
reforms to this system. And with
her is Anne McKinney. She is a
proud advocate and foster
grandma, and she has decided to
dedicate her
retirement of her life to
improving the foster care
system, and it has been
wonderful to be able to hold
such a sweet baby, say a prayer
over her.
of health
Of um wisdom that nothing that's
formed against the will prosper
is so great to see her thriving
in this environment and, and
wishing well that that remains
her um experience over her life
span. Thank you guys both for
being here and for being such
strong advocates. Welcome to the
house.
gentle lady from Burnley or set
of Hack maybe you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanna take a moment and
recognize my sweet husband,
Charles V. Hill. He, he's here
today. He, um, sacrifices a lot
for me to be able to do this
work, and he's here to watch me
put on my big bill, power up New
Mexico today, but Mr. Speaker,
there's also another reason why
we're here today. I was hoping
you could help me out with that
a little bit. Well, uh, gentle
lady, I, I can't help you out
with that.
Um, we have an esteemed former
member of this house sitting to
my right, um, politically, I
think that's also where he sits
probably to my right, um, and
today,
We're celebrating his birthday.
So gentle lady from Berlio to
meet us in her rendition of
Happy Birthday to Mr. Joe
Thompson. Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady to seeing you.
He, he's also very good at
redecorating offices, Mr.
Speaker. Happy birthday to.
you
How
He was sitting in my office
suite and I think he thought he
was in trouble, he'd look like.
Death
He was so worried he didn't even
have a Red Bull with him.
Happy birthday, Joe.
Thank you for being you, buddy.
And welcome to the house to your
entourage.
Welcome you guys.
Announcements.
Gentlemen from San Juan with an
early joke.
Now my speaker, I don't have a
joke this, uh, this early yet.
Uh, but I'm standing in, in, uh,
support of foster care, uh, what
they do of the hope that these
kids get from there and the, and
the start, uh, hopefully if
something it will take them out
of situations that uh uh may not
provide the best outcome to an
outcome that will provide a
great outcome for them. So I
just stand in in uh respect and
awe and gratitude of what you
do. Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen and thank
you to all of our foster parents
and our, our guests who are here
today and, and all of the other
ones watching at home for the
incredible work that they do,
you know, it takes a village to
raise a child and these good
folks here are um helping
rebuild those villages around
those children, young lady from
Berlepresentative Nicole Chavez.
Mr. Speaker, I just also wanted
to speak in support of foster
parents, um, I would be remiss
if I didn't mention my own
legislative assistant, uh, Jill
Michelle and her husband Doug
have fostered over 400 children
throughout the last 20 years and
they're two youngest babies
they've had for the last 5 years
already, um, since they were
newborns and so they have done
amazing work for the last two
decades, and I just want to
thank foster parents across this
state. Thank you. Thank you.
General lady from San Miguel and
Torrens, Representative
Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I too also just want to
rise in support of uh foster
parent day here at the
Roundhouse, um, within my own
family and friends circle, I
have many that are foster
parents. Uh, my nieces have
actually been blessed to our
family through the foster to
adopt system, uh, my sister was
a foster parent for many years
before bringing our nieces
officially into our family and
so we just really want to rise
in support for um all the
parents.
The families um that are working
through this.
This family system, um, and just
thank you for all your hard
work. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. The
gentle lady from Bernard
Leealencia Socorro McKinleyibula
San Juan representative Abeta.
Beautiful, thank you, speaker. I
also rise in support of Foster
Day and I wanna give a special
shout out to Anne um McKinney,
who organized this morning's
events down in the Rotunda or up
in the rotunda, uh, as you know,
foster parents are much needed
in our tribal communities as
well as the entire district 69,
and I know that when I was
knocking.
on doors, especially in grants,
this was a huge problem talking
to so many people who needed
that support and that help
because of the children who um
were ultimately suffering from
their parents's addiction and
had to go to other homes, but
speaker, I just want to raise
the importance of the people who
do step up and take on these
roles because we have to really
do our homework and make sure
that when we embrace these
children that we're providing a
positive home that.
They feel safe spiritually,
physically, uh, mentally all of
those issues are so important
and that we help guide them on a
path to be successful,
contributing human beings in
society and so to a special
shout out to uh my husband's
late grandmother. She was a a
foster grandparent for years, 40
years, and she took in many
people, and that's also what my
grandmother did and so I wanna
say thank you to those women who
made a way when there wasn't.
away. They weren't rich. They
didn't have even $100 in their
account, but they made a way to
open their homes to children and
take care of them. And so if
they can do it, I can do it, we
can do it. Let's continue to
support our foster parents and
our children and lift the state
up. Thank you, Speaker. Thank
you.
The gentle lady from Donana
Hidalgo and Luna Representative
Jones. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
also want to rise in support of
foster Parents Day and, and I
just wanna say that um in
addition to all the comments
that have been made, I wanna say
a special thank you to the
foster parents who are willing
to take on this special
challenges for the care of
babies who've been born exposed
to drugs and they are uh having
been a NICU nurse myself and
having weaned those babies off
drugs.
I know they have a many, many
health challenges and they take
a lot of time and there's just
an extra amount of compassion
involved in caring for them and
and taking them through those
months of of development that
they um they so much need so I
just, I just wanna say thank you
so much for the compassion, the
many sacrifices that are made by
all foster parents, um, because
you could be doing anything else
in the world except devoting
yourselves to children in need
and it it means a lot you do a,
um, we, we.
owe you as a society, we owe you
a collectively, um, agree
gratitude and so I appreciate
that a lot for your dedication
and just thanks for being here
and uh happy foster Parents Day.
Thank you,
Mr. Speaker
round of applause.
Jela from Santa Feo Blujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just
want to stand and and rise in
support of our.
foster parents stay and say
thank you to you as well. It's
a, it's a huge, huge, huge
effort. We've seen some
legislation today that that
works in the rounds of how we
can be supportive of this and
and I just wanna say thank you
to those who have brought
forward that legislation and
continue to work on these this
issue and, and.
And inviting more of us to
participate as foster parents,
uh, uh, so thank you, we owe you
a debt of gratitude. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentleman from Curry Quy Colfax,
Harding, San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I rise at uh
To honor
Foster parent day.
And, and to honor all the people
out there that work as foster
parents, as you well know,
that's something that I did for
several years, quite a few
years, and, um, it was something
that I felt the need to. I felt
called to do that to kind of
give back a little bit for the
blessings that I received in my
life for the people that helped
me down the road a lot of years
ago. And, uh, I think it's
something that, uh, that's
important.
And it's something that we as a
body need to really work towards
doing a better job of, I think
that, that we need to get
together, put our heads
together, see what we can do
about CYFD and try to make this
thing work so that we can have a
better, a better world for our
young children. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Gentlemen from Berna Leeen
Garcia.
Gracias speaker speaker also
stand uh.
No
Foster parents day to day.
And uh I'd like to also, uh,
kind of reflect on uh
Uh, some
Foster parents, uh, they're in
the, the Trisco Valley that uh
were very
Miraculous
In their care and attention of
uh
Oh, approximately 7 children, as
the male speaker
and the speaker, uh, Fidel
Alicia Montoya had passed away.
They passed away in their late
80s.
Uh, they fostered the kids in
their 60s or 70s, even into the
early 80s as the speaker.
And uh
But as the speaker, they didn't
foster.
Any regular.
kid
So speaker they fostered uh
Kids that were
Physically abused.
And they fostered kids that were
uh physically disabled.
And in fact, the the speaker,
they adopted 4 kids.
Um
One was, uh,
A young lady who has spina
bifida, the mono speaker.
Uh, one was, uh, a young man
with a
Drug fetal syndrome.
Another was a young man with
alcohol fetal syndrome.
And another child was uh.
Also uh physically disabled as
the speaker.
And uh small speaker, uh,
They took in a, a couple of
twins.
They were all young
Maybe, uh, not even one year
old.
Uh, maybe a little bit older
than that.
Uh, and when they took him in,
uh, the speaker, uh,
They had uh
Burner stove burner burns.
On their buttocks.
Uh, where the parents
placed the child to kind of
Keep me from crying.
speaker
And uh
These are the types of
pastor parents that we ever hear
about.
speaker and uh
I talk to you and Alisa one day
in Spanish speaker, uh.
You know, the upgrade Jo would
really
Appreciate doing a story on.
On your raising and caring for
these.
Disabled and physically
Um
Abused children.
And uh this was speaker.
Alicia tells me, uh, you know,
Miguel.
Uh
We do this for the love of God.
Not for any fame or fortune or
glory.
So as we
For the, for the love of God.
And they were blessed with these
skills to just kind of
They
The worst of the worst.
Within that population, Mr.
Speaker.
And you know, the speaker.
I'm very disappointed in CYMP
and one of the meetings that I
attended regarding
A recruitment plan.
For foster parents.
They had none.
I think that lady in the rostrum
should be part of the task
force.
That really begins to develop a
recruitment plan for IDF.
And that the YDF reach out into
our communities and take those
Fidel montoyas and Alicia
Montoyas and incorporate them
in, in developing a recruitment
plan because they've been
successful at it.
Mr. speaker. So that's what I
wanna do. I wanna acknowledge
all those foster parents that
have gone all these years
without any recognition.
Without any respect.
And without any solicitation of
input from them, from CYFD in
terms of how they can better the
program as the speaker.
with that
I thank you.
Gentle lady from Dona Ana
Representative Gallegos thank
you Mr. Speaker. You know, I
have been working um with abused
and neglected children for over
25 years and sometimes um the
only light at the tunnel is the
foster parents, um, children's
land in their homes that have
been broken, abused, um,
spiritually and physically and
I've seen miracles happen with
foster parents. They put
children back together and so I
just wanted to say from the.
bottom of my heart how much I
appreciate the job that it's a
thankless job, but I wanted to
say thank you, um, for the hard
work that is put in, um, for
raising children for making them
your own and for uh helping them
have light at the end of the
tunnel. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
See no other announcement. I'll
go to committee reports and we
can come back to announcements
in a little bit. General lady
from Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker, I
mean we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
It is so ordered.
clerk to read. Mr. Speaker, your
appropriations and finance
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 70 has had
it under consideration report
seen with recommendation that it
do not pass, but that house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for House
Bill 70 do pass. respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
Hold your wild horses,
gentlemen.
We are adoption of an
unfavorable community report for
Al Bill 70, but a favorable
committee report for house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 70, all those in favor
signified by saying I.
I was supposed.
Yes, I have a committee report
is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 448 has
had it under consideration,
report same as recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are adoption of a favorable
committee report for Housing
448. All those in favor signify
by saying I.
Although suppose me,
the report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 453.
Has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption. We are in adoption of
a favorable report for House
Bill 453.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
All the supposed nay, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Bill 458 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
Right.
Saturday
We're on adoption of a federal
committee report for Alville 458
as amended. All those in
favorenabaa.
of the supposed name.
Yeah, report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 519 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favor
committee report for House 519.
All those in favor say I.
Of Bosna,
the I have report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee team has
been referred House Bill 553 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable report for House Bill
553. All those in favor signify
by saying and I.
All the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources committed to whom has
been referred Senate Bill 48 as
amended, has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and thence referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Matthew McQueen,
chair.
We're adoption of a report for
Senate Bill 48 as amended. All
those in favor by C and I.
All the supposed's name, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee, to whom has
been referred Senate Bill 142 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 142 as amended. All
those in favor signified by
saying aye.
I suppose.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I mean we go to that
order of business messages.
Like, are, are you sure?
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
learn to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed. Senate Judiciary
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 18. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 180 as amended and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson and chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 20.
Senate Bill 274 as amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 507
and request the concurrence of
the house, respectfully
submitted Sherry de Luan, Senate
chief clerk.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is ordered.
Any other announcements?
All right, folks, we're gonna
take up some 3rd reading, um,
everybody should have the bill
list.
Um, we will also a little bit
later, but not too much later.
Have dinner, um, brought in for
the entire chamber and our
amazing staff, uh, it'll be set
up in the lounge, um, but we
don't want it to get cold, so
it'll come in a little earlier.
Early dinner.
Just in case, gentlemen from
Lincoln and Otero.
kids are wondering, it'll be an
early dinner.
gentle lady from?
Santa Fe
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. It is
ordered.
General la from Ber Leo of Ho
maybe Hill. Are you ready on
item 19. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Will you take me to that point
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill 13 as amended
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New
Mexico's been a leader in
addressing the climate crisis
head on by passing hallmark
legislation like the Energy
Transition Act. Community solar,
the Healthy Soils Act, and
others.
We've been working hard to
expand our transition to clean
energy by supporting the
buildout of our statewide
electric vehicle charging grid,
incentivizing energy efficiency
measures and supporting the
buildout of multi-state wind
energy farms.
But at the same time, Mr.
Speaker, New Mexico has proven
that we are very good at walking
and chewing gum at the same
time.
That's the beauty of House Bill
13. We've been calling it Power
Up New Mexico.
Because I believe, Mr. Speaker
that the key to reaching net
zero will also bolstering and
supporting economic development
throughout New Mexico is through
infrastructure development,
Power Up New Mexico does just
that.
This bill came to me through the
Berlio Economic Development
Office in relation to the trade
port issue, a bill that we just
passed a couple a few days ago
because just as high speed EV
chargers and high efficiency
heat pumps require access to
energy, so do site site-ready
commercial development.
Uh, so the site right commercial
development, transportation
infrastructure development and
traditional energy development
in the southern part of the
state.
So, to put it simply, Mr.
Speaker, one of these laudable
goal, so all of these, none of
these laudable goals, emissions
reductions, economic development
and energy production can
actually happen without access
to a robust, modern and
resilient energy grid, and that
is precisely what power up New
Mexico is designed to do.
So what does power out in New
Mexico actually do? I'm gonna
break it down. First, it
requires utilities to submit
right size distribution system
plans over a five year, over a
10 year trajectory to the PRC
employing a streamlined
regulatory approval process with
truncated deadlines that allows
utilities to not only plan for
today but also for tomorrow. It
allows them to preorder critical
infrastructure such as
transformers, which while
bolstering workforce initiatives
to create long-term, high
salaried in demand employees.
On expanding and maintaining
this modernized grid. It also
incentivizes build out of the
modernized grid by the public by
our public utilities by allowing
for cost recovery measures
governed under the PRC to ensure
consumer protection.
Um, the distribution system plan
also requires utilities to
report not only where we do have
broad energy transmission, but
where we don't have it and we
utilities are contemplating
great expansion to better allow
for economic development
planning throughout the state.
Lastly, power up requires
utilities to file to file
beneficial electrification
plans, which tell us the how and
the why our public utilities are
planning to meet emissions
reductions goals is already set
forth by all of the um previous
laws that we have passed.
Such as the ETA and the US
climate accords.
So why does this matter? It
matters because the future of
this state is dependent upon the
creation of a, of a process and
an environment that empowers our
utilities to act to build out
and modernize our grid now for
the betterment of our economy,
for the betterment of our
children and for the betterment
of our state. And with that, I
will stand for questions.
Donana Sierras Coro
representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend from all of
those counties, just a couple
actually. Thank you, thank you.
Um, well, I, I had not seen this
bill prior to this morning and
so I was, I haven't even read
the whole thing yet, but I do
have quite a few questions from,
from where I've gotten so far.
Um,
The
Whenever you talk about
beneficial electrification. What
is, what does that mean? What,
what is beneficial
electrification?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, lady
from Sierra.
County? Is it just here, uh, so
beneficial electrification
essentially is a process that
our utilities are going through
now in which we are
transitioning from fuels that
create higher emissions over to
um other sources of energy that
either have lesser emissions or
no emissions at all. So that's
the beneficial electrification
that is also ensuring that we
use our, uh, we use energy
sources in a way that's more
efficient as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you gentle lady. And when
you talk about beneficial
electrification, are you talking
about at the end user, are you
talking about in the
transmission process.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this bill is specific to, um,
the, the process that gets
Energy to our homes or to our
businesses or to um it's kind of
the end user, the in space, so
beneficial, but beneficial
electrification is um relevant
to the entire process. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, but in this
case, it's the consumer. It's
the, the utility payer.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it's
anybody who uses energy supplied
by our public utilities. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. And do these
electric utility companies, do
they have beneficial
electrification plans today.
Mr. Speaker Ginlani, they do
not. They do not. OK. Um, and
why do they need, why do they
need the plan specifically?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm so
glad you asked me that question.
So, um, as you know, you've been
a member of this, this body, um,
for many years on and off and so
the state has already passed
laws that create emissions like
the Energy Transition Act, which
is now a law that has created
emissions standards over the
next few years. And so while we
know where we need to be in
terms of hitting those emissions
goals, what these plans do is
require our public
needs to tell us how they're
going to get there.
So it's not passing any new
standard. It's not lowering the
mission's goals. It's not
requiring anything with regards
to those goals, it's simply how
are we going to get there?
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Um, and, and the public
regulation commission will be
responsible for reading the
plans, approving the plans, what
will they do? Mr. Speakergen
lady, all the above. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how often?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, for the beneficial
electrification plans, um, the
utilities will have to, if we
pass this bill, have to file
them by January 30th of 2026,
um, and this will be to hit
targets for as soon as 2032.
It'll be every 6 years from
there and um the PRC must act
within those plans or make or
make a decision on those plans
within 180 days of receiving
them as written in this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, General.
Are you aware if the public
regulation commission asked for
additional funding this year,
uh, to, to maintain their
operations to implement the
things that we've already
required them to do, Mr. Speaker
Ginellini, uh, the PRC has asked
for additional funding in which
they have received. I have a
great little note here, um, they
have received in addition to
what they had before, an
additional $200,000 in personnel
to help them with um these
additional requests and costs
and an additional
LFC increase, increase of 850.
00 $0. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, gentle ladies. So
PRC needs, I don't know if
that's 1 or 2 positions. And
then LFC needs 3 to 45 positions
for this effort.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe, I believe so.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Um, when I,
the first thing that stood out
to me when I was reading the,
the bill is how often the word
tariff writers and cost recovery
occurs. What, what is a tariff?
In this context, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so, um, the way it
works under the public Utilities
Act, um, with regards to like
when utilities want to build out
infrastructure, um, they can
apply it to the PRC for, they
can do that in one of two ways.
One is what's called a tariff
writer, which is um something
it's like an additional cost
that appears with your bill or
they can apply for what's called
the base rate increase and which
that, what that means is your
rate just goes up. So as part of
the request that goes to the
PRC, the PRC
has to evaluate the request and
the reasons for that request,
and then they are in charge of
um either apply approving the
request or denying it.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
how about a cost recovery?
Mr. Speaker Delani, that is cost
recovery. That's how the
utilities would would complete
cost recovery to turf riders or
base rate increase. OK, thank
you. You explained both. OK, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that the tariff could be like a
surcharge on a utility bill for
the, for the New Mexican
citizens, and then the cost
recovery would be a rate
increases to the utility payers,
the citizens of New Mexico,
residents of New Mexico, that
PRC would approve, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they are both cost
recovery, so it can either be
achieved through a
tariff or through a base rate
increase.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you gentle lady. Um, on,
on page two, in this is under
new material, just the plan, the
grid planning distribution
system. Um,
It's very difficult for me and
you're a lawyer, I'm not to
understand what it means when
you say, in accordance with
furnishing adequate.
Efficient and reasonable
service, are, are these legal
definitions.
Mr. Speaker Jim Ley, um, I have
spent more time learning about
public utility law around this
bill that I care to admit, but
um, my understanding is under
the public utilities Act under
which is all of these utilities
are under that purview, um, that
is language within that act and
those um are the
responsibilities as per that act
that each utility has under the
law.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle ladies. So, your,
your modeling in the grid plan
distribution systems plan,
you're, you're just bringing
over the utility Act language,
so it's defined there. Does it
need to be defined in this bill?
Mr. Speaker, Jim Ley, um, yes,
we are bringing it over from
there and it does need to be
defined because um the one of
the reasons why we're bringing
power up is, um,
Because we are asking these
asking this of our public
utilities, it is pertinent to
remind them of what their legal
obligations are in the first
place under the Public Utilities
Act 2, their customers to their
ratepayers and um that they are
responsible for furnishing all
of these things and throughout,
uh, what is proposed in this
bill is designed to actually do
a better job of doing that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, so
adequate, I would assume that
that means that there's 24/7
demand. I, I, I don't, I don't
know the definition of adequate,
and it's not here in this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't either, um, since it's not
within the purview or the four
corners of this bill. So I'm
sorry, I don't know the
definition definition either.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
just generally see, this is a
technical issue and we have new
language that we have
definitions as well. Um, so I
guess I, I don't know what, I
don't know what adequate means.
I'm assuming it's on demand
because we, we are so accustomed
to flipping a light switch and
our lights come on, that's not
the case, even in all areas in
the United States, it's
certainly not the case around
the world, um, but then
efficient.
I, I, I don't, I, it almost
feels like efficient would be
affordable.
efficient doesn't mean
affordable.
Mr. Speaker Jalani, that's the
beauty of this bill is that
efficient can mean affordable.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
could, um, and then reasonable
service. Um, OK, what, what did,
what did
So in the public utility shall.
OK, so it's in accordance with
furnishing adequate, efficient,
and reasonable service, the
electric public utility shall.
Um, when we talk about system
hosting, this is just in section
one. Are you talking about
electric storage or what is
systems hosting because we're,
we're not talking about, uh, a
gas company buying low storing
and then selling, you know,
whenever they have the
opportunity so that they can,
can make sure that they're in
their
they're um right
uh, what they're able to charge
folks in this, what's, what
system hosting when you're
talking about zero emissions and
only electric.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so,
um, when we're talking about
system hosting, that's how we
would get, let's say, uh, solar
system connected through the
grid or battery, um, to get that
energy into the grid so it could
be distributed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. And how many
acres of solar panels are we
estimating that New Mexico will
need to replace natural gas.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't think that's germane to
this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think it is. It's, it's right
here. It says that they shall
just, they shall have a
distribution system hosting
requirement.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I.
I have no idea and I, I don't
think, um,
I I don't think that this bill
is about replacing any source
with another source, and I have
no idea how much of one source
it would take to replace another
source, um, that, that is not
what this bill is about, um, I,
I wouldn't be able to furnish
you with that information
because that's just not part of
this bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
this bill is not about
transitioning to zero emission
utilities.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
bill is about grid modernization
and about um energy efficiency.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, estimates that I've
heard, um, from, for the Western
states. I, I don't, I don't know
what specifically is for New
Mexico, but to cover, I, I have
read a report from um from
High skies or highland skies.
Anyways, they talk.
Hundreds of sections of land of
New Mexico would have to be
covered in um electrical panels,
uh, solar panels in order to
replace, um, gas. Um, but if you
don't think that's part of your
bill or you didn't consider the
amount of our pressine BLM state
land, federal land that would
have to be covered with solar
panels, I guess I can't ask you
about those questions, but it's
literally hundreds of sections
of our land that would have to
be covered in solar panels in
order to um modernize a grid to
be zero.
emissions, but I'll keep going.
Um, in
Section 2, it talks about to
have time to allow for
achievement of federal, state,
regional, and local air quality
and decarbonization standards,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what is decarbonization
standards?
Mr. Speaker Jelani, so, uh, we
just mentioned the energy
Transition Act a little while
ago, so that is a great example
of what one of those standards
would be.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, how
about, let's stick to the bill.
What is grid modernization
standards.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I mean, great modernization can
mean a lot of things. I mean, as
it relates to this bill in the
state of New Mexico, grid
modernization means expanding
the grid so that those every
resident in New Mexico who wants
access to electricity and
efficient electricity has access
to it. And so grid modernization
means grid expansion. It could
mean different um utilization of
different types of energy
through this
expanded grill grid. I also want
to remind you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that this bill is
about, you know, distribution,
not about the source of energy.
So, you know, it doesn't matter
what the source of energy is,
grid modernization is about
being able to get that in that
source of energy to where we
want it to go.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, there
are some small spaces in New
Mexico that don't have that, but
who, who in your district
doesn't have. Everyone who wants
access to electric energy, who
doesn't have electric, who
doesn't have that.
Mr. Speaker Jim Lady, um, I come
from Albuquerque, right? So
we're a Class A county and we
are very lucky to have access to
electricity, um, although some
people I'm sure in the village
of Los Ranchos where I live,
probably have to deal with great
modernization issues, um, I, I
think it's an issue that is
especially relevant to probably
your constituents and, and those
people in rural parts of the
state who do not have adequate
access to the grid.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
you're saying this is about grid
modernization.
I, I, I see a little bit
different about what this bill
does. I see decarbonization
standards, plans and
regulations, including vehicle
emission standards. That doesn't
sound to me like it's about
having reliable, affordable,
accessible energy.
Mr. Speaker Generallini, so, um,
I think I'm gonna take this
opportunity to kind of talk
about the different sections of
the bill because I think this is
where you're, this is where
we're miscommunicating. So the
first section is about
distribution system planning,
and, um, that is exactly how
we're asking utilities where
they plan to distribute, how
they distribute, where they want
to augment that distribution,
then we have um 2 session with
section which is definitions
surrounding the third section,
which is beneficial
electrification.
electrification is really when
all of the issues of
decarbonization, emissions
goals, carbon reduction, that's
where all that stuff comes into
play. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, are, are a rural electric
co ops exempt from this bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
are. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, wouldn't those rural areas
be the areas that were lacking.
I don't even know what you're
saying that we're lacking. I
mean, I know some areas lack,
but what, what user of PNM Xcel
Energy and El Paso Elec.
are short on, they are the
customers, they're already
signed up. What are they short
on electric?
Mr. Speaker, Jelani, so, um,
when I first, when this bill
concept came to me a little more
than a year ago, um, it was
through Bernalillo County
Economic Development with
regards to the trade ports
because we are planning to have
a lot of um fast EV charging
there, especially for, uh, if we
ever get to the point of
utilizing electric semi trucks.
They do not have sufficient
energy or sufficient grid to um
accommodate those chargers, um,
I
Xcel Energy is actually a
supporter of this bill, and one
of the reasons why they are a
supporters in the Permian Basin,
where a lot of New Mexico's, uh,
oil and gas energy is
manufactured, they don't have
adequate access to electricity,
and so that is another reason
why they are asking for grid
modernization as well because
they are hauling out diesel, um,
diesel powered generators to get
the electricity they need to be
able to get everything done that
they do down in the southern
part of the.
State. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. The
question was, so you're saying
that, that Xcel doesn't have
enough energy to supply their
customers with the energy they
need. I, I think I just have to
disagree with that. But, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
when you are, is this going to
raise rates for the consumer.
Residential consumers.
Mr. Speakergen Lei, uh, the only
way this will raise rates is if
it is approved through the PRC
in their process in which they
approve the raising of rates,
but that is one that is one.
part of this bill in which we
are allowing the utilities to
seek cost recovery to
incentivize grid modernization
and augmentation. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, if hundreds
of millions of dollars are going
to be spent on new equipment for
grid modernization and
beneficial electrification, how,
how can the cost not get passed
on to consumers? Are you
suggesting that PRC should deny
the they should deny the, the
tariffs and the, the cost
adjustments? No, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies, so this
process
just occurs um over 30, 40
years, uh, expansions and, um,
another, another thing that
needs to be mentioned is the
concept of um
Economies of scale. So if you
augment and modernize a grid,
you get more people connected to
that grid. You have more people
paying for energy in that grid.
The cost of that electricity
coming through that grid will
come down.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you tell me the last time that a
rate went down for consumers in
New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I do
not have access to that
information. Let me ask my
expert, see if he does.
Mr. Speaker, Generalliti, uh, I
think PNM's rates actually went
down last year in their most
recent rape case. Um, oh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlelani, you're
right, they lost a rape case.
Um, was that ras case before
PRC?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So, um, I, I
I just have so many questions
and, and folks are coming over
to me that understand a lot more
about it. Um, what, what I, the,
the bottom line of what I read
in this is that you're, the, the
goal of this is for the end
consumer to switch from a gas
furnace, a gas oven or a gas
heater.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, only
if they want to, it is a
completely voluntary program and
process, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, we know what happens with
voluntary programs in this body,
they come back the next year and
the word voluntary struck. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how is
it voluntary if the utility
company is forced to switch to
that because we choose the forms
of gas we choose the forms of
energy that are able to be
generated and used by our major
utility companies. So if they're
not allowed to use gas because
it's zero emission, and unlike
The state that some people think
is more radical than us. I don't
think it is, but California even
uses natural gas. Are we
considering natural gas in our
energy transition Act as a clean
fuel.
Mr. Speaker Ginellii, um, there
are absolutely some applications
in which natural gas is probably
the uh the best option in terms
of energy, energy production. So
this bill in no way sets out to
eliminate natural gas. This bill
in no way is forcing our
utilities to change from natural
gas. All this bill does is
giving utilities the choice and
asking, asking them to share
with us their plans as to how
they're going to get these
sources of energy into this.
to be distributed. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, why, if
there's no increase to the cost
of utilities for the end user,
for the, the consumers in New
Mexico, the citizens of New
Mexico. Why do you see the need
to include um programs that
subsidize low-income housing by
20% of the total beneficial
electric electrification program
funding, why do we need to do
that if the cost isn't going to
go up.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
sure you know there are many New
Mexicans that are struggling
just to make ends meet today for
a number of reasons, the economy
has been tough. Inflation keeps
rising and so low income
citizens deserve access to
energy just as much as the rest
of us do, and they need to be
considered in all of our
utilities plans, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but the utility
rate changes for low-income
people are in a different bill.
I'm suggesting and I hope that
you would be frank about this,
that you're talking
about helping them convert from
gas ovens, gas furnaces, and gas
heaters to electric.
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
If they want to, absolutely, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, is that
what this is the offer? Is this
that's offering people, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lani, um, yes,
this will be, that will be
offered to people, and it's a
voluntary program and they can
choose to take part of it if
they want to. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, our dollars are
generated from tax dollars.
What's the average cost of
converting just to residential.
I don't go small, commercial or
large commercial or ag or
industrial or business, but just
for residential, what's the
average cost to convert from gas
to electric that
taxpayers will be subsidized for
low income families.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I,
uh, taxpayers will not be
subsidizing this at all. I mean,
again, that's, that's why we're
here. That's why we have these,
these, um,
Cost recovery processes baked
into this bill, the taxpayers
will not be paying for any of
this. It will be the ratepayers.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
the, the ratepayers, the
citizens of New Mexico, they
won't pay it through a tax.
They'll, it won't be going
through a tax credit. It will
come through an increase in
their utility rate.
Mr. Speaker, Jelani, if allowed
so through the PRC process.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but that's the purpose of
the bill. And so it would
definitely be allowed because
that's what the bill is asking
to be allowed and what we're
asking it to do. So what is the
cost of converting an existing
residential home from a gas
oven, gas furnace, gas heater.
What does it cost in a
residential home?
Mr. Speaker Generallini, so
again I'll remind you this is a
voluntary program. This is only
for people that would choose
they want to convert their gas
oven to an electric oven, and
this is a rebate program, so,
um, if they make that choice
that they want to give up their
gas oven, they would be subject
to a rebate that would help them
with the cost of whatever it is
whatever electric appliance it
is that they select to use. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
happen to know what the cost is
for the gas ones, um, because
I'd just recently done this. I,
I think the cost at a minimum
for a furnace, an oven, and a
heater would be around $14,000.
I don't know how you're saying
that it won't come from
consumers. It won't come from a
rate increase, it won't come
from taxpayers. It has to come
from somewhere. These aren't
free. Someone's voluntarily
choosing to do it, they're going
to get a rebate. Someone else
pays for that rebate. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, who pays
for the rebate?
Mr. Speaker, gentlelai, these
will be rebate programs offered
through the public utilities.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
how will the utility company
cover the cost of these rebates.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
mean, utilities are very
complicated businesses, um, you
know, they every day have to
Keep into consideration what the
cost is to connect any household
and they are always trying to,
they are trying to maintain
efficiency measures as well
because efficiency for them also
means cost savings and so if,
uh, a certain type of energy was
more efficient and would through
this grid program cost less for
them to provide, it's going,
that is gonna be the type of
energy that they would prefer
people to select, but again,
you're not forcing anybody to
do.
Anything, it is a voluntary
program and so for those cases
in which there are savings
through efficiency, that would,
that's how those rebates would
be given to the consumer, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if a
low income person voluntarily
chooses to participate in the
rape program, the rate user or
the taxpayer and rate users are
taxpayers, we'll cover the cost.
There's that's the direct
answer. I think that's part of
the problem that I have with
this bill, it's so confusing.
It's so hard to read.
The word may is there, the way
shall is there. It sounds
voluntary, but it's actually X
Shao and other sections, but
when you put it all together,
it's mandatory. The cost of the
rebates are recovered in the
rates. I, I have one more
question because I, folks who
know better than me are on the
board, but can you tell me what
is social cost of carbon, uh,
what is that? the social cost of
carbon, the I'm on page 14, top
of the page, global social cost
of carbon. What does that mean?
Mr. Speaker gentle lady, so, um,
we know that carbon emissions
are uh contributing to climate
change. We know that as a result
of climate change, we've seen
increased rates in lung cancer.
We've seen increased rates and
disasters such as hurricanes and
fires throughout this country
and the world and so social cost
is computed through.
That mechanism
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so is it saying in, in, in this,
I'll just read this section for
the body, carbon dioxide
emissions from the most recent
assessment of global social cost
of methane and carbon dioxide by
the federal government.
And, and I did not know about
this. I, I, I asked some
questions. Those were subsidized
because in your bill, you
actually say, provided the cost
shall not be less than those
adopted as of December 31st,
2024. That's Biden
administration and using a
discounted rate from the
assessment of the global social
cost of 2.5% of or less. So
we're obligating this body to a
standard that was set by the
Biden administration. Do I
understand that?
directly, Mr. Speaker, Jelani.
Mr. Speaker, generally, you're
gonna have to give me a second
to catch up with you here of
page 13.
And OK, and you're starting from
lines, let's see here, 10. All
right, so 9, using the cost of
methane and carbon dioxide
emissions.
It will cost, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady Section 6. I'm
looking at the amended and
context, I don't have lines. I'm
sorry about that.
OK, and repeat your question
please, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
The section 6 says, I'm starting
a carbon dioxide emissions.
We're going to include the
projected reductions in
greenhouse emissions and avoided
costs of gas, greenhouse
emissions. So we're gonna, when
we're considering if it's
justified rate increase. This is
how I'm reading it.
We're saying we're gonna look at
the social.
Benefits of increasing rates on
the consumer and we're going to
use the cost of methane and
carbon dioxide emissions from a
most recent assessment of global
social cost of methane and
carbon dioxide by the federal
government, but we're not really
going to use the most recent.
We're gonna provided that that
cost shall not be less than
those adopted on December 31st
of 2024. That is the Biden
administrations global social
costs of methane and carbon
dioxide.
Can't be less than that. It has
to be at Biden's rate as of
December 31st, 2024. I'm
wondering what that rate is.
Mr. Speaker Jelai, so when we're
talking about the social cost,
um, of carbon emissions, that's
exactly how we are defining the
benefits and beneficial
electrification. So when you
electrify, you get an added
benefit in that you get to
carbon emissions reductions,
which are going to lead to
reductions in the social cost
that is related to carbon
emissions. Now, Mr. Speaker
Gianini, I think that.
You and I are gonna agree that
we have just a philosophical and
political disagreement as, as to
whether or not, you know, there
are social costs associated with
carbon emissions. I don't know
what your exact thoughts are on
that, but that is how we are
defining the benefits and
beneficial electrification, and
that is exactly how we get that
standard. That's what we are
asking our utilities to look at
when they are filing these
beneficial.
electrification plans with the
PRC. This is how they're going
to get their data as to how
they're reducing their emissions
and how the beneficial
electrification is occurring to
get to those emission standards.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
why December 1st, 31st, 2024.
So Mr. Speaker, Jim lady, um,
December 31st, 2024 was kind of
the last date in which we had
this data coming in from the
federal government. We started
working on this piece of
legislation like 10, 10.5 months
ago, um, and so this was, you
know, the, the last state that
we assumed that we were that
access to this information from
the federal government would be
most recent. So that's where,
you know, it's gonna be reported
yearly and so 2024 is.
We're in 2025 now, but just
barely and so that's where you
get that date. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle
ladies. So if new studies come
up, come out and new
efficiencies are determined and
the social, the, the global cost
of methane and carbon dioxide is
lowered, we will not accept a
lower cost, only the highest
cost, and I'm being told that
that, that, um, in 16, during
Trump's first administration, it
was $8 a ton and that's at the
state of, um, and 2023, Biden
had it at $104 a ton. And so,
um, that seems to gone up, we
could maybe predict that it
would go down, um, are you
concerned at all that, um, any
of this costs that would have
been subsidized prior to
December 31st, 2024 won't be
subsidized and how are we going
to make up for that as a state.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Jim lady, so,
um, yes, I am concerned. Uh, we
have a new federal
administration and we're in a
new year, but um this section
also accounts for um state
standards as well, and we have
established state standards
through our um environmental
department, and so, um,
depending on what standards are
available to us, they will
either go up or go down, but we
will at least have a, a
measuring stick, and that's
what's established in section 6.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
I am, I think I've asked enough
questions to know where I stand
on this bill. Um, I didn't even
get through the whole bill by
the time I got to page 14, um,
it was pretty, uh, uh,
Pretty obvious that this is to
phase out other fuel options,
um, gosh, I mean, it, it removes
justification for the PRC to
override any rape cases. I mean,
the plans have to be done every
3 years. I, I cannot imagine
that this will do anything but
increase costs for the
hardworking families of New
Mexico. There's, it is.
The word the tariff writer cost
recovery is all throughout this
document. Um,
It's very convoluted to read. It
doesn't read well. And for
someone like me, I, I mean, all
I see is increased costs, and I,
when I pair it with the other
costs that we're imposing on the
citizens of New Mexico, the
businesses of New Mexico, the
agriculture community of New
Mexico. I, I, it, it's shocking
to me that we would continue to
bring bills forward like this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Representative Ortiz. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, the gentle lady,
uh, from Bern Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from beautiful Taos
County. Uh, thank you so much.
We were, we had like 6 inches of
snow last night, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, which is great for
our wildfire season. Let's get
more, let's get more of that.
Um, I wanna go back to sort of
The purpose of this, um.
Why, why did you bring this
bill? You know how.
Who brought it to you again,
just remind the body, you know
how we got this bill to where it
is today.
Mr. Speaker Jalini, so, um, way
back when, when I was the um
When I was the chair of the
House Transportation Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee, um, I started doing a
lot of work with electric
vehicles and the electric
vehicle charging infrastructure.
We had a lot of federal dollars
coming down for that specific
purpose, and so I started
learning a lot about EV charging
and uh we were talking about
carbon emissions reductions
through implementation of
electric vehicles, and then I
got into energy efficiency and
then um when
we were talking about the trade
port, the trade port folks at
Bernalillo County Economic
Development came to me and they
said, hey, we have a problem
here, which is the same problem
I was hearing with uh through
DOT and implementation of the EV
charging infrastructure grid,
which is we don't have a robust
grid on modernized grid that is
capable of supporting things
such as level 23 DC fast char.
on a, on an EV charging grid.
Uh, we do not have the ability
to connect a trade port if we're
gonna, um, we're going to spur
economic activity through trade
ports, we do not have the
electricity and uh a robust
enough grid available to allow
for any of this economic
development to occur, and too,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I also
want to bring up the point that
we have this same issue with
site readiness. So we're trying
to attract business
is to the state of New Mexico,
one of the things that we need
to do that is we need to have
buildings and sites that are
complete and ready for these
businesses to move in. Well,
that can't occur if our grid is
not in a place where it can
support that. And so that is how
Power Up New Mexico came to be.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, and, and who's
involved in that?
Wow, Mr. Speaker, Jim lady, um,
we started with something like
over 60 stakeholders. I could
read them out to you, but I
think the speaker would get
annoyed with me, but, um, gosh,
we've got everybody he's nodding
his head.
So many gentle lady over 60.
Don't make me gavel you down,
gentle lady from towns.
OK, so lots of people
representing, uh, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, um, representing,
uh.
Only nonprofits or?
Mr. Speaker, generally we've got
nonprofits, we've got
environmental uh organizations
we've got car manufacturers
we've got, um, public utilities.
We've got, um,
We've got unions, we've got um
the American Lung Association.
We've got CalStart Clean Air
Task Force band sweep, Volvo,
WRA NRDC we, we've got a lot of
people. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
ladies. So, uh, wide variety of
stakeholders involved in
developing this bill, um,
working with you, uh, to develop
this bill so that we can.
Modernize our grid so that we
can
Provide more efficient
electricity and more reliable
electricity to.
All of you know, New Mexicans
who are served by investor own
utilities.
Mr. Speaker, Generaliti,
precisely.
OK
So, Mr. Speaker, generally, I,
I, I was, um, confused too when
I read this bill but I because I
didn't really understand
anything about the distribution
system planning because I
have been working a lot on the
transmission side, um, and can
you explain to me, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that the difference
between that, um, distribution,
transmission and what.
Utilities do right now with the
PRC with regard to distribution
planning.
Distribution system planning.
Thank you Mr. Speaker
Generallini. So, uh, let's say
your bill, HB 93 dealt with
transmission, right, which is
high voltage, the wires that go
above your house, right? And um
that's how we move electricity
from long distances from power
plants, or substations.
Power of Mexico, HB 13 deals
with the distribution system. So
low voltage, the low voltage
system that delivers electricity
to local homes and businesses,
so the end point, um, and I hope
that answers your question and
makes that clear, and the
distribution system planning is
what utilities do, they're
already doing this too, by the
way, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
It's that they've never actually
been asked to share what these
plans are and there's never
really been
any uh transparency, and so this
bill would require that the DSPs
be filed with the PRC and
available for
Public view and so we can know
exactly, you know, what the
utilities, what want to do, how
they're planning to do it.
And now that's one of the
another good thing that this
bill does. uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
that's actually that that's
something I did not understand
and I'm, I'm glad that you
explained that. So the utilities
right now, they do this
planning, but it's basically
behind closed doors.
Mr. Speaker, generally,
precisely.
Great, um, thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, what's happening right
now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
with, um,
With grid planning proceedings
and things like that are, are,
are those proceedings underway?
Are utilities doing this on a
regular basis.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
they are, um, especially with
DSPs, they all go to the PRC for
review, um, and, uh, the PRC is
also initiated a grid
modernization rulemaking process
themselves because they too, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, see the
necessity for this, um, and so
what our bill also does is it
kind of, it, it will become a
statutory mandate.
in a, in a way, if you will, for
the PRC's grid mod rule to kind
of give them some statutory
legitimacy. It'll help um
inoculate them against appeals
of the rulemaking and um again
it just makes those plans
available and transparent to the
public.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. Um, that's very
helpful for, for me to
understand, um.
I want to talk a little bit
about the, the rate making we've
talked in this body.
Couple times in the last couple
weeks about ratemaking and the
process and how it can affect
low and middle income
ratepayers, um.
Is it possible, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that with this bill
and you know support for
utilities to
Uh, to bring more efficient
appliances and things like that
that ratepayers might actually
end up paying less, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, absolutely, yes,
that is the point of energy
efficiency Act, which um part of
this bill modifies, right? So
with energy efficiency, the more
efficient you are, the less
energy you use, the less energy
you you use, the less you're
going to pay.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
thank you for that, um, I think
that's important for the body to
understand that, you know, we.
I think as as a body, we don't
want to increase prices for, um,
for New Mexicans. I know I I
certainly don't, I don't think
any of us in this in this room
do, um, so the fact that we can,
um, incentivize the utilities to
provide more efficient.
Um
Refrigerators or heat pumps or
things like that, that's
something that this bill.
We can allow them to do.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
bill creates a framework to do
just that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank
you, gentle lady. And how, um,
does it work with um existing
programs that we have in the
state, um, to provide, uh,
energy efficiency to for low
income folks like
Community energy efficiency
Development Act, which we passed
a couple years ago or the
sustainable buildings tax
credit. Is there any
interrelation between the things
that this sort of the incentive
programs we have and um various
agencies with what the utilities
might be offering.
Mr. Speaker Delani, so this is
just one more tool in that
toolbox. Um, so with we
implement these standards, then
we can continue to see our
utilities offer those programs,
offer those rebates, there's
gonna be grant programs
potentially through another
piece of legislation, um, so
again, this is just another tool
in the toolbox to allow our
utilities to bring, to bring
energy efficiency, grid
modernization and augmentation
and energy prices.
down with access to the grid.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle ladies. So if a if a
homeowner um who happens to be
low income, um, or who has, you
know, who's potentially
benefited from the sustainable
buildings tax credit or um or
seed if they.
Get those appliances through
another means the utility is not
going to charge, potentially
charge ratepayers more money,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
Not at all.
Uh, OK, thank you for that, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
um, I wanna talk a little bit,
sort of move away from that and
talk a little bit about, uh,
the, the planning processes that
exist at the PRC for these uh
these utilities, um, so
utilities have to file, I think,
reports on their integrated
resource planning every 3 years,
but they do that planning sort
of, they forecast that really
far out. So would Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, would the
the, the electro um the
me what those are called again.
Electric beneficial beneficial
electric plants, um,
electrification plans, would
those be filed with the IRPs.
Uh, Mr. Speaker Gellini, it'd be
the energy efficiency plans, and
those would be filed. Great. OK.
So no relation to what the IRPs
are, are all about. Mr. Speaker,
and lady now. OK, uh, thank you.
Gentle lady, I think I have
exhausted myself with these
questions. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. There is further
debate, gentlemen from San Juan.
Representative Duncan.
He was out there looking up
jokes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was
trying to find a good one.
Mm
Mr. Speaker, will the gentle
lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, let me ask you a
couple of questions about this.
Is the purpose of this bill to
uh to modernization, uh, to
utilize that modernization to
bring the price of utilities
down.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
ultimately, yes, again, going
back to that uh that concept of
economies of scale, so the point
of the bill is to grow the grid,
expand the grid, get more people
connected to the grid, the more
people connected to the grid,
the price, the lower the prices
are going to be because of
economies of scale.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
You mentioned ETA a while ago
and whenever we, whenever I hear
that my ears, you know, prick up
and, and, uh, so I'm gonna, I'm
gonna talk about um ETA just a
little bit if I could.
ETA was supposed to um get us to
an area where we could
transition and, and utilities
would be cheaper for us,
electricity would be cheaper for
folks in my neck of the woods in
my district.
And so as the mayor, let me tell
you what happened when ETA came
in and I think everybody in this
body knows that I lost the power
plant. I lost the mine, and I
can't tell you how many families
came to me as a mayor and as a
friend and said, what do we do?
And they left the state of New
Mexico because of what ETA did
to them.
Now
Um,
We had 700% increase in
homelessness in our school and
we still have a big problem with
that.
All because of ETA and what it
brought to our my district. So
when we talk about the deduction
in price, and we say, we circle
it around ETA.
I think we need to be very, very
honest with the people in the
state of New Mexico, um.
Modernization
Might be a wonderful, wonderful
thing.
But what is the cost?
Um, the cost for my community
was and still is tremendous. It
is a huge cost and we're still
fighting um the cost on that,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The ETA has driven up costs in
my district and I can't help but
wonder, um, how my, how high my
electricity will eventually go
as a result of this, so then
that leads me to this bill and I
wonder uh what the cost is going
to be as we modernize so, so,
um.
He explained to me in, if you
would, uh, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if you
would, um, you said that as more
and more people connect to this.
Is that what you said, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I
said as more people connect to
this.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, how many more people do you
think will connect to this?
Mr. Speaker, Jim lady, um, I
think that the, the bigger the
grid gets on a more modern, it
becomes the more efficiency
electric electricity gets, I
think the more people will
connect and I, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do want to take a
moment and and recognize, you
know, your concern and recognize
um the effect of ETA. I want to
remind the body, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this bill has
absolutely nothing.
something to do with the ETA,
the ETA was um about, you know,
energy generation. This is about
distribution, um, it has nothing
to do with where our energy is
coming from, how we get our
energy, it's just about how
we're distributing it, um, not,
but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
not want to, um, by any means
play down the effects that the
ETA has had on your district,
and I'm sorry for that, but, um,
again, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
And this, that is not this bill
at all.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and, and I
appreciate that, but that was
the same sentiment though that
we're getting with this right
here with, with modernization
bills are are my bill should be
going down and so my question if
we're going to uh hook more
people up. Where are we going to
find those people, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I'll
use a permian basin as a great
example. Um, there are folks
working really hard down there
who need better access to
electricity, um, there are folks
in the northwestern part of the
state that need better access to
electricity. I know there are
many members of this body that
represent uh rural areas of the
state that need better or more
sufficient energy. Um, I know
that there are people in my
little tiny village in the
middle of Albuquerque who
need better electricity and
better wiring systems to their
houses and so, you know, again,
it's all part of the ecosystem.
It's all part of the grid.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So I understand
that part. I, I get that. Um,
T&M or Texas, uh, utility or El
Paso, um, electric or anybody
else that puts this stuff in,
there is a cost of putting this
in. Now, as we, as, uh, and I'll
use my neck of the woods for
example. I'll use mine and, and,
uh, another representative from
that part of the world. So if I
take and I'm on a um I'd come
off of a, uh, a road that's a
paved road, and I, I go back 2
miles on a dirt road.
where there is nothing, who
bears the cost and the brunt of
that cost for that line to be
run to that home?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if it's
under the purview of any of a
utility under the public
utilities Act, the utility does.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So if we're gonna
go and we're gonna say we're
going to modernize all of our
grid.
You say it's voluntary, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
voluntary part falls under the
beneficial electrification
section of the bill, which is,
you know, switching over for
energy efficiency standards, um,
but in terms of distribution
system planning, um, that part
is not voluntary. That is
something that our utilities are
already doing. This bill just
changes how they would do it and
how that information will be
made available.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um,
I think, um, PRC is about ready
to prove uh P&M for a rate
increase in 2026 for 2026, is
it, is that correct, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady? Speaker,
gentlemen, I don't have a
crystal ball, but I think you're
probably correct. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So my concern is this a few
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we passed or a few
days ago we passed a bill that's
going to be able to um pass um
bills onto ratepayers of others
for those who can't afford it.
And I'm wondering what this bill
will do as well and, and my
concern is that as we do things
like this, we sit here in this
body and we say this is a great
idea.
But we've already felt the great
idea and it's cost us dearly in
my community and I think as we
do this we need to be really
careful what we do because it's
going to cost us again, and
that's my fear and so with that
in mind, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I've got an
amendment.
Um, I would like to get passed
out, Mr. Speaker.
Right, let's get that passed
out. The gentleman is moving
house for Amendment number 1 to
House Bill 13 as amended. Could
I have a roll call vote you have
a roll call vote.
Can you please bring the
amendment up here.
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom left.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, 231-780.1.
Great, that's what I have. We're
gonna get it passed out and
posted online, stand by and if
you absolutely must. You may
remove your coats, sweaters,
jackets.
Right, gentlemen, it looks like
it's been passed out and it is
online, gentlemen, to explain
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
this, this amendment right here,
all it does is take the labor
unions out of this, um, because
I feel that the labor cost will
just drive up the cost of
electricity for every person in
the state of New Mexico.
Back to the bill sponsor. Is
this a friendly amendment. Mr.
Speaker, this is not a friendly
amendment.
Right
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor Amendment number 1
to House Bill 13 as amended.
We've got a roll call vote.
We're on a motion to table House
floor amendment number 1 to
House Bill 13 as amended, a vote
of yes. The amendment is tabled.
I would have nowhere back on the
The vote is about to close.
The boys are closed by a vote of
38 in the affirmative, 21 in the
negative. House floor amendment
number 1 to House Bill 13 as
amended has been tabled. General
River San Juan, we're back to
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
My concern, uh, gentle lady is
the costs are going to continue
to go up as we do these things,
um, I think when we
When we state that the costs are
going to go down, um, I think
that we need to be very, very
careful because I'm still
reeling from the effects of what
we thought was going to be a
great thing and it was not a
great thing in my in my part of
the um the state in my district
and the district right next to
me and so I hope this does not
do that to the rest of the state
of New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is further debate
generally from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. We're the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from McKinley
County. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, gentle lady. Uh,
I wanted to make a couple
comments and then also ask a few
questions if I may, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, I'd like to
start with the comment that um
utility availability is the
number one issue raised by
industrial prospects anywhere in
the state of New Mexico you have
to be able to talk about your
utilities, what you have
available, what you think you're
gonna have available.
And if you can't talk about that
in the present, you have to talk
about a timeline for utility
availability that is always a
key issue when we're looking at
development.
Uh, many times the development
is based on internal ROI, which
of course is the process of base
rate increases.
But just as a personal request,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
can't think of one business
represented anywhere that
doesn't do cost recovery for the
purpose of expansion.
I can't think of any business
that didn't do that.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I read what the synopsis
says on this FIR it's very clear
to me what you're trying to do.
And modernization of um.
Our system is critical when we
talked about the trade port
initiative, Mr. Speaker and
members we talked about having
um world class infrastructure
available for the purposes of
logistics and distribution.
And that can't happen without
this kind of upgrade across the
state, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, when you think about the
needs of something as simple as
Amazon Prime when they're moving
products in real time and they
have to be able to track exactly
where that product is at any
time of the day and any hour of
the day, that's what makes you
have a competitive advantage in
the state of New Mexico and we
don't have competitive advantage
right now in certain places.
I'm sure that in my own, uh,
county we're one of those places
that we would absolutely need to
have this kind of infrastructure
of.
Expansion
I also wanted to say, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, when
we're talking about trade ports
and modernization that ties back
to what's happening
internationally. When you look
at what's happening at the port
of Rotterdam as an example or
even in the United States, the
Port of Houston, there's there's
an alternative energy, um,
transition happening it's from
diesel, believe it or not, to
hydrogen.
And particularly at the port of
Long Beach, the port of LA, the
port of Houston and these
international ports, so you're
gonna have to have compatible
energy process across this
across this pattern you're gonna
have to know you're gonna have
to be able to have those kinds
of energies available in these
trade ports. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
When I think about a process of
a 3-year cost recovery, that's
very typical. I think it's very,
very typical when you look at
cost recovery as a way for
expansion, and I, I'm asking
everyone to please support this
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Barna Leoil.
Mr. Speaker, I yield and
gentleman from Lee County.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
educate me, please.
Can you tell me the definition,
the true definition.
Of grid modernization.
Not the New Mexico definition.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from Lee
bringing all of your polls and
lines and distribution.
To a modern standard to ensure
that homes are electrified to an
adequate.
Please.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Love the definition now take me
to the
Two words modern standard and
define those two, please.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, from Lee
County, I can define them in my
own standard, and when I think
of modernization, I think of
every single New Mexican having
adequate.
And efficient.
And low cost energy.
Whenever they need it, wherever
they need it.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Great. Thank you.
How would your expert define
modern standard.
I think he defines it the same
way, gentlemen, from what I can
tell.
Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
for stepping in and helping out,
um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
let's work on the low-cost piece
of this.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you tell me what happened about
A year and a half to 2.
and
A quarter years ago in the state
of New Mexico with respect to
electrification.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
you're gonna have to be more
specific.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
About 2.125 years ago to about a
year and a half ago, we passed
some laws that required
Moving
Ask of of.
Petroleum-based energy to
electrification from
non-petroleum based energy and
the use in the state of New
Mexico for
Alternative energy went from a
slope of about 10% to a slope of
about 45 to 50%. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, would you agree
with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm not
an expert and I don't have the
statistics in front of me. I do
know that we passed those laws,
and I do believe that there was
a dump in demand for renewable
sources of energy.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what, what we've, what we've
gone through since then is a
significant change with respect
to lack of energy.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you know what it takes to
Create a win.
turbine
How much energy it takes to
create a wind turbine arm.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm, I'm
gonna object to your question,
the same reason I object to the
gentle lady from Sierra County's
questions. Again, we're not
talking about generation at all.
We're talking about
distribution, uh, distribution
can happen whether or not it's
distribution from a coal plant
from petroleum from renewable
wind, solar distributions all
the same, Mr. John, Mr. Speaker,
gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
would agree that for the end
user, it's all the same. Does
the light switch turn on.
For the distributor, it's not
all the same because it
determines what we want from the
gentle lady from McKinley County
talking about um
cost recovery for expansions.
Talking about
Um, being, being able to bring
business into the state of New
Mexico at some point in time,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's how much power can you take
to point A?
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Your legislation.
And pass legislation has
controlled that in a very
negative way, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, do you know what
the definition and the ability
or what
The two words put together with,
with respect to the PRC of
accredited capacity means.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, first
question, is that in this bill
and second question, does that
have to do again with
generation?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, at
the end of the day, you want
power to the end user, right?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
correct.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
as we're talking through the
discussions with respect to the
PRC. Do you know how long it
takes to get
And approve
Expansion from P&M XL.
El Paso Electric through the
PRC. Do you know what the time
frame is? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I know that it is
a very long time. It can
sometimes take up to years and
that's actually one of the
things that we're trying to
address.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
PRC has 9 months.
To respond
Once
The
Company has put out their RFPs
for power source generation.
To put together
And they have submitted it to
the PRC, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the PRC has 9 months to
respond.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
When we talk about modernizing
grids, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, when we talk about how we
want to, to accomplish this.
We also have to look at the tail
end of what can accomplish this.
When we want to look at, do we
want an AI facility.
Do we want uh micro grid.
In Donana County.
Do we want
Brackish water cleansing.
Somewhere
Do we all these different
things.
How much does it take? How much
energy does it take?
Um
I look at this bill and I'm, I
get concerned because we talk
about
Different aspects of this
companies already have to.
Turn in the beneficial capacity
of their proposal.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady when
Xcel Energy or P&M or El Paso
Electric goes for an expansion.
Project or a group of expansion
projects right now.
Southeast New Mexico, we're 3300
megawatts behind.
Today
We could use 3300 megawatts
additional power.
Right now
We're self generating that
because.
The capacity is not there.
Because a year and a half, 2
years ago.
This body made some choices.
That negatively affected that.
So we're self-generating that
and we're taking on hits from.
And
Environmental standpoints
because we have to self-generate
because of the laws that we're
trying to comply with, which law
do we wanna break sometimes.
And um
So we get to this point.
If I wanted, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady to expand 3300
watts.
Of power right now and I could
turn in my proposals.
Three different phases.
Three different looks.
Looks at it from.
Natural gas standpoint from a
solar and wind natural gas,
solar, wind combined.
Geotechnical or geothermal all
these different pieces, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, you,
you can submit 4 or 5 plants.
PRC has
9 months to to decide what to do
with that.
So if I submitted one in May of
this year.
With respect to I need 3300
megawatts now.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I wouldn't get that approval
until next year.
Takes a 3-year buyout with or
build out.
Once that's approved,
Based on everything which
includes rate paying.
Which
I would
Argue some of the, some of the
debate earlier on how rate
paying works.
But
We include rate paying in those
decision making.
Pieces
So now we're, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we're in the year
2026. It takes 3 years to build
it out. We're in 2029.
We're 3300 megawatts behind in
2025.
This bill didn't help us.
This bill doesn't solve any of
this problem and this bill
doesn't get us more power today.
To anybody that doesn't have it,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
help me understand why.
This bill is necessary.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
wanna thank you actually for um
making the point for my bill,
maybe even better than I am
trying to.
Um, and that this bill, which is
again, this is not law yet. This
is a proposed piece of
legislation, this would truncate
the PRC process we do, OK, 3
things. First of all, it would
make the distribution system
planning process transparent. So
you're correct, utilities have
to turn in these plans. So one,
they turned in the plan to the
PRC. That plan then has to be
transparent, open to the public.
Uh, then the PRC has to consider
the new requirements in the plan
that are set out in section one
of this bill and then the PRC
has to, uh, has to rule make do
a rule make for making for these
new distribution system
planning.
Um
Turn ends by June 1st of 2026,
and they need to have the plans
by July 1st, 2027, and through
our process, it's just one.
process, whereas the PRC usually
has two processes. There's an
initial announcement where
there's feedback and then you
can go even to litigation from
there and after all of that is
complete, you then get a
decision from the PRC. So what
our bill would do is meld those
22 stages into one stage, it
would give her truncated um
promulgation of rules and it
would ask that the utilities get
their DS.
be in sooner for a longer
planning period so we can write
size and they can build out more
than they have been and they can
plan for more than they have
been.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
not sure who you're getting
advice from, but, um,
The I will tell you the process
is very transparent.
We need this much power.
We submit as a company to
Uh, RFPs out.
We need this much power.
You're gonna win, you can go to
solar, you can go to geothermal,
you can go to natural gas, you
can go to oil and gas, it
doesn't matter. You can go to
coal.
Doesn't matter.
Process is very transparent.
So you submit the RFPs, you
receive the RFPs. You put the
RFPs back in and say, OK, this
company can give me this much
megawatts. This company can do
this this company can do this.
As the corporation, the energy
supply company, they get to put
together their plan and they
submit it to the PRC. Once it's
submitted, this is a 9 month
process.
Is, is there litigation? Oh
yeah, there's civil rights
attorneys.
are huge
It's a great lobby effort in the
state of New Mexico.
Everything can get
Everything can be litigated, but
at the end of the day, the PRC
has a choice.
And they have to make that
choice within 9 months. Your
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
It was a lot longer than that.
And there's nothing.
About the process right now, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady that's
not transparent.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you're only talking
about the generation and
distribution portion of it,
you're not talking.
You're not the, the transmission
portion of this process is not
covered and, and what you've
been discussing it all.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
transmission process is
completely different. It goes a
whole lot quicker.
Yeah. You build a transmission
line or you, you either transmit
power from one point to another
points like water, and then you
distribute it.
OK. Anything's that way. The
transmission process is a whole
lot simpler than this. Now, it
engages a whole lot more people,
a whole lot more entities,
government entities which
creates its own.
bog in the system.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
there's nothing non-transparent
about any of it.
So when we talk about
Section one and the, the
planning process, all of this is
transparent already.
It's all public publicized and,
and if you're on that system.
And if you want to be involved
in that.
Doesn't matter if you're from
getting energy or watching what
P&M's doing. If you're watching
what El Paso Electric's doing,
Excel Energy.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
only people that, that have
excess power right now or the
rural co-ops.
Because we can't control them.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
again, you and I disagree, the
distribution planning process is
not transparent at all. The DSPs
are not public.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
could Google right now every,
every, every transmission.
Line that is in process of
approval right now for the state
of New Mexico, and I could tell
the whole body who what and who
they are. It is completely
transparent, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's one.
10th of the process that goes
into a DSP.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
agree it's 1/10 of the process,
but at the end of the day,
that's the transparency we're
saying we don't have.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, also,
um, so I think you're also
speaking about the integrated
resource planning process. I
think that we're maybe getting
some cross talk and
miscommunication on that as
well. That, that.
portion is.
Transparent.
But what we're talking about in
the distribution system planning
is not.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we're bouncing back and forth
between.
Higher level generation to
transmission to distribution.
And distribution within a system
is based on
What the electric company.
Chooses to do.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think we heard some debate
about this earlier.
Give me examples of somebody
that doesn't have power, that
doesn't want power. I mean, for,
for the majority of
Well,
Mr. Speaker Dylan, I can't give
you an example of a single
person who doesn't have power,
who doesn't want power.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, say that again,
Mister Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't think I can give you an
example of someone who
Doesn't, who has power, who does
not want power.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I asked the reverse question,
but.
Are we, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
are we doing the double negative
thing again?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
we're not going to go down the
double negative side of this. I,
I appreciate this. I just, I
already know, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, what the PRC
process is, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I know what it is
to do on the, on the, on the
grid that feeds New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this doesn't fix anything.
At all and it doesn't.
Improve the process if anything,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
impedes the process.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady are
our, our companies are out
there.
Um, willing to do this. We have.
Energy building capability. We
have the ability to supply.
In New Mexico.
Everything we need for AI for
quantum for, for every piece and
parcel of the industries that
we've heard bills on Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady this year.
This number of 70 people.
And the member of 42 on the
other side are the ones that are
stopping this from happening.
Because
We don't want to deal with the
true problems that we created
from the ETA and then a year and
a half, 2 years, 22 years ago
with the laws that required full
electrification without
capacity.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
This is a bad tree to bark.
And I can't support that. Thank
you.
There is further debater from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. A gentle
lady from Bernard Leo, please
yield, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
my friend from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, generally, um.
This
This is um
The this uh piece of legislation
has gone through a couple of
iterations. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, generally, that
would be putting it generously.
It depends on where you'd start
in the time process.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
lady. I know I came into the
discussion um back in in
December and I but I know that
you've been working on this
pretty much throughout the the
past year and I wanna just
commend you on that. This is a
lot of work and understanding
all these processes and all the
information around, um, the grid
modernization, um, I too took on
a uh a big bill like this a
couple of years ago.
Um
And didn't meet the same fate of
as we are now so I think we need
to be having this discussion and
we need to be looking at this
processes and procedures that we
have to um the PRC, um, granted,
madam, uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
general Leaddy, uh, for what you
said.
The PRC can already do these
things, but we're looking for
more transparency. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, General.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct. Thank you. And
specifically, uh, regarding, uh,
the dis distribution which is
essentially.
Um
Transforming, uh, the energy,
uh,
To the consumer. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker General
Lee?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
correct.
Thank you. And we're not talking
about rate prices. We're not
talking about, um, uh, a lot of
things that are being discussed
today we're just specifically
saying.
That to get to a better or
modernized grid that if we have
these things in this bill, um.
Addressed and clarified, then
we're gonna have a better uh
grid system, if you will, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker Jelani, what this
bill does is it gives more tools
in the toolbox to our utilities
to be able to make the exact
decisions they want to be able
to make to augment and modernize
their grids through the means
that they choose to do so. This
this bill is about options. It
is not about mandates, it's not
about
Generation, it is simply about
choice.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
Does any of this, and this is,
uh, anything in this bill talk
about RTOs, regional
transmission organization.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
does not.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
Lady. It's just one thing I
always like to add when we are
talking about grid modernization
that when we get to some of
these other outside of the scope
and, and please bear with me
discussions on better, um,
addressing the demand of uh of
energy for our state that that
would be a separate bill, Mr.
Speaker General later you're
correct.
Mr. Speaker, that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker lady. I
just like to add that in there
because it's.
I'd like to have that
conversation or just drop that
in any time I can and talk about
RTOs and grid modernization
because it's a favorite subject,
but I just wanna say thank you
on this, on this bill this um.
Mr. Speaker, General Leader,
this, would you say that this
bill would um help us in
balancing like our policies.
Um, and regulation and demand
through through the transparency
aspect, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
yes, I would. I, I, I think that
it strikes a good balance. I
think that it's um also asking
the various levels of government
to work together and uh more
transparent and efficient way
and um that's precisely I think
what good government is about.
Thank you Mr. Speaker Janet
Lady, again that's what this,
this like for me this is this is
uh an opportunity for us to
really look at how we better um
give those tools to our
regulators and I so I thank you
again for this. One thing I
always, uh, will advocate for
Mr. Speaker and General Leader,
as, as we are giving these
mandates or or.
Move to um.
To give these, these new
responsibilities, if you will,
to the PRC that we're looking at
how we're budgeting that, Mr.
Speaker General later, and you
did address that through this
piece of legislation, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
while the additional costs are
not addressed through this piece
of legislation, um, you, I
believe you sat on the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, you know how our
budgeting process works, but
there is additional um personnel
funding and LFC funding in-house
Bill 2 for the PRC for these
additional obligations and
responsibilities. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, um, yes,
and I would just say, just as
I've been uh talking about and.
being privileged to serve on
House Appropriation and finance
and, and knowing some of this is
that as we're moving through um.
Our our session and looking at
and hearing all the different
pieces of legislation that would
ask a mandate, put mandates.
To the PRC I just say that we're
gonna need to take a closer
look.
In this next uh.
This this next uh cycle, uh, for
our finances because we are
putting, uh, we are asking them
to do more and we are asking
them to do it in in a a new
timeline. So I want to be
sensitive to that and I want to
say thank you for addressing
that and knowing that we do have
some budget for that, but I just
say I would just say that if we
were to
Enact all these pieces of
legislation that we are, we're
working on, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady that we um.
We kind of honed in on that
because they're gonna need a
lot, uh, a lot more from us in
order to to um meet all the
mandates that we want them to do
because these are good.
These are good opportunities. I
mean these are good, uh, pieces
of legislation and I don't
disagree with them.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
with that, I say thank you
again. I think this is, this is,
uh, getting to the
thoughtfulness of the processes
that we have in place and really
adding and and uh moving towards
those transparent, transparency
measures, and so thank you for
doing that and spending all the
time that you have in addressing
this, uh, this piece of
legislation. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
There's for the debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker.
There's a gentle lady from
Bernalo Yil. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to my friend from San Juan
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and, and,
and gentle lady.
Um
Obviously, you and I've
Had some discussion about this
bill. Uh, this bill has been
before two of my committees and
now here on the floor.
And Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, um, I'm, I'm gonna have to
just for the body's sake and
have to go back to some of that
debate. So hope you indulge me a
little bit, Miss Speaker, gentle
lady.
Um
The, uh, I heard you state
earlier that this bill is not
about mandates, um, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Beginning on page 11.
For the next several pages.
There is a series of shells.
So the Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I'd like to, to go through
that with, with you and with the
body.
Um, briefly.
On page 11
In under section uh
A new material beneficial
electric electrification plans.
Um, on page 11 line.
21, uh, starting with the
committee shall.
The committee shall establish a
schedule by which beneficial
electrification targets will be
set for each subsequent six-year
period.
If you switch over to page 12.
On line too, it says an electric
public utility shall file an
application with the commission
for a for a beneficial elect
electrification plan.
If you skip over to page 14.
It says the commission shall
take final action within 180
days of the submission of a
beneficial electrification plan
and any relating rate recovery.
Uh, mechanism included within
the plan.
On F on 11, the next line, it
says an electric public utility
shall recover its prudent and
reasonable costs for beneficial
electrification.
Programs
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just to walk through those
series of shells.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady does
this legislation.
Do a couple of things and I'm
gonna ask these very
specifically, does it mandate
That the PRC put together a
plan.
For utilities to modernize the
grid.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
legislation does not require the
PRC to put together the
beneficial electrification plan,
the legislation requires the
utilities to put together the
beneficial electrification plans
which are then submitted to the
PRC for review.
Yes, um, Miss uh Miss Speaker
and gentle lady, does it not
require the PRC to hold the uh
the utilityresponsible to submit
that plan.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it does.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
And then the utility then must.
Submit a plan for beneficial
electrocation, so expanded
electrification beyond their
current uh uh um ratepayers,
customers, current customers,
and this modernization, it goes
beyond just the needs of
current.
Customers and it goes beyond
them to potential future
customers. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, the,
the whole point is to get
additional new customers and
then.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. And then if you follow the
next shell.
Then the PRC.
Shall take final action within
180 days.
And then it says the Electric
public utility shall.
Recover
Prudent and reasonable cost, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The whole issue I have with this
legislation is that it doesn't
give the PRC.
Any real authority. We are, we
are mandating.
The PRC to take certain actions.
As a matter of fact, I didn't
even go through it, but uh uh
this bill mandates a timeline.
That the PRC has to do these
things. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so, you
know, I also want to remind you
and remind the body that the PRC
retains ultimate authority
whether or not to approve or not
approve the beneficial
electrification plans. We want
to be careful not to conflate
the again, the distribution
system planning with the
beneficial electrification
plans, the beneficial
electrification plans.
Do you have to be submitted to
the PRC. The PRC does require
submission of the BE plans from
the utility, and there are uh
deadlines that are set forth in
this piece of legislation for
the um turning in of an approval
of those BE plans,
um, in my, and by the way, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I, I
didn't, I wasn't here earlier
who uh your expert witness, who
is your expert witness today,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you for pointing out a bad
habit.
That I've had throughout this
entire session in which I have
not been introducing my experts
who are crucial and critical to
helping me in the passage of my
bills. This is Michael Kinney.
He's from Western Resources
Advocates and um he has been
with me since the very
beginning, 10 months ago.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um
I think that's my issue, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, as I
reached out when I when this
bill first came, um, the Speaker
and gentle lady, I
Um
Had an issue with several
statements that have been made
which were about rates and how
rates.
Had gone down and how bills had
gone down and Mr. Speaker,
generally I reached out to the
PRC at that time.
And what I find, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, in particular P&M
where they've had to shutter.
Uh, early shuttering of a power
plant in San Juan County.
Um, for 2014, 2015, 1617, 1819,
20.
During that six-year period, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady.
Uh, bills
The average rate went up.
A total of
Of 28 cents.
per kilowatt hour.
The Speaker and gentle lady from
that point forward,
Rates
Jumped
Up to in the next.
1234.
5 years Rach jumped.
from 1326 to 1521, almost $2 a
kilowatt hour. But the Speaker
and gentle lady.
Bills did not jump.
And when I asked the PRC why
bills did not jump.
Uh,
with the rates, why, why were,
why were bills held down and
what I was told was, and they
sent me a, a
Uh, a document here that says
that with the, the shuttering of
the plant, there was a credit of
$360 million credit that went
back to PNM from the state of
New Mexico, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
That the way that showed up in
bills was a credit to the bill.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that
Payment of the $360 million went
away at the end of 2024. And so
at the end of 2024,
Utility bills.
Total bills, rates, tariffs,
fees.
Jumped on average $80.
He
Customer, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady.
These are not my, these are not
my constituents. San Juan
County, we have a municipal, uh,
electric utility.
But Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
this is, this is here in Santa
Fe, most of Albuquerque.
But Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, the discussion that that
we just had.
You're seeing that discretion is
not taken away by the PR uh from
the PRC, but when I talked to
the PRC they say exact that's
exactly what this does.
This takes away discretion
because it puts in a series of
mandates that I just read
through.
The last one being that after
the PRC.
Requires based on this
legislation requires
The utility
To file
An electric, uh, modernization
plan.
That a modern, yeah,
modernization electrification
plan that then.
They are given a very short
timeline to implement it.
And it says when they implement
it.
The PRC will grant them rate
recovery.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
That's very concerning. What
we've just done is with a
private business, we have told
them.
That that.
They will increase.
Their infrastructure they will
increase their assets, let's
say, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
And they are required to pass
that cost on to their customers.
Mr. Speaker and generally,
that's, that's.
scary. I mean, that's what we're
doing here. That's exactly what
this does. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, when I reached out
to the
PRC
I asked about what involvement
That they had had with this
particular bill.
And Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, they said not much.
That they, as a matter of fact,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, the,
the, the discussion that you and
I had was
One of the reasons you want to
put.
Dates in here and some deadlines
is because PRC is not doing this
fast enough. Um, is that, is
that accurate or is that an
inaccurate statement, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so first
point, the only way to make
electricity, electricity cheaper
is to sell more of it.
Second point, um, I believe the
180 day deadline was amended
out. We're checking, uh,
checking that that should happen
in judiciary, um, and I forgot
my third point, but let's just
start on those two.
OK, Mr. Speaker, and generally,
let me go back to the, the last
one which is that um.
That that the PRC.
Feels as if these bandates
are not necessarily achievable.
That that quickly, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe it was stated earlier.
Uh, in, in debate that the PRC
is already in the process.
Of putting together these plans,
is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
is correct as it again relates
to distribution planning, um,
and, and that grid.
Mod rule that they have put out,
um, but we've actually gotten
feedback that this statute is
necessary in order to solidify
the PRC's rulemaking process for
that.
For that rule, um, so I mean
this is
This will actually help
inoculate the PRC from further
challenges with their rule,
which they have already
anticipated as being necessary,
otherwise they would not have
initiated it themselves already.
Mr. Speaker and general lady
though, but they did not ask for
this bill.
Mr. Speaker, this was not
originated by them to inoculate
inoculate themselves. We're,
we're doing this for them
without their asking for that.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I,
I'm not familiar with the PRC
ever asking for specific
legislation, um, but we have
worked very hard over the last
few months, and I would
disagree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, with the, um,
assertion that we did not work
with the PRC. I was, I myself
attended meetings with the PRC,
so I don't know where that's
coming from, but, um, the, this
legislation is meant to um
compliment.
What the PRC is already trying
to do, and it is, um, they may
not be happy with the time
frames that were, and I want to
emphasize, were proposed, um,
because we are impatient and we
want good modernization as fast
as we can get it, um, but that
we have been willing and ready
to work with them from the very
beginning and should this bill
be passed, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we will continue to
work with them to get the best
result possible. Speaker and.
So we are taking away some of
their.
A discretion.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, whether
or not uh tariff writer or a
base rate increase is granted is
solely within the discretion of
the PRC. The legislature has
nothing to do with that. The
Speaker and gentle lady, I just
read the exact words.
From the bill that is not the
case. We are prescribing all of
this.
Anytime we say shall, that is a
mandate.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
every time we say shall, we are
taking away discretion, Miss
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
just read through a series of 4
shells that get us from.
That they shall.
For the PRC, the PRC cell
require utilities to provide
that modernization plan and then
they shall implement it within a
certain day, a certain number of
days that that plan is given to
them and then they shall.
Give rate recovery. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that is
my problem with this bill.
This bill
Oh, I, I
As I was looking, besides what I
was describing here in there.
Uh, in this, uh,
Um
Email that I was sent, which
shows that
Not only has
Rates since we
Uh, for, for PNM, I'm just
dealing with P&M at this point,
that rates have gone up every
single year except for between
2023 and 2024 where they just
held flat.
But there's current requests
before the PRC from PNM to jump
up from 1521.
To this year, 2025, what's
before them right now is a
dollar and
75 cents increase.
This year
2025 per kilowatt hour.
In 2026.
There's another uh request for
another.
Dollar 95 cents.
Increase
To go into effect in 2026, and
the Speaker and gentle lady that
a chart that they gave me shows
not only what they expect with
the ETA, how much rates are
going to have to go up.
With this mandate on top of
that.
What I, what I'm looking at
right here is
By that by the year 20
27, they will be approaching.
$20
A kilowatt hour.
That is a jump.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is a jump.
Of rates from the time we
implemented the.
Uh, the ETA.
Of
$6.74 Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, per kilowatt hour.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Ratepayers cannot afford that
type of an increase and then on
top of that to pay for grid
modernization, which means
expansion beyond the needs of
current customers.
They cannot afford to have
What looks like it's gonna be
annual increases.
To rates
And then on top of that, another
rate increase or a tariff.
Or a fee that is above that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that is
that is.
Just not doable by the average,
uh customer. So I, I'm not
gonna, I'm not gonna go beyond
this because quite frankly, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
most of the folks on the other
side of the of the aisle, this
your, these are your
constituents, they're not mine.
And so uh I, I, I'm going to
suggest to all House Republicans
do not vote for this bill.
This bill is just an outrageous
mandate to utility companies to
increase.
The
beyond the current need of
current customers and the
current customers will have to
pay for it.
And Mr. Speaker, in general,
and, and, and gentlemen, gentle
lady, um.
You guys can do what you want to
do with this, but it's gonna
our, our, our hands are gonna be
clean of this. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
You know, for the debate, I need
to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Bonn for the robust
discussion. I want to remind
everybody, um, that
New Mexico deserves.
To have economic development New
Mexico deserves to have clean
energy in New Mexico, Mexicans
deserve to have choice as to the
energy efficiency and the types
of energy that they receive and
the only way to make energy
cheaper, Mr. Speaker, is by
selling more of it, this bill
will do just that. And with
that, I now move that House Bill
13 as amended do now pass.
final passage of House Bill 13
as amended, the vote is now
open.
Oh
It
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative. House Bill 13, as
amended as Ui passed this House,
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports is so clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker.
Your judiciary Committee team
has been referred House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 222 has had it
under consideration reports and
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler, chair, uh,
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable for energy,
environment, and Nasources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 222. All those in favor say
9.
I was opposed,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 230 as amended, has
had it under consideration in
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, Chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption favorable committee
report for House Bill 230 as
amended. All those in favor
signified by C I.
All the suppose nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 253 has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker moved option
favorable committee report for
253 but a favorable committee
report for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253. All those in favor say
say I.
All those oppose nay, the IA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to has been referred
House Bill 287 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 287 do pass. Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are on adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
files Bill 287 but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 287. All those in
favor of seba say I.
I supposed, the ISI committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 298 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption of a favorable report
files Bill 298. All those in
favor 5 C 9.
I suppose nay, the IAA committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 340 has had it under
consideration report and with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
report for House Bill 340. All
those in favor by saying I.
I suppose name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee.
To who has been referred House
Bill 244 has had it under
consideration reports seen with
recommendation that it de pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
244. All those in favor are
signified by saying I.
All the supposed nay, the eyes
have a committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee too has been referred
House Bill 269 as amended, has
had it under consideration in
Port same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
269 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying a.
I suppose name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 366 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We are
on adoption of a favorable for
366. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
I suppose nay, the Iabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 428 has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report for OB 428. All
those in favor, say 59.
I suppose.
The eyes have it report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 442 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 442 do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption favorable
report for House Bill 442, but a
favorable committee report for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House 442. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
Although suppose nay.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 469 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of favorable report for
Houseville 469 as amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Well, suppose nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee team has
been referred House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 73.
Has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73 to pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Speaker, adoption
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report in the House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73, but a
favorable committee, but a
favorable committee report for
house appropriations and finance
Committee substitute.
For House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 73.
All those in favor are signified
by saying aye.
All the supposed nay.
The I have it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 286 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair?
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
of a favorable committee report
for House Bill 286.
All those in favor signified by
saying a.
All the suppose nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to who has been
referred House Bill 369 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair?
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 369. All those in
favor signified by say I.
All the supposed nay.
The report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 398 has had
it under consideration, reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and he referred to the
Health and Human Services
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Move adoption. We're adoption of
a favorable report for house
about 398. All those in favor
say a.
All the suppose nay, the eyes of
a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 540 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Move adoption favorable report
for Asville 540. All those in
favor of 75 but say no.
All the suppose nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Memorial 45 has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted to
Johnson share.
Move adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
committee report for houses with
45. For How Memorial 45, 0, I
got to be careful. We are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report for House
Memorial 45. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
All the supposed name.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House resolution 4 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair? Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.orable committee report
for House Resolution 4. All
those in favor signify by saying
na.
I suppose nay.
Nay
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation is
ordered. Is the gentle lady from
Bernard Leo and or the gentleman
from Berlio or maybe both ready
on item number 47.
Yes we are Mr. Speaker. Can you
get us to that point that a
place in House Judiciary
Committee substitute for Alvie
255 and final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. So House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 255, um, amends the
definition of youthful offender
to include voluntary
manslaughter. It extends the
time period for supervised
release from.
3 months to 6 months, um, it
stops when a youth has absconded
from parole or other oversight,
it stops the clock from running
while they're until they are
back where they belong. Um, it
renames the juvenile community.
It renames the juvenile.
Community Corrections Act to the
juvenile community connectctions
Act.
Um, renames the the juvenile
community corrections grant fund
to the juvenile community
corrections grant fund, um, it
provides that the money in the
grant funds shall be used to
operate programs that provide
services for adjudicated
delinquents, children or youth.
It establishes a local panel to
determine the next steps of a
delinquent child sentenced to a
juvenile facility facility
providing for consideration of
available services and programs.
Um, and with that, Mr. Speaker,
I will turn it over to my
co-sponsor for a little more
introduction of de la Cruz. Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
First, Mr. Speaker, I want to
thank the gentle lady for
letting me join on this bill as
the co-sponsor in the house.
It also does one thing that's
very important, Mr. Speaker.
And it allows for a pilot
program that will help youth
that have aged out of the foster
care.
System as well for any youth
that has been formally
incarcerated, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this
Earlier today this morning,
there was so much love that was
given to our foster parents.
And that being said, this will
only strengthen that system by
ensuring that those youth that
are now aged out of the cyst of
the foster care system have now
a segue to success by being able
to participate in a in a program
that will provide them with some
support while they are attending
school or a trade program.
And so Mr. Speaker, um, I yield
back to the lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um.
So just, just a brief, um,
snapshot of what this is. This
is actually looking to intervene
in youth who are going down the
wrong path before they get to
the point where they're involved
in a shooting or a carjacking,
so this is, this is going
upstream to try and prevent the
problems instead of downstream
and having to lock them up and
with that Mr. Speaker, I will,
uh, next go to my other
co-sponsor representative, um,
the gentle lady from.
Um
Sam Magellan Torrance.
And a lady from Sanya in
Torrance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Um, thank you. No, I, I am too
also happy to um co-sponsor um
on this bill coming from a
career working with students,
working with youth, um, we like
to use the term of at promise
students, um, so this, this was
an opportunity to deal with some
of the communities that we are
seeing um in our communities
both.
City communities as well as our
rural communities where we are
starting to see what was once
traditionally known as city
problems, you know, coming into
our smaller communities, but
ultimately we are looking for
solutions as to how to support
our young juveniles. Thank you.
Oh, Madam Speaker, you pulled a
fast one. And we are
open for questions from Chavez
Curry and Roosevelt
Representative Ree. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from Bernna Leo Ye.
Madam Chair, I, Madam Speaker,
I, I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I don't want to
really talk about the first part
of the bill that went through
CPAC. I wanna talk more about
the sub and the delinquency
changes, um, because I don't
really have a problem, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady with the
first part of the bill, but, um,
I wanna talk about the three
changes that, um, you added in
the sub if you could go over
those please for the body, uh,
Madam Speaker.
So short term memory isn't what
it used to be, so the first part
was adding um voluntary
manslaughter to the youthful
offender, the second part was.
tolling the time and for those
of you who aren't lawyers, that
means stopping it. I learned
that recently and the third part
is to.
Expanding the jurisdiction for
supervised release.
OK, and, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, it was my
understanding sitting through
this in judiciary that this
these last three changes, uh,
that came into the sub in
judiciary was to, um,
Kind of strengthen, uh, what,
what you guys were saying be a
little bit tougher on, on some
juvenile offenders. Would that
be a fair statement as far as
adding manslaughter, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, could
you rephrase your question? I
think I got lost there. I guess
let me just ask you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, why did
you um add manslaughter into the
definitions of youthful offender
under the delinquency code,
um.
Madam Speaker, and gentle lady,
it, it, it was for balance
essentially it was, it was what
was negotiated between um some
of the parties.
All right, and Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
When you say negotiated between
some, I think you were, you used
the word in judiciary
compromise. Um, can you tell me,
uh, who you were compromising
with, uh, what stakeholders, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
when you added manslaughter into
the definition of youthful
offender, um, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, members of the
community and the body.
OK, um, did you, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, talk to any of
the district attorneys.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
no, but um we say their analysis
of this.
Of the, of another bill, um,
No, but we, we saw their
analysis of the other bills. So
we kind of incorporated some of
that within uh what we're doing,
Madam Speaker, would that be the
bill that I presented um to your
committee, uh, 1134.
Uh, that's one of them, madam
Speaker and gentle lady, but
there are others and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, did you
speak with the law enforcement
agencies, DPS or the Attorney
general's office, not their
analysis, but did you actually
take into account them as
stakeholders and have a
conversation with them about
this bill, madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, no.
OK, and Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, do you think that would be
important when we're amending
the delinquency code to add
manslaughter into it to get
into, uh, take into account.
The feedback from these law
enforcement agencies that are
dealing with these very serious
juvenile offenders on an
everyday basis, Madam Chair,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, no, but partly because we're
looking further upstream and
another change that we added,
um, was to make it so that the
chil the child, the youth
doesn't have to be adjudicated,
they can be referred from the
department.
and Madam Chair and uh.
gentle lady, OK, we'll come back
to that because I'm not really
understanding what you're
saying. Could you define what
voluntary manslaughter is for
the body police.
Hold on a second while I'm
looking for it.
Oh, OK.
So Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, voluntary manslaughter
consists of manslaughter
committed upon.
Upon a sudden quarrel or in the
heat of passion.
And Madam Chair, gentle lady,
could you give me just an
everyday example of what might
be voluntary manslaughter so
that the, the body can
understand exactly what type of
crime this is and how this would
be be charged and in what
circumstance, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I'm not a lawyer, but, uh,
when, when I think of crimes of
passion, let's say it's um.
The wife comes home and finds
her husband in bed with another
woman and, you know, she may
beat someone up or something
that that's what I consider a
crime of passion.
OK, and, um, Madam Chair and
gentle lady, so, um, voluntary
manslaughter is, it does say or
in the heat of passion, um, or
upon a sudden quarrel. So would
you be able to, uh, define for
the body, um, Mr. Speaker, and,
um, gentle lady, uh.
The sudden quarrel part because
they're actually two different
areas to what voluntary
manslaughter could be. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, let's
say someone, um, knocks over
someone's drink in a bar,
accidentally and the person who
the drink belonged to got upset
and and started beating up the
person who knocked over their
drink.
All right, and Madam Chair and
Mr. Speaker, um, and I think it
can also, I think most of us
know can be defined as something
that uh maybe two people get
into a fight and it's a fist
fight and someone brings out a
knife and you know you have that
type of situation to, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes.
And how many years, um, as an
adult, um, because being that
this is in the youthful offender
statute would or could you be
sentenced to if you were
convicted, um, as an adult or as
a juvenile and then found
amenable in this, uh, statute to
um for voluntary manslaughter.
Madam, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it's a 3rd degree
felony um carrying a maximum of
3 years.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because it involves death, um,
it actually carries 6 years, uh,
because it's a 3rd degree
felony, but when you kill
somebody, it's a six-year
penalty, madam, Mr. Speaker,
sorry, that was our mistake.
OK. Um, so I'm gonna come back
to that in a second. I want to
talk about the other two,
areas that you changed in the
sub, um there was, uh, well, you
talked, let me just ask, ask you
to go through besides
manslaughter, what would be the
next one, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, the, the increasing the time
of the release, the time under
supervision after release.
Right, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and I believe that starts
on page 9 of the bill. Is that
correct and goes on page 10 of
the bill.
Um,
Madam Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I'm, I'm not sure. Could
you give me a line number?
Yes, um, page 9.
Line 25 onto page 10, line 1.
OK, so I see that now. What was
your question? All right, so
what exactly does that, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady do to
um help with juvenile justice or
the delinquency issue that we
have in our state.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
allows for 6 months of release
supervision time to to get their
GED time to to get to learn a
skill for a job, time to find a
place to live, um, all those
kind of things to prepare them
to enter back into society and
not to be not to res.
Recidivate.
All right. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, what, there's
obviously two types of
commitments in the juvenile
delinquency code. Could you tell
the body what those are, please?
Madam, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, long term and short term,
right, and Mr. Speaker, General
Lee, what's the short term
commitment?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, a
short term commitment is one
year, no more than 9 months
shall be served in a detention
facilities, well, um, and then
long term commitment is 2 years.
Thank you, um, and that's
correct. That's what's currently
in place, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies. So your bill extends,
um.
The one-year commitment to allow
and correct me if I'm wrong, 6
months of a supervised release
after that commitment, Mr.
Speaker. Speaker and gentle
lady, yes.
All right, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this is not
allowing for incarceration for
uh a juvenile or a higher
penalty, it's a supervised
release where you're out. Are
you in the community, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are you in
a home? Could you explain that
to the body, please, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, it depends on
the, the community.
But they are not in custody.
All right. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady with a two-year
commitment that we always hear
two years, it used to be 2 years
in Springer, you know, now it's
2 years YDDC commitment so the
body understands what does your
bill allow for that type of
commitment, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it also allows for
6 months of of supervised
release. OK. And so again, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that is
not any type of incarceration.
Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
correct.
All right, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that provision that
extends.
This supervised release, um.
Will do nothing really to deal
with our serious violent
offenders that we have in our
state regionally wide, whether
it's whether it's in the metro
or the actual rural areas. Is
that correct, Joe lady? Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I don't
agree with that, um, I, I feel,
um, as, as we've heard many
times in this body that I
believe what.
About 95% of youth are gonna
eventually go back in the
community and what we're trying
to do is catch them upstream
before, as I said, before they
do get to the place where
they're shooting out of cars
when they get into.
Smaller trouble for lack of a
better phrase, we will, they
will serve their time, but then
they will have 6 months to to
get their lives together
hopefully to be productive um
taxpayers and have jobs and get
education and all of the above.
So to be clear, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if someone is is is
in your bill, um, found to be a
youthful fender for
manslaughter, um, and then the
amenability hearing happens and
a judge orders that they will be
they're found to be amenable,
um, the judge will then
basically recommit them up to
the age of 21 and they'll get
some type of a supervised
release.
Under your bill after that.
Mm
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, yes
they will, but it's a required 6
months of uh supervised.
OK, um, well, we'll.
So, so Mr. Speaker, generally,
that's not going to deal, that
at least those sections with the
problem of our serious violent
offenders that are murdering
people and things of that
nature, um.
And I know you, you believe it
does, but I just want to make
that statement. So let me just
move on to before we go back to
the manslaughter, the 3rd thing
in your bill, um, I believe it's
on page 15, so I get you to that
place, um.
Where we're talking about the
absconder situation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
explain what it means to
abscond.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
basically to not, not follow up
with the program, not check in,
not go to their job, not what,
whatever it may be individual,
so, so as it currently is in the
law, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, I know you know this
better than me, um, that the
clock continues to run. So let's
say you had 3 months of
supervised um probation or
supervision and you run away and
no one can find you, um.
Then when that 3 months is up,
you're you're just done under
this, the clock stops while
you're missing.
And then once you're found, the
clock starts again as long as
you, um, are continuing with the
program.
All right, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this is basically
stops the clock and, uh, the
judge could just place you right
back on supervised probation,
Madam Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the judge could, but there
are other options. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what would
those options be?
Mr. Speaker and gently committed
back to the facility.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so dealing with those two
areas of the 3 that changed in
the delinquency code besides the
first part of the bill which I
kind of call the feel-good part
of the bill. I'm talking about
the, the more harsher part of
the bill, the second part, uh,
changing the parole term or the,
the supervision released term
and the absconder statute is is
really not gonna do anything to
reduce our violent juvenile
offender problem here in our
state. Would you agree, Mr.
Speaker gentle lady, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, no, I don't
agree.
OK, so let's go back now to the
first change you made by
compromise or um
I guess you said by compromise
that was suggested to uh
Try to, I guess.
Compromise this bill is
something that might have some
uh teeth in it, Mr. uh, Speaker
general lady, um, on the
voluntary manslaughter, um.
In committee, it seemed like you
weren't really even interested
in having that in your bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. How do you
feel about this being in your
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, it's not my favorite part,
um, but I also have been here
long enough to know that
sometimes, um, to get a good
bill, you have to listen to some
other people and, and that's
what was done here.
All right, and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I do have an amendment
and I would like a roll call
vote. You have roll call kindly
deliver set amendment.
To the clerk.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is.
0.231783.2.
OK, got it. Let's get this
gentle lady, the amendment has
been passed out and it is posted
online. gentle lady to explain.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
house floor amendment number one
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 255,
um, is basically what it does on
page one, which is in the title
I believe strike Voluntary
manslaughter and insert in lieu
of certain crimes on page 3
strike 2 in its entirety and
re-letter, the the succeeding
paragraphs accordingly on page
7.
line 20 strike or and the big
change on page 7 between lines
22 and 23, it adds um crimes for
uh the youthful offender, not
the serious youthful offender,
but the youthful offender, um,
for 2nd and 3rd degree criminal
sexual contact of of a minor is
provided in 39-13 P aggrevated
assault upon a peace officer is
provided in 302222 Q.
ro bb er y while armed with a
deadly weapon.
Um, as provided in 3016 to our
homicide by vehicle is provided
in section 668-101 as failing to
stop a vehicle when the vehicle
is involved in an accident, the
results in great bodily harm or
death as provided in subsection
C of 667201, which is the third
degree felony or an offense
enumerated in subparagraph O of
subsection 11, which is 33-2-34
when committed with.
A firearm and um the the basic
premise of the amendment, uh,
Mr. Speaker, is that it's only
adding um different crimes to
the youthful offender,
discretionary, one where the DA
will have discretion to actually
decide whether to file this, and
then the amenability hearing
will have to happen, so it's
nothing that is mandatory and so
that is the basis of the
amendment Mr. Speaker. Let's go
back to the sponsor. This is a
friendly amendment. Mr. Speaker,
no.
It is not a friendly amendment.
Right?
Uh, gentle lady from Berlio
Representative Nicole Chavez to
debate the amendment.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind lady yield, yes, I'll yield
to my friend from Bertolillo
County.
Thank you, Representative Reed,
um, as you know, I think.
You're aware that we're all a
little frustrated and deeply
disappointed this week when our
bill that was pre-filed with the
intent to truly hold the most
violent juveniles accountable.
Um, for their actions in the
state was tabled.
I am gonna interject real quick
let let's stick to the
amendment. I, I, I get the, the,
the, the purpose, but let's try
to stick to the amendment so
that we don't go sideways. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, um,
Representative Reed, so I have
some questions for you regarding
your amendment, um, I know you
explain this, but I just want
you to, um.
Just stayed again for the
voluntary manslaughter that was
added.
In the current bill, it is a
six-year maximum.
Penalty, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlelati, yes,
if, uh, voluntary manslaughter
as committed as an adult is 6
years, so if, if this, uh.
Crime was found to be um the the
DA went for a notice to seek
adult sanctions and if the court
found that the child was um not
amenable to treatment than the
court would have the discretion
to sentence the child as an
adult up to 6 years.
And currently, because I know
victims that have had their
loved ones murdered. Majority of
their time they're found
amenable and they're held in a
juvenile facility, but sometimes
in the worst of cases that is
that doesn't happen, is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I've done a lot of
amenability hearings on a lot of
different crimes and, um, there
are about 6 or 7 factors, um,
that the court has to look at
and decide, um, including like
what type of crime it is one of
the big ones is, uh, Mr. Speaker
Jannaladi is, is the child
amenable to treatment, and those
aren't weighed all equally. So
if the court finds that the
child is amenable to treatment,
then he can or she can just go
off that.
one factor, and I find most of
the time, uh, judges and with
their evaluators find that the
child is amenable to treatment
and they end up in the juvenile
system still, Mr. I hope that
answers your question, gentle
lady.
Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker
Representative so I'm looking at
your amendment and I just want
the body to know.
These charges that you added in
here. Can you describe what um
some of these charges are.
Sure, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so beginning with um 2nd and 3rd
degree criminal sexual contact
of a minor, um, which is added,
I believe penetration is already
in the um youthful offender
statute, um, but 2nd and 3rd
degree is criminal sexual
contact of a minor is when you,
um, criminal sexual conduct of a
minor in the 2nd degree consists
of all criminal sexual contact
of the unclothed intimate parts
of a minor.
when it's perpetrated on a child
under the age of 13 or on a
child over the age uh on a child
13 to 18 years of age when the
perpetrator is either in a
position of authority over the
child and uses that authority to
coerce the child to submit or
the perpetrator uses force or
coercion that results in
personal injury to the child or
the perpetrator uses force or
coercion and is aided or abetted
by one or more persons or the
perpetrator is armed with a
deadly weapon.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the 3rd degree, um,
Criminal sexual contact of a
minor is when it's perpetrated
on a child, um, on the clothed
parts under the age of 13 or on
a child 13 to 18 years of age
under those same circumstances,
but I believe the difference
between 2nd and 3rd, um, is the
fact that one is a clothed, uh,
touching and one is an, uh,
unclothed touching higher
degree, Madam Chair or higher
degree, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady being in the unclothed
touching, obviously.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Representative. Can you
describe, I guess I'm trying to
understand the failing to stop a
vehicle while the vehicle is
involved in an accident that
results in death. Can you
describe that to me? Um, yes,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, so
there are two sections in that
code. One is felony and one is
misdemeanor, so if you fail to
stop um at an accident that
involves um.
Death or great bodily injury, it
can be a misdemeanor, but when
it becomes a felony is when you
knowingly leave, um, an accent
where you know you've hit
somebody and you don't render
aid, so example for an example,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
am currently, I just had a case
where um an individual hit a
lady on a bicycle and she came
in through his front windshield
and he left her at the scene to
die, and that would be an
example of that type of charge,
the felony.
The event, uh, gentle lady and
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Let's get to the offense, um,
enumerated in subparagraph
33-2-34. What would those
violent charges include?
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
33-2-34 is actually the serious
violent offense statute, um,
that is listed and so basically,
um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
there's a list of them, um,
under, uh, I believe it's
section 4 in that statute and it
lists uh.
It goes through basically um oh
is where all those offenses
would be listed and in those
offenses, um, according to the
amendment in this bill, if
there's a finding by the DA that
a firearm was used or or the DA
believes a firearm was used in
the commission of any of these
crimes. If there wasn't, it
wouldn't apply. If there was,
the DA would have the discretion
to file a notice to seek adult
sanctions and pursue, uh, the
child.
As an adult, um, through the
court system, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so that would be um an
example, shooting at a dwelling
or a vehicle like the isotopes
incident, I think that we've all
seen most recently, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm,
there's so many shootings at or
a dwelling it would be anything
from um shooting um into an
occupied dwelling, uh, which
injures somebody or causes great
bodily harm or shooting at her
from a motor vehicle, um.
which could cause death or great
bodily harm, um, those would be
the type of crimes we would be
talking about, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I think, you know, looking
at all of these and, and some of
these charges, I'm glad you
explained because I, I wouldn't
even think of them, but they are
the worst of the worst of what
we're seeing across the state
right now, um, and a lot of
those would not fall into just
the voluntary manslaughter.
In the original bill that's
presented today, um, I believe
we have some data that was given
to us as far as regarding
Bernalillo County alone because
we have our expert from there
and in Bertino County alone I
think it was over 1400 charges,
um, in a year and a very violent
offenses and it doesn't seem
like voluntary manslaughter
would cover a majority of these
charges.
Um, so really, I, I think right
now there's 24 individuals
incarcerated for murder, um,
but.
Criminal sexual penetration is
42 people right now behind bars,
is that correct? Um, yeah, Mr.
Speaker Gianetti, yes, so I, I,
and I've seen those statistics
that I'm looking at. I think
another important part of this
amendment is it it discusses the
problem and the statistics of
armed robbery, which is one of
the crimes we've added, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and if you
look at the current youthful
offender statute, it just has
robbery in there if I'm not
mistaken, yes, on page 7 under.
Jay,
so we amended that to armed
robbery so we would actually
pick up the more violent
offense. I mean, I can rob
somebody and not necessarily
have a firearm, um, Mr. Speer
generally but with armed
robbery, which is definitely a
high statistic. I can't even see
what the numbers are on their
beds. It's 40, they're 48, um,
48 currently, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so that would
actually be a higher level than
what's currently in the statute
for more protection that this is
an abuse.
used, you know, for a, a robbery
that is a 3rd degree robbery
versus the 2nd degree robbery,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you for that. Yes, I'm looking
at the statistics and it's 42
and on the statistics sheet, it
shows 65 are behind bars right
now for shooting at or from a
motor vehicle or dwelling, so
that would also cover a lot of
the crime that we're seeing
across the state right now in
your amendment. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and, and
again pick the crimes that we
seem to be seeing the most of
and that would affect the
violent juvenile offenders in
New Mexico the most and.
And the important thing, um, to
remember, which is a little
different from the bill I
carried is that these are all
falling under the youthful
offender statute section on 6,
which is on line 11J and and it
lists the sections already. I
added some, but again these are
all crimes that are not
mandatory time. So, um, it's
very important that the body
understands what the amendments
that I'm making, these are all
crimes that a DA will have
discretion on to decide.
Is this a crime that I want to
seek adult sanctions on, and if
so, they will have to go to a
grand jury and find probable
cause on that or preliminary
hearing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and then it will go
through the process and if
they're convicted of the crime,
um, then they have the
amenability hearing. So at that
point, that is when the judge
decides whether they're going to
be amenable to treatment under
the, the youthful or under the
juvenile system or if they will
actually be sentenced as an
adult.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
they're found amenable, um,
there's nothing mandatory about
this. And even if they aren't
found amenable under any of
these charges, the judge still
has the ability to sentence him
as an adult to probation. So it
leaves discretion um in the
hands of the judge and the
district attorneys and other
people that um can look at the
facts of specific crimes and
then decide what's the best
route, but yet still have the
chance to open up the amount of
crime.
are we can really deal with our
violent juvenile offenders in
the state, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you so much for explaining that.
I mean, I think right now when.
Juvenile crime is at an all-time
crisis and New Mexicans are, are
screaming at the top of their
lungs that they want this
addressed. I think adding these
specific crimes would do a lot
to impact juvenile crime in this
state and knowing that we're not
just locking up juveniles for
the rest of their lives knowing
that they're going to have an
amenability hearing that the
judge will have a choice and the
district attorney, which is a
very important and
key point we'll have a choice of
how to handle these juveniles
and these offenses is so
important so we are not just
locking them up and throwing
away the key and only giving one
choice. This gives um a
multitude of choices, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker,
Generalleti, and it also allows
the victim to have some
discussions with the district
attorney about how the crime
affected them if someone shot
into your home, um, as a victim,
Mr. Speaker, generally.
I think you would want the
opportunity to sit down with the
district attorney and talk about
the facts and specifically how
it affected your family or
whether there was an injury or
not, so that you could actually
then decide whether it should be
handled as this someone we can
rehabilitate because we all want
to rehabilitate kids because
we're just gonna see them again
later, but we aren't in this age
anymore where these kids are
just toeing the line, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, these kids
are, they're laughing at it.
because we're doing nothing and
this opens the door for us to do
something as New Mexicans and
legislators, so, um, I think it
most importantly, it also allows
victims to have input, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
glad you said that. I know I've,
I've heard from several
different people, whether it's
law enforcement, whether it's
somebody working in the
facilities saying that these
juveniles are laughing in our
faces or in the cop car, they're
knowing that they're gonna get
out because we're not doing
anything about what they're
doing, and it seems like their
crimes are becoming more and
more violent, but I'm glad that
you brought up that victims will
have a choice and a chance to
talk to the district attorney
and talk about how this impacted
them, um, being.
that you did work on this first
bill and you're putting thought
into that work that you've done
the last several months. I'm
assuming that you did work with
victims across the state for
feedback. Um, yes, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I have talked to
law enforcement, district
attorneys, the attorney
general's office, all the DPS uh
governor's office as far as
their representatives, um, and
everybody's ready for some
seriousness when it comes to
dealing with.
juvenile offenders. Nobody wants
to take away the rehabilitated
part of what our juvenile system
is supposed to do, um, which is
most of the time 80% of the time
probably is rehabilitating these
kids, but we all have to face
the reality and I think
everybody in this room, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can face
the reality we are not where we
were 5 years ago. We are in a
crime crisis with our kids and
at some time at some point we
have to put our foot down and
deal with them, and I believe
these.
Amendments will open the door
for district attorneys, um, and
law enforcement to do that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I agree 100% and I think
that it is so frustrating as a
community member and a citizen
of New Mexico and is a victim of
crime myself to constantly be
given the excuse that we need to
understand just the why but not
work on the penalties
themselves, I think that we
should be holding these violent
juveniles accountable instead of
just slapping their hand, and I
think that this bill would.
be a solution to the issue that
we're seeing today, and I really
want to thank you for that
because sometimes I feel like we
get so many watered down
solutions and options that
really isn't gonna move the
needle for truly addressing
juvenile crime and I am sick and
tired of seeing people in our
community and across our state
lose their loved ones to
juvenile crime because these
juveniles know that they are not
gonna be held accountable and
Maybe they'll have 1 or 2 years
at most in the juvenile
facility, so I just wanna thank
you for this amendment. I want
the body to truly listen to
these charges, um, that we're
putting into this amendment and
really sit back and think.
Are we holding juveniles
accountable, will this be the
solution, because again, they're
not maximum numbers. It's giving
judges more options for the most
violent of crimes. It's not the
nonviolent charges, a juvenile
caught with marijuana, um,
somebody shoplifting from a
store, it is the most violent
charges for killing New Mexicans
across the state, so thank you
so much for that.
Gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gently.
And a lady from Santa Fe
Speaker, I move to House floor
amendment number 1 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 255. We are on a
motion to table Houselo
Amendment number 1.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 255, a
vote of yes. The amendment is
tabled. The vote of no. We're
back on the amendment 32nd
clock. The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 32 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative House floor
amendment number 1 to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 255 has been
tabled.
gentle lady from
Kuri Chavez Roosevelt
Representative Reed, back to
you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
and gentle lady obviously upset
the amendment didn't pass. I
really feel I tried to do an
amendment that would um have
both sides allowing the
rehabilitated process but also
addressing the concerns of our
community, um, and our
stakeholders and leaders and law
enforcement and our citizens and
the people who elect us, uh, to
really deal with this juvenile
crime with um.
Um, you know, the issues that
we're seeing, um, so
unfortunately, I, I believe back
on the bill, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I don't believe
adding just manslaughter in
there and these two other minor
changes are going to deal with
the situation that we have at
hand, um, whatsoever, um, so
with that I, I will not be
supporting this bill, um, I
thank you for the discussion and
um I will yield Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from Berton Leo
representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady,
I yield to my co-sponsor lady, I
have a series of questions that
I think will help clarification
for the body and so Mr. Speaker,
let me start with
What is a useful offender under
law.
And how has the definition
changed?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
you look on page 6 line 11 J
youthful offender means a
delinquent child subject to
adult or juvenile sanctions who
is 14 to 18 years of age, um,
and then, um, it lists a bunch
of crimes that fall under that.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
So how does this change a case?
Or an outcome of a juvenile
charged with a voluntary
manslaughter.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
by adding this, we are basically
leaving it up to the judge for
an amenability hearing and they
can decide at that point whether
the child is amenable to
treatment or should, you know,
it's truly a danger and can't
be.
Rehabilitated.
Thank you, General Le. Mr.
Speaker.
And gentle lady, can you speak?
And I think this is important,
particularly as we contemplate
the amendment that we were
hearing a little while ago.
Can you tell me a little bit
more.
About the judge's latitude in a
situation that is being
adjudicated.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, it, it gives the judge the
latitude of charging them as a
juvenile or as as an adult again
depending on the severity of the
crime, the, the circumstances of
the child's upbringing substance
use of there's, um, it can look
at any factors.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker,
Under the delinquency Act
currently.
What is short term commitment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
a year.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Can you
encapsulate
Philosophically.
What has changed in this, this
bill by the substitute.
Mr. Speaker and general
gentlemen, I think it's a kind
of as I've said before, a
compromise, um, my bill was
shorter, uh, and it didn't have
the manslaughter. We listened to
folks, we put in the
manslaughter and as I've said
before, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, the purpose of this
bill is to catch kids before
they get to be serious, you, you
juvenile offenders and by
getting them treatment by
getting them education, by
getting them stable housing, um,
whatever it is that they.
need then we will set them on
the right path to to join
society.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of
the key items and it was
discussed earlier is the uh the
notion of of supervision in the
time and length of services. Why
is the extension of supervision
important and how will it help
our children?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
it, it just gives more time. I,
I someone told me earlier this
morning that the research
they've been reading said it's a
minimum of 9 months to really
rehabilitate a child, but, but
we realized that might not be
realistic. So just, I mean,
doubling the time where they
have to get their lives together
where they have to get some job
skills, get a high school
equivalency, get a stable place,
get treatment for their
substance use disorders. It just
gives more time.
to
for the kid and the team that's
working with them.
I, I would say him, him or her,
um,
time to get get themselves
together.
Thank you I appreciate that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, even after
a judge.
Sentences a kid.
That was your word.
To a term of commitment and
supervised release, can that
sentence change?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
it can.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, why
can't it change?
OK, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
The judge can the
The, the judge can extend the um
period, the commitment or the
the youth can um petition for a
decreased sentence.
Thank you, General Lee, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so.
Would that be considered
judicial discretion?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would, I would think so.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Speaker. This bill also makes a
substantial change to supervised
release when a juvenile has
finished serving time and
commitment.
But now is in a community
program or rebuild or rebuild
then I'll get it out
rehabilitation.
Program, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and general
gentlemen, yes, you know,
depending on what it is that the
child needs if the child has a
very supportive family that can
help keep them going in the
right direction. It could be at
home and we will have local
panels to decide, um, what kind
of, what kind of treatment, um,
services are needed by that
youth or child.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and this
bill provides for funding to
strengthen those rehabilitation
programs, is that correct,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, there, there is
a program called um yeah.
Um, the juvenile community, it's
corrections now we're, we're
amending it to connections is a
grant fund in the state treasury
that's overseen by CYFD and in
recently.
I write numbers too many places.
I believe that that fund, um,
had that 6.1 million was
reverted.
Thank you. That's essential, Mr.
Speaker.
General lady, can you tell me
about the balance that we are
trying to strike between
punishment.
commitment and rehabilitation
for our youth.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
will try, um, so basically, as
I've said several times, um.
Kids youth kids are their brains
aren't.
Fully developed, they don't have
great impulse control, so we are
trying to, as I said, move
upstream and get them the
services they need before they
become a murderer.
Thank you gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker.
A closing comment, you know, the
Speaker, the reason I was
excited by this bill, the
substitute bill generally.
It was because
In essence, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Members of the body, it does two
key things.
One, it provides an awful lot of
carrot.
And that's enticing at the same
time it provides that needed
stick for.
Being able to answer to a
juvenile that is absolutely out
of control and commit some of
the things that have been
described earlier. So Mr.
Speaker, with that, I yield back
to the lady.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from Bernardo
Representative Chavez.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do you
yield, Mr. Speaker and gentle
gentle lady from Health, I
yield.
Thank you, gentle lady. I have.
Some questions on the original
bill and I know we've had
several conversations, whether
it was in another committee or
or now on the floor when we talk
about science, but I just wanna
remind everybody that today
we're talking about reality and
the reality is there are more
and more juveniles committing
more and more violent crimes and
killing.
Our loved ones in the state of
New Mexico.
We have the opportunity right
now to bring true meaningful
change.
Not just rehabilitation, but
truly to hold our juveniles
accountable now, I am not a
hypocrite. I know people love to
say Nicole wants to lock
everybody up and throw away the
key. That is not the case. I
work with the incarcerated
whether it's adults or the
juvenile facilities and I
strongly believe in working with
our incarcerated and finding out
the whys we absolutely need to
find out the whys, but we also
need to hold them accountable.
and we also need to remember
that a lot of times when our
juveniles are incarcerated. It's
the only time that they see
hope.
That they see a better way that
they get their GED that they
want to go further in college,
that they learn a trade, because
sometimes they come from a home
of of generational crime, uh,
gangs and that's the only life
that they know.
I know
when I spoke.
With one of my son's murderers.
He told me
The only way he saw a why and
wanted to do better was because
of the individuals that work at
YDC.
He got his GED. He ended up
enrolling in college and taking
courses. He really wanted to
change his life, and that's what
we need to do, but sometimes the
only way that they make their
lives better is by being
incarcerated because we're
holding them accountable for the
decisions that they've made.
Um, you know, this is a hard
one, and I don't want.
People to think that.
The legislature doesn't care
about victims and that we don't
want to give them justice
because more than anything
that's what I want. That's why
I'm here.
Um, but I wanted to just first
Point out to the body that
first degree homicide, which
In this state has a 30 year
sentence.
It's not life in prison and
throwing away the key. Second
degree homicide in this state
only gives an 18 year maximum,
and that's only because of a
bill we passed a year ago we're
the only state in the country
that doesn't have a minimum for
second degree homicide.
That to me
is not OK and then in 2023 we
passed the second chance Bill.
That even cut down life
sentences for juvenile offenders
even more, and I worked across
party lines trying to give my
input and so I just want to
remind the body that that cut
down, I believe it took life
sentences away, which again is
only 30 years and dropped it
down to 15 years for a parole
hearing.
For homicide and then every 5
years after that, they get a
parole hearing.
So in no way in this state, are
we locking people up and
throwing away the key. So I
think
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
if you're comfortable putting
manslaughter in the youthful
offender category might I just
ask or throw out is there any
way that you could add 2nd
degree murder to the serious
youthful offender that is
killing somebody at point blank.
I know.
Um, one of my son's murders is
behind bars for killing two
different people. One of them,
he killed 6 months after he
killed my son because he wasn't
yet arrested and shot him point
blank at a house party in front
of everybody, and that was 2nd
degree homicide to me that's
pretty violent, um, is there any
way you would consider just
changing some of those or at
least adding that to serious
youthful offender.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
unfortunately, no, and the
reason is because that would
force the judge to sentence the
the youth as a as an adult and,
and we are trying to leave
options
as you stated, kids grow up in a
family where they know nothing
but crime and abuse and and
substance use, so we're we're
trying to use the scalpel and
Not
And leave it up to the judge,
depending on the individual
case, depending on the
individual youth, um, I'm not a
big believer in one size fits
all.
Mr. Spiegel, gentle lady, and
that's what we tried to do
earlier, give the judges a
choice. Second degree homicide
point blank, you're murdering
somebody. That's just giving an
option at a maximum to put
somebody behind bars for 18
years. It could be a minimum of
probation. It could be a minimum
of 2 years. There's no minimum
in this state, so to me we are
not even thinking that that is
an adequate penalty for
murdering somebody in.
taking their lives away. I guess
I just don't understand how we
are so stuck on the why, but we
don't care about the
accountability and the lives
that were taken, and that's what
I feel like we're doing, um, in
this case, um Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, was
there gentle lady, was there a
question?
Well, I guess my question is.
Why when we have the one chance
here because I, I believe that
this is a, a very important bill
we are doing two things today
which haven't been done in a
long time. We are looking at
A minor penalty, but we are also
looking at rehabilitation and
trying to make the incarcerated
better. I think that this is our
one shot to actually not give a
watered down bill to the state
of New Mexico and the citizens
and the victims, but truly give
a bill that's gonna hold the
most violent juveniles
accountable for their actions
and so I just want to point that
out one.
More time are you willing to at
least put any of the other
charges or a serious youthful
offenses into this bill today.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
because that would mandate them
to be treated as adults.
And we know that the vast
majority of them will come out
at some point and, and if we
haven't learned anything, we, we
should have learned that
incarceration, particularly for
youth.
Leads to anger and um.
uh um being
not being part of society so
we're trying to not throw the
kids away. We're giving the
judge an opportunity to to
sentence as they see fit, but,
but I don't want um kids who,
who
Who really didn't have a chance
ever growing up to spend 30
years in prison.
Again, remember it's not 30
years, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it's a maximum of 18 if we're
talking about second degree
homicide, so it could be as
little as probation or 2 years,
um, but to me it just feels
like, again, you talked about
how angry and how upset the
criminals are the offenders, how
do you think that the victims
feel, how do you think that the
parents feel when they're having
to bury their children in that
ground.
How do you think that the
parents have to feel like myself
when every single birthday,
holiday, I go to the cemetery to
visit my son.
I feel like that needs some type
of accountability in addition to
just concentrating on the
rehabilitation. It is important
lives were taken, so let me just
remind you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when there is a youthful
offender, even if they're 17
years old and they kill
somebody, 2nd degree homicide,
point blank.
They're only going to be in
there for a maximum of 21 years
if they're held amenable, which
doesn't always happen actually a
majority of the time I don't
think it does. Um, my son, when
he was murdered 9.5 years ago,
the same day.
Steve Gerrike was killed by a
mobster of teens in his own
driveway, and guess what? All 6
of those individuals.
We're not held amenable and so
most of them are already out
right now.
Um, I think there's only one
person still in there, but he's
gonna get out when he's 18, I
believe, so, um, again I just, I
just want to remind the body
we're here to truly help.
The citizens of New Mexico and
today we really had an
opportunity, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady to do both and
that's all I've ever wanted from
the beginning is to do both.
Rehabilitation. Look at the why
and hold criminals accountable.
With that I yield, Mr. Speaker,
generally.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from San Miguel and
Torrance, Representative
Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. There's a gentle lady
from Bernalillo Yie, Mr.
Speaker, I gladly yield to my
co-sponsor, um.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I do have some
questions on the other portions
of the bill that were presented
here, um.
We've made a lot of work here in
this body, um, specifically
passing some important CYFD
reform work. Um, how do you see
this proposal tying in to that
CYFD reform work that we have
passed here in this chamber so
far.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
for one thing, it, um, kind of.
Tightens up. Well, let me start
with it will allow kids who have
not been adjudicated, but CYFD
sees that they, they may be
having issues and need some
treatment, so, so first off we
don't have to wait until the
child has been adjudicated
before we can provide them
services and uh it it takes some
of the, I would say it takes
some of the onus off CYFD since
we're setting up panels for lack
of a better word, in in in
counties or or towns.
where they can kind of figure
out um what services are
available, what services need to
be available, those kind of
things, so, so I think it's just
putting, uh, I hate to say this,
more tools in the toolbox.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
Gentle lady, um, you mentioned
panels talking a little bit
about the panels, um, this bill
also changes the panel
structure, uh, maybe how that's
look like, um,
There is a selection panel.
There's something that's
involved in the panel. What is
the panel's job as you're
talking about um the panel, the,
the, the jobs of a panel have
come up. What is the panel's job
with this legislation?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you tell me what page you're on?
Page, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, page me two lanes 7 to
12.
Oh, so, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, in case that it's
called selection panels, a
county municipality or private
organization individually or
jointly may establish a local
panel whose duties shall be to
immediately screen and identify
delinquent sentence to a
juvenile facility of the
department and transferred to
the legal custody of the
department.
Um
These entities are likely to
have direct insight into the
needs of the children in the
context of delinquency
proceedings based on their
location things in Albuquerque
will look really different than
things in weed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, so you
talked about those, it being now
a local panel, um, can you maybe
give some examples, um, I know
you kind of read through, but
like how do you see that panel
working in different
communities? Maybe what are some
examples of who may be on those
panels.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the panels are pretty much open
and.
that, uh, let's see, um.
So on the bottom of page 22 line
um 24, the composition of a
local panel shall include
representatives from the
judiciary, the public defender
department or the public
defender department's designee,
the district attorney or their
designee local schools CYFD
county sheriff or the mun
municipal police department
individuals representing local
programs and private citizens
and, and the reason we made it
local is because of course.
Folks locally know what services
there are, no, you know, that
they're maybe there used to be
services and they closed down
because they didn't have work,
um, because of the reverting of
the money back to CYFD so we're,
we're trying to give local local
control in terms of what, you
know, I mean, and then people,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
know, know every and small
communities, everybody knows
everybody. You know if the
parents are, are a good place to
place the child or not.
You know, you know, a lot of
things, so, um, it's just using
the knowledge and the resources
of the local area.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, walking through maybe
some next steps with that panel,
um, if this panel determines
that a suitable a child is
suitable for placement, say, in
a particular program or for
service, um, how exactly does
that happen?
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the um, the, the, the.
panel will make a recommendation
to the judge, um who can.
Decide if that's appropriate way
to go.
OK, thank you Mr. Speaker, um,
thank you, gentle lady. Um, I
have, I have just a few more.
closing questions, um, myself,
especially coming from a rural
area, this was a concern of
mine. This was something we're
talking about services, we're
talking about different
programming. Uh, we know that
there are not currently enough
programs in all communities in
our state, um, what happens when
services aren't available in a
kid's community. How do we go
about getting those resources as
described in this legislation,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
part of me says um build it and
they, you know, if there's
funding then.
the services will come. I mean,
I, that's what I've always said
about autism they'd say, oh, you
know, well, how come there's no
services? Well, there's no
services because there's no
money for services, so, um.
Let's see, the, the bill
provides funding for programs
focused on decreasing violence,
gun violence, alcohol and
substance abuse, gang activity,
criminal mentality, trauma,
anger management and improving
mental health.
And then followed by that those
that those types of treatments
would be given first priority
for the funding. Second priority
are education, literacy,
financial literacy, job
training, apprenticeships, food
justice and housing and then um
the third priority are arts
performing arts, sports, music,
debate, and leadership in terms
of getting funding.
OK
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady for going
over through the types of
different services, um, will
this bill, um, House Bill 255
will help to build a system of
programs throughout the state,
especially in those areas that
it doesn't have any Speaker and
gentle lady, that's the hope,
and not, I mean, we all know,
and you've heard me say a
billion times, we don't have the
healthcare providers, but some
of these systems can be run by
um
Like, uh, uh, a non
non-professionally degreed
medical folks, they know, peer
support and that kind of thing.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady with that I yield my
time.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalillo,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and
Well, the gentle lady yielded,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
gladly yield.
Thank you gentle lady.
Unfortunately, as his body
knows, I too have unfortunately
experience have experience in
this area.
The offender in our
situation was actually 19 at the
time.
But it was during the sentencing
hearing that the court was
provided.
With information about prior gun
related activities by this
individual.
But he had not been through the
adjudication process.
So it wasn't part of the record.
And I wonder.
I wonder
As I heard the story of his
life, a very tragic early life.
Mm
That if he had been provided
this assistance.
Prior to him coming into contact
with my brother.
Might the outcome have been
different?
And so with that in mind.
I look, I have some questions
and some of them might have been
addressed earlier but um I would
appreciate just a quick review.
Can you tell me how much you,
how many youths were committed?
Uh, a year ago.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
committed.
that incarcerated incarcerated,
OK, I'm sorry. No, that's OK,
just making sure we're speaking
the same language.
Approximate Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, approximately 80.
And so today, how many uh uh
that was a year ago how many
today Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady at 128.
Does the Mexico.
Incarcerated and I thought I
heard some of the conversation
as I was preparing my comments.
Um, did they incarcerate Does
New Mexico incarcerate kids more
or less than the national
average, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, my experts say higher and
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
forgot to introduce my experts
Megan Dorsey, who is chief
counsel for the, um,
Speaker's office and Nick
Costeas, who was a long time,
um, I wrote down his title with
CYFD, um, and now he's an
advocate.
Thank you.
So if New Mexico is more
punitive than the national
average.
And
So the issues and the issues
we're seeing among juveniles
today do you think?
The greater driver.
Of this is a lack of punishment
here.
Or could it be?
Um, failures.
Um, for a lack of a better word
elsewhere in our systems.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think there, there are a lot of
failures in our system and lack
of behavioral health, um, on the
Health and Human Services
Committee over the interim, we
got a report from, um, the
social workers statewide task
force that only 26% of New
Mexicans who seek out behavioral
health care can get it. So if
you're not seeking it out,
you're really not gonna get it
and on average it takes 10
different calls to get an
appointment for behavioral
health.
provider. We have a problem with
substance use, alcohol abuse,
poverty, um, there, there's,
there's a lot of reasons it and
I
I think the research shows that
and, and many countries in
Europe have also shown that
locking people away isn't the
way to, I mean, they, they, they
should be punished, but I, we
have to remember that the
majority of them will come back
into society and if all we do is
basically turn them into animals
in cages that it's not going to
that, that hasn't worked for us.
Mr. Speakham, Madam
Representative.
So how does this bill address
that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it,
it will help the youth, um, and
it, in the, the help may
involve, you know, getting the
the parents um behavioral health
treatment substance use disorder
treatment, it may, it will, it,
the, the youth can get um a high
school equivalency or even do
some college or job skills. They
will learn how to manage their
money, um, so that.
As I've said many times, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we
catch them before they get to
the point where they pull a gun
and shoot someone in a movie
theater.
Mr. Speaker,
Madam Representative.
My question is about this next
question is about funding.
To increase the community
programs.
Because it does take a village.
Um
To increase the community
programs that supervise
juveniles and provide
rehabilitation services.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, it does. Um, as, as I
stated earlier, CYFD reverted
6.1 million of it and part of
this bill is is to um.
I, I won't say force, but I mean
force. CYFD to use these funds
as their intended instead of
reverting them to get treatment
for, for youth.
And, and the, the really good
part of this bill, at least as
far as I'm concerned, Mr.
Speaker, is that it will allow
youth who can be referred from
CYFD rather than having to wait
until they've done a crime and
get adjudicated, then they can
be referred. So we're skipping
that part where they have to do
a crime to get help.
Thank you. So am I correct uh
when I say that this funding
could address help to address
the root causes because that is
what I heard during our
particular situation.
Um
Anger, the mental health, the
issues in the family.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, it, it, it, that's, that's
what we're looking at and and we
we know I mean we've all heard
horror stories about how kids
have been raised, how they've
been treated, generations of
criminal activity generations of
untreated behavioral health
issues, so the money is there
and we are just this bill.
will allow it to be used to.
Basically build a community
around the people who the youth
who uh either are adjudicated or
referred by the department to
help them and and rep
representative, um, the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative de la Cruz talked
about.
Allowing stipends for these
youths, so if they get if they
get released from incarceration
and they have nowhere to go
they're gonna go back to the
same places in the same people
where they got in trouble
before, so if we can provide a
stipend for college tuition or a
s stipend for, for a bus pass
and an apartment so they can
kind of move away from the
communities that got them in
trouble.
Thank you for that. So with all
of this funding that might be
available for them, how.
In your view, how in this bill
will funding be prioritized.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's what I talked about, um,
in terms of the programs um.
Yeah.
Let me go back and find that um.
Yeah, so, so, um.
In the, the, the first priority
will be programs focused on
decreasing violence, gun
violence, alcohol and substance
abuse, gang activity, criminal
mentality, trauma, anger
management, and improving mental
health.
The second is education,
literacy, financial literacy,
job training, apprenticeships,
food justice and housing, and
then 3 are um,
Arts and sports, essentially.
Thank you so much, um.
For that information. So moving
through, Mr. Speaker, through
the life of a young person at
the age of 14 should they come
into the system.
Um
They're going to at some point
leave commitment.
And
Uh, correct, I mean that is the
idea, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I think the number I was
given is 95.
85.
About 95% will rejoin the
community.
OK
So going to the issue of
probation as I was reading and
trying to uh.
Understand all of these pieces,
um, remind me again.
About the process or what
happens today if a child.
uh, uh, absconds.
absconds from probation.
Or chooses not to comply and
participate in the programs.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
the way current law is now, if
they, if, you know, if you can
abscond for six months in your
probation is 6 months when you
come back, it's over under this
bill what will happen is let's
say you're, you've got 6 months
of probation and you've done a
month and then you disappear for
5 months when you come back,
you're gonna go back to that one
month and still have to do the,
the additional time that you
were missing.
OK, thank you. So how does this
different differ, um, from a
youth that absconded during
supervised release, is that the
same? Am I?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Thank you.
Now,
Does this bill.
Can you tell me how it changes
this bill changes that and
strengthens juvenile.
Juvenile probation, sorry, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
It
It makes sure that the youth
does the full 6 months, um,
right now, you know, if you get
out in your, your, you are
sentenced to 6 months of
probation and you go live with
your grandmother in California
for 6 months and then come back,
you're done. Under this you go
moved with your grandma, you
come back and you still got to
do the 6 months.
Thank you. I can see, uh, I, I
have Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, I think my final.
Thoughts on this is I can see
how these changes actually can
help children of New Mexico
facing these serious.
Crimes from
Lives that might otherwise.
Have been different had the
opportunities for services and
interventions taking place.
Um, how that can be different,
um.
Thank you for this information.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward, um.
I appreciate it and I will be
supporting it thank you thank
you gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Bernalia
represented Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
general lady from Berna Leo,
would you yield, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the one of the other
gentle ladies from Bernal Leo.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, um, so while I'm
sitting here listening to all of
this debate, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I've been
texted by some of my
constituents, um, and, um, I'm
just gonna read just a little
portion of what they say, um,
this is a priority.
making headway for juvenile
crime, um, they get slapped on
the hand. We have we have
consequences for what we do, and
that includes children,
juveniles and adults, and, and
actually they asked me to speak
gentle lady and Mr. Speaker, um,
I was gonna speak anyway,
honestly, but um.
How would you gentle lady and
Mr. Speaker, how would you
respond to my constituents when
I get back, um.
knowing that we had 2 bills that
were one was a little different
and I did sign on to that bill
and I'm proud to have signed on
to that bill, uh, gentle lady
and Mr. Speaker, I wish I had
known about your bill sooner
because I probably would have
signed on to that bill as well,
um, but
How would you respond to that,
um, constituent that just text
me a minute ago, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so as I've said
many times, this is trying to
prevent, um, you know, once the,
the horrible things have
happened to as to two of our um
colleagues here.
They, they still, uh, it was,
it's still up to the judge to
determine um what the sentence
is, and I think the important
part to remember is that we are
providing for 6 months of
treatment, education, whatever
it is, so that they can become
participating members of our
community as opposed to gang
members or, um, you know, giving
them a support system that they
may have lacked.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and I know your work, um,
generally I've watched you work
over the years and I know that
you're very much uh community
health oriented, which I am as
well, having been a city
planner, um, and I, and I
appreciate that about you. I do,
um, and I know that you're
looking for a way to um
have accountability.
For the youth and for their
actions, but finding a way to
bridge that gap to maybe at some
point making them um
Um
Productive citizens, do you
think that's correct, gentle
lady, and my Mr. Speaker, I
believe so.
Yeah, I think I, that's kind of
the, the feeling that I get, um,
I, and when I think about the
discussion that we had about
the, the, you know, about.
How we hold our youth
accountable and how we hold all
of us accountable actually, um,
you know, there are, and I
remember this from when I was a
kid, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, you know, there's a
hard and swift, uh, you know,
when my dad took the belt out,
um, and then there was a um more
a little more compassionate,
it's like if you do this, then
maybe you can, you know, go out
with your friends if you come.
ma
11 o'clock or whatever, um, so
there's, you know, there's
different approaches, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady for how
people are, are held
accountable. Would you do
different degrees, would you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Speaker and gentle
lady, I would agree with that,
but I think it's important to
remind the body that the, the,
the number one thing to prevent
further criminal activity is
the.
Um surety and the speed of
consequences. So if, if, if we
can get it, um, get our system
to the place where you were,
everybody knows that if they do
something they're going to be
caught and they're going to.
Be dealt with quickly that's
much more much more meaningful
than, you know, grabbing them in
3 years and throwing them,
putting them in some sort of a
confined situation for 18 years.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you talked about um
Um, you know, the, um,
Sort of lack of behavioral
health facilities and what the
state needs to do, and I just
wonder, does this relate to a
bill that we passed earlier, um
SB 3.
I'm just curious. I mean, uh,
because I think there was some
funding, uh, attached to some of
those bills that we passed
earlier and how they kind of
interface with each other, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, as I've
said there already is the
funding, but um a big infusion
of dollars into behavioral
health are going to help.
Businesses to pop up to to fill
the need, um, and there were
These things are hard on thumbs.
There were um.
Agencies, groups that did some
of this work and the contracts
dried up, so they dried up, so
we're hoping it's kind of a
multifaceted approach including
more money for behavioral health
in general. thank you for that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
because that clarifies a lot in
my mind about, you know, how I
would support this bill because
it, it goes back to a comment
that I made this morning when we
had a uh a an earlier meeting
and discussion about
The lack of
um of um.
Programs that are out there to
help rehabilitate and I think
that this is a move in that
direction, um, from maybe how
we've been dealing with things
in the past and I think it was
uh Judge Zamora who brought this
to our um our uh committee, our
justice committee or criminal
justice or I can't remember the
the name of it exactly, but our
committee during the interim
about diversion programs that.
That would actually help our
youth, uh, get back on track,
hopefully, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and this is kind
of, this is a move in that
direction. Would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
absolutely, and I have to give,
um, lots of credit to Justice
Zamora for all the work that
she's done around this.
I agree with you on that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, the
one thing that I would
definitely um and I, and I
raised that this morning in our
meeting as well as the the.
The need for a coordinated
approach, uh, a coordinated um
program.
And services or some kind of a
clearing house that not only
informs legislators but also
informs the public of where and
and how many of these programs
are going to be needed across
the state to in fact help our
youth get back on track and, and
I understand that there are
severities in terms of crimes
that were committed because that
was discussed today, um, but I
think that it's important that
we.
um
You know
But we understand that these
programs will help our youth
become productive citizens and
you know I, I truly admire you
for, for taking this step, uh,
and, and all of your sponsors,
uh, Mr. Speaker and Madam,
madam, um, I was gonna call you
Madam Leader, Madam
Representative, I truly do
admire you because it, it, it
really is a move in a different
direction, um, and there are
other states in the country.
that are doing that is that not
correct, uh, Mr. Speaker, and,
and gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes.
With that, Mister Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I appreciate
your, um,
Your candidness. I also wanted
to mention that um,
And I just had one more
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and then I'm gonna close,
um.
So when they when when our
youth.
commit a crime and they go into
this program that you're
proposing here, um, they are
still being held accountable.
Are they not, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen gentle lady, yes, they
are still being held
accountable.
And with that, thank you, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you for your time.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Chavez Erian
Ortero, Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, will
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Yild, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After
listening to this discussion, I
just wanna make sure I
understand something very clear.
If I'm a youth, if I'm 16 years
old.
And I commit murder.
What's gonna happen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
it's first degree murder you're
treated as an adult.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
it's 2nd degree.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle,
gentlemen, it's it's under the
amenability hearing so the judge
can decide if it's uh an adult
offense or a juvenile offense
and maybe I'm using the wrong
terms because I'm not a lawyer
but.
Hopefully you get the message.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, in
this bill.
If, if the judge decides that
I'm not to be tried as an adult.
What's the maximum sentence I
can get, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, up to the age of 21.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and I
just wanna make sure I
understand this because I did
not catch it until just
recently, and that's, I think
why I pushed to speak.
When I get out at 21, if this
bill gets passed, then I can get
my college paid for and an
apartment paid for, is that what
I just heard. I just want to
make sure I'm clear on that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's a possibility, but there
are requirements that have to be
met.
Including education, um, job
training, those kinds of things.
Mr. Speaker, that's all I
needed. Thank you.
There is for the debate.
The gentle lady from Catcher and
Sierra Socora and Valencia
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Bern Leo yield,
and I know your thumb is tired.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
talk for a while and I'll let my
thumb rest. I, I do, I do yield.
Uh, thank you, um, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, um, I, I
was, uh, I, I read that also in
our analysis, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, where it says, uh, added a
pilot project that allows a
stipend not to exceed $2000 a
month for adults.
Um, former foster or delinquent
children that are enrolled in a
post-secondary education or an
apprenticeship program.
Or a program that promotes
employment and removes barriers
to employment is, is that, uh,
Fairly specific.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm gonna defer to my
co-sponsor, and this is kind of
his part his part of the bill.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady.
Uh, let me just outline what is
required for participation, the,
the qualifying individual would
need to be enrolled in a
post-secondary education program
participating in apprenticeship
program or workforce development
recognized by the workforce
solutions department or
participating in a program or
activity designed to promote
employment or remove barriers to
employment.
Channel lady, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I, I'm curious, what
are the parameters in place if
they reoffend.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady is, if
you recall that there was a
panel, uh, also you have CYFD so
if they're amenable to, you
know, we're talking about
formally incarcerated, not
talking about somebody that ages
out of the uh foster care
program so if they are suitable
for
That funding for that program
and then they enroll and follow
the outlines that are in the
bill that is what it will take,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and so is, uh, where
is this panel? Who appoints this
panel?
While we're waiting, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. I did
talk about that earlier. There's
a list of, of, of folks that
must be on there, um, the, the
DA or their designee, the law
enforcement and or their
designee it can be people from
schools, um, you know, just
people in the community, uh,
behavioral health providers,
it's, it's pretty, pretty open
who can participate in the
panels.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and that's in the bill,
correct. Written, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
I can find the page if you want,
OK. Oh, page 22 I hear.
Oh yeah, at the bottom of page
22 on to page 23.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um.
And that $2000 a month, uh,
where is that funding coming
from?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
funding can come from two
different places.
In House Bill 2, there's $4
million appropriate appropriated
for the.
Next Generation fund.
And also.
juvenile community Connections
Act.
the
Has a fund associated for as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, um, and the, the, the
other question that I didn't get
answered yet is the
accountability part if they
reoffend.
What happens
Um
Do they, do we give them another
second chance, a 3rd chance, a
4th chance? How many chances do
they get, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, to be able to access
$2000 a month of taxpayer
dollars.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
This anticipates one act if
there is an offender that
reoffends for whatever reason
and to the extent that they do
that again it falls to the
judicial system and to a
judgment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, but who's making the
decision if they keep receiving,
is there a report? Do they
report to somebody? How do, how
do we find out that they've
reoffended and does the money
get cut off then, uh, who makes
that decision?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
they don't reoffend, then it's
not an issue if they reoffend
they needs to be adjudicated in
whatever manner is necessary and
appropriate for the judicial
system, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, that's not my
question. My question is the
$2000 a month if they reoffend,
who gets that report if they are
found guilty of reoffending.
Who is held accountable for
making sure that they don't keep
receiving the $2000 a month of
taxpayer money.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Both the healthcare department
as well as the higher education
department they oversee the
student, they oversee the
disbursement of the fund. So if
there is an issue related to
that particular individual, they
are a part of that system. They
are in the system.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, I'm
still not quite getting the
answer of how does the reporting
work and how are they made aware
that they reoffended and were
found guilty. How was the higher
education department and the
healthcare authority made aware
and where are those checks and
balances.
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, let me
just read this.
It is on page 32D, the Higher
Education department shall
promulgate rules for the form
and manner of application
procedures and criteria for
reviewing applications, the
methodology for evaluating
participants and other rules
necessary to carry out the
provisions of this section. If
the higher education department
determines that the Federal
Societ Social Security Act
requires waivers or
authorizations.
Speaker General Lei, it is the
higher department and remember.
General lady, Mr. Speaker, that
they are enrolled in a higher
education program they are
connected to the system.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, I
am not getting an answer on my
question.
How do we know?
If they, who is checking on.
The child or the person, the
adult, whoever it is, that's
receiving the $2000 a month of
taxpayer money.
If they reoffend.
How are higher education and
the, the.
the justice system connected so
that they know.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, once
they are released.
And they are qualified to be
within an educational system if
there is no problem within their
Enrollment, uh, there's nothing
to check if something happens
outside of that, that's where
the educational department is
aware because they are part of
that system.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
I, I think that we're talking in
circles, um, and so I, I'm gonna
move on. Um, I don't think there
is accountability and checks and
balances in that process, and
that's a concern to me, uh, to
be, uh, reoffending and still
receiving dollars because
they're, it's, uh, apparently
going to be promulgated in
rules, something we don't really
know how, we don't really know
where, we don't really know
what. So Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
I'll move on.
uh, with
my next question. So in, in my
community, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I sit on the juvenile
Justice Board.
And Mr. Speaker, kind gentle
lady, I, uh, um, one of your
expert witnesses in the room was
well aware of uh one time when
we got our funding cut.
And he worked really hard to
help us get that funding back,
which we didn't.
But these were all services for
children after school, and this
was 8 years ago, maybe longer.
Where we, um, one of my very
first things, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, where, um, I, I worked
really hard to to figure out how
can we get this funding back.
These are for kids that don't
have any place to go after
school. These are for after
school programs where we were
taking these kids in and making
sure that they had a place to
go, they had extracurricular
activities. They weren't out
breaking into houses, they
weren't acting, uh, running
amok, and, and so, um, you know,
courts, DAs, uh, judges,
sits on, sit on these juvenile
justice, uh, the Jay Jacks, um,
direct dollars, uh, preventions
for inmate intervention after
school programs, uh.
Refuse um all kinds of skills
training, reducing risky
behavior, restorative justice,
teen court, um, and so.
My, my biggest concern, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, is that
Is that we, we have had these
programs in place for many
years.
The funding was cut.
And now all of a sudden, because
we're gonna give them more
funding, we're gonna do all
these things that, that sounds
so great on paper.
Behavioral health, that's a big
one, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
You and I both know we fought
hard.
This body has fought hard for
behavioral health.
But there's still barriers. We
still have licensing barriers.
We still have licensing red tape
for behavioral health
specialists coming from out of
state, coming from other, other
states to get their licensing,
to get credentialed, to receive
Medicaid.
So there's, there's this is a
much larger picture of, of
what's going on in the state of
New Mexico and Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
I will, I will end with.
New Mexico is spoken and they
want answers and they want
action. This is in my opinion is
a watered down bill that's not
going to give action.
We've done this already. It
hasn't worked.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentle lady,
the greatest teacher of all
times.
Showed mercy.
But people were also
Served with justice. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady. Mr.
Speaker, if I might add
something.
Oh OK
Thank you Mr. Speaker
thank you Representative. Uh,
there is for the debate, uh, the
gentleman from Valencia,
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, um, there's a generality
yield from Bernal Leo Speaker, I
yield from the to the gentleman
from Valencia.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady.
You know, I was sitting here and
I was listening to the debate
and something occurred to me so
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so a
a as.
A youth that has committed these
crimes and has gone through
their um
As far as in cars racing
weather.
Are they then eligible for the
opportunities scholarship, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
thought so, but yes they are.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker, generally the
body, so.
Does our current
Opportunity scholarship.
Do we know what that covers, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's not in this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, then
I'll go in and help out because
of the bill because I do think
it has relevance to what we're
trying to do here, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it covers books
tuition and fees.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
does not cover.
Housing or food.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And for the body so a youth that
has committed a serious crime.
And qualifies for the
opportunity.
And is receiving a stipend of
$2000 a month.
Is getting more than the student
who has gone through our
schools, has done what they need
to.
And is having to uh parents are
having to write a check and
students are having to take out
loans to meet the needs of the
cost of attendance. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the, the number one
deterrent to recidivism is
education and employment, so and
it the $2000 is a maximum. It
could be anything below that,
and there are qualifications for
the.
Opportunity scholarship so um
we.
Again, as I've said, what we're
trying to do is make sure that
these youth have the skills
necessary to become parts of
society, so I, I mean, I, I, I
don't know in terms of this
opportunity scholarship because
that's not addressed in here but
we are trying to get them
educated and or job ready.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
generally, but I think it, I
think it is.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when
you talk about that to be
eligible and I understand very
much, Mr. Speaker, generally
about rehabilitation and
training.
But Mr. Speaker, generally, and
we're talking about the times,
the types of crim activity in
crimes committed.
And that while many other
students who did not offend.
Or having to and and are not,
will not be receiving the $2000
to attend colleges, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I think that's that's something
that I want to bring to the
attention of the body and to the
public there because that that
is something that is a concern.
Of the stipend of the money, so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do you
care to respond?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Mr. Speaker, generally, so you,
you do not want to respond to
the statement about the $2000.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, could
you ask the question again.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
When we talk about this bill
that is being introduced.
And we're talking about not only
with the
Person who has committed this.
Also receive.
He's stipend of up to $2000.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Those
Students who have not offended.
And we'll be applying for
whether it be the legislative or
opportunity scholarship will not
be receiving those funds, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this,
this bill does not only talk
about adjudicated youth it's
also kids who've aged out of
foster system and, and what
comes to my mind is that um
incarcerating people also cause
the taxpayer money.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when we, when it comes to my
mind and many of the others, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is the
cost of attendance and that.
Every month and every semester,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Families like me and others are
having to pay for the additional
costs of attendance including
food, housing, and other
expenses and so my my my my
statement for this and you can
respond or not is that under
this we are.
Providing an opportunity for
some folks and other folks who
have not offended will not be
receiving the same, um, monetary
support that this bill provides.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Secordo, Representative Dao.
Mr. Speaker, will the gently,
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
minority caucus chair. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker,
Madam Chairman, um, in
When we talk about adverse
childhood experiences, um, when
someone
Someone is a minor and they're a
victim of a juvenile crime. What
does adverse childhood
experiences, what, what would
their score be?
If their sibling was murdered by
a juvenile, what would their
score be?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's not in this bill, I would
guess it would be, it would be
an ACE score.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
I know we're trying to address,
we don't want a youth in a safe
home in a positive environment
who has a loving and safe home
that would be, um,
Those, those children are also
victims of crime. They have a
sibling or a family member who
is now deceased. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, did you consider in
your bill providing room and
board or a stipend for those
siblings, for example, like our
own representative Chavez, who
gave the experience of her young
son being victimized and her
daughter living that with her
and the hurt of the victim. Did
you consider the stipend for the
victims sibling when they go to
college, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, this is about.
The offender.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, did
you consider the school, the
schooling and housing and
tuition and assistance for the
offenders' victims.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's not part of this bill. So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
did not. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Sandoval,
Representative Cullen.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker,
um, do kind lady.
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker and
kind lady, um, so I'm just going
to ask it very plainly because
there's a lot of questions that
have been asked and they kind of
ask some other things I'll
follow up on that. So I'm gonna
plainly ask, if somebody was
convicted of murder, they can
get out and receive a $2000
stipend.
On 2nd degree murder.
So Matt, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, you have to be under the
age of 26 and the qualifier is
that you must be um doing well
in the program. You must be
working towards, um, getting
into college, getting your, so
it, if, if you are not following
the program, you will not be
qualified.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so.
I um
So under 26 with this program,
so I will kindly say that I will
not be supporting this bill.
Thank you.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan
represented Montoya.
Mr. Speaker and uh gentle lady
um does general lady yield?
Speaker, I yield for the from uh
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Um, madam, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I
Did not read this bill in detail
and just over the last several
minutes, I've heard, uh, the
debate.
And quite frankly, it's shocking
that we would
Put together uh something like
this that would be more
Beneficial to someone who has
committed a crime.
Then what we offer in, uh, our
opportunity scholarship or in,
um, the lottery scholarship.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I'm, I, I'm.
Do you
Disagree that this
Is is
a reward for initial bad
behavior, even if it's good
behavior afterwards, is it's
not, uh, would, could you not
see this as, uh, a benefit for
bad behavior initially.
Mr. Speaker and Generalman, just
a reminder that this is also for
youth to age out of foster care
and I keep coming back to the
point.
These youth are going to rejoin
society if we do not
rehabilitate them, then they
will recidivate and we will be
no further along, so I don't
consider it a um a reward to get
the services that you need to
get your life in order. I
consider that our
responsibility.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentle lady. I, I disagree
as a matter of fact, Madam
Speaker, and generally I think
we should rename this uh
provision, the homicide
scholarship. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
See no further debate John later
close. Mr. Speaker, I move that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 255 do
now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Hospital 255. The vote is
now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 34 in the affirmative, 24 in
the negative.
House Bill judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 255
has duly passed this house.
Members, I have an announcement.
Dinner is in the lounge. Please
help yourselves.
members we're going to hold in
place for a few minutes.
Yes, well, people get their
dinner.
Members, please start making
Members, we are going to resume
our
The 3rd reading 4th session.
Young lady from Bernalillo.
Are you ready with item number
18.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
the action necessary for
placing.
House Bill 64.
Our final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 64 would amend the state's
non-discrimination and tuition
equity law passed in 2005 to
allow adult immigrant workers
and taxpayers access to in-state
tuition and financial aid for
credit and non-credit training
programs at community colleges.
New Mexico's current tuition
equity law for young immigrants
known as dreamers relies on
middle school.
Or high school attendance for
one year for eligibility. This
bill would extend eligibility to
immigrate New Mexicans who have
attended adult education
programs in New Mexico for a
year, worked in the state and
filed in Mexico income tax
returns for at least 2 years or
it would also extend eligibility
to young New Mexicans who are
applying for special immigrant
juvenile status.
These new criteria align with
the state's existing residency
requirements for tuition
benefits. Ultimately, Mr.
Speaker, this is a workforce
development bill.
Many immigrant New Mexican
workers aspire to jobs and
health care, HVAC welding
broadband, and other skilled
trades, but because they are
currently excluded from reduced
tuition rates and tuition
support, the cost of credit and
not credit career and technical
education and certificate
programs remains a significant
barrier. HB 64 removes a key
financial obstacle and provides
hardworking New Mexicans with a
fair chance to gain the skills
they need to fill.
jobs in high demand industries.
This bill is a win-win. It will
help these New Mexicans get
better jobs and it will help New
Mexico fill them.
Mr. Speaker, um, I would like to
introduce my expert witnesses,
Marcela Diaz, executive director
of Samosopolo Unido and Gabriela
Ibanez Guzman, the staff
attorney at Somos and Mr.
Speaker, with that we stand for
questions.
There is a big the gentleman
from Valencia Representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady from Burnleyo yield,
please to the representative.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. On page 2 of
your bill.
Lines 3 through 6.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we talk about attendance at a um
secondary educational
institution, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, does that have to be in
person or can it be online?
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it can be either.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
the fact is that I may be
enrolled in here. I may be
taking classes, but I may
actually not be residing in New
Mexico is that.
Uh, what I can understand, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, that's
incorrect.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you,
we, how we verifying where they
live, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Speaker, they have to provide a
physical address to HED.
Mr. Speaker, so generally so is
that addressed in this bill or
is it somewhere else, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that's part of the current rules
for HED.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
sorry, the last, the court rules
for what you say again Mr.
Speaker, Representative, the
current rules for HED.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I did, I did, I should
say, Mr. Speaker, generally, I
did see this in education, so I,
I only have a few questions and
so I'm not going to be dragging
us out or.
But I, I, I do think that there
needs some clarification. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. So, um, the, the
question I had asked, and this
is something that is there again
like page 2.
Lines, um, 7 through 10.
And it talks about the um.
2 semesters as provided by rule.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
question is,
Do those have to be consecutive
and do those have to be at the
same institution, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that would be determined by
rule.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
could attend a semester at UNM.
Sit out for a year, go to New
Mexico State.
And I would then be eligible
under this House Bill 64. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
we're talking about adult
education, not the four-year
institutions.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
do think that colleges are adult
education institutions.
Uh, Mr. Speaker John Lady, and
we would look at
Uh, I think the average age for
UNM is probably 26, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, last I checked.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
if you will look at the bill, on
page 2 lines 7 through 10, um,
that explains what adult adult
education um courses we are
speaking about and I can go
ahead and read it for those who
don't have the bill in front of
them, um, it states attended
adult education courses
recognized by the adult basic
education division of the higher
education department for a
period equivalent to 2 semesters
as provided by.
rule.
And thank you Mr.
Sorry.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative
and adult education programs are
located at colleges and branch
campuses.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally, that's actually what
I had asked about. I, I referred
to that very thing and so, Mr.
Speaker John Lady, my, my first
question was, do those have to
be consecutive under that line 7
through 10.
And my second question, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Is do they have to be at the
same institution?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
to answer your first question,
no, they do not have to be
consecutive.
And I don't remember your second
question, sorry.
Mr. Speaker Representative.
I, I appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, it
was also do they have to be at
the same institution.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
they just have to be at at an
adult basic education program.
Approved by the higher education
department.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
with your bill,
Um,
this is to make sure this is to
ensure that he's, it's.
A student or someone seeking
enrollment.
Would be receiving in-state
tuition, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
can you please repeat your
question?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when in the introduction
of your bill, you talked about
in state tuition.
So Mister Speaker, gentle lady.
Um,
This bill is really to make or
to ensure that people are not
discriminated and they receive
in state tuition. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, Representative,
if they meet certain
requirements, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
they also simultaneously be
qualifying for in-state tuition
and qualify for the opportunity
of scholarship, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
they meet certain requirements
under this bill, yes.
So Mr. Speaker, and generally I
just, so we do so um.
They could both qualify for
in-state and receive free
tuition through the opportunity.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
yeah
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
they qualify for the opportunity
scholarship, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I'm actually
gonna now refer to the FIR.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
the FIR we talked about there
was a number that was there and
it said that on the high end for
1000.
Students that would become
eligible.
We have a cost of $903,000. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
OK, um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, yes, that is
what the IRS IRFIR.
Says, um, but it is likely on
the high end.
And thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentlela and so the
calculation on that is just the
difference between in-state
tuition and out of state tuition
is that where that amount of the
900 and $3000 comes from?
Mr. Speaker, um, Representative,
that's if 1000 people were
eligible, newly eligible for the
opportunity scholarship.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, General. That was my next
question. So my, my question
was, and you answered, so I just
want to be clear that I
understood that.
Was the 903,000 was not the
increased revenue that would be
by just getting and qualifying
for in-state tuition, it was
calculated of 1000 people.
Accessing the opportunity
funding, correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative
on the high end, yes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I'm gonna now talk to the
agency analysis, and I'll be
referring to UNM's analysis, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, on the
analysis provided by the
university in New Mexico.
One of the highlights, and it
was actually found in other ones
by the smaller community
colleges.
But it is really the impact that
it may have and the additional
requirements that would be
needed in services provided, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
As on the analysis.
Do you also, uh, do you see
where it says about the they may
require additional, uh,
As far as support or personnel
for the
Admissions, the scholarship, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you tell us which section, I
think we have it, but I wanna
make sure. Can you tell us which
section you're um looking at?
I put away my computer, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but it's,
it's what it says, and I, I
think if you look through and I
can see nodding.
It really does say that to enact
and to be compliant with this
that it would require additional
support through the office of
admissions and through the as
far as the student uh student
aid or financial aid.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, I think we, um, did find
the correct section, but that's
if all 1000 students who are
anticipated again, we don't know
that there's actually going to
be 1000.
Um, if they all enrolled at uh
the University of New Mexico,
which is highly unlikely, um.
Students would likely register
at, uh, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, community
colleges near where they live.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
The other requirement would also
be the verification of paying
taxes through the IRS. Do you
see that as an additional
Burden on a university or um.
It's higher education adult
education institution, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker Representative, they
would just have to prove that
they did file their pet, um, and
we don't believe it would be an
additional burden.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
generally, but when, when we're
talking about the institution
and its financial need.
Someone's gonna have to collect
either the forms or the copies.
Of the tax return, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mm
Mr. Speaker, Representative, um,
that's correct, just like they
would have to um gather
information to prove residency.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. And my last
question.
Is really about does is there
funding that will be provided to
these universities, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that as a part of
this bill.
would be there to us at the cost
additional costs that I have
described, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
there's no additional funding in
this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I will yield.
Thank you. um, just a couple of
quick questions for you. Um, can
you, and, and maybe you already
shared this, can you tell me
what the special immigrant
juvenile Classification Act is.
Yes, uh, Mr. Speaker
Representative, uh, special
immigrant juvenile visa is a
humanitarian visa available to
an immigrant under the age of 21
who has experienced neglect or
abuse and reunification with
both or or with one or both
parents is not likely.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so who
Who decides whether they've been
abused or neglected.
Mr. Speaker, Representative of
State District court.
OK, so they would be, um, and
have to go through the court of
law.
of law would determine that. OK,
that's what I want to know.
Thank you.
See no further debate John later
close.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I was just
gonna vote, um, Mr. Speaker, um,
I moved that House Bill 864 do
now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 64, the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 19 in
the negative.
House Bill 64 has duly passed
his house.
General Leni from Rio Riva
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Taos.
Are you ready on item number 48,
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
House bill.
352 as amended on final passage
has now been taken and is now
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution generally need to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Miss
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, this
bill, uh, will close certain
magistrate, uh, circuit courts
in McKinley Santa Fe,
Torranceton Anne, and Lee
districts and relocate a circuit
court in the Rio Ribe district.
I stand for questions.
See no further debate. La gentle
you close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that
House Bill 352 as amended do now
pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 352 as amended, the vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. House Bill 352 as
amended has duly passed this
house.
gentle lady from Bernao, are you
ready on item number 33?
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, I am ready
on item number 33.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 243 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, general lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, HB
243 is one of a number of
interstate.
Uh
Compacts that are being offered
to increase the number of uh
health care professionals in our
state, HB 243 is the actual
medical licensure compact and is
uh would increase the number of
doctors available by 10 to 15%
uh available to our people.
And with that I stand for
questions. no further debate
General lady to close.
Uh, I, uh, Mr. Speaker, I do now
move that HB 243, uh.
now passed.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 243. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 50.
58 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 243 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on item number 37?
Mr. Speaker, can you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
actions necessary for placing.
House Bill 439 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. General lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, it's House Bill, um
439, uh, will decrease the
number of fatal cardiac arrests
by training 911
telecommunicators to provide
high quality instruction for
cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
Mr. Speaker, with that I'd stand
for questions.
So no further debate gentle lady
you're close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
know.
A move that HB 439.
pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 439. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
OK
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 59 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 439 has
duly passed this house.
Lady from Santa Fe, you're ready
on item number 44.
Speaker, can you get me to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House bill oh house
appropriation Finance Committee
substitute for House Bill 113 on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution.
OK. So lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
Happier 113 will improve animal
care infrastructure and make
communities safer and lead to
cost savings for taxpayers by
giving animal care and control
providers, the tools they need
to care for animals already in
their care.
And those roaming in our
communities, um, Mr. Speaker,
I'd like to introduce my
Expert witnesses here today. I
have Stacy Kirby, who's the
chief government affairs officer
for animal protection voters and
Judy Wolf, she's a chief humane
uh communities officer for
animal protection New Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. With that
we stand for questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe please
yield, Mr. Speaker, I will yield
to my friend from um Eddie and
Lee.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So, um,
We did hear this bill and House
Appropriations and um.
Some members of the committee
expressed some concern about the
original version of the bill,
um.
Do you recall, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, what the bone of
contention was, if I can phrase
it that way, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, generally, yes, I do.
Um, we wanted to, um.
Really look at some of the, the
listings of the, the.
The um
The the
What the bill would cover, um,
and so there was some concern of
how the the the funding would
would be used for those, those
things and so we met and with um
with uh.
Compassionate heart with all of
us in mind of our, um,
four-legged friends we came to
an agreement and we amended the
bill, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, yes, gentle lady, thank you,
and Mr. Speaker, so I, I seem to
recall the detail that the
original bill provided for
private individuals to receive
money for pet food, fencing
veterinarian bills and all those
things and we thought there was
an issue with the anti-donation
clause on that, uh, so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, you were,
I think, uh, very accommodating
to remove that from the bill and
I think everyone expressed um.
Love and affection for animals,
but we just thought that was a
little bit going too far and so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, I believe the bill recalling
um does provide that this money
would go via grant system to
applicants who are operating
animal shelters and they could
use funding that's granted to uh
improved facilities is that uh
how the bill works, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, that
is correct.
And I, I think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we, um, going to a
governmental or some
quasi-governmental agency, um,
that, that's perfectly
acceptable. So, um, generally I
just wanna say because of the
amendment that was made to the
bill, I can support it, and I
thank you for accommodating Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Curry, the Baca
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel represent Uzamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
gentlemen from all those
counties.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so how
much money are we talking about
in this bill?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, we
have, um, $7 million in HB2.
OK, you did, and, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that I
hear 7 million? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
OK, and, and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, is that, was that
an HB2 or how did, how did that
funding come to be or where is
it?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, it
is in house built here.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how much of that money will be
going to the animal shelter in
Clovis, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
a DFA would assess the
application uh by need.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
do we know how many applicants
we have are there applicants
ahead of time or is there gonna
be applicants.
Uh
Is there an applicant list now
or is that to be yet, yet to be.
Uh, put together.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
yeah, there's still some work
that needs to be done and we
know that the need is vast and
great, so we would hope that all
those uh those that are eligible
for the, for the application
process would, would submit
those applications and then DFA
would assess by need.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, I assume what you're telling
me is none of this money has
been allocated yet, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no.
OK, and, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what are the perimeters
of.
How we're going to distribute
this money. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, if you turn to
page 4.
And you look at lines 9 and 10
states that DFA shall promulgate
the rules that, um, but.
a core priority to areas with
the greatest need for animal
welfare protection.
So Mr. Speaker Speaker and
gentle lady, what keeps somebody
from coming into this.
fund or, or
Is it, is it a fund? Am, am I
correct in saying that, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, it is a fund and it
is for uh program.
Program.
OK, and, and Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so it's, it's a
one time appropriated
appropriation to the fund. Am I
correct in saying that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, that's
correct.
OK, so what happens when this
fund runs low, then, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, um, gentlemen, we're
we're able to ask for more
appropriations down the road,
uh, because there is such a
great need, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, what
What keeps
This moneys from going all to
one location. How do, how do we
know?
What, what parameters do we have
in place that, that aren't
That aren't going to, that are
going to equally distribute this
money throughout the state of
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'd, I'd
have you look to page 4.
Lines 7 through 13. So, well,
So why, uh, line 7 would
establish procedures for review,
evaluation and approval of
proposed project applications
and
A cor cord priority attention to
areas with the greatest need for
animal welfare projects and 3
evaluate the ability and.
Competence of an applicant to
provide efficiently and
adequately for the completion of
a proposed project.
Mr. Speaker General, did I
answer your question?
Yes, but Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, was that on page 4? I was
looking on page 4 and I kinda
got lost somewhere.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
going to double check with the,
the substitute to make sure we
are on the same.
Page so to speak, and.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think that's what I think
that's where we're lost. You're
on the substitute and I'm on
the, on the original bill,
probably that's that could be
so.
And the substitute you have to
um.
In the subs on in the substitute
on page 3 starting line 23, you
will find that information that
the department shall promulgate
rules to administer the animal
welfare program. The rules show.
Include the provisions.
And then on page 4, you'll see
those provisions that I just
read out, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, gentle lady for
your time. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. That concludes my
questions.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Donana Sierra,
and Socorro Representative Dao.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady, and I know it
was probably pretty painful for
you to make amendments to the
bill, but I think that what you
have is something that will
really help communities and um
that those communities will be
able to address some of the
concerns that you are willing
to, to amend. And so I, I, I'm
so grateful that I get to
support this because I know that
there's a need, and thank you
for being amenable to an
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Rotero, Representative Vincent,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is
a gentle lady from Santa Fe
Hilder,
uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and I also appreciate you
working with the, with the
committee to
Do the substitute, but on page
2, I just had a few questions
clarifying questions. One, it
says controlling looser stray
cats and dogs to.
mitigate threats. So did we ever
talk about, does this go for
animal control? Can you pay
wages with this money?
How does that work, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, this
will not, um, be able to pay
wages and yes it would have um
the effects of helping with
animal control.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and on #2,
improving the enforcement of
animal cruelty laws. How do you,
how do you, how do you enforce
that? Is it somebody at the
animal shelter that will be
doing that? Or do you turn it
into a municipality or a county,
and they're doing the
investigation work.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's
through a series of, of being
able to train everybody at the
at those uh levels and how they
interact and treat animals, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Santa Fe. So on page
2, line 1, when it talks about
facilities to purchase equipment
and supplies to provide for
services. So if you do get your
people trained at the animal
shelters, will they have
vehicles where they can go out
and assess animals to make sure
there's no cruelty going on or
they're not starving them.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
See no further debate, gentle
lady close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
really wanna thank um my
co-sponsors and a shout out to,
um, my co-sponsored gentle lady,
um, in her, her little girl, uh,
Brittany, and Mr. Speaker, I do
now move that
I have to say, uh.
How appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill 113 do now pass final
passage of House Appropriation
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 113. The vote is
now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 58 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative.
House Appropriation and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113 has duly passed this
house.
The gentle lady from.
Donana Sierra and Socorro, are
you ready on item number 41?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 571 on final passage
has been taking and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The building housing
Communities Bill, uh,
establishes a program through
Department of Finance that
incentivizes local, uh,
governmental entities to look at
their zoning practices and
remove barriers to increased
housing. With that, I stand for
question.
See no further debate generally
do close.
I now move that House Bill 571
do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 571. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 59 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 571 has duly passed
this house.
Gentlemen from San Juan, are you
ready on item number 39?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 494 on final passage
has been taken and is now
started to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, I can only hope
this takes uh the same amount of
time as my last amendment.
Um, HB 494, it amends the
property tax exemption for
disabled veterans.
for questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from San Juan represented
Montoya.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I, I don't know
that I was in committee when
this bill came before us.
Could you, uh, explain to me
what this bill does.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I sure can.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this bill will align the timing
of all exemption claims and
ensure an orderly process for
establishing the tax roll. In
other words, the assessors won't
have to go back and, uh, work at
it uh all during the year, so
just one time.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, just one final
question. Should I vote for this
bill?
Mr. Speaker, absolutely.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'll take that under
advisement.
Joe, there is further debate.
The gentleman from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There
the gentleman from San Juan, you
know.
Mr. Speaker, yes, I sure do.
Mr. Speaker, this, this should
be pretty straightforward, um,
what does this do that we didn't
take care of in the November
election for our veterans on
property tax.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
what this does is just fills a
gap that um disabled people
disabled veterans, um, could go
in and claim that any time now
there's a window that they have
to um file their claim in.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you're saying that at any point
in time, they can come in and
they can't, it's not just an
annual thing.
anymore.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
it used to be now it's not. Once
that's on the roll, then it's on
the roll.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
look forward to supporting your
bill.
Seeing no further debate,
gentlemen, to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that HB 494 do now pass?
We're on final passage of House
Bill 494. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 59 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 494 has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Sipansy.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
announcements, gentle lady from
Bertolli, representative of
Borego, Mr. Speaker and, and
representatives I mistakenly
announced yesterday that it was
International Women's Day
yesterday, but it's actually
today. I was just anxious,
sorry, but um.
To all the beautiful mujeres and
lovely ladies that are in this
in this historic chamber Happy
International Women's Day.
Happy International Women's Day
every day should be
International Women's Day.
You heard it here first.
gentle lady from Burley or Sam
Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Health and Human Services
Committee will meet at 8:30 on
Monday morning, room 307.
Breakfast or no breakfast?
I had breakfast two days. I'm
done.
Vice chair of health.
Gentlemen from Berliozan Romero,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House Education Committee will
meet at 8:30 in room 309 on
Monday morning. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. No gentlemen from Santa
Juan Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanna congratulate the Shiprock
girls for playing a really good
good game, uh, against going all
the way from Shiprock to
Portales, New Mexico, uh, they
didn't make it through.
Congratulations to the Portalis
girls advance. Also want to
congratulate the curling girls
who are
advancing seat number one and
also the Gallup girls who are
also on seat number 2 on bottom
of the bracket. Look forward to
the game that's all of our uh
young athletes will be playing,
uh, uh, round two next
week.wesome. Congratulations.
And gentlemen, by making that
announcement you've officially
made yourself the official high
school hoops, uh, reporter, so
you will be tasked with
reporting out all of these
results over the next few days
here on the floor.
Announcements.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, why can't dinosaurs
clap their hands?
Why gentlemen?
Well, they're extinct, Mr.
Speaker.
Are you guys laughing with him
or at me?
Can't really tell.
Any other announcements?
All right, thank you everybody
for a very productive day.
Appreciate all of your hard
work. Have a great rest of your
evening and enjoy your Sunday
off.
And
I've got one more announcement.
I am remanding a bill back to
committee, so give me a sec, OK.
So item 20 on the 3rd reading
calendar is House Bill 78.
Uh, we've got a similar problem
as we did with a bill yesterday.
There's an amendment that needs
to be fixed. And so I will be
remanding the bill back to the
House Judiciary Committee, which
is the last committee was in,
um, if there is no objection to
that, I will remand House Bill
78 back to House Judiciary
Committee.
All right gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning. Enjoy
your Sunday.
The recess until 10:30 Monday
morning.
