this.
Representative Farman.
Representative Jones.
Representatives.
Thank you.
All right.
Representative Romero.
Eva
Dela Cruz, here.
So good morning everyone. We
have HB 600 for us today. We
will not be voting, but we'll be
hearing a presentation, but
we'll run it as if it was a
voting bill. Representative, are
you ready?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, I'm
ready, and thank you all for for
being here this morning, um,
particularly as we are
approaching the end of the, the
60 day session. I know how I'm
busy everyone is, and we very
much appreciate uh the time that
you are giving to us today.
So, uh, this morning, I am here
to present and introduce you to
House Bill 600, uh, which is
increased penalties for
vehicular homicide.
Um, I will have my expert, um,
Add some information after, but
what I'd like to do is start by
letting you know that in
Albuquerque in particular, which
is where I rep part of where I
represent and I, it's not
limited to the area of
Albuquerque, but we've
definitely seen this in
Albuquerque. Uh, Mayor Keller
and Police Chief Medina have
identified an alarming trend in
street racing and reckless
driving incidents.
More lives are being lost,
people are going faster, uh,
said Mayor Keller.
Despite dedicated enforcement
efforts by APD's traffic team,
existing penalties have proven
insufficient to deter these
dangerous behaviors.
House Bill 600 addresses this
critical public safety issue by
increasing penalties for
vehicular homicide, while
reckless driving from a 3rd
degree felony to a 2nd-degree
felony.
Aligning the consequences with
the severity of the offense and
the loss of life.
Second, by creating a new
penalty provision for vehicular
homicide or great bodily harm
while committing careless
driving.
Establishing that as a 4th
degree felony.
This legislation recognizes the
significant difference between
different levels of driver
culpability, while ensuring
meaningful consequences for all
fatalities caused by unlawful
vehicle operation.
This bill serves multiple
important purposes.
Justice for victims and families
like Jenna Hamilton and Paula
Mills, ensuring that those who
take lives through dangerous
driving behaviors face
appropriate consequences.
Enhanced deterrence of street
racing and reckless driving
behaviors through stronger
penalties that reflect the
seriousness of these offenses.
And closing a sentencing gap in
existing law by providing
appropriate penalties for deaths
caused by careless driving.
I'd like to now turn to my
expert, um, Albuquerque Police
Department Sergeant James Burton
for some additional context.
Thanks again, chair and members.
Um, again, my name is Sergeant
James Burton. I am the sergeant
of the fatal crash unit, uh, in
the Albuquerque Police
Department.
Um, this bill holds a lot of um
passion in me, so I apologize if
I get a little bit emotional.
Part of my responsibility in my
position is I have to be the one
to call families and tell them
that their loved ones are
deceased because of these
crashes. Um, over the last few
years, we've been seeing an
alarming trend. It once was that
uh DWI kind of held the.
title spot, for lack of a better
word, um, for fatal crashes over
the last couple of years,
reckless driving has now passed
that.
Um, reckless driving now holds
the higher, the higher weight of
our fatals, um, not just here in
Albuquer or not just for us in
Albuquerque, but across the
state as a whole. Um, it's
actually one of the factors that
Uh, Forbes rated us as the worst
drivers in America, uh, and for
the state of New Mexico and one
of the major reasons for that
was our high fatality rate.
This is a new trend. It's one of
the reasons that we've brought
to inform the council today.
This is something that's just
starting to come up now and it's
one of the reasons that we're
trying to kind of get ahead of,
ahead of it, um, traditionally,
DWI has held a higher penalty,
whereas reckless has been a
lesser penalty. Now it's
reckless being the higher case,
we're looking to kind of take
that up to more significant.
Additionally, with the careless,
um, we have not historically had
careless as part of this, there
is a two reasons that we're
trying to introduce careless.
This time around, um, one.
Reckless holds a much higher
standard to be able to prove in
a court of law.
Um, with reckless many jurors
again, I, I, I mean no fault on
anyone, but many jurors do not
necessarily realize that if they
say this does not meet the
criteria criteria of a reckless
that by turning it into a
careless, it takes it from a
felony to a misdemeanor, a
misdemeanor that holds a maximum
penalty of 90 days.
And in most court systems that
90 days gets deferred to um.
Traffic, uh, traffic, uh,
classes or a deferred sentence.
Um, you'll hear from some of the
families today.
His harder than all get go to
basically tell a family that.
I don't have
The ability to do anything to
bring justice to the loss of
their loved one.
Um
Again, these trends and these
trends are newer.
Probably over the last 5 years,
this has been a dramatic shift,
um, and that's why we've been
trying to fight so hard to kind
of bring it to the attention and
get it out there so that people
are aware, we can't just sit on
the sidelines and allow
something that's becoming such a
big issue to continue to become
such a big issue.
Are you done?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes. Thank
you. Before we go to uh to
audience uh support uh and
member questions. I just want to
take a moment to thank, uh, Mr.
Jasonianni for his kindness and
providing burritos this morning,
so thank you so much.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of this bill?
Raise your hand if you do, if
you would like to speak on this
bill, please line up behind the
presenters.
Good morning committee. Thank
you very much again for hearing
us here myself and the other
families that are here.
Um
11 months ago today on April
20th, my brother Ben Gonzalez
was killed in an accident in
Albuquerque.
The driver was
Beating
Almost twice the speed limit and
ran a red light and my brother
died instantly.
He was 40 years old.
Just
Starting his life,
And as you can see, my family
and I are devastated from this
loss.
And so I think Officer Burton
and everybody else involved and
Senator, thank you for bringing
this to the committee. I know
that there's a lot of hurdles to
get through this. I understand,
and I just want to
Make a change and, and get, you
know, people's advice on what we
can do to make our state a safer
place.
just in general because
It's just devastating for our
families to have to lose someone
to
Carelessness and we just need to
Make our streets safer, our
state safer, and
As Officer Burton, Sergeant
Burton said, um, to feel justice
because quite honestly,
Sometimes we feel like, um,
You know, our, our family
member, our loved one that we
lost, just doesn't matter
because it's just, you know,
the, the person who who
committed the crime, who, who,
who killed my brother is just
walking free on the streets, and
nothing has happened to him, no
charges.
So, again, I thank you for your
time and um
I hope that we can move forward
to make Mexico a safer place.
Thank you.
I am Paula Mills, um, mother of
Jenna, uh, Mills Hamilton.
And also is here and
I do want to thank you for this
time today to discuss a serious
issue. I realize we are here to
work together in finding
solutions.
When our daughter Jenna woke up
on October 8th of 2023. She had
no idea at all that her life
would be cruelly taken by 7:30
of that evening.
She was simply taking her
daughter and her daughter's
friend to a sleepover.
Both girls sustained serious
injuries. One, our daughter, our
granddaughter's friend has 2
pins in her hip bones and is
still recovering from a serious
concussion.
This tragedy occurred on
Louisiana only blocks from our
daughter's home.
This in no way was an accident
because the two street racers
made a conscious decision to
wilfully break numerous laws,
the surviving racer had so
little disregard for life that
he engaged in this behavior with
his own son in the car.
I have been dreading the
upcoming trial and had resolved
not to go, but our granddaughter
has been subpoenaed.
She will have to summon courage
beyond her 15 years to sit in
that witness box and answer
questions from the defendant's
lawyer.
I believe there are numerous
ways to tackle this problem,
including the participation of
first responders and driver's ed
classes to discuss the tragic
consequences of reckless
driving.
Reworking of problematic streets
using Vision Zero principles to
reduce speed.
Additional speed cameras across
the city, they work.
And far stiffer penalties when
these needless deaths occur and
destroy families and futures.
My hope is you will understand
these kinds of crimes have
cascading effects that the
losses sustained could never be
reversed, that we have an
obligation to enact laws that
keep innocent people from harm
and dangerous offenders of ours.
Thank you for your time.
Good morning. Thank you so much
for um
Meeting with us today and
letting us have a moment to
share, um.
A little over 7 months ago on
August 4th, 2024. My husband of
almost 41 years at the time, um,
was on a Sunday.
Early evening on his way to the
gym, and at the just a quarter
mile from our home in
Albuquerque at the corner of um
Ebank and
Manal, um, a person half his
age.
Uh
Chose to push through to run a
red light to make the light and
um
And
Uh, T-boned my husband's car.
And my husband, obviously, um,
as you know for me being here
was killed, um, at the scene.
And um and I
Went later to go pick up dinner
as we had planned from a
restaurant nearby and saw that
there was and having picked up
the food, saw the yellow tape at
that intersection and went to
see like what might be going on
and I came up on the scene and
saw my husband's car and saw my
husband under a white sheet on
the asphalt, um, and realized.
But the yellow tape was about,
that it was personal, and um it
was 6 weeks short of um our
first grandchild being born, um,
an event that my husband had
greatly looked forward to and um
my husband was tremendously
active.
Um, as a volunteer at Roadrunner
Little League, working the
fields and um um uh umpiring and
giving clinics, um, not only to
fellow umpires, but to you,
teenagers wanting to umpire and
he was beloved and anyone who
goes to the Roadrunner Little
League website and reads through
around that time of early August
we'll see the outpouring and the
grief of
so many who were touched by
that.
Um, and, and feel the loss.
Because he's not there.
To be doing all of that
important work with them.
And obviously he's not with our
family to be
Becoming the grandfather in his
earthly body and, and for both
of our adult children and their
spouses to be there as they
continue to cross milestones.
And the hardest part of all of
this has been.
To date at this moment, there
has been no word on whether
they're really going to be able
to even press charges right now,
what it looks like on paper is
that he was killed in an
unfortunate accident where
someone ran a red light.
And
There may be absolutely
No.
Consequence, really, other than
whatever ticket you get for
running a red light, and he's
not here.
Or
For any of us other than his
spirit, obviously.
Thank God.
But we miss him so much.
And he, um,
And so many people miss him.
Thank you.
Thank you and God bless you.
I wonder, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, my name is
Ben Valdez. I'm the deputy chief
of police with the Sanpe police,
um.
Excuse me, just um.
I know her husband.
He unpacked my kids, worked a
lot with Terry. Wonderful person
and um
This just goes to show that it's
not only one community in our
state that's affected by unsafe
driving, um, and folks have
decided that they're going to
not give their full time and
attention to driving and engaged
in dangerous driving behavior.
And
Every community across the state
is affected.
Santa Fe has experienced several
in the last year.
We've lost many people of, um,
again, different roles that
contributed to the community
that had impacts on our
community.
That we're doing good things for
folks that were lost because
people were not driving safe.
In this day and nature, vehicles
that pretty much drive
themselves. There should be no
excuse for this.
And I stand before you to
express our support for anything
we can do to stop this.
And just so we can share with
everyone that's listening and
even with members of the
committee, law enforcement, we
are out there doing everything
we can.
My job is mostly administrative
in an office this morning again,
my shift starts at 7 before
7:25. I was just telling my
other counterpart, I wrote 6
citations.
Because people are not driving
safe.
So it's not just our line
officers, we have everyone. It's
all hands-on approach. We're
trying to get that addressed. We
also participate in drug
education programs within our
community to share.
The dangers that people may face
if they're either engaged in
unsafe driving habits or
impaired driving. So there's a
lot of efforts that are going
there.
And I think if we have a
collaborative effort, we can
hopefully stop these tragedies
from happening and minimize
these types of tragedies. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Troy Weler
chief from Mexico State Police.
I mean, I can't say it uh better
than all the individuals that
have come before me, but um,
What I, what I would say, what
you, and I can uh reiterate what
Deputy Chief um
Valdez said, is that this is an
issue statewide, uh, racing and
traffic safety in general. I
think the most recent year that
we have stats available
nationwide. I think we have the
2nd highest per capita deaths
per 100,000 miles traveled of
any state, um, and I, I'm sure
most of you are well aware, we
have the highest rate of
pedestrian fatalities pretty
much every year, uh, in the, in
the country here in New Mexico.
And at the same time,
I
We have the cheapest or 2nd
cheapest citations, uh, it's, I
mean, my officers literally get
Laughed at when they tell people
what tickets cost now after some
changes this last year. And I
know that that's not what this
bill is about, but uh this bill
and any other attempts we could
make to help uh on the
enforcement side to help give
some more teeth uh to this
issue, which is a major issue
that, you know, kills hundreds
of New Mexicans every year, that
would be much appreciated, so we
fully support this bill. Thank
you all.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
online that wishes to support
this bill.
Chief Steve.
Morning. I'm Chief Steve Hebby
with the Farmington Police
Department. I'm also president
of the New Mexico Chiefs of
Police Association, and we
strongly support this bill. Um,
some of the testimony you've
already heard, we can echo up
here. Uh, we've been laboring
for the last couple of years
with some of the higher uh
traffic fatalities in the state.
Um, we've been working hard to
try and stop it with, with some
effect, however, it's gotten bad
enough that we're exploring
things like
Traffic cameras, uh, speed
cameras, so that we can do uh.
more effective job in in cutting
down on this problem, but we're
having serious fatalities in a
small town like this, so what it
is across the state, uh, it is a
serious issue and, uh, you know,
my condolences to that lady that
spoke about her husband.
Unfortunately, there's way too
many New Mexican families that
are experiencing the same thing.
We stand in support of the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else on
support?
Is there anyone in the audience
in opposition?
Anybody online in opposition. I
didn't think there would be.
Um, members that questions
resentative Armstrong.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
thank you, uh, and my
condolences to.
the members of the audience.
Could you explain again, uh,
sergeant, uh, Burton, the
difference between careless and
reckless.
Yes, madam chair. So with a
reckless driving, we have to
prove that they had.
like intentional driving
behavior, um, that not
necessarily they intended to
injure or kill somebody, um, but
that they had intentional
driving behavior that led to um
somebody's life being taken,
such as uh driving at a high
rate of speed in a in a busy
residential or a busy um
business district or weaving in
and out of traffic or um
something that
Most common people would say
that's, that's dangerous.
Careless driving and the way the
state statute is written is puts
it to more of a um
It's
And I apologize all of a sudden
in my mind blanked on the term,
but it's, it's more deemed an
accidental, and so you're which
it's a hard, it's a, it's a very
fine line, so running a red
light, right?
Running a red light is that, is
that.
A reckless where that a
careless, the state most of the
time looks at running a red
light as a careless as that
that's a uh a minor infraction,
um, running a stop sign, minor
infraction, not looking before
you pull out into the middle of
traffic, looked at as a minor
infraction. However, these minor
infractions.
have great consequences as
you've already heard numerous
times here, um, and but that's
kind of the differences,
reckless.
Looks at it as you're doing
intentional behavior, careless
looks at it, you're doing a
common, for lack of a better
word, a common mistake. Um.
The argument I have is the.
They have a tendency to cross
paths, and that's where it's
dangerous to not have.
As we said, a penalty for the
careless.
When they're crossing the line.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mister Chairman. And so what
this bill.
Does this, this bill changes it
to a 4th degree felony, is it
changing the careless, is it
combining the careless and the
reckless.
Or what does it actually
thank you again, chairman. So it
does two things. It'll raise the
penalty of a reckless to the
higher 2nd degree felony, um, so
that it is equal to a DWI, uh,
which again, part of the reason
is.
They're now overcoming DWIs and
how often they're happening. The
careless, which was never
originally there, being it a 4th
degree felony, allows us two
things one, to give teeth to um
these lesser, these lesser
crimes. It also gives us the
ability to, um,
Uh
Do a lesser fine, so let's say
we have a crash in the, the jury
the deems that it does not meet
the criteria of a reckless. We
still have the option of meeting
that lesser charge of careless,
uh, whereas right now,
basically, if we can't meet
reckless, it drops it all the
way down to just
A misdemeanor, nothing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And so,
um, not being involved, thank
goodness, in any kind of
criminal activity. I don't know
what the difference between 2nd
and 4th is which one has a
heavier weight. Can you explain
that?
Uh, so currently, the way it's
the, the way it charged, and,
and I apologize, I meant to say,
Mr. Chair, representative, I
apologize on that. Um,
Uh, so with a misdemeanor,
you're looking at a maximum
penalty of 30 days with a 4th
degree felony, you're still only
looking at about a year and a
half for a penalty for the 3rd
degree felony, you're looking at
about 3 years, um, if we're
lucky, we can sometimes push it
as much as 6, and then with the
second degree felony we're
jumping all the way up to about
18 years.
So, again, that gives us a
little bit more um wiggle room
for, as we all know, and I mean
it's a no fault of anything. A
lot of times we'll go to trial
and then they plead down,
correct? It gives us more
ability to just
Have charges to be able to bring
justice and to be able to hold
people accountable for these
crimes.
Thank you for that explanation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
sergeant. I, I, I feel um
ignorant not knowing the
difference, but now I do, so I,
I thank you for that. Um, uh, I
I just
Um, ordered a new car for the
first time in my life.
And guess what it has on it, Mr.
Chairman? Thermal imaging.
The reason I ordered the, my
husband laughed at me, but I
said, the reason I want it
because I live in rural New
Mexico for the animals on the
side of the road.
But the other day, Mister
Chairman, I was driving down 2nd
Street.
Very dark street close to um.
Oh, the Mexican food restaurant
in the area.
What was it?
Saddes close to Sades, and there
was, there's a, there's parking
here and there was an event
happening here, and people were
crossing the road, Mister
Chairman, in the, it was dark.
There's no not good lighting.
There's not a crosswalk. They're
crossing the road, and I almost
hit.
An elderly man and lady that
were crossing the road.
And I'm thinking, gosh, would
that have been my fault?
I wasn't speeding
It was not good lighting,
luckily I could have been
distracted. I could have been
looking at something over here
and, and I thought,
I'm getting the thermal imaging
because for that reason and the
animals, but I thought.
I'm curious, you know, would it
have been my fault? What have I,
would I be found guilty. I mean,
God forbid, I never want to hit
anything.
But I was, I was thinking, uh,
my heart started racing so fast
because I, you know, after an
accident or close call you.
get that rush of adrenaline and
it just scared the heck out of
me and so I, I feel your pain
and I understand what you're
wanting to do and, and, you
know, it's
It's really unfortunate that we
didn't, in my opinion, do more
than we could have this session.
It's unfortunate that this bill
didn't come to us sooner.
So we can, but I'm excited to um
I mean if we were voting, which
I don't know why we're not
voting, we should vote, uh, but
uh.
I would be in favor.
Of this, uh, even though it,
what it might do, Mr. Chairman,
is make people say I better.
Put my phone down.
I'd better pay attention.
And I, I raised 4 kids and I
have 13 grandchildren and I
would, I'm always telling my
grandson, my first one, to get
his driver's license.
Accidents or happen because
they're accidents, but you need
to pay attention and be aware,
uh, cause it's my worst
nightmare.
one of them to be in an
accident, so.
And especially to take a life or
lose their home.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, first of all, my condolences
to the families that have lost
their loved ones.
So deeply regretful to hear
these stories, um, and thank you
to uh represented uh
representative Dixon for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
I had a similar bill which I put
on halt, um, I was working with
the family of Phil Garcia, who
is a retired firefighter.
Who is senselessly killed on
course and around Montano. I
some kids that were drag racing
on Coors Boulevard, and his
brother came to me.
Asking me to carry a similar
bill we drafted the bill.
Um
And uh we
They were going to court now in
March with the individuals that
killed his brother. These kids
were drag racing on Coors, and
they went up onto the sidewalk
and they were just doing.
Mindless things that
Happen all the time on cores and
pao and my district, um,
So, because it, it is such an
emotional issue.
And um
The family was going to be going
to court, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative officers now and
in March, we decided to wait
until next year.
But I will tell you that
One of the things that we talked
about.
Was that we needed more people
and more instances. So you guys
are like a godsend really.
Right now, um,
It's uh, you know, I, we had a
lot of, I had a lot of
discussions with his brother,
and I could tell that he was
not.
Prepared
Emotionally, to to bring this
bill forward or the bill that I
had forward, and so I kind of
asked him.
And we wait until next year,
maybe when you guys have already
gone through all this process.
Uh, in the court system. Um, so,
honestly, the families that are
sitting behind you,
Representative Dixon, or like a
godsend because I want to reach
out to him and put him in touch
with these people.
And let him know that.
His family is not alone in this
effort.
Um
You know, I always say that
everything happens for a reason,
and um
It was really hard to not push
that bill forward.
But on the other hand, you know,
I knew that there was some
reason that we needed to wait.
And you guys are seriously, this
is the reason right here. Um, so
representative Dixon, I'd love
to work with you on this and get
these families in touch with um
with his his brother.
And their family, and thank you
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Hoffman V Hill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative, for bringing
this bill. Um, you must have
been reading my mind because
I think that we've all um
received the heartbreaking
calls, um, about instances just
like all of these that have been
described today, I had a
constituent in um House District
15, Mr. Chairman, outstanding
citizen, a um, he was an
emergency room surgeon, uh,
doctor for 35 years. He was hit
at 3 in the morning by someone
going 124 miles an hour.
And he was killed instantly.
Um, I was talking to his
brother, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, um, about
wanting to possibly
testify, do something about this
cause I know that there's a big
gaping hole in our laws that
don't really address this
particular problem. Um, and
how's District 15, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I have a large
portion of Piceo del Norte,
which is known, um, kind of
internally by the Albuquerque
Police Department iso de
Audubon, um, because people just
are known to um street races,
especially at, um, early, the
early hours of the morning, so
Um, I commend you for bringing
this bill, Mr. Chairman. It is
absolutely needed these, these
tragic stories need to stop and
um, uh, there needs to be
accountability and I think that
a big part of that, Mr.
Chairman, is, um, is increasing
very few instances. Do I agree
with increases in penalties.
This happens to be one of them
because we need to send a strong
message, um, throughout the
state that um this is not OK.
And this has got to stop. These
are senseless.
deaths that do not need to occur
for any reason, and thank you
very much for championing this
issue. I, I look forward to
helping you in any way I can.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dick, I just
wanna add my condolences. I'm so
sorry.
What you experienced.
Mr. Chair, this isn't, isn't
always uh urban problem. Uh, I
live a block from
called Cherryla. And during this
session, I received a call from
someone who just moved to that
location.
And she has dubbed that street
uh Cherry Lane Speedway.
Because of all the racing that
goes on there, and so there has
been a fatality some years ago
in that area, um.
teenagers racing, one of them
hit a telephone pole.
killed instantly.
But, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I, I too wish
this had come a little earlier
in the session, so we could
actually get it through.
And uh I would just hope, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, that
this will be on your priority
list for the next session. I
know the governor will need to
provide a message for it to be
heard because it'll be a 30 day
session, and that's
Her authority at that point, but
um
I just would like to ask you to
please do that and uh any other
bills and if we could get
A lot of bipartisan support on
this. I think that would help
Mr. Chair, I, I do have one
other question.
We've had some efforts, um, to
enhance penalties to try to
prevent behavior or at least.
Make it harder to get away with
just a slap on the wrist and
oftentimes the rejoinder is well
enhanced penalties don't really
change anything.
So Mister, Mister Chairman and
Representative, what would be
different about this, do you
think?
Would it really help?
Thank you, Representative.
Um, I do believe that this will
help, especially the lesser
careless, um, I think part of
the problem that we have, uh,
right now is because we are not
holding people accountable, um,
there's no consequences and
In this sense, so, and, and I
apologize because I'm, I'm gonna
use drag racing, so we in
Albuquerque and I'm just gonna
speak from Albuquerque that's
what I know. We do stuff to to
enforce going after drag racers
and doing all that, but when you
have a drag racing that comes
away with just a careless or
with a with a slap on the hand.
What does that tell me? That
tells me that I can just go and
do that next week weekend just
fine because nothing's gonna
happen. If all I get is a
driving school. Like there's no
consequences of that, and the
consequence that we're asking
for is not even that heavy, um.
The reckless deaths and, and
rightfully so, um, and, and.
I, in my mind, if we don't ever
cross that line and give people
a consequence for their action.
There is no deterrent to stop me
from doing the exact same
behavior next weekend, and the
exact same behavior after that.
And I, and I hate to say this
only because we have a drag
racing team. It's the same
people every weekend that we're
picking up on drag racing. The
same, the same groups of people
every single weekend.
Something has to change, and
I'm, I'm.
And my belief
Is putting a stiffer penalty
even at the low end.
Forces that change.
Thank you. Mr. Chair and uh
ranking member, just to add to
that, um, in our conversations,
um, before this, uh, discussion
began, there are other um tools
that I think our communities um
law enforcement can use as well.
Um, and, um,
Can you describe just a few of
the, the other mechanisms that
we have to reduce and prevent
this?
Um
Mr. Chair, representative. So I
also not only do I sit as the
sergeant of the fatal crash
team, I also sit as a member of
Vision Zero, Vision Zero is a
globally recognized program for
reducing fatal crashes down to
0. So on our committee, I sit
with traffic engineering, I sit
with different community
representatives. So we look at
everything from lighting,
roadway designs, speed limits,
traffic flow patterns. Um, we
try to do everything we can for
and we literally we
Review every single fatal crash,
uh, as well as serious injury
crashes that happen to
determine, is there something we
could have done that would have
potentially prevented this crash
from happening, um.
This bill is just on top of all
the many other things that we
do, and we are very blessed. I
think the state as a whole has
started to recognize these
issues as being such a problem
that we see, we see a lot of
people in the community coming
together to try to work to
correct the problems, and it's
not just government officials,
we have bicycle communities,
pedestrian communities, um, all
of these groups coming together
to try to see what we can do to
correct anything and everything
to help reduce and save lives.
This is just one other aspect of
that that we want to address.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Officer Representative. I
I agree with you, there are
other things that we can do. I
know when we make a change on
paper and it's in these orange
books. The public doesn't
probably know about it. It, we
have to make sure the message
gets out.
stiffer penalties. Don't do it.
We can do dynamic messaging
with, you know,
Do not race or whatever, we just
need to educate people as we go.
Uh, so they changed their.
Inclination or their behavior to
to speed.
So, um
I, I definitely again wanna say
I appreciate the Bill.
Um, it will definitely be
looking for this early in the
session, maybe we, like I said,
could get a a team together to
endorse it.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you ranking member.
Representative Dixon, I uh,
I, I can't speak for the
committee, but I suspect that if
we were taking a vote, it would
be unanimous. Uh, I know the
members clearly are interested
in in co-sponsoring, I think
you're gonna have to add a few
more lines on the build to have
all of his co-sponsor.
Uh, that being said, a bit of
good news, uh, the state of New
Mexico, New Mexico DOT has
adopted its version of Vision
Zero.
It's now, if they call it target
zero and it aims to do the same
thing.
Uh, awareness is important and I
appreciate what ranking member
Brown said. One of the things
that I don't think we do well is
advertise our laws that matter
in our are important to the
community and this would be one.
So,
Perhaps uh represent Dixon the
the bill could have some aspect
of it for funding to advertise
that there is this law.
Why it's matters and how it
impacts real people.
Uh, members often like to
describe myself as a news
junkie.
I'm reading the news all the
time.
I'm looking at TV news all the
time. I can't help myself.
And we see these cases, these
issues were for somebody's life
has ended, you know, I think
about not too far from my
district where some
Gentlemen.
a gentlemen but they were
racing, they hit a bus.
You probably heard about it in
the news, they turned over the
bus.
Thankfully nobody was hurt
fatally, uh, but the trauma for
those children, the parents, the
fear.
had to be
Terrifying.
And so,
It is indeed everywhere this,
this problem isn't local to any
one city. So,
While we're not voting today.
I'm sure you would have had a do
pass and, and for the families
that are in the audience and
attendance and those that are
online.
I hope they understand that they
have a lot of support.
At least in this committee.
So, thank you so much for your
presentation, everyone.
Thank you Mr.
Represent.
Mr. Char, before we wrap up, um,
I just wanted to, since we have
the police officers here, just
wanted to bring the attention to
the racing that I hear every
night on golf course, on Pao, on
Coors, um, and I know it happens
all over the city of
Albuquerque.
On the big streets, especially.
Um, in the middle of the night,
you know, 2 in the morning, 3 in
the morning, you can hear those
engines just
Blowing up, you know, and, and I
just wanted to mention that
because I think, and I know you
guys are working hard on that,
but
I just wanted to point out some
of those streets in my district.
Thank you.
Thank you again.
Members, we have no further
