Ho call is closed.
Before we close the doors, if
you are within the vicinity of
my voice, please walk into the
chambers.
Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from Chavez, Representative
Mejia.
Thank you, Speaker.
Dear God, as we begin this day,
let us turn our thoughts to you
and ask your help in guiding us
in everything we say and do
today.
Loving Father, please keep our
hearts and motives pure.
We thank you for allowing us to
call upon you.
We ask for your blessings,
wisdom.
Understanding
Determined and knowledge.
Please give us the insight into
the needs of our communities.
And determined to make
decisions, to lead our state in
districts, well.
I declared that the decisions
that will be made today will be
inspired and directed by the
Holy Spirit.
Irido padre
Tepio Mantegaussest penamiento
el mente.
I got to voluntaolami.
In the name of Jesus, I pray.
Amen.
lady from Berlin representative
Thompson with the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew with
the pledge that he made a lady
from Berlin.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move to go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Burnley representative Garrett
with some very, very special
guest, gentle lady, the floor is
yours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
am so thrilled along with uh
Representative Little who is
someplace to welcome the volcano
Vista Hawk's Boys basketball
team and the spell of the day.
These boys um are hard working.
They have one back to back 3
time class 5A state champions in
22, 23, and 24 this year's
championship week starts on
March 8th. The final game will
be played on March 15th at the
pit, so I know we're gonna all
hold our breath to see what
happens because now you're
seeing the team.
Um, an incredible thing about
them is that their coaches,
according to Senator Natalie
Figueroa, who teaches at volcano
Vista drive them hard, so their
cumulative grade point average
is 3.7.
Hope that can motivate
everybody.
And they are strongly encouraged
to all take AP class and um I'm
gonna introduce their coaches
and the boys. I do want to say
they really have a heart to
serve um head coach Greg Brown's
father was uh Mike Papa Brown,
the late Albuquerque Academy and
New Mexico sports Hall of Fame
coach in their practice clothes
are in purple, they wear them in
honor of Papa Brown to bring
awareness to multiple system.
atrophy. So they're really
having a heart to do well as
students and good characters,
community members, uh, Mr.
Speaker, can I introduce those
on the rostrum. OK, first of
all, we have head coach Greg
Brown, if you can just stand up.
Uh, Cesar, uh, Cuevas, who
teaches with Senator Figueroa,
Spanish at the school.
Barry Bates who led the first JV
team to an undefeated 24-0
season.
And Josh Miller, who's over
here.
And then I'd like to introduce
the seniors on stand when I call
you Evan Cillian.
Kenya Aguino.
Hudson Brown
Ryan Gonzalez.
Lucas Kern.
Eli Salas.
And David Lennon is not a
senior, but he's been a starter
for 2 years.
And then I'll quickly introduce
those on our very fabulous buco,
uh, just stand when I call your
name, uh, Jayden.
I
Then the talk.
Wyat Coleman
Caleb Vander Wilt.
Shimdy aquatic.
Luis Gonzalez.
Drayden Montgomery.
And Houston Brown.
And uh two students, uh, Eliovo
and um Spirit could not be here.
The principal isn't here. I
would like to introduce the
honorary teen mother, uh,
Alexandra and Liy Taylor.
And Mr. Speaker, if there's any
uh parents or others in the
gallery, can you ask them to
stand? If you are in the gallery
of Volcano Vista basketball
team, please rise to be
recognized and welcome to your
House of Representatives.
And Mr. Speaker, they'll all be
receiving certificates, but we
will have to part with them
because they're gonna go be
recognized by my senator Pope
from the same district in the
center floor now.
Very cool. Well, before, before
we let you I'll leave, I do
gotta share uh a quick New
Mexico story. Coach Brown's
father and one of my most
esteemed friends and mentors,
coach of court of uh coach
together, uh, gosh, I guess
almost 40 years ago, uh, and did
tremendous, tremendous work not
only on the basketball court,
but off the field with a lot of,
uh, a lot of young men,
including myself. I didn't play
ball, uh, but I was part of that
mentorship that guys like Coach
Brown and Coach Cordova.
Afforded people like me. So you
all are lucky you guys have a
great coach, a great mentor,
great coaches, great mentors,
uh, and I'm very proud of you
and I look forward to seeing
what you do in the tournament.
Please don't beat up on Highland
High School or Valley High
School or Albuquerque High
School, um, poli politically, I,
you know, I'm aligned to those
places, uh, but I wish you all
the best in the state
tournament. Welcome to your
house.
Anybody else want to join the
celebration before they walk
out, gentle lady from uh Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um, I, Mr.
Speaker, I'm sorry, um, and
thank you, Representative
Garrett, for bringing these fine
young gentlemen and I met them
some time ago when I was city
councilor in this and I
represented in this area and I
know that they are outstanding
young men and I look forward to
your futures. I hope that
someday you you too will serve
in the New Mexico State
legislature.
Your lady Familio thank you Mr.
Speaker. I'd like to welcome you
all here. I had a chance to talk
with y'all here a little bit ago
and I am so, so happy to see you
here. We send you with all of
our blessings for good health
and good luck, uh, you go team.
Take care. Bye bye.
lady from Si McKinley.
Nope, gentle lady from all those
amazing counties. Thank you.
Welcome to the House Volcano
Vista. It's great to have you
here. My name is Michelle Beta
and I represent District 69, but
I'm an alum of West Mesa High
School where I played
basketball, so please go easy on
them too.
I'd like to welcome you and just
encourage you to have a great
state tournament. I was there
when you won the Metro
tournament and I saw your coach
play against his brother, and we
were actually there at the
request of my son. He's 12 years
old. His name's Miles, and
Kenyon is actually his favorite
basketball player, so we're
there supporting you all, so I
wanna wish you well and welcome
to the house. Welcome to the
house.
Or volcano visa we'll let you go
and uh hang out with the
senators not as fun, so.
Walk in at your own risk.
Make sure they buy you lunch at
least, gentlemen from Curry the
Baca Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and
San Miguel representante Samoa.
Thank you, Mr. Speakers and
everybody in the house.
Today you'll find a package from
eastern New Mexico University.
On your desk we're located in,
uh, Portales.
Roswell and Riodoso in the
package you'll find a journal,
uh, a coaster, a pin, and you'll
find a big cookie just in case
you get hungry, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Eastern New Mexico.
University for what you do and
educating our future
legislators. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Greyhounds.
Gentle lady from Towers
Representative Ortiz. Thank you
Mr. Speaker also on your desk,
you will find a bag from the
higher education department.
It's a lunch bag, important for
packing your lunches on the way
to college, uh, or your adult
education classes in that bag,
you'll find a really um a really
great things including a cup,
uh, uh, water, uh, bottle, and I
think really importantly a bunch
of um chargers for various types
of devices. Um, it's higher.
Education Day, uh, today, uh,
and I wanted to just
congratulate the Higher
education department for um
doing incredible work uh for
nearly 4000 New Mexicans, uh,
additional New Mexicans enrolled
this year at uh one of New
Mexico's public, uh, colleges
and universities enrollments are
up, uh, adult education is going
strong training the workforce
that we need in all types of
fields. I'm so grateful for the
work that they're doing, uh, in
that department and.
enjoy your coffee and also um I
gave many of those eastern New
Mexico cookies to the uh
players, so sorry.
If they're not on your desk.
Did you hear that represent of
Samoa?
The, oh, he's eating his cookie.
You didn't give away his cookie.
She gave away all those cookies
to the volcano Vista basketball
team, so if you don't have
cookie on your desk, you know
why.
They are growing kids, they look
hungry.
lady from Berlin or Senator
Gurrola.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
would like to introduce my
shadow for today Isabel Lucero.
Isabelli is currently a senior
at Cibola High School and lives
in my district.
She has had much academic
success while at Cibola
maintaining a 3.8 GPA since her
freshman year and being in the
honor society for all 4 years.
Her favorite subjects are
mathematics and history.
Isabella is currently siding
between twofold rice
scholarships to Texas State and
Northern Arizona where she would
like to study physical therapy.
In addition, her studies,
Isabella has participated in
competitive archery since she
was 4th grade, having competed
and placed in the top 10 several
times at city and state
competitions and reached the
Western National Tournament 3
times since she started please
help me welcome Isabella to the
roundhouse. Welcome to the
house.
Gold Cougars.
Other announcements, gentle lady
from all those amazing counties.
Thank you. I know when you say
amazing, it's me. Thank you.
Duly noted.
I'd like to welcome a special
group that I have here today
visiting an advocating the
individuals from the city of
Grants who are on the Rosham if
they could please stand. I have
the mayor Eric Garcia here.
Welcome to the house, Mayor
Garcia.
Mayor Pro Tem George Garcia.
Councilman Fred Rodarte.
City manager Andrew Valencia.
Police Chief Maxine Monty.
And Fire Chief Mike Mays,
welcome.
Welcome to the house and go
pirates.
Go pirates generally from Santa
Fe is better have a high school
analogy or.
We'll move on.
Mr. Speaker, go to birds.
birds that's the school I went,
I went to um Saint Catherine's
High School here in Santa Fe.
It's no longer here, but uh
historical site. Nonetheless, in
uh uh Senator Schendo and I are
both T-birds, just so you know,
so.
Thank you. We're rare, but
we're, we're, we're the, the
fire that we come from. Mr.
Speaker, um, on another note, I
just wanted to, as we are
announcing and we have shadows
and we have high school students
and we have
The youth here paying attention,
um.
The work we do reflects across
our country and across the
globe, but I just wanted to put
something in reflection for us
in the paper today where the
United States voted with Russia,
North Korea, Iran, and 14 other
Moscow friendly countries Monday
against a UN resolution
condemning Russia, Russian
aggression in Ukraine and
calling for the return of
Ukrainian territory. The US
delegation.
Also abstained from voting on
its own competing resolution
that simply called for an end to
the war, Mr. Speaker, I just
wanted to bring light to that as
This is, this is something that
we, we should be reflecting on
and what, what, uh, consequences
elections have, Mr. Speaker,
thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. Other
announcements.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and we would go to
that order of business committee
reports
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and finance committee to has
been referred House Bill 41 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report and House 41,
all those in favors and if I say
I.
Oppose nay, I have it can be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Bill 252 has
had it under consideration in
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted Nathan S
small chair. Speaker, adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 252. All those in
favor unified by C I.
Bona.
The Abbott committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 60 has had it under
consideration, reports the same
with the recommendation that it
do not pass, but that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 60 do pass,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.favorable
community report in House Bill
60, but a favorable committee
report on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 60. All those in favor
signify by saying a.
Although suppose say nay.
The AI's have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 73 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73 do pass and
then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We are
an adoption of an unfavorable
community reporting house was 73
but a favorable committee report
and House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House was 73, all
those in favor and say nay.
I suppose Nate, yes committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 153 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 153 do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.favorable
committee report in House Bill
153, but a favorable community
report on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for Housing
153. All those in favor of
signified by saying I.
name
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 169 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that the House
Judiciary Committe substitute
for House Bill 169 do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report in House
Bill 169, but a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House We won in '69. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
All the supposed name.
I have it can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 178 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption report
and House Bill 178. All those in
favors by say and I.
All the supposed name.
The report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Energy, Environment and
Natural Resources can be
substitute for House Bill 212
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house, Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212 do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption if you can.
pronounce the word?
Polly
Floral cool
We're an adoption or a favorable
community report and house with
212, but a favorable committee
report and House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 212. All those in favor,
signified with say a.
Opposed name
Yes, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 339 as
amended has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report and has 339.
All those in favor signified by
say 9.
All the supposed name committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and engrossing committee to has
been referred House Memorial 3.
House Memorial 26 has had them
under consideration in reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house.
Respectfully submitted.
Michelle obeyed the chair.
Mr. Speaker, what options.
We're an adoption of favor
committee reports and house
memorials 3 and 26. All those in
favors say no.
I suppose Nate, the SAA
committee report adopted.
Does the record reflect that the
duly enrolled and engrossed
copies of House Memorials 3 and
26 were signed by the officers
of the House in open session.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Senate Bill 242 as amended,
introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to school
personnel enacting the
advancing.
The science of reading act
requiring teacher licensing
candidates to demonstrate
competency in structured
literacy and the science of
reading, requiring the use of
high quality instructional
materials for all student
teaching and supervised field
experiences disallowing balanced
literacy as a teaching method in
public schools and state
institutions, providing for
literacy coordinators, providing
mon monitoring and enforcement.
Senate Bill 242 as amended.
Senate Bill 24.
as amended have been read to us
by title is referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Memorial introduced by
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Amy, a memorial requesting the
Department of Transportation to
assess blocked train crossing
times across the state and make
recommendations to limit blocked
crossing times, House Memorial
41. How's Memorial 41 twice by
title is or printed and referred
to the house transportation,
public works and capital
improvements Committee.
House Memorial 42, introduced by
Representatives Block and Lord,
a memorial recognizing.
Did,
did this Virginian.
Virginia, Virginia opossum as an
important native marsupial.
House Memorial 42.
House Memorial 42 have been read
to us by titles or printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Memorial 43 introduced by
Representative Gorola, a
memorial acknowledging the
significance of the Hispanic
education Act and the bilingual
Multicultural Education Act and
requesting the legislative
education Study Committee to
study Hispanic and bilingual
educational programs. House
Memorial 43.
House Memorial 43 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee,
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, it now being 11:59 a.m.
I moved the house adjourned
until 12:01 p.m.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon's session.
If there's an objection, it is
so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to provision and
approval of the rules and order
of Business Committee.
It is so ordered.
Happy legislative day 10.
50 more to go.
50 more to go. Representative
Senator Cortez, almost there.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business. It
is ordered. Announcements.
General lady from Kaine Sierra
Secoro Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The Republicans will be
having a caucus, uh, immediately
following the floor session.
Members take note. Any other
announcements?
Members, we're going to take up
a little bit of 3rd reading, um,
here after announcements and uh
then we'll break.
In the afternoon for committees.
Seeing no further announcements,
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation. It is so
ordered.
lady from Bernillo,
Representative Garrett, are you
ready on item number one. Thank
you, Mister Speaker, um, please
take me to that point that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 12 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 12 Extreme Rik Firearm
protection order changes is what
we'll be talking about today. My
two expert witnesses, our Deputy
Chief Carolyn Juan. She's from
the New Mexico State Police, and
she led the federally funded New
Mexico Herbal Task Force and
Lieutenant Janice Madrid, who's
in New Mexico state police
officer who is a member of the
task force.
Um, this spill the extreme fire
Protection Order Act became law
in New Mexico in May 2020.
I'm gonna just review it for a
moment for those who aren't
familiar with it. It's a tool
that law enforcement officers
have used when family members or
employers are concerned that an
individual appears to be in
imminent danger of harming
themselves or others.
Um, these changes to the law,
uh, are a direct result of law
enforcement officers using the
ERPO Act and several 100
instances throughout the state,
uh, 15 counties in fact who
identified needed changes, um,
it allows the reporting party,
uh, when an individual poses a
significant danger of imminent
personal injury to suffer others
to file uh
report with the law enforcement
officer who files a petition in
district court, uh, with that
reporting party's foreign
affidavit. The judge can enter a
temporary UO if the court
believes that the situation is
very, very serious.
Within 10 days, however, a
hearing must be held in which
the respondent, uh, the
petitioner, the reporting party
all go before a judge.
Uh, the judge then determines
based on everything that is
heard whether or not a one year
ERO petition should be issued if
it's issued, the respondents,
uh, it's for one year the
respondent return gets all of
their weapons returned at the
end of the year.
Um
It is not a criminal complaint.
It's a civil um, and so I am now
going to uh yield to my
co-sponsor Representative
Christine, uh, Chandler who will
review the two major changes
that are made in house Bill 12.
lady from Los Alamos, Sandoval
in Santa Fe, Representative
Chandler. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The bill provides for
two changes both of these
changes, Mr. Speaker, we're
done.
after a task force had convened
and issued a report.
They reflect
Interest by law enforcement to
have improvements made on the
current process that we enacted
nearly 5 years ago, Mr. Speaker,
and it's on the basis of
experience and um some court
rulings that I'll, I'll share.
Um, the first, um, change that
we're proposing, Mr. Speaker, is
to allow a police officer, a
member of law enforcement to
initiate a petition without
having an affida.
it from a reporting party.
And the reason for that is that
law enforcement has suggested
that it sometimes puts um family
members or others in a difficult
situation when they want to
continue to be the support
system for the person who's
having a, a behavioral health
crisis and may be a risk to
themselves and there has been a
split in the demo in the New
Mexico District court circuits
where some jurisdictions have
said the law.
Provides for a police officer to
petition and other circuits that
have have have said that they
are not allowed. So we just want
to clarify that, Mr. Speaker,
and ensure consistency of
application and so this bill
would allow a law enforcement
officer to um petition without
um any other party providing,
um.
With a reporting party, um, but
based on credible information
and evidence that has been
gathered by the law enforcement
officer. The second change, Mr.
Speaker, was also a
recommendation of the task force
and, and that is to remove the
48 hours that an individual who
is the object of um such an
order, an ERO order to um
relinquish their firearms and
the modification now provides.
at the, um, the firearms shall
be relinquished upon receipt of
the order immediately or as
provided by court order, so 2
changes that I view them as
really just.
Tweaks that are being done, Mr.
Speaker, after having some
amount of experience with the um
with the statute and how it's
been applied, it will make it
more efficient and more
consistently applied across the
state, Mr. Speaker. And with
that, I turned the
Uh, with that, Mr. Speaker, we
stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentle lady
from Bern Leo and Torrens,
representative Lord.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady, OK, I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, uh, are you both
presenting, so it's both gentle
ladies, or is it just you
representative Chandler that is
representing.
presenting the bill, Mr.
Speaker, um, gentle lady, it's
one at a time and uh at the
moment I'm the person who has
the lucky opportunity, uh,
gentle lady to respond to your
questions.
So Mr. Spiegel, gentle ladies
gentle lady who's currently up
from Los Alemos we yield your
time, please. Um, Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentle lady from Torrance, I
yield. Torrance and Berlio, yes,
thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I do have some
questions because I know we're
amending a, a, a specific
portion of that.
But in that portion that we're
bending and and with the whole
bills entirety, the 4th
Amendment prohibits states from
depriving any person of life,
liberty, and property without
due process.
The Fifth Amendment due process
people cannot be deprived of
life, liberty, and property
without the due process of law.
The Fifth Amendment due process
clause guarantees that the
government cannot take away a
person's life, liberty, or
property without following
certain rules and procedures.
So a person has the right.
To confront their accuser in
person as a fundamental aspect
to due process and guaranteed in
the 6th Amendment of the United
States Constitution, can you
show me?
In the bill or in your amendment
where there's a bare minimum of
due process standards, the right
to an attorney cross-examine
witnesses to testify on one's
own behalf and the.
of the state to prove the case
will be clear and convincing
evidence before the property is
taken, not after, but before the
firearms are removed, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, first
I would, um, point out that this
is not a criminal proceeding, so
criminal proceeding would
require a right to attorney, but
this is not a criminal
proceeding, so that um reference
to that is, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I say this
gently to you, misplaced.
Um, secondly, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there is no in this
context there is no requirement
for pre um hearing process,
there is a prompt, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, process within
the statute, not within this
bill that provides for a hearing
that must take place within 10
days from the removal of the
firearms and that satisfy all
due process requirements, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady.
So Mr. Speaker lady, I do have a
question, um, people are allowed
to have due process if they're
Medicaid is denied, correct?
They're allowed to do an appeal
and have their day to represent
themselves, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General? Mr. Speaker,
generally, that's not the
subject of this bill and I have
Mr. Speaker John Lady, I did do
some research on that and that
is a civil, it's not a criminal
instance where they are allowed
due process, they are allowed to
go ahead and appeal that it's
the same when anybody in the
government is fired from their
position, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that they have the right
to stand before somebody to say
I am not in agreement and have
the opportunity to defend
themselves, so.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, are
you aware that New York State
said the red flag bill is
unconstitutional.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
if you can refer me to an
opinion I'm unaware of that.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
New York's red flag bell was
rolled unconstitutional, and
this was in 2002, the New York
red flag laws unconstitution
because it does not provide due
process protections and the way
that it's written in here, it
says GW versus CN 2002 New York,
uh, number 22392 New York
Supreme Court, 2022 makes it
clear that the new New York red
flag bell is unconstitutional
and is a violation of the United
States Constitution.
Running afoul of the 2nd
Amendment. So Mr. Speaker Danny,
are you aware of that? Mr.
Speaker, um.
Gentle lady, I'm not aware of
that, but we do not know the
factual situation associated
with that um case. We don't know
the specifics of those
particular statute, and we don't
know, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
if a 2002 law which was
overturned as comparable to a
200.
20 law that was passed, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so I think
at this point it's very
difficult to draw any analogies
or conclusions based on an
opinion that you're sharing with
the body, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, so the court said they
were very um mindful of the
dangers of farms when when in
the hands of people that are
suffering mental illness, uh,
harboring criminal intent or
both, however, when viewed
objectively, CPLR 63, the goal
of removing weapons from
otherwise lawful possession of
them by their owners without
adequate constitutional
safeguards cannot be condoned by
this Court, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and with that, Mr.
Speaker generally, I want to
present an amendment and I want
a roll call vote.
Kindly deliver your amendment to
the clerk.
So that we can get it
distributed.
And post it online.
Give me one moment, Mr. Speaker,
and I'll have them right to you.
Mr. Speaker, it's on its way.
Mr. Speaker, did you grant the
roll call vote and did everybody
raise their hand?
You've got a roll call. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I believe the amendment's been
passed out.
And it is posted online, the
gentle lady to explain the
amendment.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, do I need to
read the, uh, 202 number at all
or are we all good with that,
Mr. Speaker?
heck of it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That
number is 231056.1. That's what
I got
to explain.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So one
of the things.
Mr. Speer generally, one of the
things I noticed is with the
decision by the New York State
on the red flag bell being
unconstitutional with the Rahimi
decision that there must be a
judicial process before this
takes place and it has to be
very clear and convincing that
this person, um,
Um, that the decision needs to
be based on reviewing the
evidence and there has to be
something judicially
significant, Mr. Speaker, I
bring forward an amendment
that's going to provide
procedural safeguards and
address the gaps of the original
red flag bill and insert due
process.
And this, the respondent would
be allowed due process to
testify on behalf and it was to
be the burden on the state that
they must find a finding like a
credible threat like in Rahimi
suggests and not just an
accusation. So Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and young lady.
What we have here items 1 or 2.
Make conforming amendments to
the title.
Item 3 is a substant substantive
provisions and inserts 4 new
amendatory sections of the bill.
The new section 2 amends a
process for obtaining a
temporary order by marrying the
stans of other forms of
injunction relief in places a
higher burden on the requesting
party.
And gentlemen a party request
and an inn injunction
restraining order other
extraordinary equitable remedy
they must provide for things.
That without an injunction he
will suffer or he or she will
suffer immediate irreparable
harm that when the issue is
ultimately decided on the
merits. He or she is likely to
succeed, that the balance of
equity justice is in favor, for
example, if the courts do not
issue an injunction, he or she
is likely to be harmed more than
any harm the other person would
suffer at the injunction is
issued.
And the injunction requested is
consistent with public policy.
The amendment reflects these
standards by providing that a
court issue in order in
accordance with the standards of
extraordinary equitable relief.
And section 2 also provides an
additional procedural safeguards
that are consistent with the
requirements.
First, it requires personal
service of a temporary order
under the ERPO Act, a person
subject to an order is having
his property seized.
Is being temporarily deprived of
the right to possess farm and
may even be subject to criminal
charges if he doesn't allow the
order.
Requiring personal service of
the temporary ensures that the
respondent has actual notice
that the responsibilities and
rights under the order.
Second, it provides that a
temporary order will not go into
effect until 48 hours after the
personal service. Third, it
provides a temporary order is
immediately appealable upon the
person's personnel service.
Violet requires explicit notice
that the respondents write that
immediate appeal within the four
corners of the order that should
be personally served to them.
The new section 3 million
conforms to section 2 by
requiring personal service and
both the one year order.
And the new section 4 provides
for different relinquishment
standards from a temporary order
to recognize Section 2 is 40
hours before it goes in fact and
the new section 5 conforms the.
Uh, penalty section of
recognition that requirements,
uh, personal service example the
person is not guilty of
violating an order unless he has
actually or she has actually
personal been served. This is
consistent with the requirements
of the crime of violation of
domestic violence order for
protection pursuant. So Mr.
Speaker, I also want to add to
that.
That this is not a fact the
court's ability to still process
the order.
But we are inserting due process
to guarantee our constitutional
rights, our notice of a hearing
before property is taken, which
is observed in many government
procedures like I said earlier,
including Medicaid denial and
public employees being fired.
And like in the Rahamni decision
we're asking that you must have
actual judicial finding for a
credible threat before your
property is taken.
And allowing the restaurant to
be served, given instruction, do
that, um, that allows an appeal
process, so what this will do
will help remove any ex parte
decision that places judges in
a.
Inevitable indeed impossible
position of trying to predict
who who may or may not be a mass
murderer.
And these red flags are not
limited to application mental
health and they allow the court
to intervene in potentially
major intrusive ways that may
obstruct a person's liberty and
property threats without
adjudication.
And the red flag is, I believe
unconstitutionally vague because
it's left too much discretion in
trial courts and law enforcement
determining among with other
things when a person possess
poses a significant danger to
himself or others and the
American Civil Liberty Union
also agrees in Rhode Island,
they said that there is a lack
of due process and their red
flag.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, I go back to the New York
State that says the red flag
bill is ruled unconstitutional.
And while they understand that
there's issues that we cannot
restrict somebody's safeguards
and their opportunity to have
their possessions and the last
thing I'll state, uh, all of the
studies too that I've shown show
that there has not been a
significant decline and
suicides, murders, or crime in
general. So Mr. Speaker, um, I
want to know if you would
consider that a friendly
amendment.
Generated from Los Alamo
Sandoval, Santa Fe is this a
friendly amendment?
Mr. Speaker, um, may I ask the
gentle lady from Burnley on
Torrance, a few questions.
um, gentle lady, uh, help me
understand this. You say in, in
2002, the New York state's red
flag law was deemed
unconstitutional and you're
relying on that and as in part
the basis for proposing this,
um, amendment. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, now we know that it is
not correct. What I'm basing it
on is the fact that somebody
has.
due process. I would just
signing that there was another
state that has said and I've
also said in the Rahimi case
that there must be very
substantial evidence and that
all happens before somebody's
property is taken. This was just
simply a reference to another
state, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and also to Rhode Island
who the ACLU said that it is not
constitutional. Um, Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady, I'm glad to
hear that we're not relying on a
2002 New York State decision and
a New York state law since New
York State enacted in 2019.
A red a red flag or extreme
order protection statute that
now is in place that is very
much similar to New Mexico's,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, are
you aware of that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when I'm going off of the
information that in 2002, the
law was deemed unconstitutional
because it does not provide due
process, and I was using that as
a point, whether it's standing
or not, it has no bearing. What
it has to do with we do not
allow due process before
someone's property is taken from
them, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm, I just want to just
verify with you that you
understand that currently in New
York State, there is a red flag
law or an extreme order
protection law that is
very much similar to New
Mexico's and that allows for ex
parte order prior to removal of
the guns that the order is
served on the individual and
they have 6 days in which to
challenge that. Are you not
aware of that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker and
dinner lady, I will go back to
what I originally said was that
was brought up as an example of
that there is no due process and
that the ACLU also agrees with
that and there has been a ruling
that there has been a standing
that it is unconstitutional, but
my main premise is the fact that
it does not
Offer any due process regardless
of what other states have done
or not done, Mr. Speaker, and
done lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so help me understand
this. We are now amending
section 40-17-6, that is not the
provision that is before the
body and and house Bill 12.
Is that not right, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
would have to go here to my
amendment and what section are
you speaking about, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, on the um proposed
amendment that you offered, you
are amending section 40-17-6 our
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, and men's 40-17-5.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you?
Addressing 40-17-6 where it does
have an amendment on there.
There has been a change, um, Mr.
Speaker, I think, uh, gentle
lady, yes, that's what I said,
yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm looking right here at
40-17-6 petition for temporary
extreme protection order,
temporary orders proceedings.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, could you tell me, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, why are
you changing um the terminology
a significant danger of causing
imminent personal injury to an
imminent risk of causing
significant personal injury.
Could you tell me what the
distinction is there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
very basic terms we're giving
the power to the judge to make
that decision so that the person
can have due process.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, what is it about the
original language that doesn't
afford the court the ability to
evaluate the petition
information.
To get
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what we're trying to do is fill
the gaps that are missing in the
original red flag bill.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and what specific gaps are you
referring to, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
lack of notification, the lack
of due process, and the lack of
the person allowed to have their
day to speak in court, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, then how
does that, how is that addressed
with the this language and
imminent risk of causing
significant personal injury, if
you could connect the dots for
me, Mr. Speaker, generally, I
just don't see all those other
things that you mentioned in
this language.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you relying on an expert? I, I'm
sorry, yes, this is my expert,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady the
amazing Rick May.
And was just
Mr. Speaker generally, it
relates to the right of when
you're taking somebody's
property, there should be a
higher standard.
Uh, OK, Mr. Speaker, and you,
it's your contention, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that the
phraseology and imminent risk of
causing significant personal
injury is different from a
significant danger of causing
imminent personal injury.
There's a difference there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, I'll refer you back
to the whole premise of this
bill to allow due process and to
allow a judge and a person to
have their day in court.
All right, so I guess we will
move on then to try to
understand how that fits within
your, uh, Mr. Speaker, General
Premises of the bill, um, so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, on page
two of your proposed amendment,
what does it mean to say and in
accordance with standards for
extraordinary equitable relief.
Where is the terminology
extraordinary equitable relief
defined.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, I'm
glad you asked that question
because that was something we
discussed with the lawyer
earlier. If you hold on for one
second while I review my notes,
Mr. Speaker and young lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you want me to go through the
exact definitions or how it
applies in this ruling. Well,
Mr. Speaker, um, if you could
point me where in New Mexico law
because Mr. Speaker, generally,
that's what we're talking about,
where in New Mexico law either
through court decisions or in
statute, the term in accordance
with standards for extraordinary
equitable relief are defined.
stand by Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Angella, you're
talking about something to be
very similar to what this is
like an injunction, like that
could something be stopped, a
person could be asked to be
stopped doing something or asked
to do something? Is that what
you're in reference to? Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
referencing what you've
referenced, and that is, um.
In accordance with standards for
extraordinary equitable li and
I'm trying to understand, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, where in
New Mexico law that terminology
is defined.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's common use language, but
I was just hand something where
there is possibly something with
that if you hold on, and we'll
look it up or if you'd like to
look up 31-1-4 please, Mr.
Speaker and gen lady.
Mr. Speaker, lady, could you
repeat what you just said.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that would be 38-1-4 NMSA which
I'm about to look at as well.
Which Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm looking at that now. It
appears to be, and I have not
looked at it, 3814 equity rules
prevail over common law.
OK, well, that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I understand that
principle in the law, but again,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, where
is the definition for in
accordance with standards for
extraordinary equitable li.
Connect the dots for us all, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what we're trying to say is
whenever we have an
extraordinary equitable relief
it is.
Hold on, Mr. Speaking.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
also have the drafter who's an
attorney who's coming down to be
my expert witness here in just a
moment.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, just rule 160b of the New
Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure
outlined circumstances in which
a court may provide relief for a
final judgment.
Um,
The circumstances include um
mistake and newly discovered
evidence fraud if the judgment
is void, if the judgment has
been satisfied or released. So
Mr. Speaker Delaney, when we're
talking about this, we're
talking about extraordinary
equitable relief where the
courts then have the ability to
uh make remedies on this
decision of of moving forward or
stopping just like in an
injunction, they can stop doing
something or they can move
forward with asking to do
something in this.
is considered extraordinary
relief, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentle lady, I'm reading um
section 38-1-4 and essentially
what it says, if there's a
conflict in the rules between
rules of equity and the rules of
common law, the rules of equity
shall prevail, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so perhaps you can
share with us why is that
particular role relevant to this
provision in your bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, hold on
one second.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I have
Simon Suzuki now here is my
other expert witness if you want
to stand by.
Mr. Speaker.
And gentle lady, uh, Simon works
for the Legislative council
service. He's here in the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
this committee, and he does not,
he's not here to support uh this
matter before you.
Thank you.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, can
you please ask me a question
because I was actually handling
this at the same time while you
were asking me the question, Mr.
Speaker Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I totally understand. So,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
you referred us to section
38-1-4. We looked it up, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and in
essence, that provision provides
that if there's a conflict
between common law and equity
equity shall prevail. So Mr.
Speaker, generally, uh, gentle
lady, could you share with us
how
That's relevant and why this
particular phrase was inserted
into this provision, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, my
understanding is that this is in
there because this is going to
be an injunctive relief or
whether the courts are going to
make that decision on this
firearm removal.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
not sure we understand that, but
let's move on to the next, um,
amendment, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady on the same page below the
reference that we were just
talking about, um, you provide
that a temporary extreme risk
firearm protection or shall not
go into effect until 48 hours
after the order was served,
Mister Speaker, gentle lady. So,
um, what I, I understand this to
mean is you disagree, Mr.
Speaker, with our
interest in ensuring that the
firearms are taken away
immediately for the safety of
the individual or some third
party. Is that not right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? No, that
is absolutely not correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what I'm
saying is we're not giving the
person due process. They do not
have an ability to go into the
court and say this is not
correct. I do not agree with it.
They don't have, they don't get
notification, they don't get to
go in also because I researched
a lot on the 7 day waiting
period as well as this bill, the
latest RAND study.
shows that there is inconclusive
evidence.
On the red flag that it has no
effect on violent crime,
unintentional injuries and death
or mass shootings, and the point
is, Mr. Spi, the whole point of
this amendment is that we're not
allowing the person to have due
process and have their day in
court before the items are
removed and furthermore, if
somebody.
On a civil issue
Is a harm to themselves or
others, then that person should
be taken in for psychiatric
evaluation then they go on, they
see a judge, etc. what I'm
saying is this person has their
due process and I'm trying to
make sure that everybody in the
state has a constitutional right
to have their day in court and
that we are not violating any of
their constitutional rights, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I think then I
think there's a um I heard from
you a synopsis of the status of
constitutional law and due
process, and I think um I
respectfully say to you, gentle
lady, that that is a
misunderstanding of what due
process requires, gentle lady.
It is perfectly acceptable for
um there to be a post prompt
post hearing
um process which this our
current law provides that's well
established in.
constitutional law, and I would
point to Rahimi if we're gonna
be talking about Rahimi, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that
involved a domestic violence
order uh similar to what New
Mexico has, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and under New Mexico's
law, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, it allows for ex parte
order issue, and that means
without the presence of the
respondent and it allows for
removal of firearms when such a
domestic violence order has
issued and.
Then there is a post
Um, is order hearing where the
individual has the ability to
raise the kinds of concerns
that, that you are raising in
this context, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, are you not aware
of that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I absolutely, I absolutely do
understand that that's a
criminal case, not a civil, when
it's DB, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, it is not, that's not a
correct characterization of what
a domestic violence order
involves Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
somebody, uh, that has a DV, uh,
a restraining order against
them, they get noticed, so the
temporary order.
If they violate that temporary
order that's now a criminal
case, isn't that not correct,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
don't know that, but that's not
the scenario we've been talking
about. What we've been talking
about is when a DV order is
issued, the authorities have the
ability to remove the firearms
prior to uh hearing on the DV
order.
Speaker gentle lady, if I
understand correctly.
Mrs. Fingerton lady, is there
any notification to this person,
uh, if, if a police officer were
to go in.
Knock on the door.
We think
That there's a reason to take
your farms away, Mr. Speaker,
gently, there's no notification
like from the court system at
all. They just go ahead and take
those firearms right there on
the spot. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, young lady? Mr.
Speaker, General Lenny, are you
talking about our bill? or are
you talking about your amendment
because if you want to talk
about our bill, I'm happy to do
that, but I believe, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're,
we're talking about your bill,
Mr. Speaker lady, I'm asking you
a question in reference to what
you just asked me about. I'm
trying to tell you that there is
a notification.
ation process that does not
happen. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that the
police officer can just take the
firearms immediately on the
spot.
Mr. Speaker,
The law
Generally I, um, it was a little
long there, but uh let me try to
understand the um police officer
petitions the court hears the
evidence that's contained in the
petition and order is issued.
The order is served on the
individual who's possessing the
um firearms um he is required,
he or she is required to submit
the um firearms to relinquish
the firearms to the police
officer and then at 10 within 10
And, um, provides for the
opportunity for the individual
to challenge the pleading and if
successful will um obtain the
firearms that were relinquished.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
side of size due process.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so again, where is the part
where in our constitution that
that person has been served,
professionally served and
they're given a piece of paper
that says, OK, you've got 2 days
to appeal this and then they get
to be heard in a court of law.
Where, where is that process,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
where you just talked about Mr.
Speaker, that process is not in
our current URO law, and it is
not in the current New York
state law. It is a post um.
Relinquishment hearing with
intent promptly within 10 days
and that satisfies due process,
gentle lady. This is something
that's well established in
constitutional law. This is not
something new, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and it was upheld
in Ra Rahimi, the most recent
Supreme Court decision on this
kind of issue, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. All right, well
established that this is not a
friendly amendment and uh while
I respect your ability to use uh
counsel drafter as an expert on.
It's not gonna delay this any
longer, so, uh, it is not a
friendly amendment from what I
understand, Mr. Speaker. OK, is
there a debate on the amendment?
Do you remember from Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentle lady from Berna Leo
and Torrance, please yield.
I would absolutely uh yield to
my possum friendly.
Representative over there. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, appreciate that.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm wondering.
About some provisions of your,
your amendment specifically
regarding the due process. So
the way I understand it, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
current bill.
It allows immediate
relinquishment of the firearm.
Upon
The law enforcement officers
going to the, the door.
And once they say I have an EO
order.
Immediately the person must or
shall give over the firearms.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that, is that what I understand
correctly on the bill and then
yours, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it amends that language to put
it back to
48 hours.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was
just referring to my expert, so
with the.
Second notice that goes out for
the longer hold that one does
have a notice on the first one
there is no notification, Mr.
Speaker and generally, uh,
gentlemen, sorry, Rotero County.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, I'm just trying
to understand how we're changing
it in the amendment. So I know
that in the amendment.
Instead of those two orders, I
believe the second order is
after the firearms relinquished.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how would this change the
process from currently. So right
now it's immediate. We take your
firearms, then afterward you get
a hearing following it.
According to what I hear, at
least in Rahimi is what we're,
we're always referencing. There
was a hearing, but I beli I
believe the problem that was in
that case was.
Removing the firearm from
individuals who pose a clear
threat, but before the hearing.
So Mr. Speaker, General lady,
from my understanding if there
was not a hearing.
Prior to that removal.
Or at least an opportunity to
have some kind of
Hearing then.
That's why we're making this
stipulation to make sure that it
is constitutional. That's, is
that kind of what I'm
understanding or please, please
correct me if I'm incorrect.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
whole purpose of this amendment,
the whole purpose in its
entirety is not to rely on an
accusation or someone going in
and saying, and I'm not saying
that law enforcement is not fit
for this. I'm not saying that at
all. What I'm saying is this
gives a person their right to
confront an accuser.
And the person has a fundamental
aspect of the process, which is
guaranteed in our constitution,
which is not in the red flag
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Sorry, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, appreciate that, that,
that helps me a little bit on
this, and so I'm wondering, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to the red flag.
Law and the provisions in it. I
know we've talked a little bit
about unconstitutionality when
it comes to other states, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
actually looked up all the case
law right now while you all were
talking and debating very
ferociously. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, while that was
happening, I looked it up and
according to
This is Duke Center.
For firearms law.
I saw Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
was a 2022 case in New York and
that 2022 case, Mr. Speaker
General Lee.
That is when a court judge
actually struck down that New
York law because he found it
unconstitutional. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
assume that since the sponsor, I
believe referenced that law
saying it's similar and it's
constitutional that actually we
could potentially have some
litigation based upon that
similar language because that
court judge.
Did indeed find it in Monroe
County, New York, on December of
2022.
That individual judge said while
relying on
Certain case law.
That it was not constitutional
based upon the provisions that
would have taken it prior to the
actual hearing. So I'm just
wondering, can you just go into
that a little bit for me and how
this provision could be
constitutional now because we
did indeed take out that section
that would indeed lead the state
to costly lawsuits.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
that always lies the problem and
that New York did deem this to
be unconstitutional, as did the
ACLU who said these bills are
all unconstitutional,
specifically in Rhode Island.
Any time that you take
somebody's property from them,
especially in a civil case you
were taking somebody's stuff
without giving them their moment
to be able to face their
accusers, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
So now you're leaving it up to
judges to determine whether that
person, because what happens is
everything's taken from them.
And there was an initial court
ex parte without them there and
that judge has to decide, do I
really feel this person's gonna
do that or not, but the person
themselves does not get to go to
face their accuser. It's up to
one person to make a huge
decision. This is something to
be taken extremely serious, Mr.
Speaker and gen lady. We're
taking people's property. I
don't care what it is.
It doesn't matter and I'm gonna
give you a story. So April 19th,
1992, my boyfriend at the time
who was a world heavyweight
champion kickboxer, beat the
hell out of me, tried to
strangle me to death and then
held me kidnapped by a knife in
my condo.
He didn't uses a fire.
But we keep
We keep punishing anyone who has
a firearm.
That would not have helped me if
I restraining order or if he had
was red flagged that wouldn't
have done a damn thing because
he was able to beat me up, try
to choke me to death, put a
pillow over my face, and then
held me kidnapped in my own
house so I have lived
experience.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Everyone seems to think that oh
if we remove the firearm, that's
gonna make everything OK.
The problem is it's a false
sense of security does not allow
anybody their due process
because if somebody is falsely
accused, they don't have a
moment.
And even if you do take the
firearm, apparently we can go on
any app and buy firearms all day
long and in my case my extremely
violent acts held me at
knifepoint, had nothing to do
with the firearm.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I don't see anything there's
never been a bill of, OK, so
this person is going to harm
another person we're gonna take
everything possibly away from
them. Now what we normally do is
we say, OK.
This person is gonna harm
themselves or other we take them
at least in for a psych vow, so
you talked to a psychologist,
they talked to a judge, they can
make the determination where the
person have at least there's
some quasi due process and this
process here.
We are saying you are guilty.
Before you've had your day in
court.
You do not get your process. You
get nothing, we're taking your
property. Then after 10 amount
of days they get to go back and
say, OK, I'm fine, they have to
pay for a lawyer even though
this isn't criminal.
They have to go back in and
prove that they are not guilty.
Which is kind of a backward
process of what our constitution
demands of our people that they
have the right that there should
be very specific information
that a judge says yes upon ruin
the looking at all this
information.
There's a possibility this
persons will harm themselves or
others.
But again it's punishing the
firearm which would not have
helped me in my situation where
I had somebody that could have
beaten me to death with their
bare hands, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally, and thank
you for, for sharing that.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I understand that that's
That's something that we're
trying to address in this
amendment.
And so specifically, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering when we're adding the
words personally served on the
respondent. Can you tell me
what, what that would look like?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
would mean that somebody would
have to show that as a server
like a law enforcement officer
that would go there and serve
that person that says to them,
you are being served for this
reason, you have 48 hours to
appeal this decision, the courts
are available 24/7. They would
put in that appeal and they
would be able to have the right
to have their due process, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Yeah, that, that helps me a
little bit on this, and I
appreciate that answer because I
I feel like
We're trying to uphold these
people's constitutional rights.
Can you tell me regarding
current law.
Currently, would they be
allowed, would, would that
service have to happen or how
does that work?
And why are we adding this?
That's the whole premise, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, for this
bill, you're.
Not for the first temporary one.
This would now require you do
get due process from the get-go,
from the very start of this
whole process, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady that, that helps me
on that question, and then.
I guess I'm just looking at the
case law, and I know that we're
talking about this Rahimi case a
lot, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I just wanted to understand
how this could be upheld.
Because from my understanding,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
just, I, I read a lot about this
case and from what I understood,
the Supreme Court of the United
States made clear that merely
being accused.
Of posing a risk is not enough
to justify a firearm
confiscation.
And I believe it also said, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that these
bands solely on restraining
orders and required a judicial
fine, it required a judicial
finding that a person is clear
and present danger before
restricting their 2nd Amendment
rights. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I know in state law
we currently have provisions, I
think it's somewhere in the
health code, I believe,
regarding individuals who may be
dangerous, they can already be
put into some kind of facility
and be have tests run on them.
To make sure that they are not
dangerous. So instead of in the
bill, and I know you're amending
the current bill. How can you
tell me how that works currently
if there was an immediate danger
currently in state law, could
that already be the case that
persons removed from the
residence and then that person
is evaluated.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
depends on the circumstances,
meaning if a law enforcement
officer walked in and
There were witnesses who said
this person has said they're
going to harm themselves or
others. They have to look at the
whole situation and its totality
they can't just make a decision
on one thing they're looking at
everything.
So when they make those
decisions and I'm not a trained
law enforcement, but I, I, we
did get the opportunity, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, to ask some
questions last time about, uh,
mental health and the training
for mental health to be able to
evaluate if somebody is a harm
to themselves or others. The
problem becomes, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from my
Degree in psychology that if
somebody is a borderline
personality disorder, they often
say they're going to kill
themselves and they have,
there's no merit to it they, I
think it's only like 10% of the
time, so somebody would have to
be trained enough to understand
is this person having a schizoid
type episode, are they a
borderline who's having a
horrible day just broke up with
their boyfriend. There's
multiple situations that could
have somebody saying, well, I
feel like killing myself or harm
myself or others.
But in that situation, if that
law enforcement officer or first
responder who's there.
There is a civil process, Mr.
Speaker Deleman to take somebody
in.
Which we should do because if
somebody's saying, and there is
very, very credible evidence and
witnesses and people have come
forward and says this person
wants to harm themselves or
others, then it should be the
removal of the person, not just
taking their farms because we're
taking the farms and leaving
them there, there's multitude of
other ways to kill yourself, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. In China,
the number one way is poison.
So Mr. Street gentlemen, uh,
gentlemen, the, the whole the
whole reason for this what I'm
bringing forward is we already
have the ability to remove the
person and have them evaluated
and then we also have um we want
to make sure that our people are
getting a hearing and a
notification having due process
in case it wasn't the case and
it's just the accusation, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, if
someone was to say, like an
ex-wife, oh, I think he's going
to harm me.
Then it comes down to and I
would hate to be a law
enforcement officer in that
position of if somebody said my
ex said he's going to harm me.
And then they have to make that
decision if the other person's
saying I never said that.
So now that puts, I would say
that put that law enforcement
officer in an interesting
position, as well as a judge
because they have to make a
decision to take not you but
your property, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so.
That, that makes a lot of sense
to me, right? Having to prove
something before something is
taken away, which seems super
constitutional.
me. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I see on the next question
I have, page 3.
Of your amendment.
And it has uh under number 6.
Notice of the respondent's right
to an immediate appeal of the
order and information about the
standard form for such an appeal
promulgated by the Supreme
Court. Can you tell me a little
bit about that?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's a due process portion
that is the portion that allows
the person who has been possibly
falsely accused of something and
they're before their property is
taken from them, we go ahead and
we go back to our constitutional
rights of we have the right to
defend ourselves and we have the
right to speak to our accusers
and we have the right to get a
notification.
So they have gotten the
notification there, which is
part of it, but they also have
the right to appeal, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, so that they can
go to court.
And they can say this isn't
true, this isn't what happened,
because this isn't how we
normally do things, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we don't go to
somebody's house and somebody
says, we heard you're an
alcoholic. We saw you going to
AA. We're gonna take your car.
Because we feel you're gonna use
your car to run people over. We
don't do that. What we do is we
give that person their due
process, and this is the thing
with red flag bell I'm trying to
make the same opportunity that
this person can appeal. Now they
don't have to, Mr. Speaker
Delerman. There are some people,
there are a few people have said
that they were glad that their
farms were taken from. I think
it was like 10% maybe or less
than that, 8%.
So in that case they have the
right to say well you know what,
I agree with this, I'm not going
to appeal and I'm gonna go ahead
and surrender. So that, that's
still optional. They don't have
to appeal, Mr. Speaker Dileman.
This is just their opportunity
to have their constitutional
rights.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I guess right now if
this happened to me, if someone
use this against me.
Currently, I would have 2 days
to appeal.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Out of 2 days to appeal, is that
correct?
Currently
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, can
you please repeat that question
so I can fully understand.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I
didn't, I didn't hear. I heard
the two days, but I didn't hear
what it was attached to the
bill.
Pretty much sets it back to what
it was. Is that what I
understand? With 2 days, if this
does happen to me, I get the
order and I say, OK, I have 2
days to find a lawyer.
File something and then put a
stay on this order so that I can
actually have my day in court
before my 2nd Amendment rights
are taken away from me.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, that that is
exactly correct. The whole
purpose of this is it takes it
back to the 48 hours it was
before but also adds that you're
being served, you know what is
happening, you know what's about
to happen, and you have the
ability to go ahead and appeal,
hire a lawyer or go there on
your on your own to defend
yourself, but to have your
moment to say that this is not.
What is happening and I do not
want my uh property be taken for
the Constitution until I have my
day to speak, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I
think that's super important
because this this bill as
currently proposed is very
unconstitutional and will indeed
be struck down pretty much
immediately, I believe, because
Mr. Speaker, the what I read, I
read here on the Rahimi case,
which we are very reliant on, I
can see by the sponsor
apparently, so it says.
From the Supreme Court, it warns
against firearm confiscation
without the respondent having
the opportunity to challenge the
order before seizure. It also
says.
That the firearm seizure, it
requires a fair hearing before
property deprivation.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
am extremely concerned if we do
pass the bill without your
amendment.
To keep that 24 or that 48 hours
plus the actual process to
appeal.
Then it would directly
Be an opposition to the Rahimi
Supreme Court case, which is
current law because the court,
the court found that on the
Supreme Court level. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering if you could opine on
that for me because I don't want
our state to be in lawsuits for
years, and I don't want us to
blatantly violate the United
States Supreme Court's orders,
which this bill does currently.
So could you please tell me a
little bit about that. Well,
gentlemen, uh, before, before
the gentle lady.
response to that case was
overturned and it doesn't
control in New York or anywhere
else, so I'm afraid we're
debating something that doesn't
really have um uh authority over
what the issue at hand is, but
if you'd like to respond, you
can go ahead and do that, uh,
but we are, uh, getting outside
of the realms of what we should
be debating or how we should be
debating. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I
appreciate, and before you
respond, you know, I, I know
there's all kinds of other case
law too that I would, I would be
happy to just
go through that's just recent
case law, but I will say
regarding that the Supreme Court
did indeed say that, so I did
want to at least to comment on
how, how we think this could, if
it goes to litigation with your
amendments now, so we are on the
amendment. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, with this
amendment.
Do we think this will pass
constitutional muster.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, to
answer that question. I've
always thought that this is an
unconstitutional bill, and it
does not give people the rights
and also I want to make sure
that by instance Rahemia has not
been overturned, um, that is
still standing, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the issue does
become when to take it to a
lawsuit.
It has to have someone who's
harmed, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and there's been a low
propensity of the use of the red
flag bell, so that could be one
of the possibilities hasn't
moved forward plus you have to
deal with that stigma, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. I, it
would take a very egregious case
in somebody who has a lot of
chutzpah that would come forward
to say I want to take this to
court because I have to face
accusations, uh, that might be
in a very personal level that
could affect the employment,
their status in their community,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I think that's
super important and a good point
to make, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because when it comes to
Just the optics of it. I would
want to make sure that I wasn't
being deprived of a right just
because of someone's
Opinion, you know, and I would
want to make sure that there was
actually a very clearly defined,
stipulated process for me to
have to at least be able to
defend myself because if
something happens and, and
someone files this and there's
an ERPO in my rights just get
taken away immediately.
I think it could also
potentially, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady Harm, not only your
reputation, it would harm your
status in the community, it
would harm your ability to
protect yourself in lieu of your
firearms being taken away and so
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, I
guess it could also
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker,
without this amendment, it would
just.
It would not allow that time
that I think is needed to
appeal, and I think it's 24
hours or 48 hours is good, but
I, I do think it is a bit
restrictive, but still, it's
something.
And so I guess if you could just
comment on that, that time frame
why we chose that to put it back
in with current uh current.
Status quo.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
trying to take away the
immediateness where I want to
give somebody due process, and
you could argue on the time
frames, but.
The issue is, is it needs to be
addressed as quickly as humanly
possible, meaning that person
has the 48 hours they are given
that time to appeal that
decision and then there's uh
hopefully a short period of time
when they get to go to the
courts. The whole point of that
is, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
because this is just a
punishment of the firearms,
which it always has been and the
studies, every study I've seen
is extremely inconclusive, or
there'll be a state that says we
have like a 2% reduction, but I
go in and I start digging.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, let's
stick to the amendment, please.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and I find that it's had to do.
With the lack of due process and
the fact that there were other
things that were happening like
behavioral health and issues
being changed in that state, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That's a good, good
synopsis of that for me, and it
does help me on your amendment.
And then can you also tell me,
I, I don't, I didn't know if I
saw any changes with the current
law versus the bill versus the
amendment, which can get a
little confusing, but what is
the evidence standard.
In your amendment, does it
change that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
probable cause.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and that's the same
as the bill?
Yes, that is Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then when it
comes to the actual service,
does it have to be a sheriff or
can it be a process server? How
does that work?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it can
be either as long as it's
somebody that is who will
actually serve, not like leave a
note on the door somebody that
actually served the person so
that they know.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then it, it
would have to have them be able
to read it.
And then once they read it, then
they can, they can sign
something.
To say they were served. I mean,
I've never been served before,
thankfully.
In person, so I'm just wondering
how that works and what they
need to understand what's in the
service because currently in the
bill, from my understanding,
they just go in and take it and
there's not really any
discussion, and I just want to
make sure that there is at least
the like like if what if someone
can't read it, right? What if
you just physically cannot read,
how would that work when it
comes to the service on this
versus the bill Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so what happens is
the server goes out. It's a
server that signs that they
presented the document to that
person.
And they will hand it to that
person and then they will be
able to look at that to see, uh,
that's an interesting question
if somebody could not read it, I
would imagine that would be up
to that person to say at that
moment, uh, Mr. Speaker
gentleman, I don't have the
ability to read after that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
apparently they're presumed that
they can read that document when
that document is handed to him.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that, that helps me
on that and then I'm gonna go to
page 3 of your amendment. I
don't know if I was there
before, but I'm skipping around
a little bit.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
see on F we're taking out some
of that language. Could you just
tell me a little bit about what
that does, how that restructures
the bill. And then could you
just tell me a little bit about
how that could change the
process when it comes to this UO
or this red flag.
Mr. Speaker and.
Gentlemen, thanks for that great
question. So we're striking F.
And we're moving it down below
to the temporary extreme risk
protection order and a one-year
extreme risk protection order
issued pursuant to extreme. We
just moved that section down uh
further when you look on the
page, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK. OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That helps me on
that portion.
So when I'm reading it here,
relinquishment of firearms.
Relinquish all firearms in the
respondents' possession,
custody, or control in a safe
manner to law enforcement
officer, but this is only after
the, the 48 hours. Is that what
I understand, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, where are you in the
amendment? Pardon me, I'm on,
uh, from where you showed me at
the bottom of page 3 and then
going on to page 4 at the top.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
relinquishment of firearms
respondent who receives personal
service of a temporary extreme
risk fire and protection order
and who does not appeal the
order shall relinquish all
firearms in the respondents
possession, custody, control,
and a safe manner to a law
enforcement officer, a law
enforcement agency, or to an FFL
within 48 hours.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then below
that, can you go with me to to
number or letter B.
I don't really understand this
section, so we're changing it a
little bit. It says takes up
temporary.
And then it says or a federal
firearms licensee within 48
hours of that was stricken, and
it is immediately upon service.
Or
Ordered by the court. Can you
tell me how that changes that?
So it's just Speaker and
gentlemen, if, if what you're
asking is that there are two
processes that happen. The
process that happens now they're
asking for media, which we're
asking to remove that and the
second part that Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we were, we are
allowing 48 hours for the very
first, the first time that they
are served, the first time
they're told her that with this
red flag they wanna take their
farms. They're allowed 48 hours
now, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen for
the temporary.
OK, OK, that makes sense. Sorry.
I know it's multi-pronged, so I
just wanted to make sure that I
was very crystal clear on that
and so Mr. Speaker, before I
stop on this amendment, I do
just want to reaffirm that that
Rahimi case, and according to
the Supreme Court, it is binding
and serves as a precedent for
evaluating the constitutionality
of firearm regulations,
particularly those involving
individuals deemed to pose a
credible threat to others'
safety, and I do want to make
sure that the the body uh
understands that and the lack of
Passing this legislation will
indeed respond with probably
immediate consequences for the
state when it comes to
constitutionality, and it would
be a shame that the, the state
would be bumped into the courts
again for probably years due to
this bill's passage without the
amendment. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady for the
answers and uh thank you for
clarifying what your amendment
means and I appreciate it. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. You lady from
Rebuhunderball Santa Fe Towers
Representative Ferrera.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
lady from uh Torrance and Bernao
yield.
Yes, I will yield, um, kind
lady, I know that we both
represent rural districts and we
know that our sheriff's
departments in rural districts
are are uh highly underserved.
Can you tell me how many
sheriffs you have in uh in
Torrance County.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
would have to call, uh, Sheriff
Frazee to ask him that specific
question and do you want to know
how many are on duty at a
specific time or do you wanna
know exactly how many sheriffs
he has currently, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, probably
on duty at any given shift.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I don't
know and would you like me to
call him Mr. Speaker and
generally to ask him or, or how
is he like that's OK. I, I can
give you the statistics for Rio
Ribe County because I think this
will let the body know um kind
of how it is in in in rural
districts in New Mexico so um in
Rio Riby County we have 34
sheriffs on duty, 5 right now
are in the academy. uh, we have,
uh, sometimes 3 or 4 per shift 4
other deputies are assigned to.
shift assigned 10 hours for the
courts and uh prisoner
transport, so that means at any
time, any time on shift, you
have about 4 shiriffs working in
a county the size of
Connecticut. I, I just want to
explain this to the body so that
so that you understand.
That, uh, that we don't have our
department staff the way we
would like to have them. I, I
just want to explain that to the
body and then I, I also want the
kind lady to understand I have
had two brothers who are police
officers, and I know that you
probably know that the most
dangerous call is that of
domestic violence. Would you
agree with me, uh, kind lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
no, because I don't know if
that's a true statistic or not,
every single call, every time
they do, they go with their
knock knock stick and they're
kicking in the door every single
time is a dangerous situation
for these law enforcement
officers, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, gentlemen Mr. Speaker
and kind lady, I just want you
to know that I actually think
that is pretty true, but I just
wanted, I just want to tell a
story about why sheriffs in
Morriba support this
legislation. I had um.
Sheriff Matt Callegos, uh,
worked in trauma and they had a
domestic violence situation. It
was about a half an hour out of
town.
So they would get this call and
this young woman was 17 years
old and her partner was 30 years
old and there were lots of guns.
There are lots of guns in this
household and they would, she
would dare to call and then by
the time they got out there,
which was about a half an hour
away, she would, she would not
press charges. It's a very
daring act for a domestic
violence.
Person, usually a woman to make
that call and when they make
that call if there's if there's
any time it get it gets very
tricky and and to and to impose
a 48 hour that that that time
after that call to to say they
have 48 hours more to to um to
get their guns taken away, I
think is really very dangerous
to to women that
We're trying to protect so
anyhow one time they got that
they would get these calls
they'd go out there they'd
they'd counsel this woman, they
take him aside, they talk to
both of them, they tried to do
everything they could do and
then of course one day they got
the call and they went out there
and it was a murder suicide.
And he said if we had had these
laws, if we had had this, we
could have presented prevented a
murder suicide, and there is
more than one story for that and
with that, uh, I rest my.
lady from Santa Fe. Speaker, I
move to House floor amendment
number 1 to House Bill 12.
We are on a tabling motion to
ask for amendment number 1 to
House Bill 12. There's a roll
call vote of yes. The amendment
would have been tabled. The vote
of no, we're back in the
amendment. 32nd vote clock. The
vote is now open.
Oh
Well, it's about to close.
The vote's now closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative, 22 in
the negative. House Floor
Amendment number 1 to House Bill
12 has been tabled. lady, you
still have the floor. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just want to
address the floor um.
I will stand very firmly and I
always will. The thing that has
frustrated me the most about all
of these red flag bells is that
it's a continual persecution of
somebody with a firearm because
that's I just stated in 1992,
April 19th and 1992, I was
beaten almost choked to death,
and held kidnapped by a knife.
There is nothing that a red flag
bill would have done to prevent
him from killing me.
And there are numerous times
that women are killed in other
ways, very commonly with bare
hands.
So what we're trying to do is
we're saying we want to a
knee-jerk reaction. We want to
remove that firearm.
And say this person isn't gonna
do that crime and I
wholeheartedly disagree that
person can find 100 different
ways to kill themselves.
I mean, unfortunately, you can
look at Taos, people come from
all over the world to jump off
that bridge.
So Mr. Speaker, and um I just
wanna say.
But again, this is a
penalization of the firearm and
again we're not looking at the
root crop, the root cause, what
are the issues that we're
addressing we're not addressing
anything that has to do with the
mental health. We're not
addressing anything that has to
do with women in these
situations because Mr. Speaker
and John lady who, as I've
learned firsthand, if you have a
partner that wants to kill you,
they do not need to use a
firearm. They can find a
multitude of different ways, and
I stand for all the women.
Who unfortunately have been in
these situations and it still
ended up dead, even with the
restraining order, even with the
red flag, and it's a great
injustice to women overall.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Berlio
Representative de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I
appreciate the debate today does
the uh gentle lady from
Let me put on my glasses, Mr.
Speaker.
From Rosalomo Sandoval in Santa
Fe yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentleman from
Bernal Leo, yes, I yield. Thank
you so much.
So
Extreme risk. Can you explain to
me how it really, really works,
uh, between someone seeing a
potentially life threatening
scenario and a firearm being
relinquished, can you describe
that a little bit for me?
Um, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
I will attempt to do that so
before I go on, I do want to um
introduce experts that we have
with us, Mr. Speaker, if I'm in.
There are members of law
enforcement primarily. We have
Sergeant Matt Tinney with the
Crisis Intervention Unit from
Albuquerque, Mr. Speaker,
Albuquerque Police Department.
We have Deputy Chief Carolyn.
When from the New Mexico State
Police we have Lieutenant Janice
Madrid from the New Mexico State
Police and we have from the
attorney general's office.
Lara
Um, Sunderman and I just wanted
to make sure everyone was aware
we have these wonderful people
from law enforcement supporting
us on on these amendments, Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentlemen. So,
um, the way I understand it as
it happens may happen there may
be a family member who is aware
that a person is in crisis and
maybe um contemplating um
harming themselves, let's say
that for an example, Mr.
Speaker, and, and that may be.
based on statements the person
has made, email, text messages,
social media, those kinds of
things, or it may come to the
attention of a police officer
such as the sergeant here who
works with people who are in
crisis, um, all the time that's
his main function in Albuquerque
and sees all kinds of scenarios,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
comes to his attention maybe
through observation himself
maybe having to go to the
person.
Home a number of times, maybe
hearing from family members who
are really nervous, Mr. Speaker,
about being a petitioner
themselves because, um, maybe
they're fearful for themselves,
Mr. Speaker, but maybe even more
importantly, they're worried
about breaking that familial
trust and if somebody's in
crisis, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, they really wanna
maintain that so they can be
there for as a support, Mr.
Speaker. So having a police
officer, Mr. Speaker, as this
bill.
Um, contemplates being the uh uh
having the ability to petition
is very important. So let's
assume the police officer has
the ability to petition, and I
believe the sergeant has been a
petitioner in the 2nd, um, court
district, um, they would file,
they would outline in the
petition and our bill outlines
what must be in the petition,
Mr. Speaker, and it's a list of
things that describes why the
police officer has, you know, a
credible.
to believe that the person may
be um a risk to themselves or
others, and that is filed with
the court, Mr. Speaker, and the
court, um, after reading the
petition, perhaps questioning
the police if there are some
questions about what's going on.
We'll issue an extreme risk
order and and that is done
outside of, um, the person who
is the object. I think we call
them the respondent, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. That person may
not
not be in the loop. That's
called an ex parte proceeding
without the other party and the
police officer will go to the
person's home primarily or
perhaps somewhere else, but
we're most likely the home to
start, Mr. Speaker, and say, I
understand you have these
firearms. Um, I have an order,
please relinquish them and I
understand from speaking with
the sergeant, um, rarely is
there an issue with that, but,
you know, the person complied.
The orders are relinquished.
They hold the police hold the
firearms and then within 10
days, as I mentioned earlier,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, there
is a hearing in front of the
court and that person who's a
firearms who have been
relinquished, has the ability to
challenge Mr. Speaker, the
validity of the information
challenge whether it was a
proper order to relinquish and
then the court makes a decision
from that. And if the decision
is to return.
the firearms, the firearms are
promptly returned if it is to
maintain, to retain the
firearms, meaning the police
department retains they have the
ability to retain them for a
year and then possibly seek a
renewal based on information,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that that, that's my
understanding and fortunately
I've been seeing nods over here
on my side again tell and
reaffirming that my
understanding is essentially
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
from Bernaa.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General
Lady can you briefly
And and you don't have to do it
every single statement, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, contrast
the difference between this red
law flag basically they refer to
it commonly that way and any
other state in our surrounding
area.
Mr. Speaker, um, we'll look that
up for you, so maybe if you
wanna ask me another question
while my colleagues here are
looking that up, would that be
OK, Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker,
that would be fine, gentle lady,
you know,
We entrust, would you agree that
we entrust our law enforcement
personnel.
Our commissioned officers with
making decisions about not only
on the spur in the second
moment, decisions, uh, and also
decisions that we would entrust
that they would have the ability
to decide at least to form a
conclusion that would move
towards.
Taking someone's firearm away or
recommending that that firearm,
do you agree that that we
entrust our law enforcement that
way.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think, um, everyone in the
chamber, I hear on a regular
basis, has, has a great deal of
confidence in our Laura
enforcement officials in the
state. We had a special day
actually acknowledging the
contributions that law
enforcement make to us and our
great confidence in their
ability to make good judgments,
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
am confident that law
enforcement will act very
carefully and prudently.
Before they choose to proceed
down this path, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I, I guess I get a little
dismayed when when I.
I feel that we and we feel
confidence in our law
enforcement when it's convenient
and not so much when it's not
convenient.
But the reality is that.
If not only people that are at
risk from bodily harm from a
family member or or anyone for
that matter, but it seems to me,
young lady, Mr. Speaker, that
These particular professionals
are in a unique situation to
conclude that a firearm needs to
be removed from.
A potential situation.
Can you
Expand a little bit on that
connection between law
enforcement and the civil rights
or the the um.
Right of due process.
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker, and, and,
um, gentleman from Bernal Leo,
it, it came up, uh, when we were
when I was talking with the
gentle lady from, um, Bern Leo
and Torrance, um, I think people
misunderstand what due process
is often and they have a maybe
Mr. Speaker, uh, a layman's
belief about how it should go,
but actually the law is pretty
clear. If there are situations
where property, let's just talk
about property in general. We
don't even have to talk about
firearms.
Can be retrieved from someone.
Um, if prior to a hearing, you
know, a full-blown hearing. If
there is what we call a post
here, you know, post retrieval
hearing process and as I said,
that's.
Established in in law, um,
constitutionally it is a viable
approach and as um noted
earlier, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, a number of the URO
um states laws have.
Coast retrieval hearing
processes and we spent a lot of
time talking about New York. I
think there was a lot of
misinformation there, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, but what we
do know, and because I looked it
up while we were talking, Mr.
Speaker is New York, for
example, has a has a 6 day, um,
where the, the firearms are
retrieved from the individual
through this order process and
within 6 days there must be a
hearing. So the number of days
varies state by state, but many
of the processes.
Speaker, are very similar to
what New Mexico has, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Let's dovetail with that notion.
So one of the things I heard
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was, oh,
you know, you guys, you guys are
just gonna have the cops show up
and grab people's weapons.
Is it that easy, Mr. Chairman
General Lady, that law
enforcement just
For whatever reason, just shows
up and says, all right, hand
them over.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for that question and,
you know, um,
Again, we have a lot of
confidence in law enforcement.
They have to go to a court. They
have to go to a judge. They have
to file a petition that outlines
the basis for their belief that
the individual would be a
firearms, um, as a danger to
themselves or others, all that
is done through this affidavit
process, petition process, and
so it's not like.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you,
they can just show up. They have
to do a process then they appear
they're very respectful. I'm
certain to the individual in
most cases the individual
relinquishes the gun and then
there's a hearing. So this is
not done in a cavalier or, you
know, half baked, if I may use
that terminology, Mr. Speaker
way, it is very much uh.
Process that um requires proof
and and in uh in an intersects
with the courts, of course, Mr.
Speaker, and gentlemen, I do
have an answer for you. Colorado
has an extreme risk protection
order, um, statute, and it
allows for um 14 days before
there is a court hearing and it
allows for um uh possession of
the firearms by the law
enforcement for up to 360.
4 days, so the very similar to
our statues, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, that's what I was
wanting to hear just didn't want
us to think that pardon the pun,
we're going off half cocked
here.
Exactly.
Speaker, I want to get this
right. Last question, uh, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, do you believe
these amendments balance
protecting individuals in crisis
while ensuring their due process
rights are maintained.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, I
absolutely do. I wouldn't be
bringing forth to you or nor
would my dear colleague, um
Representative Garrett be
presenting anything that was
other than something that's
constitutional and intended to
protect the rights of everyone
while at the same time offering
public safety and safety to the
individual involved, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker gentle
lady. I just want to close with
this. It's not so much a
question and a statement.
And I and and.
Along the lines of the notion
that we entrust very, very much
in in our law enforcement and
commissioned officers.
We sometimes have to do things
that someone will disagree with
for the safety of others and law
enforcement faces that every
single day.
Because Mr. Speaker, I assure
you that if I become a threat
right now in this chamber, these
folks right here are gonna make
sure they deny me some rights
real quick.
And I think that this is an
extended version of that, so I
totally support this.
And I encourage all of our
colleagues to support as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker.
There's for the debate generated
from Curry, Chavez, and
Roosevelt, Representative Reeb
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Los Amos Sandal
and Santa Fe yield. Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady from Lee
County happily yield to you, but
that's OK.
Sorry, Eddie?
Thomas Curry and Roosevelt.
It's fine,
um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
just want to kind of address the
parts of the bill that have been
amended or changed from what we
had, um, gentle lady starting
with the, the change we're now a
law enforcement officer may file
the petition, um.
With the credible information,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady, so
based on that change, would you
expect there to be an increase
in filings now that law not if
this bill passes, if law
enforcement officers can now
file these uh petitions, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would expect there would
be some increase, um, I think
it's very hard to measure and um
I do not, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, expect there to be
significant additional expenses,
Mr. Speaker, gentle.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady and
uh Mr. Speaker, I, I guess I, I
am concerned a little bit about
that because in my smaller
jurisdictions and I've heard
from my colleagues, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, that one
concern is if we start
increasing the case load or
increasing the filings in this
that we're gonna have for one
possible storage issues, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, two
possible personnel issues
dealing with, you know, logging
in all these different firearms
and
ammunitions and then in
addition, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the fees for training, um,
law enforcement and so does your
bill have an appropriation, um,
or do we have existing
infrastructure to deal with
these issues that have been
expressed to me from the smaller
areas, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
a gentle lady, um, just to be
clear, we haven't heard from any
smaller law enforcement
agencies, um, raising those
kinds of concerns and I'll get
to answer your question.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
no, there is not a um an
appropriation in this bill or um
I'm, I'm certain though, Mr.
Speaker, should they actually
see such, um, such a workload
increase that we would be
hearing from them and I'm no
doubt would be happy to support
any kind of financial assistance
for those, those, um, smaller
entities, Mr. Speaker, general
lady.
And I appreciate that gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, because my
question is basically it has
come an issue in my county where
everyone's fighting over who's
gonna have to store these guns
and there's no space and having
to go, you know, find other
storage issues that are, are
actually conducive for a storing
a firearm and ammo that won't
destroy the firearms or anything
like that. So, um, that was just
one concern I had Mr. Speaker,
generally. So right now there's
no um there's no appropriation
or anything for increased
training.
you need storage or personnel in
in this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's correct. There's no
additional funding at this point
in time, Mr. Speaker, but
definitely open to supporting
it, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
right and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, with the officers be
in the reporting party. I want
to talk a little bit about uh
and I believe their intentions
are, are very much, I, I support
law enforcement fullheartedly,
but I also worry about law
enforcement and the, the, the
issue with the qualified
immunity and
with officers being the
reporting party and the
petitioner in this bill so they
could be directly responsible
for the deprivation of someone's
civil rights and so are you
concerned, um, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, about the financial
impact that could have on law
enforcement agencies and then
ultimately I guess the taxpayers
if um this change is made in
this bill, Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, generally,
uh, appreciate your concern.
So I would note that the
petition has to be filed with
courts. The court will be
evaluating the quality of the
information that's provided, so
I think that should be um, Mr.
Speaker, generally of comfort to
the law enforcement officers,
they're not doing it on their
own, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, so there's that and I'm not
sure what reference you're
having with regard to qualified
immunity, um, in New Mexico
there is we have adjusted
qualified immunity, but.
Police officers are still
personally immune, Mr. Speaker,
generally, so that Mr. Speaker
generally no law enforcement
offers are going to be exposed
to any personal liability, uh,
Mr. Speaker, generally, the,
their employer might, but in
this case, I think the concern
is misplaced given all the
procedural protections in place,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, I,
I, I agree personally I will
know, but definitely the law
enforcement agencies, um, if
they deprive someone of this
what we'll go into 48 hours, um
that is originally in this law.
I'm concerned that that could
expose, um, the different
agencies to liability if someone
were to, you know, uh, protest
the fact that they didn't get a
chance to have a hearing or to
hire an attorney or or to have
some of these protections as
this original bill of Fords, but
I, and that's what I want to
move on to Mr. Speaker.
is the, the change, um, starting
on page 4 into page well I guess
it's on page 5 at the top. We
talk about taking out the 48
hours, um, and originally, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the bill
had stated, um, a law
enforcement, OK, a respondent
who receives a temporary or one
year extreme risk firearm
protection order shall
relinquish all firearms in the
respondents' possession,
custody, or control, or subject
to the respondents possession.
control in a safe manner to law
enforcement, a law enforcement
agency or federal firearms
licensee within 48 hours, um,
within 48 hours of service of
the order or
Or sooner at the discretion of
the court. That was the original
language, is that correct, um,
Matt, uh, I keep wanting to call
you Madam Chair, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, I think you read
it correctly, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what was the original intent of
the 48 hours in the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
was a member of this chamber
when the bill was passed and
frankly at that time I didn't
think it was logical, so I
cannot, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, attest to the logic
behind it because I think it's
illogical to to give someone who
may be a danger to themselves or
other 48 hours to um either, you
know,
Act on their interest in hurting
themselves or someone else. So I
can't answer that question, Mr.
Speaker, because I, I thought it
didn't make sense then, and I
don't think Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it makes sense now.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I, I think if I recall the
reason was to give, give the
party time to turn over their
firearms, get a lawyer, due
process, the different things
that have been talked about, but
what I remember when we were in
committee, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is every single officer
that had filed a case or or had,
I guess jurisdiction that had
filed a case every single one of
them that was brought forth in
that committee, the judge had
ordered the immediate, um,
release of the firearms. I know.
I believe there was one that
had, had, had to wait 48 hours
and I accurate, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady and in remembering
what was said in committee, Mr.
Speaker, I do remember some
testimony that said in most
cases the court directs
immediate retrieval, which Mr.
Speaker gave me great comfort
because now we're changing the
law in such a way, gentle lady,
to conform with a practice we
know has worked OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I guess that's
what I'm getting to, Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies. It seems
like the practice, um, and
how it was worded was working
with the intent of, of allowing
a judge to make a decision, you
know, if they felt they should
be taken sooner. It appears that
in every case that was discussed
at least in a judiciary
Committee, um, general lady and
Mr. Speaker that the guns were
immediately taken and so.
Now we're doing this change that
takes out that 48 hours, which,
um,
Just takes away, I guess that
time frame, but it still leads
in there as directed by the
court, so Miss, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, we're still
kind of in the same situation in
my opinion that the court can
still direct that that the guns
be taken with immediately or
within 48 hours, uh, based on
the testimony we heard, so I, I
was, as I'm confused now as I
was in judiciary, how this was
really changing anything that
was currently happening, Mr.
Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
was reminded by the sergeant
here that his testimony and he
was my our expert witness in
judiciary related only to the
second judicial district or his
area in Bernalillo County, so,
um, I think perhaps we're
drawing too much from that other
than to say that the judges in
Bernalillo County recognized the
need for immediate retrieval and
we, I think consistency, Mr.
Speaker, generally.
lady across the state is
important, so I think it's
important to clarify for the
entire state that immediate is
the preferred course of action,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I guess I preferred the language
that was in there because it's
still gay of the judge the
opportunity to take those guns
sooner, but also balanced the
due process right of the 48
hours, um, if, if necessary, um,
and it seemed from that
testimony that while these are
all happening in Bernalillo
County. I'm assuming that it is
a larger county, um, that, uh,
we were accomplishing what this
bill set out to accomplish and,
and now by doing this.
It, it seems to take away that
48 hours, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, but yeah, it, it
says as directed by the court so
and again it's just to me just
flip flopping it. I, I guess it
to me, I don't see the reason
why we're trying to change this,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And if you can respond why we
need to change this, Mr. Speaker
general, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think I addressed that,
but I'm happy to address it
again and that is the default
should be immediate and um and I
rarer circumstances based on the
conditions that are presented in
the petition, um, perhaps there
might be a different time frame
as directed by the court, but I
think this is an improvement on
how the bill is currently
drafted where the uh default is
to give the
time, um, the 48 hours, which I
think is very risky, Mr.
Speaker, in terms of public
safety and individual safety,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um.
I understand we disagree, um,
but yeah, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, I think we're just,
just disagree on that issue
respectfully, um, I just feel
that, um, the bill was
addressing what it needed to. I
do have concerns about the
costs, expenses, um, that will
come with the change in this
bill again, I feel the bill was
addressing what needed to happen
if necessary at the guns could
be taken immediately and now
we're just, uh, taking out that
48 hours, which concerns me.
that we're, we could be
violating someone's rights, but
I appreciate the discussion on
those amendments and I have
nothing else, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady, um.
There's a senator in the
chambers.
Would you please kindly have it
removed.
I'm just kidding. You can stay.
Senator
Senator
Senator
Hi, Senator.
Proceed.
lady from Berlin Marnaya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr.
Speaker, this lady from Los
Alamos, Sandoval and Santa Fe
yields, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Bernalo, I happily
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
So, uh, let's see here. So if
I'm not mistaken, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, the
original version of this bill
was very much informed by um,
victims, right? Victims who knew
that they needed protection, um,
I'm always really interested,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady, to
know what kind of input, um.
What kind of input from
community from law enforcement
helps make the bill, and
especially if you're coming back
to make changes on a bill. And
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
you would speak to, uh, the law
enforcement side of why these
particular changes are needed,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, uh, gentle
lady, uh, it derives from a
couple of things. One is, um,
experience, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, we've consulted
with various law enforcement
agencies and law enforcement
agencies also provided input to
the task force that was working
on proposed changes and as you
can see I have a whole bunch of
law enforcement folks here with
us supporting this effort and
again Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the
concern was if there is uh this
default of 48 hours that could
put law enforcement at risk.
Um, when they go to serve the
order and that's some of the
feedback we received, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and also
if the person happens to become
aware of the order provides that
person, Mr. Speaker, with
opportunities to probably engage
in.
Not good behavior, um, if I may
politely put it that way, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies. So
we're receiving that input we
received that kind of input, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady from
Victims groups, individuals
who've had experience with, um,
family members who've been the
object of these orders or should
have been the object of these
orders, but weren't and horrible
things happen, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so a wide array of
people have had input.
Mr. Speaker, on this, and, you
know, as I said, one of the,
some of the principal advocates
for this change our law
enforcement officials don't, not
just here but in Farmington, uh,
also Donana County other areas
of the state, both urban and
rural, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I'm imagining that
through that process, um, in
community building and talking
to victims and talking to law
enforcement officers. You heard
a number of stories as to why
this is really important, um,
and Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
you could speak to a particular
instance in which, uh, a family
member might be reluctant to be
named as a petitioner. I'm
wondering, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady if they're um were
any stories or situations in
which that might have been the
case.
Yeah
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for that question. I
was just conferring with the
sergeant who told me they have
many, many such stories, um, but
one that he just gave me as an
example, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is, um, a situation where
um a mother, um, actually filed
the petition, and she had been
very active in supporting the
individual, the young man, the
son, um, in his efforts to get
his arms around some of his
mental health issues.
And, um, struggles and after she
was a petitioner, he basically
closed her out and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and you can see
why, how that could happen, um,
Mr. Speaker, generally, the
person is already suffering some
from some sort of episode, you
know, behavioral health, mental
health episode, there may not
always under rationally
understand that what the parent
is doing or close family members
doing in their best interest and
react.
In a way where they've just in a
way hurt themselves again,
because they've lost their
support system and they've
reacted that way. So I am told
by um sergeant here that there
are a number of cases where he
has had that come up, and he is,
as I said, Mr. Speaker,
generally, very much in support
of the idea of a police officer
being able to so that break in
the familial relationship or
close relations are less likely
to happen, Mr. Speaker or gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
thank you, gentle lady, uh, for
that story. I believe they're
incredibly important actually
maybe speaks to our competency
bill as well, um, in, in cases
in which we have families who
have really conflicting um
emotions around something like
this. You have somebody who you
love and who you've trusted and
it's really hard to come
forward, especially if you're in
a position in which that could
very much endanger you.
Um, so thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, building
off of that, I would imagine,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
that those very intense 48 hours
are probably the most dangerous,
um, for anyone who in which URO
has been.
Um, essentially the red flag has
been raised.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
do you think that maybe fear
combined with this 48 hour
period might actually prevent
some folks, um, from filing for
a petition, uh, even if they're
in a scenario in which their
life might actually be
threatened, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I think you've made a
very good point. Um, so let's
assume it's not a police officer
who's a petitioner, but
A close friend or a family
member, and, um, the order is
served, person is aware of who
was the, you know, the
petitioner and you know, there
is fear there. I mean, uh,
because we've already the person
reported or petitioned because
they were concerned about the
stability of the individual,
whether that person might be a
danger to themselves or others,
and here's someone who stepped
out, tried to help the person,
but that help isn't always
recognized as help and
Unfortunately, that could create
a threat situation, Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady, that of course
we all want to avoid. Thank you
for that question.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, you know, after
listening to some of the debate,
I know that I heard um.
It was characterized as if Urpo
had a low uptake, if you will,
but if I'm not mistaken, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, EOs
have actually been filed in 15
counties thus far.
Um, and one of the things that I
think of is if they've been
filed in 15 counties, um, often
we're here, we're in a bubble,
we're, uh, in a literal basement
and um we kind of stick to
ourselves and it's really hard
to pop our heads out and think
about how our laws are affecting
other folks, but, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
it's really rewarding to see
when our bills passed that they
have actual.
Tangible results, uh, for the
families that we're trying to
help. And so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, within those 15
counties, I would imagine that
within them there have been at
least more than one,
of these files, but Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, would you agree
that that might have saved very
minimum 15 lives.
Um, Mr. Speaker, generally, I'm
certain it has um saved more
than 15 lives, but even if it
were just one life, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that would justify
in my mind the processes um with
all the safeguards that we have
in place, um, through URO. It
really would and um I think
there are many families out
there who have experienced loss
due to suicide, um, who would uh
share our point of view, Mr. S.
speaker gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and as much as I
love stories and thinking about
tangible results, I'm also, um,
thinking about the practicality
of this bill as well. And so Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
HB 12 as I'm understanding it
would actually create
consistency amongst our judicial
districts as well. And so Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
wondering if you could speak to
that and tell the body why
that's important.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, as I mentioned, and I
think maybe my opening, uh,
there's a split amongst some of
the districts um in the state as
to whether or not a police law
enforcement may be a petitioning
party and I think, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, that
has created some confusion
amongst law enforcement as to
what the proper approach is and
cause Mr. Speaker generally them
to question whether or not it's
gonna be deemed.
uh correct and lawful if a
police officer petitions given
the various splits, so this
settles it this makes it clear
for all the districts that, yes,
a police officer may be a
petitioning party or may seek an
URO and you know, I think that's
good for us in the state when
there's a level of consistency
across the state and not split
districts and different
decisions and so on, Mr.
Speaker, generally.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I don't have any
other questions.
It's for the debate generated
from Katherine Sierrasoro
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Well, the lady from Los
Alamos Sandoval and Santa Fe
yield. Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Katron and all those
other great counties, um, I
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady. First of all, I want
to start out by thanking law
enforcement, um, they risk their
lives every day and uh I wanna
make sure that we show our
appreciation for that.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I just
want to talk specifically on the
new, um, uh, language.
On page 2, line 24, it says
credible information. Can you
define, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
what credible information, uh,
the definition of that. Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what's
credible will be determined by a
court and what will be required
is in the petition that the law
enforcement officer is providing
will outline the information
that is the basis for the um
request that the firearms be
removed and they will
that will be determined by a
court as to what is credible
courts, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
do this all the time when
they're issuing things like
warrants, um, and, and subpoenas
and things like that. They are
the ultimate arbiter of what is
credible information, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, kind
lady, I just, uh, I was curious
who made that determination. And
so, uh, that answers that for
me. So the, my next question is,
why are we including um.
Firearms or ammunition. Why are
we including ammunition?
And so it sounds like to me that
you're going to confiscate if
they found credible.
Um, credible information that
you would confiscate the
firearms or
Ammunition.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, generally
I'm informed by my sergeant
here.
And uh attorney from the
attorneys general's office that
they're just they just wanted
clarity as to what might be the
scope of the petition and um
they apparently had been
disagreement amongst the
circuits as well as to whether
or not the ammunition could be
as part of the URO order as
well.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so ammunition is included now in
your language. So if it's, if
this is found to be credible,
then they would, they would
confiscate the firearm and all
the ammunition. Is that correct?
It's page 4, line 11.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct. It says ammunition.
And so Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so when this, the
In the the first red flag law
that you are amending it didn't
have ammunition. Is that
correct? Or does it have
ammunition somewhere else in
here? Are we adding it? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's
correct.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, so we're
adding it.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, this is new language. OK,
thank you so much for that
information. I am a little bit
concerned, uh, I'm, I'm
concerned about the whole bill,
of course. I'm concerned about
safety, of course, but, uh,
madam, uh ma'am and, and Mr.
Speaker, there are people that
just collect ammunition that's
old ammunition, um, antique
ammunition and so what what they
collect.
Unusable ammunition that is just
for looks, uh, my concern is,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, is that,
um,
Some of it is very valuable.
And, but not usable.
Um, Mr. Speaker, so I guess the
question then is, uh, I'm
concerned about that, uh, or do
I share that concern? Um, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I don't
share that concern because
remember there's a petition
that's being filed. So imagine a
police officer writing a
petition saying, I would like
ammunition that doesn't work.
Um, and we need to retrieve that
because that person, um, poses a
risk to themselves or others.
It's, that is not a credible
scenario, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, especially since we know
how much confidence we all have
in law enforcement and their
ability to ascertain facts from
fiction and what's credible and
not credible, um, I think that's
not a credible scenario, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I would
disagree when you, when you say
ammunition.
ammunition is ammunition and so
my concern once again, I will
state, um, that my concern is
that there are collectors of
antique ammunition and my
husband happens to be one of
them and so if he happened to
have this petition filed against
him, I think since it says
ammunition in the law, you would
collect all the ammunition.
Every single firearm that he has
and every bit of ammunition and
so it's a concern for me. I know
that, uh, my job.
as a representative from rural
New Mexico and from my way of
life, um, it is something that
maybe other people don't think
of, but it is actually there is
a collector, um, a a whole
collector scenario for, for
antique ammunition and so, um,
for that reason and many others,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I cannot
support your bill, but thank you
so much.
There's further debate, young
lady from Burnley, your
representative Herndon.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, with a
gentle lady from Los Alamos,
Sandoval and Santa Santa Fe
yield.
Um, uh, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Bern and Leo, yes, I
yield.
Thank you gentle lady. We've had
a, and Mr. Speaker, we've had a
number of conversations today
about the 48 hour period that is
currently listed or indicated in
the heral uh law as it exists
today. Now, can you tell us,
gentle lady, uh, Mr. Speaker,
who has raised concerns about
this 48 hour period.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentle lady,
the, the, uh, as I mentioned,
uh, there are, um, family
members have raised concerns,
but certainly law enforcement
has raised concerns, and I mean
law enforcement, not just from
Bern Leo County, but from other
parts of the state, including
places like Farmington, um,
Donana County Sheriff and others
who have raised the concern
about allowing the individual to
hold on to the firearms for 48
hours after the
order has been issued for the
reasons we've discussed in great
detail, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you and Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, if a court has
determined there is a real and
credible risk of an individual
having access to a firearm
because of the current mental
state. Don't you think that
giving them an extra 2 days
after they've been notified that
they're gonna have to give up
their firearm, will create a
dangerous situation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and as I
mentioned when we voted on this
a few years ago, I thought that
then I think that now.
It's you're putting law
enforcement at risk because the
individual knows when that knock
comes on the door, that's a law
enforcement officer asking for
his fire that person's firearms,
and that puts the law
enforcement officer at risk. It
puts family members potentially
at least, particularly if they
maybe were the petitioning party
as opposed, so yeah, this is a
health and safety thing. It's
totally is and I think it's very
important that it be included in
the bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and the law.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
absolutely agree with you. It is
a very important issue and let's
just look at another aspect. So
the language you are proposing
to modify how quickly the
respondent must relinquish their
firearm to immediately or as
directed by the court provides a
great deal of flexibility and
what kinds of circumstances do
you anticipate that a court
would need that kind of
flexibility.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, let me
speak to one of my experts.
OK, um, Mr. Speaker, an example
that I, I um was just received
from the surgeon here is they've
asked for additional time when,
you know, they couldn't find the
individual and they don't want,
you know, him to be put at risk
in terms of violating the order
or they mention of individual
who was in the hospital.
So you know that person
obviously needed additional time
in terms of relinquishing,
making arrangements, Mr.
Speaker, to, uh, relinquish the
firearms to law enforcement or,
um uh another uh authorized
individual, Mr. Speaker, that
was one example I just heard of,
Mr. Speaker, where we want that
flexibility so the court could
say, oh, we know he's in the
hospital. We're gonna give him X
amount of time to relinquish the
guns, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for that example, but
let me ask you.
this question. If we do not pass
House Bill 12 with the changes
to Opal law that enforcement and
families have asked for what
options do families have to
ensure their safety and the
safety of their loved ones
during this 48 hour period.
Well, I think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we're, we're
putting people at risk if we
don't enact these um changes,
both law enforcement, family
members, family members if they
are afraid that they will be the
object of the person's ire, you
know, uh, probably irrational
ire, but nonetheless ire will
have to, um, maybe seek
someplace to go that's not where
they couldn't be found, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
think it puts them at risk for.
From from threat, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and we don't want
to do that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you for your
eye on safety and for immediacy,
we really appreciate that. I
support your bill and I look
forward to voting for it and
thank you Madam Speaker.
There is further debate, the
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. There
is a gentle lady from Los
Alamos, Sandoval and Santa Fe.
Um, Mr. Speak, uh, uh, Miss
Madam Speaker and gentlemen from
Otero, is that right?
And Lincoln, uh, yes, I yield.
Thank you gentle lady. So,
I had to step out for a little
bit and I don't mean to keep
beating this up, but
On due process.
Your favorite one. Yes, ma'am.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady on
due process. So what I was, you
know, sometimes I feel like
we're putting law enforcement at
risk, and, um, you know.
Gentle lady, how, how extensive
of training does law enforcement
get on being able to really
evaluate somebody that is legit
mentally sick, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, uh, from Otero and
Lincoln.
Uh, I am told that the minimum
is 40 hours of training to
identify individuals who have,
uh, maybe, um,
Exhibiting mental illness, um,
that in a way that could present
a risk to themselves or others.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady.
You know, I, I was in public
safety myself, and I went
through a lot of the same
training that law enforcement
went, and I've, I've made
mistakes.
And gentle lady, you know, if
Let's just use a hypothetical. I
know people don't like
hypotheticals, but I have to
throw a scenario out there if
somebody
If they call and, and law
enforcement shows up and they've
made the decision that
They're gonna go ahead and
confiscate their guns and they
get a court order and they do
that.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so whenever I go to court, I
have to get an attorney. Is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
not necessarily, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So I could act on my own behalf,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
right.
Thank you, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So if
I'm acting on my own behalf, I
probably wouldn't be represented
as well as I probably got an
attorney. Why wouldn't the state
Prove me wrong.
Why would the state not prove me
wrong instead of me having to
prove myself right, gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
you're asking who has the burden
of proof?
Would you repeat that, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, um,
let me kind of rephrase what I
just said in this instance, if
the individual goes in and
challenges the removal of the um
firearm. I'm informed by my
experts that it's on the state
to show that the petition was
valid and there was credible
information that justifies
removal of the firearms, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
You know, there's any time you
add the human factor in
anything, there can be mistakes.
And, you know, as, as a 2nd
Amendment advocate.
You know, law enforcement can
make mistakes.
And
I would, you know, if, if it
happened to me.
Mm
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
you know, that's what I, I don't
want law enforcement getting a
bad name that, you know, they're
taking, and I, I'm not saying
that they're going to, I'm just
saying there can be mistakes
made and if that happened to me,
gentle lady.
So I'll give you another
hypothetical in a county that I
know.
That
has asked for capital outlay
money.
For the last 3 years.
They don't have an evidence
room.
And
If you showed up, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, and you are
going to confiscate.
Someone's guns and let's just
say.
You know, the minority leader
said
There was people that collect
ammo. What about the gun
collectors.
And just say, you know, they had
100 to 150 long guns.
Does every single county that
you know of having an evidence
room.
That those prize possessions
that might not just be
collectors, they might be family
heirlooms.
Are they safe?
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen,
as, um, we noted, uh, I would
agree with you, I'll accept your
representation that not every
sheriff's department or, um,
city, um, municipal police have
um an adequate or large amount
of evidence storage spaces and
if they rely, if they need to
rely on this law. I'm certain
that they will make appropriate
arrangements for storage with
other law enforcement agencies
or other approaches.
to addressing this issue. I have
a lot of confidence, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that, um, law
enforcement's very resourceful,
and they can certainly develop a
strategy that will ensure the
safety of those items, Mr.
Speaker, and, um, gentlemen.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
madam.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
So,
This could result in, could this
ever result in an unwarranted
seizure, and that's, that's what
I'm trying to get at is
I again, I love the law
enforcement.
I love firefighters way better,
but I do love law enforcement.
And gentle lady, I just, you
know, I, I don't want to set
people up to fail ever. And I
just, I think that I know people
that are very passionate about
their guns and
I know that we have a mental
crisis on our hands. I get that.
And I do want to make sure that
everybody's protected, but, you
know, it, it just takes one
person for, um,
For this to happen to and
I just wanted the body to really
recognize that, that, you know,
we, the law-abiding people that
might have a bad day and I don't
know if there's anybody in here
that's been married over 15 or
2030, 40 years that haven't had
a spat with their husband or
their wife.
That might have got a little bit
overheated.
I'm not saying I'm one of them,
but
I'm not saying I, I'm not
either. Um, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I'm just saying
that
Some people would really take
offense if they knew in their
mind that they were OK and they
got their guns confiscated and
then they had to hire an
attorney, and I know how
expensive attorneys are, and
then I'm having to prove my
innocence, and after I prove
that I get my guns back and I
just wanted the body to
recognize some of the, some of
the problems that I have and for
that, you know, I wouldn't be
able to support the bill. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Motero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Speaker, with the kind gentle
lady from
Let me get this right. Los
Alamos, Santa Fe, and Sandoval
please yield. Um, Mr. uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen from
Otero, yes, I yield.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so.
First, let me see which part of
the bill I'm gonna look at. I
guess I'll look at the major
changes on page 4.
And I'll start there.
So Miss Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
I'm wondering how can you walk
me through the process on each.
It says a petition for an
extreme risk.
Firearm protection order filed
based upon credible information
that a law enforcement officer
collected while carrying out an
officer's official duties shall
include. So Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, what could this
include? I'm, so would it just
be a traffic stop? Would it be a
call at the residents. Can you
tell me what, what that could
include when it comes to the
officer collecting that
information, um, Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentlemen, it can
include a lot of things. It
could include the personal
observations of the police
officer. It could include the
police officer then following up
with, um, perhaps witnesses of
certain behaviors, um, talking
to family members, Mr. Speaker,
uh, I mean, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, sorry, Madam Speaker,
I keep messing up there. Um.
Uh, it could include um other
incidents that the officer is
aware of, um, in many
communities, police officers are
very in tune to the individuals
that they're working with in
their area, so it could include
a whole litany of information
and I would note it's not going
to be just one bad day. It's
gonna be information that's, um,
probably multiple observations,
multiple interviews, multiple
interaction.
with family members and perhaps
even the individual, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
OK, so.
I heard, OK, personal
observations, witnesses, so,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, what
if
So how I'm, I'm just wondering
how, how this report would be
created. So let's just say I
went to an, I was an officer. I
went to the door. I saw
something I didn't necessarily
think was.
was something I like to see and
then I go to get witness
testimony. So Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, while I'm building
the case to find how I will file
this. How, how do I know what to
sift out, what not to sift out
when it comes to
To the information because I
know they have training, very
good training, and I just wanna
make sure that what we're
getting, is it all gonna be like
affidavit kind of stuff that
would be required or could it be
you go to my neighbor, my
neighbor really doesn't like me,
and he says, oh, he's violent,
he's dangerous, he's a terrible
person. How do we, how do we
know what we include in that
report.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
Police officers routinely
investigate issues and
allegations. This is not a new
concept for them in terms of how
to sift through information and
sort out what is credible and
what is not credible, and I'm
reasonably certain, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, relying on one
neighbor's comment it's not
going to be the sum total of
what the police officer is
looking into. There will be
additional resources these
individuals, Mr. Speaker, are
professional.
Only trained as um evaluators of
information and reporters, Mr.
Speaker, have evaluation and
they know how to do these
things, Mr. Speaker, I think we
can all agree to that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady, and I, I do agree.
I love our law enforcement. I
love them every day of the year,
I think they do a great job,
mostly in, in most cases, and I
think they, they deserve the
respect and the the recognition
for that. So Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, we're talking about
training now. Could you tell me
a little bit about what the
training requirements are based
upon the changes of the bill,
what those would be needed.
On the at the academy or
wherever, wherever we get
training, and can you just go
into that? How do we train
specifically on these UROs, how
to use them and is it an hour
course? Is it 10 hours? How, how
many hours will that course take
and what would that look like?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, what
I've been informed is there's
routine training on this
particular law.
And the um training materials
would be updated to include now
that it's um 48, that it's
immediate relinquishment unless
otherwise directed by the
courts, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and it would be clear
now, um, in the training that
police officers may, um, be the
petitioner and initiate a
petition without relying on a
reporting party it would be
minimal changes.
to the um training Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. OK, so when it
comes to the training, we said
it's routine and so how often is
that training administered if
it's routine?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
done annually.
And I would note, Mr. Speaker,
the, um, the Justice Department
of New Mexico Department of
Justice offers training to um
law enforcement agencies across
the state and one of my experts,
uh, is one of those trainers,
Mr. Speaker, um, gentle lady, I
mean, Mrs.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. Yeah, it's really hard.
Because it keeps changing,
right? So it's hard, but Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, OK, so
it's annually, so when this goes
into effect, I believe probably
90 days following its enactment,
would that be a training that
would be like a virtual training
that each law enforcer must take
because that's when it would go
into effect or how would that
work? Uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, I don't have a direct
answer for that. It will be
included in the next training
module and uh available for
long.
enforcement officers, um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
and so the reason I asked that
is because I heard an earlier in
the in the questions from the
general lady from Bernna Leo, I
heard you say we're putting
people at risk if we don't enact
these changes. And so, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering since, since this is
so.
Such an, in your opinion,
something that could be putting
people at risk if we don't make
these changes. Why did we opt
number one, to not have specific
guidelines immediately for
training so that it can be
implemented and then 2, why is
there no emergency clause?
Mr. Speaker, um.
gentleman, um, as to the
emergency clause, one needs a
2/3 vote of the body, uh, we can
all speculate on the likelihood
of receiving a 2/3 vote, uh, we
make judgments calls on that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
in with regard to, let's see the
training, uh, you know, we have
to respect our law enforcement
does their business, and I have
great confidence, um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, that they
will ensure that they're.
officers know the updated
information, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So I mean I agree
with you, but I just wanna, I, I
don't know what day of the year
this new training is. It says
annually when is annually?
January 1st. I'm just wondering,
will it take 6 months for them
to get that training in, into
these offices and make sure that
they have officers trained.
That's kind of my question,
Mister Speaker, gentlemen, I
doubt it.
Madam Speaker, generally doubt
it for the January 1st or doubt,
I, I just don't understand when
will this go into effect when it
comes to training. Mr. Speaker,
um, Matt, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I don't know, but I
have confidence that the
training um.
Uh, the trainers will address it
in an appropriate fashion, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker. I see
Mr. Speaker on the floor, which
is kind of.
You know, it's difficult. So I
say, Madam Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
I don't know, but
Madam Speaker, as we were.
Asking regarding the training,
OK, I, I just wanna understand
really what that means, but at
the end of the day, Madam
Speaker.
Generally, I, I do wanna make
sure that they know what they're
doing or they have the the
actual training to know what
they're doing when it comes to
putting forward these changes
because I, I don't want them to,
to have some kind of cloud over
them where it's like, oh, you
should have had the training and
you didn't. So.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, when
it comes to, let's just say
there's a, there's a specific
scenario.
90 days after this is passed.
And it's in the first week of
its enactment.
Will they just be relying solely
on the bill's language when it
comes to this because I believe
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
there needs to be a new form
created from my understanding
from, from the previous debate,
there needs to be a form created
to do this. So could you just
tell me uh how quickly that form
could be updated and then will
this just be given to everybody
immediately in their inbox. How
will these officers know? Uh,
Mr. Speaker,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen from
Taro. I have been informed that
when a law is updated, there is
um a sharing of that information
with all officers, um.
So that will happen.
Immediately after um the law is
enacted and signed by the
governor and the like, um.
I'm sorry, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, oh, I just, um,
learned, Mr. Speaker, I mean,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen
that, uh, the form will in all
likelihood remain the same.
OK, Madam Speaker, general lady,
that, that helps me on that
form. I just wanted to make sure
it wasn't something that was
updated and if they have an
outdated form, it could get
kicked back or something. OK, so
Madam Speaker, generally.
So I'm reading on page 4 here.
I'm gonna start on line 5. It
says the name of the address of
the respondent, description of
the number types and locations
of firearms or ammunition at the
petitioner believes the
respondent has custody of
controls, owns or possesses,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, how
would they get that information
if it was something like we
said, it could be a a traffic
stop, could be something else.
How did they get that
information of what that person,
where that person could have it
cause it says.
Locations of firearms or
ammunition, and then description
of the number, so that's how
would they get all that
information? Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I don't believe
we had any conversation about a
traffic stop. What we did
discuss, um, Madam Speaker and
gentleman was the fact that the
law enforcement officer is
collecting information from
multiple sources often including
family members who um know the
types of um firearms and
locations of those firearms.
in all likelihood, um, so that's
how uh Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, it's through
investigative.
Interviewing and all of the
usual things that law
enforcement officers, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen are so
good at.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so.
I, I guess I just don't really
understand.
How that would work when it
comes to the, the numbers and
the locations cause
I, I just, I know we trust law
enforcement on how to do it, but
as a, as a person who's not a
law enforcement, I want to know
how that works. So would I go to
the first
The closest people to to me and
ask them how many.
Firearms I have, how much ammo I
have, how does that, how does
that determined when you're
looking at a case from law
enforcement because I'm, I'm not
a law enforcer, so I don't know.
So I just want to know how they
approach that kind of case. Um,
Madam Speaker, I think, and
gentlemen, I think I explained
that they use utilize their
investigative um talents and
experience to, um, find out that
information usually through
witnesses, family members, um,
next door neighbors. I mean, I
think we can all think.
this through and see that law
enforcement knows how to go
about finding out information
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and if they don't have that
information, they cannot file
the petition, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
OK, so I guess we kind of went
into that, but I, we didn't go
specifically into that because
we said, OK, they could do
interviews and find and do fact
finding, which is their job and
they do a great job as we all
have agreed multiple times, but
I'm, I'm just trying to figure
out how it gets to that level.
Of being able to prove it on the
EPO. I think there's a specific
Amount of like cause that you
need to hit to prove it, so I'm
just wondering how many
interviews, how, how much
information, how do we prove
that beyond any kind of doubt,
and I just want to know how that
happens when it comes to this,
and I know we're, we could
probably say, oh, they're doing
a great job, they're doing their
job, but I want to know as
someone outside looking in, how
that will work if it was a case
involving myself or somebody who
I knew.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
I've answered that question.
Every case is different, every
situation is different. There's
gonna be no, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, number of
specific witnesses and the court
will decide whether Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, whether
adequate information has been
provided to warrant the issuance
of an order to relinquish the
firearms, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I.
I guess I will just have to call
a bunch of law enforcement
officers and ask them because I
I just don't really understand
now. So Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Um
Can you tell me a little bit and
then I know we talked about the,
we needed this and I, I didn't
really understand specifically
the reasons why this is needed.
So can you, can you give me
specific instances of gaps in
the current ERPO laws.
And why they promoted the intro
of this.
Um
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, happy
to um repeat that information.
Um, as I said, um, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, law enforcement
um was concerned that there was
a split in the circuits as to
who had authority to file
petitions. Part of this bill is
intended to address that
ambiguity and it clarifies that
police officers may be reporting
parties and petitioners.
It also clarifies or um insurers
that a law enforcement officer
has the ability to retrieve um
the firearms immediately upon
service of the order that also
was a request of a number of law
enforcement individuals and that
is what has prompted it as well
as concerns from um family
members and others who have
observed behavior that they felt
warranted immediate.
removal, but they themselves
were concerned about perhaps
their safety and or concern
about violating a trusted
relationship with a loved one
that could carry forward into
the future and would be um
detrimental to that individual
as well as the family unit, um,
Madam Speaker, and
Gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady, and I know we
mentioned specific law enforcers
we talked about, uh, so the
people who are most concerned
about this, have we interviewed
people from all 33 counties,
how, how this has affected them
when it comes to implementation,
or is it mostly been state
police?
Um
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
cannot say that we have
interviewed every law
enforcement agency in the state.
Um, and I can say, however, it
is not just the state police who
are interested in this. We have
Burn Leo County, um,
Albuquerque. We have, as I
mentioned, Donana County Sheriff
supports this change.
Taos County or city of I think
the village of the sheriff, you
know, the chief in Taos, I
believe so.
Angel Fire supports this change.
Bernal Leo, Donana, I've
mentioned Farmington, um, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I'm
certain that's not an exhaustive
list.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen. OK,
thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. So I, I'm just trying to
look across the state here and I
heard Albuquerque, Donna Anna,
Taos.
Angel fire er Leo Farmington,
but I didn't hear anything from
the southeastern corner of our
state. Do we have any from
there, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady?
Um, Mr. Madam Speaker.
Gentleman
Um, I understand that er the um
provisions of the act has been
utilized in that county. I'm
unaware as to whether or not law
enforcement in that area, um,
Is advocating for this change or
not.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. I, I didn't reference the
county. Can you tell me which
county that, that happened in?
We mentioned the county.
Madam Speaker, gentleman, Eddie
County, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, so, so it's currently
working in Eddy County. Do we
know if that case, uh, if that
was successful in the, the
proceedings of, of that firearm
and how did that work in that
case?
Madam Speaker, we don't have
those details.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I guess my question though was
because we said it wasn't
working and we had advocates
around the state. Well,
according to you, you said it's
leaving people in danger. I
believe verbatim you said we are
putting people at risk if we
don't enact these changes. And
so, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so I'm wondering when it comes
to
If it's not working, why is it
that people are utilizing it
currently and why do we need the
changes because you just
mentioned in Eddie, they're
they're already using it. Um.
Mm
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't believe I use the word not
working. Actually, I think, um,
even with some of the
ambiguities in the statute,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I do
think it's working. This I
regard these changes.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
view as something I might call
it a tune-up.
Um, there are conflicts in the
districts. Let's resolve that.
That's a tune up, um, clarity,
so we know that the firearms
will be relinquished
immediately. That's a tune up,
so I think the the statute has
grown and utilization since our
enactment which I think is a
very good sign that law
enforcement across the state,
um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen
recognize that this is a useful
tool to keep um their
communities safe.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I'm.
I'm wondering when it comes to
the, the new changes, what
percentage increase in ERO
petitions do expect following
this bill's enactment if
enacted.
Um
Madam Speaker, and gentleman, I
don't know.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I guess I would, I would just be
interested in that because I
know every time this is used, it
takes more resources and court
costs, etc. with AOC and
Department of Public Safety,
etc. So Madam Speaker, uh, how
will these requirements for the
immediate firearm re
relinquishment impact
enforcement costs then.
Um, Madam Speaker, um,
gentlemen, my recollection
having read the um.
Uh, agency analyses are that
there are minimal uh expectation
that they'll be um increased in
costs.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I have not
heard what this could cost
locally in my county, so I, I
would hate to opine on that, but
If you, so DPS, they said it
would be minimal, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that's right.
And then, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, what about on the
litigation side when we're
determining constitutionality
and everything and potential
litigation. Has the attorney
General's office said that they
expect that and then how much
have they said they expect
according to whatever analysis,
I have not read the AG's
analysis.
Madam Speaker and gentleman, the
attorney General's office is
very much in support of these
changes and I think I could
venture to say the law itself,
they train on it, um, I'm
unaware, Madam Speaker, of any
predictions that this is going
to increase costs for them in
any appreciable way, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, so I mean I, I think we
brought up a little bit.
The concerns when it comes to
constitutionality. And so I
think we mentioned Rahimi case,
we mentioned a few cases in New
York, something in Rhode Island,
I believe. Can you just tell me
specifically about the most
recent.
The most recent cases on the
Supreme Court level, do we think
that this would
Be OK constitutional
constitutionally when it comes
to immediate seizure because
what what I've read on the
Rahimi case previously was they
took the firearm before the
person had a hearing, and that
was the problem that SCOTU found
in an 8-1 decision. Could you
tell me a little bit about how
this is different than that case
and how, how we could avoid that
constitutional question. Um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
not understanding what you're
referring to in Rahimi. Rahimi
upheld
um, the actions of what happened
in Texas that related to the
gentleman who was the object of
a domestic violence protective
order and that allowed the
police um law enforcement to
retrieve those firearms and
actually when that case came
out, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I was heartened. I
was heartened because we, I
realized that that uh the
rationale in that case could be
extended to our, um, extreme
order of protection law that we
passed, I think 4 or 5.
years ago, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, and gentle
lady, so I guess regarding that
case.
Though, and other cases.
I know in the in the opinion,
the Supreme Court did affirm
that firearm restrictions must
align with historical
traditions, of course, because
of ruin and then later on they
emphasize that you must not
remove the firearm before the,
the process or the hearing. So,
uh, according to that, so merely
being accused.
posing a risk and then those
standards were not enough. So
can you just tell me how this
could make that different. Um.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen,
I think it's, um, um, how do I
say this? Drawing sentences out
of very, very lengthy analysis
is not a productive way to
discuss, discuss constitutional
issues, um, I have read that
case and I'm, I am comfortable
as I believe other lawyers in
the chamber are that this
procedure that we have um in
place is well within the
constitutional rights of the
state, Madam, Mr. Speaker.
John.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I would not dare.
Comment on something unless I've
read it, as I'm sure you know
how I, how I read bills and how
I vote on them, so I don't think
it's someone just pulling out a
sentence from a case, Madam Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's
actually some of the provisions
that were enacted in that.
opinion. So the Supreme Court
did indeed say that and when
they say something in a majority
opinion where it's an 81, I just
think it's, it's probably a sage
thing to do to take the advice.
Madam Speaker, or Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and so I did, I did
read that and then the case,
which is very lengthy, but I did
get through it and so, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to the
24 hour or the 48 hours
currently being reduced to 1 or
0 time essentially when it's
immediate. Can you tell me,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, why
we didn't put in a provision in
the bill to have an appeals
process before the firearm is
relinquished.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would like to think that's
self-evident that the reason one
would not want to give all that
sort of notice to someone who is
at risk to himself or others is
they could act out in ways that
are not, that is a risk to
public safety and law
enforcement themselves. So that
is the rationale for getting an
ex parte order but providing for
the rights of the individual
with a post hearing, uh, post
relinquishment hearing that is
prompt an evidentiary.
Madam, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I don't know if it's
evident because this body 5
years ago when passing this bill
we said 48 hours. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, if we're
trying to fix an error in this
body's judgment when saying it's
obvious, I don't know how
obvious that could be because we
didn't give that person due
process in my opinion, if they
don't have that time, the two
days which is currently in law
to make that appeal. So, Madam
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's my concern when it
comes to this.
Because if we're saying it's a
very obvious, this person could
be dangerous, Madam, Mister
Speaker, gentle lady.
Then why did this body pass a
bill which he voted for, by the
way, 5 years ago.
That gives 2 days.
For the reasons that I stated
before, I do not know the
rationale that was a provision,
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that was
added on the Senate side when
the bill was being discussed
there.
OK, thank you, madam. Mr.
Speaker, I keep on calling you
Madam Speaker because it's
always changing. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you for that.
And so, Mr. Speaker, generally,
I'm wondering also when it comes
to, I'm, I'm pulling up the AG
analysis, which
I think I pulled up previously,
but I wanted to make sure that
there was nothing in there that
could potentially create any
instances of more litigation on
the state level. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I see that there are a few
different things that he's
talked about.
And I believe he mentioned a few
cases, including
Number one on the New Mexico
Court of Appeals State versus
Philip L'Estrange A1CA
41174D101. It's a really long
case. Can, can you just tell me,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
how that could actually affect
this new piece of legislation
and that could create some
precedent that we need to be
aware of.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, the
the L'Estrange case was the case
that has prompted us to try to
get consistency of application
by modifying the law, the, the
L'Estrange case was a first
judicial district case in which
the district court ruled that
um.
The the statue did not permit
law enforcement to be a
petitioning party and that has
prompted conflicts amongst the
districts and thereby requiring
us to or compelling us to
suggest these amendments, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Speaker Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
that helps regarding that and
then Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I'm wondering when it comes to
the state, how many people.
Charged with red flag.
Or ERO
Cases were found innocent in the
state.
Do we know
I, I will look into that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're looking for the numbers,
but um I'm told it's just a
handful and let's, um, Mr.
Speaker, if I could correct
terminology, this is not an
issue of guilt or innocence.
That's a that that is criminal
law type terminology. This is a
civil process it's whether or
not, um, the guns should had
there was adequate basis to
determine that the person was a
risk to themselves or others
justifying the retrieval of the
firearms.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
just received some information
and for the, I guess it's the
year 2023 through 2024, there
was um one denial of a petition.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that helps me. So one
denial within the last year. OK,
that helps me and yeah, I.
I guess it's good that we have
that information as well. Thank
you for providing that. And then
also I'm wondering when it comes
to our state, we have a very
diverse state and I wanna make
sure that we're not
disproportionately affecting
certain communities with this
law, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, have we considered those
because according to a RAND
study I'm seeing from 2024, it
found that Colorado's versions
of the of certain laws like this
was disproportionate amounts of
black individuals.
Uh, they, these filed against
them. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, have we considered that
with these changes.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
don't know why these changes
would affect, um, the proportion
of various, um, individuals or,
uh, demographics, I guess is the
way one would say it. All UROs,
I believe, are reported on the
Supreme Court website if I have
that correctly at least.
And I'm courses, there's data
that anyone can look at, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm trying
to get, I'm trying to get used
to that.
Now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so I, I think that's just
something worth noting on that
study, which I found
interesting, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so.
Then I'm guessing regarding the
case and the court itself, how
would the court be the one who,
how did they verify credibility
of law enforcement claims in
these petitions and then what is
that process looks like, look
like in the court setting.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I think it would be much like
they verify anything, there's
testimony received from the
officers potentially family
members, potentially the
respondent and then there's a
determination on credibility,
perhaps even looking at written
or photographs or, you know, uh,
Facebook posts. There could be a
whole litany.
Sworn testimony, of course, is
always a key element to any
evidentiary proceeding, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and so
I guess that kind of answered
some of my questions today and,
and I do even more questions
that it's created that I'm gonna
look for data and stuff on this
when it comes to the enactment
of this, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I do think that this
provision, which I find to be
very aggressive when it comes to
the immediate seizure upon the
Epo uh service. I find that to
be problematic and I also find
it that it could.
violate many portions of the
case law that we were talking
about earlier, and I would just
be very apprehensive to voting
on something like this because
it could open up the state to
litigation and that's the last
thing that I want for our state.
I do not want the state to be
brought into tens of thousands
of dollars into litigation when
the AG could be going after
fentanyl traffickers. He could
be going after human smugglers.
He could be going after the
worst of the worst and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
think that this bill would
accomplish.
was
Really what we're trying to
accomplish because in my
opinion, it would be struck down
immediately in the courts, so
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I cannot
support the bill, but I do want
to affirm that I support our
constitutional rights according
to our state and our federal
constitutions under the Second
Amendment and then also in our
state constitution, which is
even more protective of our
rights when it comes to that. So
I think it's very important that
we put those first as well as
our Fourth Amendment. We've got
to have that and then 6th
Amendment is really key, and I
think those are all things that
could potentially
be uh
A factor when it comes to
litigation on this. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, thanks
for the debate. Thank you for
answering some of my questions.
I did get a lot of information,
but I don't think I can support
the bill in this fashion right
now, but I could in the future
maybe if, if, uh, it was like
delete line one, page one to
like the end of the bill or
something. So thank you.
Gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie
Notero, Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I just want to ask Mr. Block so
there's a chance as is.
Well, the general lady yield
from Los Alamos Sandoval and
Santa Fe. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Chavez and a
bunch of other counties, um, I
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh.
Gentle lady, I just have a
couple questions. Uh, some of
them are, are off what
Representative Block had asked.
He kind of got one of my
questions.
I think you said that, that out
of all of the times that red
flag has been used, um, that at
one time there wasn't adequate
basis.
Uh
Oh sorry, there was an adequate
basis to uphold the violation.
I, uh, you're gonna give me the
right words. um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we were
reviewing a report that I think
the task force put together and
it indicated that in um one
instance where an order had
issued um that was reversed, I
guess you could say, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, through
after the 10 day hearing
occurred.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
one of the things that that came
up to me when this was
originally passed. I was just uh
Eddie County commissioner at the
time, but we had done quite a
bit of work on this.
So
If, if you are charged, um, or
charged is probably the wrong
word, but if there is not
adequate basis to uh continue
with this violation. Are you put
into an open source media at the
time of when you are.
charged.
If, are you asking if it's a
public record that when a
petition is filed, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
generally, yes.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen in
some cases that is the case in
other cases, I understand there
the um pleadings are sealed, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's where I'm gonna ask
quite a few or a couple of my
questions. When it does go into
the open source, uh, or media.
Um, a lot of our communities are
rural. They're small communities
if that gets into the newspaper
and all of a sudden they
understand how many guns and or
ammunition as our floor uh
minority leader talked about.
To me, that feels like a little
bit of dangerous for the person
who might not have adequate
basis to uphold it, but now the
entire community understands how
many guns and how much
ammunition they have. Do you, do
you see that as an issue? Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
just been informed the level of
detail that you just described
is not included in the public
record, the number of guns and
so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker,
Jones.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you for that information. The
next question I would have is,
is if you are found to not have
adequate basis to continue on
with this, would it still affect
your NICS eligibility to
purchase a weapon after that?
What would it take to get you
off of that?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
been informed that that flag, if
you want to call it that, Mr.
Speaker, gentleman is removed
immediately.
So with the one that that
actually was found to not have
adequate basis. Do we know what
it might have cost that
individual in order to prove
their innocence. Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um,
innocence again is a term I'm
not familiar with in this
context, but um no we don't and
I said it was a data point, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I don't have
the specifics on that particular
individual, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I just wanna make one
more time, uh, make sure I
understand this correctly so if
you're found to not have
adequate basis, not innocence, I
guess, um.
Automatically you come off of
the NICS and that is you don't
have to do anything. All of that
is just completely done for you,
um, moving forward, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I understand from law
enforcement who's sitting next
to me, that's correct.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
long does that normally take?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
understand immediate means
immediate, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Very good. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Generalleti.
That's all I have. Thank you.
There's for the debate,
gentlemen from Colfax, Currie
Hardy and Qua San Miguel and
Nien, Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Does gentle lady yield,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Colfax and those other counties
I yelled.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I've got several questions I
wanted to ask, but you just
brought up on one to me just now
that you, you did not understand
how innocence would be used in
this context. So, where I grew
up, if you did something, you
were guilty. If you did not do
it, you were innocent. So can
you explain to me how innocence
is not a part of this
discussion.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're not talking about where we
grew up and all that kind of
thing we're talking about legal
proceedings here, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and those sorts
of terminologies, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen have particular
meanings, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I grew up in New Mexico.
We're talking about New Mexico
legal proceedings.
And innocent is relevant in New
Mexico in legal terminology. Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I gently
and respectfully disagree in the
context of a UO petition, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I will gently disagree
with you for a long, long time.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, do the police not currently
have the right to disarm a
individual if they feel
threatened or in any way by that
individual uh possessing a
firearm.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I, I guess I'd need more context
if the individual is pointing a
gun at the law enforcement
officer? Are you asking me
whether or not they have the
authority to disarm them.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
they pull up to a residence, and
there is a domestic dispute
going on. There's a gun in the
general area.
Of that domestic dispute.
Uh, may or may not be in
someone's hand. It may be, uh,
slung over their shoulder, maybe
laying on the table. Do they not
have the right to disarm those
people.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
been informed in the limited
facts situation that you just
presented to me that they likely
um could what they referred to
as secure the firearm.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think they
have the right to secure the
firearm.
So that's short term. Now with
the
Current law
Uh, do they not have the ability
in the long term to petition the
court to remove that
individual's guns.
Mr. Speaker, if certain criteria
are met, that is, it is
determined that the person is a
danger to themselves or others
that there is credible
information presented to a court
and a court order is issued,
the, the ability to retrieve the
firearm from the individual is
there and subject to additional
court review, Mr. Speaker, um,
within 10 days of the
relinquishment of those
firearms, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think they have the right to
remove those arms unless that
individual is innocent of the
charges, so what?
Uh, problem are we trying to
fix. They have the ability to
disarm them in the short term if
they feel threatened, they have
the ability to disarm them in
the long term if they are, uh, a
menace to their selves or
others. So what is the problem
we're trying to fix? Um, Mr.
Speaker, uh, the URPO law
provides the authority to do the
latter that you referred to, the
ability to retrieve the
amendments that we're proposing
are simply to.
clarify um what you apparently
have acknowledged they have the
right to do, which is the
ability to petition a court in
order to have a legal basis for
um requiring the individual to
relinquish those arms, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, which firearms?
The firearms that are in that
house, the firearms that are in
their house in another county.
The firearms that belonged to a
parent. The firearms that might
be in a home they own in Texas?
Is it all the firearms they own
in the state, all the farms that
they have access to, which farms
are they able to be required to
relinquish.
Um, yes, with the exception of
the ones that you referenced in
Texas or out of state, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So if the firearms belong to
another person, they still have
to relinquish them no matter
where they are. Um, Mr. Speaker,
I don't recall that being part
of any of the hypotheses, Mr.
Speaker, that you provided. When
did you mention, Mr. Speaker,
that the firearms, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentleman, belong to
someone else Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think most homes have
firearms that belong to
different members of the family
if, if that family is a family
that, that owns firearms, uh,
oftentimes they
They belong to various members
of that family.
Mr. Speaker, the respondent,
that's the individual we're
talking about, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, it has to
relinquish firearms that are in
his or her custody control owns
or possesses. That is the
provision in the statute, Mr.
Speaker, uh, and gentlemen.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
if, uh,
If there was a firearm.
That was in my home but belonged
to another person. Would it be
in my custody or control?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
um, under that limited facts
scenario that you provided, the
answer, um, our expert law
enforcement individuals here
have provided is no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I like that answer.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
What types of behavior would
cause me to have my firearms
removed.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
would vary, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
I'm sorry, gentle lady, I didn't
catch your answer.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that would depend on the facts
and circumstances, um, involving
each individual person so to
speculate as to eat what would,
what would the person we rely
on, I think at this point is
speculative, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
would be up to the officer to
decide if I was acting.
Uh, dangerously or
Or
Weird or crazy or.
Uh, exact, you know, what, what
are, what, what would cause me
to be no longer able to have a,
have a
Firearm, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
actually, it would not be up to
the officer. The officer would
file a petition that outlines
the bases for his beliefs that
the person is a danger to
themselves and others, and I, I
think as I've mentioned in
previous, um, discussions with
other, um, wonderful members of
this chamber that would involve
a collection of documentation,
possibly, um, you know, media
posts, possibly interviewing
neighbors.
Family members relying on
statements, observations, and
the like, um, that would all be
part of the case or the the uh
information and evidence that is
presented to the court, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen gentle lady,
uh, this gives the officer the
right to file the complaint, not
to make that decision on their
own.
Mr. Speaker, it gives the, um,
law enforcement, the ability to
file a petition so that the
court will make a decision
initially and then the court
after 10 days after
relinquishment will validate
that if the individual so
chooses to challenge the, the,
the initial order, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, for taking my
questions.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, this matter having
been under consideration for 3
hours, I moved to close debate.
There's been a motion to close
debate. All those in favors and
abide by saying aye.
I was supposed to name.
The I have it debate is not
closed.
Generally close. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you everyone for the
interesting debate. I move that
House Bill 12 do now pass, Mr.
Speaker. We are on final passage
of House Bill 12302 vote clock.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The void is now closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative. House Bill 12 has
duly passed this House.
Your lady from Taos represented
Ortez. Are you ready? and item
number 13. Can you get me to
that point that reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 91 on final passage.
Excuse me, that the record
reflect that election is served
for replacing House Bill 91 as
amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Uh, thank you
Mr. Speaker. Um, House Bill 91
as amended allows the public
regulation commission to
consider a low income rate
brought forth by an investor
owned utility uh to reduce the
energy burden of low income New
Mexicans and with that I stand
for questions.
There's from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I do, uh, yield
to the gentleman.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
and gentle lady, um.
This, uh,
Bill actually is a bit of a
surprise, um, considering Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
Uh, during, uh, the ETA debate
when we were transitioning
electricity from some fossil
fuel sources, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
We were told that rates would
be.
would be going down.
Um, so is there, what is the
reason, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady for um even bringing this
bill forward.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
there are a lot of reasons for
bringing this bill forward, but
the, the really the first one
and the most important one is
that um low income New Mexicans
pay a lot for their utilities
and
Most low income New Mexicans pay
somewhere over 20% of their
income on utilities, that's just
simply not affordable. These New
Mexicans are making terrible
decisions about what to pay for
on a monthly basis their
medicines, food, pet food.
Um, and they shouldn't have to
be making those decisions in
that way. So what this bill does
is it um.
Allows those low income New
Mexicans to.
Pela.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
Actually have over the last
several years, um,
It's been stated in committee,
uh, after committee that I've
been in.
That that rates are are going
down.
And uh Mr. Speaker and and
gentle lady.
Um, as I have, uh,
Uh, stated, um, many times. I, I
don't believe that they're going
down.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that, that's, I know
that's not necessarily the case
across the board, but
specifically, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady in the PNM.
Uh, utility customer base, uh,
rates have been going up.
Um, I'm not sure if you're aware
of that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm, I'm
not aware.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I this year
after uh hearing again that,
that, that utility rates are
going down. I actually made a
request, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, that.
Uh, from the PRC to get me an
accurate picture of utility
bills.
And um and what I have seen is
specifically, Mr. Speaker.
Um
Utilities
Uh, rates have been going up,
particularly in the PNM.
Uh
Provider network in particular,
but they have been held down
artificially.
By
Uh, a credit that people are
getting on their bills.
So Mr. Speaker and uh and gentle
lady.
Um
There were securitization
charges.
Go ahead. I know you know Mr.
Speaker, I know you're listening
to your to your expert. Go
ahead. Go ahead and ask the
question so I can answer it
properly. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh.
Securitization charges from the
early decommissioning.
Of
Uh, the San Juan Generating
Station has caused there to be.
A credit.
That has been on
The average uh UNM.
Uh, Bill
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that, that credit is going away.
It went away at the end of 2024.
So Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
so now,
What we're getting is an
accurate picture of rates.
And the average.
Uh, rate
Uh, of folks has jumped and I'm
looking at the numbers here. It
looks like about 35%.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So without the credit, Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentle lady,
the, the actual rate.
is now going to be appear higher
bills are going up.
And the Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm not sure if you're aware.
But PNM currently has, uh, a
rape case before.
The PRC, which is asking for a
25% total.
Rate increase over 2 increments.
One in 2025.
And the other, well, one was at
the end of 2024 is when they
asked for it and the other will
be now in 2025. So a total, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady of, of
rates now it doesn't mean Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that
that's what they're going to
get.
But the ETA as written says that
as
Uh, PNM complies.
With the ETA that they will
Be giving to the utility
reasonable rate increases, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I fully expect, uh, that the
that PNM won't get a full 25%
increase to rates, but
If the PRC holds a pattern, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they will probably get somewhere
around a 20% increase to
utilities.
That
Uh, currently the that doesn't
even include the rate, uh,
increases, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that current PNM.
Uh, customers saw in that jump
that Mr. Speaker, generally that
jump that everyone received in
their utilities.
Was specifically from the
credit.
From securitization.
From the ETA for the shedding,
the early shuttering of the San
Juan Generating Station.
That's why there has been a
dramatic
Jump in utility bills. It is an
accurate reflection of the rate
increases, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
That PNM customers have
realized.
Uh, over since 2019 until now.
So Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady.
When I reached out to the PRC.
I expressed.
My
Uh, uh, uh.
Disbelief
That rates were not going up.
And so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I asked
What is it that makes it look
like these rates are not going
up.
And the answer, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady was provided to me
by the PRC.
And it was that $115 million
that was spread across.
All of uh the utility payers.
As a credit
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
between 2019 until now.
The rates have been artificially
Uh, presented in a way that,
that made it look as if rates
were not increasing while they
were.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so what, what has
happened today?
Or within the last few months.
To ratepayers is they've seen
this.
Jump
In their bills.
Because the credit is no longer
there.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they also provided me with a
graph.
That shows
With
The
Uh
Requests before the PRC
currently.
That rates
are projected to go up around
19%.
Um
That those are the, that's the
case, the rape case before the
PRC right now.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I asked if that was the only.
Increase
Of rates that was expected to be
placed on P&M customers.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what they told me was that is
not the case because
Um, because of the new
infrastructure.
Because of the ETA.
That
PNM will have to comply with the
new costs. So Mr. Speaker and,
and gentle lady, I asked them to
project.
If they have any idea what those
new costs will be in 2027 and
2028 and 2029, 2030.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they, they couldn't guess.
In part, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, they couldn't guess
because not just this
legislation that's before us.
Uh, but Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
We have another bill that's
working its way through that
will uh that's gonna, uh, cause,
uh, PNM and all of the utilities
to expand, uh, their, their, uh,
I, I believe it's called
modernizing.
The grid.
And so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, they, uh, what I was told
um by the PRC is that that will
also increase costs because.
Uh, there's also guaranteed
language in that bill to
To uh.
That they that they can get back
their money for any of the uh
Uh, new infrastructure that PNM
will be creating, so Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I'm, I'm very,
very concerned.
In particular, not so much with
the other utility areas, not the
other major utilities in New
Mexico.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
in particular, the largest
utility, PNM.
And so,
In my meeting with
The folks from the PRC.
I asked
About this legislation.
And Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady that the concern is not
that
That, uh,
Low income folks.
Might need some help. The, the
reality is, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Everybody is going to need some
help once all of, once we begin
to realize all of the costs of
this new infrastructure.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
That gets me to my question.
Uh, and that is Mr. Speaker.
What is
In your legislation, what is the
definition of low income when
we're instructing the PRC.
To
Uh, to implement.
Some sort of cost savings for
low income families.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we do
not define low income in this
legislation. That is up to the
utilities that are bringing
their rape case to the PRC.
They can define it in a variety
of ways.
So, Mr. Speaker, and, and, and
uh gentle lady.
That is my concern. This is
really open ended.
Um, I, I have.
This legislation doesn't even
really provide guidance just as
low income.
Um
I know that
In other um
In another area of PRC
regulation, low income has been
defined as 200% of the poverty
level.
Um, I'm not sure if you're aware
that that currently exists in
another area of PRC regulation
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
understand that that's in the
efficient use of Energy Act, um,
but what this bill does it it it
leaves it up to the IOU to
determine low income. It could
be 125% of poverty could be 250%
of poverty. Um, it really
depends on the service area and
they are all very different. PNM
is not the only IOU in the state
we, we have several others.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. I, I appreciate that.
I, I do realize that, but the,
but PNM is by far and away the
largest utility.
Um, and, and my, my concern, and
Speaker, uh, generally this,
this where I'm from in
Farmington, we have a municipal
utility so this doesn't affect
me in the same way, but uh I am
a a state representative, so I
am concerned about, uh, about
consumers across the state. So,
um, speaker and gentle lady, um,
is there.
Is there a reason you wouldn't
want to stipulate that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's,
it's because the IOUs are so
different. New Mexico gas.
It's very different from P&M,
which is different from SPS or
EPE I know I'm saying lots of
acronyms here, but these are all
investor owned utilities in
various areas of the state and
they just have different needs
and I want to point out, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that um
this bill also focuses on
programs that might help low
income households, uh, so it's,
it's not just rates, but it's
also programs and again, low
income is different and, you
know, various parts, you know,
I'm not covered by PNM, uh.
covered by Kit Carson Electrical
co op, and, you know, right now,
um.
A low income person could be
making a lot more than the, you
know, than the median income in
New Mexico because it's just so
expensive to live there. So we
leave it up to the IOUs to
determine.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
so, uh, gentle lady.
Um
In the event.
That
What has been presented to me by
the PRC, which is uh rates.
At least once again, I'm not
speaking for all utilities, but
at least in the PNM.
Uh, uh,
customer
Uh, bills that the rates are
going to be going up in fairly
dramatically and very soon.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, in
the event that we create another
class.
Of of utility.
customer
What's going to happen to the
costs.
Who's gonna absorb the costs.
That that
Uh, that those low income.
Ratepayers, who's going to
absorb those costs.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
really depends on how the rate
program is designed, right, when
they make their proposal to the
PRC, um, and we already all of
us, so if you're in a an IOU
service area, do subsidize other
rates that exist, um, economic
development rate, industrial
rate, so those are, those costs
are borne by all ratepayers. So
it could be.
I, I can't tell you like what
it's going to cost or what it
looks like, but I can tell you
that as they design their, their
ratemaking proposal, you know,
the, the IOU will take that into
consideration, as will the PRC.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, and, and,
and gentle lady, um,
Considering the numbers that
I've, that were provided to me
that I can provide to you and
every member in here, just the
uh email.
Information that was sent to me.
Um, are, are.
Would you stipulate to the fact
that rates are going to go up.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
I, I can't, I, I can't.
stipulate or, you know, tell you
that I agree with you. I think
they're going to go up in some
places, um, in the PNM service
area. I don't have that piece of
paper that you have, uh, so, so
I don't, I don't know, but I
think that
There is that your concern, um,
really sort of drives home my
point that low income New
Mexicans are going to need
additional support and the IOU,
uh, that serves them.
The investor owned utility that
serves them, uh, will be able to
provide that support through
either a low income rate or a
program.
Which is all that this
legislation is saying that they
can do, that they can bring that
to the PRC and that the PRC can
consider it. That is not allowed
right now.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um.
The reality, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady is, uh, the poor all
the way to the wealthy are
paying a much higher price for
eggs.
Right now, uh, paying a much
higher price for so many other
items because of uh inflation
and some other things and the,
the bird flu.
Um, but Ms. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Why are we putting this on
utilities? Why, why is this
where we're
Going after
A a pass on from
Every other person who's paying
for utilities.
For the low income.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if
this bill could be about setting
the price of eggs or allowing a,
a grocery store to come to the
PRC to um regulate the price of
eggs and it, it'd be a different
conversation we're having, um,
but utilities, uh, utility, uh,
bills are high, and that is
something that um low income
folks are, you know, they're
having a hard time paying those
utility bills. That's the reason
we're bringing this legislation
so that there could be some.
alternatives for low-income
folks.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, so,
Uh
what exactly is, if, if, if just
so I can have a baseline here.
What is the poverty rate.
Uh, what is the national poverty
rate for a family of 4, let's
say.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
you mean the amount of money,
the income.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
gonna just take a second to
Google that.
Thank you or Mr. Speaker or a
gentle lady, I just so happen to
be able to have that
information.
Mr. Speaker John and, go, go
ahead and tell me.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady for a family of 4.
Uh, the income that would make
someone.
Which is called the
The poverty level is about
31,000, a little less than
$31,000 annually, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady.
Um
Currently under, under PNM in
another regulation, once again,
which would, which would likely
since it's kind of set there
already, but probably be
precedents.
Is that low income is 200% of
the poverty level, so I'm
speaker and generally, that's
just a little over $60,000 for a
family of 4 right around $61,000
for a family of 4. And, and I
would agree that that is.
Definitely
The poverty level in in New
Mexico that is a young family,
uh, struggling, um, Ms. Speaker
and gentle lady, I, I agree with
that, um, but Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady,
My concern is just above.
$60,000.
Those people are struggling too.
70,000 for a family of four is
not enough, especially if you're
not getting.
Um, any major, uh, subsidies
and, and you're making that
money in a family. You're,
you're probably not getting a
whole lot of help. I know we, we
have some things in New Mexico
that go to everyone, including
childcare and some other things.
But beyond that,
Um, they're not breaks that
those families get, uh, for
college tuition for a child or
the Speaker and gentle lady,
everybody knows what the price
of cars have gone to and the
price of insurance and all of
those things. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I'm very, very
Uh, uncomfortable.
With allowing uh the PRC.
To
Make that decision on their own
because Mr. Speaker, generally I
don't, I don't think 200% of the
poverty level is.
Low enough, so, uh, Mr. Speaker,
um, I have an amendment that I'd
like to introduce, so I'm gonna
have it delivered to.
The rostrum.
And Mr. Speaker, can I have a
roll call vote?
Can you please read the number
on the bottom left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, uh, the, um,
amendment is 0.21, I'm sorry,
0.231.
389.2.
Thank you. We'll get that passed
out and post it online.
Looks like the amendment has
been passed out and it is posted
online, the gentleman to explain
the amendment.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
the amendment.
Sets the.
Annual household income to be
considered.
As low income as
Uh, being no less than 400% of
the federal poverty level.
young lady, is this a friendly
amendment?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um.
With this, uh, this amendment I
think nearly everyone in this
room is unpaid legislators were.
qualify for a low income rate,
um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
don't think that there's
amendment is friendly, um, I
think the elegance of the
language that we have very
carefully chosen for this bill,
um, allows the IOU to set their
own determinations and
definitions of what is low
income and what is not, um, this
is not considered low income at
um at 400% poverty, and I think
it takes away.
their ability to design a
program that really works for
their area, um, or a rate that
works for their area. So with
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I have to say, uh, not
friendly.
Right, there is a bit on the
amendment the general lady from
Lee Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from San Juan yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Lee County. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, what rates
have specifically gone up.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, um, according to the
information.
That I was given um all rates
have gone up.
In the last, uh, several years
at all from all utility
companies.
Um, but Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, more specifically the
dramatic.
Uh, uh, rate increases so far
have been from PNM.
And uh the chart that I was
given shows an exponential jump.
Uh, going forward from 2024
through 2026, and Mr. Speaker
and, and gentle lady, um, what I
was told is, uh, uh, PNM is
looking at 2027, 2028, to bring
on new infrastructure that they
will be asking for further rate
recovery.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, who
would be paying for the rate
increases.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
The, the reality is it's
everyone else and that'll be uh.
Um, so let's start at the top.
Big business, um, which, uh,
would be paying for that, um, we
would be paying for that.
Our schools
All of government costs are
going to go up dramatically on
us.
Then
you go a little lower and then
it is small business.
We'll be covering that next
share.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
After that, most of the
ratepayers in New Mexico would
fit in residential.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the far
Far majority of people who are
going to be paying the this
increase is middle income lower
middle income.
To upper middle income uh
ratepayers, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the, the concern I
have is we're not, we're not.
Going to be transferring.
The cost from the very, very
wealthy in New Mexico.
Uh, the, the, the reality, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady is the
middle class is going to be
taking it on the teeth and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I know
you're, you're new here, but
Most of what happens here when,
when we do something like this,
yes, we are, we, we have a lot
of people in poverty here in
this state. We have a lot of
people that are struggling to
survive, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the middle class is
struggling to survive as well,
and this is just another burden,
so, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the purpose of my
amendment is to try and
In particular, keep.
Those families.
That have
Um
Expenses of raising children and
everyone who's raised a child
knows that those costs are just
unexpected. Everything from
Different, uh, costs of just
them surviving among their
peers, the cost of playing
sports, the cost of uh uh
purchasing vehicles, purchasing
insurance for anybody who's had
to purchase insurance for a
teenager who knows what I'm
talking about there, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, then with the
uh what everyone has also seen
in inflation. We've seen our
insurance on our homes.
have jumped so Mr. Speaker and
and gentle lady across the
board, the middle class.
Just can't afford to take on
anyone else's bills.
And so I, I don't think it's
fair, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, for us to ask the middle
class to bear.
What I would think potentially
to be an unbearable burden with
what we see as the potential
rise in rates in particular in
the uh PNM customer base.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I just
want to clarify what I'm
hearing. So if the low income is
getting helped in the working
class would be the most
negatively impacted. Is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I would, uh, the definition
of working class might not be
the the right term. I think
there's a lot of folks that are
have two children, uh, a family
of 4 that are making less than
$60,000 so, uh, but the reality
is those folks who are who are.
Transitioning from what most of
us would consider to be poverty,
transitioning into to the middle
class, they're gonna get
hammered. It'll be like they
never left.
Uh, being a, a, uh, a, a lower
income family because um the,
the expenses to survive without
outpace.
Any increased income that they
would receive.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
I'm hearing is that the majority
of New Mexicans would be
negatively impacted. Is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I think without this
amendment, I think that would be
the case, um, with this
amendment, I, we would be.
Uh, protecting, I think, a
household of 4 making around
$120,000 which $120,000 a year
used to be.
A lot of money.
Um, but the cost to survive
these days is.
It is very, very hard and, and,
uh by, by no means are folks
who, who have a home, a house
payment.
Uh, maybe as many as 4 vehicles
if they have 2 children driving.
Um, at the expenses on that
family are, are nearly
unbearable and if they they want
to go on to college, uh, even
though we cover tuition, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and generally, there's,
there's other expenses that go
along with having a child in
college, so, um, yes, the, the,
the middle income.
Once again needs people to stand
up and, and, and protect them.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you tell me how
this amendment would help the
majority of New Mexicans.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just keeping status quo.
This is nothing.
That I, I because Mr. Speaker
and generally I think what's,
what's, what's obviously going
to happen, particularly in the
PNM.
Uh, utility, uh, customer base
is everyone is going to see
their, their utility rates rise.
So, uh, the answer would be.
Just protect them and, and, and
hold the status quo, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, but
this is not a perfect.
This amendment's not a perfect
amendment because that just
means people who are barely
over.
120 will be covering.
The
Uh, the, the, the bills.
Uh, of everyone else that is in
the PNM uh utility customer
base.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that concludes my
questions.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move to Table House
floor amendment number 1 to
House Bill 91 as amended. We are
on a motion to table amendment
number 1 to House Bill 91 as
amended, a vote of yes. The
amendment is tabled. I would
have no, we're back on the
amendment 32nd clock.
The vote
is now open.
Boats about to close.
Law folks, we're gonna hold the
vote open for a minute.
We may, we may have had an
accident outside.
Mm
Right, the vote is now closed by
a vote of 37 in the affirmative,
24 in the negative. House for
Amendment number 1 has been
tabled.
gentleman you saw before.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll,
I'll keep it short, um.
I am concerned, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that the middle
class can just cannot afford to
have, uh, utility bills of, of
other New Mexicans, um, even in.
Bad circumstances that the
Other ratepayers, the middle
class, they just cannot afford
us continuing to pile more and
more expenses on them and the
speaker and gentle lady at at
some point, uh, I, I'm concerned
that that they're gonna be very
unhappy with his body if
If they see us doing this to
their, their utility rates.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, gentle
lady from Dona Ana and Otero
Representative Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh well,
the gentle lady from Taos yield,
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you so much, um, I want to
just stand in support of HB 91
partly because housing
affordability includes so much
more than our mortgage payment
or rent payments at the
beginning of the month, right?
Uh, we have to consider commute
times or transportation we have
to budget deposits are first and
last month's rent, but most
importantly we also have to
estimate the cost related to
utilities and that's the part I
wanna talk about today, um, and
Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, because we
have many constituents across
New Mexico that are on low and
fixed incomes, um, and some New
Mexicans belong to cooperatives,
uh, rather than invest your own
utilities and so, uh, for
example, like in my district, we
don't have cooperatives and so
help me understand are the bill
um are the bill's requirements
for cooperatives different from
those for investor owned
utilities. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
the bill does not include co-ops
or municipal water agencies,
they are not part of this bill.
They just, Mr. Speaker, gentle,
they're just really focused on
investor and utilities.
Excellent, um, that's really
good to know. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and um,
You know, another really
important conversation is we
want to make sure that our
utilities are also um making a
profit like that's an interest
that they have and uh I don't
want to ignore that interest
that utility companies have and
so does the bill allow utilities
to profit from offering low
income rates. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
think that's an important
question, um, so we want to make
sure that the ratepayers that
are covered by that utility
aren't, you know, aren't gouged
in any way, um.
What we've seen in the 20 other
states that have low income
rates is that, um, those rates
when they're implemented don't
provide any profit to utilities,
um, and I wanna remind the body,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that um that under the public
utility Act, um.
At any rate, uh, must be
considered just and reasonable.
That is really the charge that
the PRC has as they're reviewing
rape cases, uh, brought by
investor owned utilities, um, so
that's, that's really that,
that's what they're held to
statutorily, um, so that's, I
think what would keep um an IOU
from getting any making any
profit from a low income rate. I
don't see how that's gonna
happen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and, uh, finally I just
wanna close, um,
By just naming, I really
appreciate the, as you've
mentioned, the elegant language
in the bill, partly because it
doesn't over regulate utility
companies it really allows for
utility companies to adjust and
adapt uh given their community
and their geography. So thank
you so much uh for presenting
this bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Montero,
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentle lady from Taos,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to.
The gentleman
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and by the way,
first, I love Tao. Taos is a
really cool place to go, and I
really want to stay the night in
a, in a spaceship someday, one
of those uh starship things.
What are what are they called?
ships. Those are cool and they
don't have, they don't deal
anything with this bill
whatsoever because they're
literally off the grid. But for
people who do not live in
Earthships, Mr. Speaker, lady, I
do have some questions about
this because I know it came to
our committee and I had many
questions and I voted against
the bill in.
Committee because I wanted to
make sure that we didn't have
people who were paying their
utilities who were not low
income to be subsidizing people
who do also pay their utilities
but were low income. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, could you
tell me if that has been
addressed in any amendments to
the bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, I understand your concern.
That's really the sort of the
thrust of, of this, you know,
we've got New Mexicans who um
who pay.
25, upwards of 25% of their
income.
On their utilities, right? The
gas and electric, um, and
that's, and that's a problem,
um, we, we wanna make sure that
those folks can afford their
bills so that they don't, um,
have unpaid notices, right? They
don't fall into arrears, which
I, I need to remind the body and
uh gentlemen that.
Those arrears payments, you
know, the, the money that is not
collected, that is something
that ratepayers pay for, um, in
the next ratemaking case that uh
that an IOU brings to the PRC.
So, you know, we, um, we feel
like the lang the language in
the bill right now really um
deals with your concern, um, in
that it gives the IOU, the
option to develop a rate that
really makes sense for all of
their customers. And I'm going
to give you an example of what
happens in Colorado when they
developed their low income
rates, um.
They, um, you know, they did
their rape making case, their
public utility commission,
whatever they're called, um,
approved it and what ratepayers
saw on their bill was a 50 cent.
Per month surcharge and that
funded low income rates, uh, and
programs, uh, for low income
folks in the state of Colorado
50 cents, that is like um 35%
less than the cost of one egg.
Right now.
For rills, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. You know
what? I, I trust you on the egg
market. I am not like a traitor
on that, so I would not know
what per egg. Honestly, I don't
even buy eggs anymore, Mr.
Speaker, because I just can't
afford them. But that's for
another day, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's why I always get
the free burritos whenever
they're here at the, the Capitol
because they do have eggs and
it's a hot commodity, but
Mr. Speaker, generally, that's
another topic for another day,
maybe we'll have a burrito bill.
But regarding your bill,
And talking about this new
implementation, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I do understand that we're
saying, OK, it'll be 50 cents.
More for the person who is at a
higher income tier, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, how are we
determining the tiers of income
when it comes to charging
different rates if this, if they
do.
Opt in on this. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the
The IOU will determine those
tiers and that might be part of
their rape making case. They
might have a tier for 100% of um
poverty rate they may have a
second tier within their rate
making case of 100 to 200, um,
they may really only look at
light heap, right? So it's, it's
not up to me or to this body to
legislate what that IOU, uh, is
going to come up with for their,
you know, for their program. It
really is, you know, it's, it's
up to the IOU and that's why
this
Which is um written the way it
is so that they can really
figure it out for themselves
based on what their customers'
needs are.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General
Lee. I just, I'm just wondering
if it's voluntary it's kind of
my question. Do they voluntarily
have to say before they get
their services from New Mexico
Gas Company or P&M or whoever. I
am at a tier of I make $50,000 a
year, or I make 25,000 or I make
160. How did they get that? I
know we talked about certain
things that could be
determinants, such as light
heap, but other than those, how
are we kind of figuring that out
on the, the utility scale.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
we're, again, we're not telling
them how to determine who
qualifies, but the IOU has some
determination, right? They have
some threshold for um, for who
can qualify, and if they're
light heap, then there's some,
you know, there's some income
qualification for that, that
they, that they are, you know,
empowered to do. So it's not as
if a customer can go to um the
IOU.
and say like, I want to qualify
for the low income rate, like
that's, that's something that
the IOU is is going to determine
based on the needs of that of
that community and I want to
point out, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, this is.
This program
And it is all voluntary. We are
not mandating. You were not here
in 2021 when I brought this bill
before the body, which was, was
mandating that, um, and then
again two years later, uh, we
really listened to the uh to the
IOUs who said that you, you
know, please don't tell us how
to run this program. We know
what we need for our customers
and.
I really listened, we listened
and we came up with language
that made sense. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I, I
get that and I, I was not here a
couple, a few years ago. I was
here a couple of years ago, but
not in 2021. So I did not see
the bill, but I do know, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, that you
exempted some people, and I
think that's probably an
improvement when it comes to, I
think local um.
Uh, like electric co ops, for
example, and I think that could
be an improvement, and I'm just,
I just want to make sure.
And I hate to kill the, like,
beat the dead horse here on
this, but when it comes to
determining income,
If the utility is the one that
determines that through the IOU.
Then Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just trying to figure out
what statistics they'd have to
be looking at because there
could be voluntary, they could
say, OK, please tell us what
your income level is.
And then you could also have
people who were at a higher
income at the beginning of that,
that time frame and then their
income devolved to a place where
they can't afford it now, but
currently it says their incomes
at 75,000. So I'm just wondering
how, how is it that we determine
that and is it on a sliding
scale like that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they,
the IOU determines that they
come up with their, um, with
their methods and um criteria
for determining who meets the
eligibility for that program and
then they explained that to the
PRC in their proposal how
they're going to qualify certain
people in this, in the PRC looks
at it and says, that seems
reasonable and just.
Or not. And then they go back. I
mean, it's, it's way more
complicated than that
ratemaking, but, um, that's
really what we're allowing this
bill, but what this bill is
allowing IOUs to do is to really
determine who.
can qualify, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I just think it's
interesting. I just don't
understand how they would do
that and I, I'm still very
confused with that because if
it's all voluntary, I would
just, I would in my own
interest, say, OK, I only make
$5000 a year and so I want to
qualify for this program. If it
was voluntary. So I could
technically say on that sheet,
oh, I only make $5000 a year,
and because I do, I would
potentially be qualifying for
it, even though I probably was
at a higher bracket.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
I, I think I now understand what
you're getting at, you know, I
think if um IOU determines that
some income is, you know, they
determine the threshold for.
Um, what qualifies for this
program they should ask that
customer to prove that they're,
they can qualify whether it's,
you know, pay stubs or something
that they, they should have some
method to, to qualify folks.
And, and the PRC, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, we, we'll be
looking at that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you, and then I, I know we're
talking about just and and a
reasonable, just and reasonable,
and I'm wondering when it comes
to the proportion of income.
So let's just say I make
$100,000 and a 25% of my income
goes to heating my house, which
could be very expensive.
And that actually takes out 25%
of my income in that check.
Would I be eligible if it's, if
they allow that per income or
how does that work when it comes
to the percentage?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, the PRC will be looking at
multiple, uh, programs that say
New Mexico gas will bring or um
PNM or El Paso Electric or SPS,
so they'll be they will look at
that, but I don't think it's up
to us to determine what is, you
know, if those things are
stackable, um.
I think the PRC can can look at
that, um.
Yeah.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So is the PRC.
Barred from currently
considering those factors and
when it comes to income or
eligibility. So is the PRC
pretty much not allowed in any
way to determine those things.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the PRC
is not allowed to consider a low
income rate for an for an
investor owned utility right
now. The PRC tells us that the
legislature can um allow them to
consider.
a low income rate brought forth
by utility, which is why, why we
are here today, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So that, that makes
a little sense to me when it
comes to that. So this would
give more power to the PRC to.
Allow these kinds of rates.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
My, my big
Concerned with the bill.
Is
It's not
Equal when it comes to the
ratepayers because Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if I as somebody
who doesn't fall on the low
income rate, have to pay for
people's.
Overages, let's just call them
for if they have a cutoff rate,
they don't have to pay more than
a certain amount.
It would stand to reason just
basic economics for me, that
person who doesn't fall into
that category is paying for the
excess in their portion and I
believe we kind of address that
a little bit with 50 cents
higher. So would you agree, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, that the,
that some consumers would be
paying more money per per watt
hour or whatever how much gas
they use versus somebody who is
on that capped rate for lower
income.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
it's, it's possible, um, we
don't know, but the PRC is bound
by law to make sure that the
rates for everybody is, um,
there are just and reasonable
rates, and I want to be
perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, right now, if someone
doesn't pay their bill, um, that
gets put into, you know, a
category of expenses that are
then built into the next
ratepayer case. So what we're
hoping
happens and I believe what will
happen, what has happened in
these 20 other states is that by
having some kind of program or
low income rate, which again
we're not prescribing, but that
will make sure that.
Uh, folks can actually pay their
bills so that we're not taking
those that debt, that bad debt
back to the ratepayers, which we
do right now.
So
And that's really why we're
doing this.
And thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I get that. So
can you tell me then?
Would this
New provision allow for in these
lower income.
Kinds of programs for
Subsidizing or for paying off or
for.
For deleting for a lack of a
better term, the debt.
On an account that was a low
income account.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, you
know, again, uh, right now the
utility can get that sort of
those charge offs so those that
they can write those debts into
their net next rate making case,
um.
It is possible that they can
present um an arrears, um,
package.
Um, which is something that we
had in 2021, and that didn't uh
pass his body.
We stripped that because it
didn't seem it didn't seem
right, um, but it is possible
that they could do that, but it
is, I think unlikely that the
PRC would approve that because
right now they can take those
arrears in bad debt and put it
into the next ratemaking cases,
something that we're all taking
care of.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. No, I get that, and I, I
totally understand how that
works, and it's kind of like in
healthcare, if you have a bunch
of patients who go to your
hospital and they don't pay,
then I'm sure that that
increases rates for everybody.
And so I just don't really
understand in this case, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, when it
comes to someone who doesn't pay
their, their debt, they would
still be obligated to pay off
that debt and so that low income
person still wouldn't even have
the lights on.
Until they pay that off. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, we
would still be eating that cost
because it's just stuck there.
And, and so I don't know if you
have a comment on that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Speaker,
gentlemen, yeah, they, it, that
is a terrible situation and that
does happen all the time and we
are eating that cost right now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I get it, the, the PRC
they have to be just and
reasonable, but in my view of
this, I don't believe it's just
to make some ratepayers.
Pay for other people's.
Overages
And I know we talked about
current debt, but in addition to
that debt, it would even add
even higher costs, in my
opinion, and apparently in
another state where it was 50
cents or something that we
referenced before. And so I
don't think that's just and do
you think that this would even
be allowed to be enacted on the
PRC level because it, I don't
think it's just for someone to
have to pay one rate while
someone else pays another rate
just based on income.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I'm
so sorry. I didn't really catch
your question.
Oh yes, the question was, do you
think, do you think it's just
when one person pays one rate
and another one pays a different
rate.
Mr. Speaker, we're, um, well,
we're already doing that.
Um, we, this body allowed the
PRC to consider economic
development rates to bring in
businesses and support
businesses in various, um,
Service areas. So we're already
doing that, um, I think it.
I think it makes sense, um.
It's not um unduly burdensome to
most of the ratepayers. I think
it's extremely unjust, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
somebody who does not make
enough money, um, has to pay.
25% of their income to utilities
because they're so high. When,
when we have the mechanism to
um.
To alleviate their financial
pain and burden. That's what I
believe is unjust.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I understand.
The concept, but I don't think
it's the ratepayer's fault that
that person is in a situation of
financial hardship, like every
single ratepayer who is not in
the low income program is not
responsible, is not the reason
that that individual's costs are
higher because of their, their
amount of income. Like I didn't
choose for somebody to not be
able to get a paying job that
that gave him $50,000 or more.
And so I feel like Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that could actually
be more it, it feels like.
penalizing people just for not
being low income and I, I just
don't understand how that works.
And then also when it comes to
economic development, I mean a
business is not a human being.
It is not a single ratepayer.
And I know according to there's
all kinds of laws that say, OK,
businesses are people, but when
it comes to actual human beings
paying rent in my house versus
my neighbor's house.
I mean, it's a very local and a
very
Personal thing
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I just don't see how that could
be reasonable or, or just when
me
A person who pays their
utilities who hates having to
pay a lot of money in utilities
because it's crazy how high they
are and I know the PRC caps
that, but I just don't
understand how, how that could
be seen as just when it comes to
me paying for someone else's
utilities just because I make
more money and I find that to be
inequitable and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Can you tell me more about when
it comes to the cost
redistribution.
When somebody has to pay for
some low income.
Program's rates, how is that?
Overseen by the PRC and how does
the PRC oversee which individual
program is.
being in those frameworks of
justice and
I think reliability or
reasonableness, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
don't know what the PRC, uh, I,
I don't know what the programs
are gonna look like yet. Uh, I
don't know what, um, El Paso
Electric or PNM or New Mexico
gas is going to bring to the PRC
to consider, uh, for a low
income rate or program, um, but
I know that we this body uh gave
the.
PRC, the statutory sort of, you
know, obligation to make sure
that there that the rates are
just and reasonable, period. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, I, I, we can keep talking
about um.
I don't know what what a program
might look like or but I I don't
know what the what PNM is going
to bring. I know that they want
to bring something, whether it's
a rate.
Which could be
50, I don't know, $5 off their
bill, um, if you qualify certain
certain income qualifications,
it could be an energy efficiency
program for, um,
housing development, uh, it
could be a lot of things.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So then, regarding the PRC.
And how they, they do this, so
I'm guessing it would be based
on estimates when it comes to
these plans that are provided in
front of the PRC, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, would that be
based on estimates of customers
and then Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do you think that they
could overestimate the amount.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
the, um, sort of the rate-making
process is um highly
sophisticated. There are great
design experts, um, that, you
know, work with the utility, the
PRC has economists that really
dive deeply into these
proposals, um, so really that's,
you know, it's, um, it's not
sort of a fly by night
operation. Like there are people
on, um, you know, on the utility
side and on the PRC side who are
really looking this and looking
at all kinds of
You know, um, projections and,
and tables and the details of
that rate design, um, that's,
that's a really important thing
and people are really paying
attention to that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and
generally and
Yeah, I think it's good that
it's a very
Complex program, right? It's
good to be complex in some cases
such as rate, rate paying. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I, you may have answered this,
and I apologize if I'm repeating
myself or repeating another
person.
Have other states enacted
similar legislation and if so,
has there been any litigation,
uh, based upon this not being
seen as equal or reasonable.
Or maybe based on something
else. um Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, 20 other states have
low income rate, right? They,
they, they're PUC or PRCs,
whatever they call them in their
various seats have allowed them
to bring a low income rate, um,
to, um, to be, you know, decided
upon, um, the actual rate making
process that rate design
process, um, that is, I mean
people litigate that process all
the time, um, you know, they
protest that process while it's
happening, right, to
make sure to really kind of keep
the PRC and the IOU on their
toes and make sure that, you
know, they're, um, they're being
just and reasonable with all of
that, but, you know, it's, it's
a, it's a process that is
designed to, you know, to
To really, you know, look at all
of the details to, to my
knowledge, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I, I don't know
of any litigation that came
after the fact, um, but
Perhaps you know more.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
lady. No, I, I do not know
anymore. I, I, I usually ask
questions that I don't know the
answers to because according to
the rules, you have to only ask
questions that you're trying to
obtain obtain information from.
So I'm sorry, I don't, I don't
know that, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I do know that I
have a one scenario that someone
reached out to me that said it
could be problematic in their
community and the question that
I have is, what if the majority
of customers
qualify as low income, leading
to a disproportionate
subsidization.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that's something that the
PRC is really gonna take into
account and I hope that the IOU
is also taking that into account
as they design their rates, um,
for whoever qualifies and, and
it could be in that instance
that it's not a rate at all that
they what they'd like to do is
to, um, you know, look to bring
some energy efficiency
appliances to, uh, their, their
customers who, who qualify.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and that's an
interesting point, and I, I
appreciate that. And I do know
that a lot of these appliances
that can be all electric, for
example, can be more expensive
as well, uh, so I think that's
something that must also be
considered when it comes to
those, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I guess I'm kind of
wrapping up my questions here,
but I do want to just reiterate,
I really don't find it just or
reasonable for some ratepayers
to have to subsidize other
ratepayers, and I know that we,
I, I've kind of
kick that dead horse and I'm
beating him and I'm beating him
and I'm beating him, but I think
that dead horse needs to
continue to be kicked because
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
really, I'm really not OK with
some ratepayers having to
subsidize other ratepayers and
then those costs get.
Increase just because of income
and just because of any number
of factors that leads you into
certain brackets when it comes
to what you pay for your
utilities versus other people,
but I do appreciate the thought
process on the bill, and I do
appreciate the, the cordial
debate and, and the answers
because I think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you and me, we both
want to fix the problems in this
state. We both want cheaper
utilities. We both want cheaper,
cheaper gas, cheaper electric,
and of course, Mr. Speaker,
cheaper eggs. Thank you, Mr.
Speak.
speaker.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady?
From Taos
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend from San Juan.
Thank you. Now, if I can only
find my notes.
Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you tell me how many?
Programs are out there right now
for low income folks to, uh, to
get help from.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
they're probably more than we
know, but I.
Yeah, I, I don't, I can't count
the number. Do you, would you
like specifically around energy,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
generally, yes, I've, I've got
um low income energy assistance,
temporary assistance for needy
families, utilities program, New
Mexico Gas Company, budget
billing from P&M New Mexico
Energy Smart program emergency
rental assistance, utility
assistance, yes, New
Mexichousing and utility,
helping hands, plus many, many,
many faith-based churches and
organizations.
So I guess my question is,
And, and you answered part of
it, that the law does not allow
PRC does not allow a public
utility to do this.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, correct.
OK, thank you for that.
Are they allowed to help people
that are low income right now
without the race, the rate or
the ability to change their
rates.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there, there is one way that
they can do that right now.
Utilities can support, um,
Low income folks and that's
under the under the efficient
use of Energy Act.
OK.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do you
know how many people, just a
general idea, do you know how
many people you think might go
on this programmer might take
advantage of this program.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are
you talking about the efficient
use of Energy Act programs that
exist at various IOUs are you
talking about what we may be
allowing with this, what we
allow with this bill.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, yes,
generally, that's it. What this
bill will allow.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
can't tell you that. I don't
know what a utility will bring,
so I can't give you an answer. I
wish I could. I really can't.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I mean, just a ballpark figure.
Just throw it up on the wall and
I'll see if it sticks. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm, I'm not
going to throw pasta at the
wall, um, I just can't or
whatever you're asking me to
throw at the wall, um.
I just don't know, it could be
small. It could be 5%, it could
be 20%, um, it could be on a,
uh, neighborhood by neighborhood
basis because we're talking
about programs and rates, um,
that's something that the
utility can bring. I, I, I wish
I could drill down deeper for
you, but um I think that again
is the beauty of the language is
that the, the utility is gonna
determine based on what the
needs are, you know, what, um,
what kind of program they want
to design.
and develop.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I guess
That would be one of my concerns
because if there isn't a need.
For this bill, then why are we
bringing this bill forward.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, just
because I can't give you a
number doesn't mean that there
isn't a need. There is a great
need, um.
You know, I'm going to give you
An example of, you know, like
light heat, for instance, right,
is a program that we have, uh,
here in this state, you know,
that's a program that um that
kind of gives a, you know, 11
time supplement to um
To heating or cooling needs or
if someone's in, in crisis. I
mean, it could be that the IOU,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
decides that.
It's light heap customers that
um can qualify for a low income
rate again something that I'm
not gonna determine. You're not
going to determine this body is
not going to determine what that
low income rate is, you know,
we're gonna trust the IOUs to
figure out what what they need,
but if they do decide that Light
Heap customers are eligible for
a $5 discount on their bill or
uh.
You know, per kilowatt, you
know, percentage off their bill,
then that's something that they
would take into account.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemendy. I appreciate that.
I don't think there's anybody in
this room or anybody in the
state for that matter, right?
Um, that want to harm anybody
that can't afford to pay their
utilities and I know that in the
winter time, um, the moratorium
on turning utilities off, uh,
it's already a law, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you for that. Um,
My concern then would fall along
with what um uh my friend
Representative Block was talking
about if we've got 50 or close
to 50% of the folks that live in
this state are already in some
type of welfare.
My concern that that is going to
be pretty close to how many
folks are going to be looking at
this program and, and, and going
after it with that in mind, um,
I have a very friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker.
I'd like to introduce it.
Will you kindly bring it to the
chief clerk.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Will you please read the number
on the bottom of the
form.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is
0.231390.1. We'll get this
passed out and we'll get this
online.
It looks like the amendment has
been passed out and it is
online. The gentleman to explain
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, on
line one, or on page one, line
24 after the period insert no
public utility shall increase
rates on non low income
customers to cover costs
associated with approving rates
designated to reduce the burden
of energy costs on low-income
customers pursuant to subsection
C of this section.
gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentleman
is not.
Friendly.
Um, I, I believe that this
language here, um, limits.
Uh, the PRC from uh looking at
the possible rates and programs
that, um.
You know, that are designed by
an IOU, um,
They, they again, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the PRC, you know,
has, has a duty to look at a at
a balance of interests and this
amendment makes it very
difficult um for them to do it
also I think it's kind of vague,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. OK.
I
The debate on the amendment
formotero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman from San Juan
yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So,
I love your amendment. I really
do.
And I don't think I've lived in
a moment as much as I love this
one because it actually does
everything that I had concerns
about in the legislation. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so this,
from my understanding,
It does not allow any utility to
raise rates of non low income
individuals.
To subsidize the low income
program, Mr. Speaker, is that
what I understand?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's exactly what
it is.
That's it.
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have no
words other than I really
support it, and if this does get
put in the bill,
I will vote for this bill.
And I really hope it does. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
And a lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House for Amendment #2 to House
Bill 91 as amended a motion to
table House floor Amendment
number 2 to House Bill 91 as
amended. All those in favor say
a.
A posing night.
Yeah I have it, the amendment
has been tabled.
Gentlemen, you sell the floor.
Mr. Speaker, I'm crushed, but I
will take defeat.
Um, my point is I'm middle class
America.
I'm middle class New Mexican and
so none of us, as I mentioned
before, none of us in this room
want to harm any low-income
people.
I can safely say for half of New
Mexico.
The burden on us is getting
worse and worse.
And
Uh, I just wish this amendment
would have been taken as a
friendly, friendly amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady lady from Santa
Fe, Lujan. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, to a gentle lady from
Taoshi, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
gladly, uh, yield to the gentle
lady from San Juan. Thank you,
um, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, um, this bill, as you
mentioned, came up in 2021 and
at the time I had similar
concerns as to what the debate
is about today, um, so I wanna.
So just uh talk about that a
little bit. What is the
difference in in this bill that
is before us today, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, in, in 2021, um,
the low income.
Um, I don't remember the the
name of it now. It was a very
long name, but it had 3 parts.
It had um a part the the first
part was to mandate a low income
rate by the utilities and I
believe the co ops as well. The
second part was to establish the
Community Energy efficiency
Development Block grant, and the
third was to um basically like
wipe out the arrears payments
that um low income customers had
been experiencing under COVID
because we were in COVID at
that.
Time, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, so, um, and that bill did
actually get across the floor,
uh, we, it died in in the
Senate, um, and we, we brought
that back, gentle lady, uh, and
Mr. Speaker, uh, the next year,
um, with two parts to that
previous spill, um, the
mandating low income rates for
uh IOUs and co-ops and the
community, uh, energy efficiency
development block grant and that
year we stripped the language
mandating a low income rate, and
we focused.
Uh, on the community energy
efficiency development block
grant block grant which we got
funded in the budget and those
grants have been going out now
to um communities all across the
state, uh, initial seeding of
$10 million to help um low
income customers, um.
Have more energy efficiency, um,
sort of things in their house,
um, whether it's refrigerators
or heating pumps, things like
that, and I, there, there's a
roll out of that program right
now, um, in, you know, in
various places across the state,
so, um, that's what passed in
2022, and we brought it back. I
don't, I think it's 2023, um,
again with the, with the mandate
and that was not, it's just not
what this body wanted and it
wasn't what the IOUs.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and so
we spent the really the summer,
uh, having conversations with
IOUs around what made sense to
them and what they really told
us over and over again it's like
you could please don't mandate
this for us like just allow us
to do this. We know what our
customers need, um, and you, you
know, what, what we need in the
PNM service area is very
different from what um EPE
service area needs and let us
design our own programs and
rates.
Um, accordingly, and that is
what this bill does right now.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I want to
commend you on all that work and
Really taken in all those
considerations because IT, uh,
you know, middle income, middle
America, uh, family and I stand
in in uh a protector, um.
Terminal, uh, income workers
and, and laborers, and I felt
like that could be something
that could to really put a
burden on them and you coming to
uh
to this session and having done
all this work and really
changing it to a me and also
putting it into the PRC so they
may allow, so that means they
may or may not allow those
provisions uh as the the go
through their processes and I
want to commend you on that. I
think that was what got me, um,
uh, very, um, I don't want to
say excited but but in uh
support of this legislation and
we, we had this bill in front of
us in, in um House.
and I just want to give
You know, um,
We had a full discussion and I
supported the bill, uh, when we
got it out of committee and I
support it today because it does
just that. It puts you on to the
PRC to make those decisions, but
not to mandate them, so I want
to thank you for that and hope
that uh uh fast um.
Process into the next chamber,
Mr. Speaker, thank you, gentle
lady.
Here for the debate, gentlemen
from Chavez, Eddie and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry, uh.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentleman.
Well, the
Lady yield, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I too have the same.
Uh, apprehensions on this bill
are several of my colleagues.
Uh
Gentle lady, this bill,
If I have it right, it's
exempting
amending existing laws, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
The uh
The existing law.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker.
Makes it illegal.
For
any of the utilities to
discriminate.
Rights
Is that, is that correct, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, the,
the existing law, um.
Allows for an economic
development rate and rates to
resigned certain load and what
this bill does is adds a low
income rates.
Or programs, rates or programs
for low income customers to
reduce their energy burden.
OK.
Yes.
What are we actually doing to
the existing law, uh, Mr.
Mr. Chair, uh, gentle lady, what
are we doing then to this law?
If the commission already has a
can prove.
Different rate different rates
for different people.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, we're amending
the public Utility Act to allow
for um another really exemption,
which is the, it's on.
Um, it's C rates.
And programs uh designed to
reduce the energy, the burden of
energy costs on low income
customers, so already um we.
are allowing
Economic development rates.
We're allowing rates designed to
retain load and we are adding.
Rates and programs to reduce the
burden of low-income customers,
the energy burden.
Thank you gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was, I
thought A, B and C were all
being added, but it's only to
see. I see that now, sorry.
Uh
Again, though,
Uh
As my colleague, uh, represented
Duncan stated earlier, you know,
uh, there, there are several
programs.
To provide assistance to these
low income.
Individuals in our state is
they're not gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there,
uh, I agree that there are
programs that help low income
folks and uh I think together
with those programs and a low
income rate or low income
customers will have a reduced
energy burden.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady, do
the individuals under this new
actively and if we do approve
it, do they have to apply to
receive these lower utility
rates.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
don't know what the IOU uh
programs or rates are gonna look
like, um, it's, it's really up
to them. They may have an income
qualification program where
people apply, but that's not,
um, that's not something that
you or I can, can tell them to
do.
Um, they, they come up with
their own program.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
So gentle lady, we're
We're allowing this to happen,
but we're not, we're not putting
any guardrails on, on that
implementing the different
rights we're leaving that to
the, to the electric companies
and gas companies, is that
correct, gentle lady Speaker,
uh, gentlemen, the guardrails
exist at the public regulation
commission.
Thank you gentle lady. It, uh
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I see, I see the point and we
all want to help people in our
state that I
Just a statement this is the end
of my deal. I hate to put a
burden on other people.
In our state
To uh fix the problem with
With the other part of our
individuals in the state.
We fight every day to not
discriminate against people in
various, various ways.
And to me,
Now we're implementing a law
that allows us to discriminate
against different tiers of our
population. Thank you, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker.
Seeing no further debate.
Generally to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 91 as amended do
now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 91 as
amended, the vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The voids now closed by a vote
of 42 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative.
House Bill 91 as amended as duly
passed this House.
Gentlemen from
Colfax, Morarea River, San
Miguel, and Taos, Representative
Sanchez, are you ready on item
number 25. Speaker, get me to
that point reflects that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 249 on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill. Speaker. This
bill does one thing. It allows
work for solutions secretary to
waive the one-week waiting
requirement to receive standard
unemployment benefits during uh
state of emergency and I'd like
to thank my co-sponsor Borego,
and I now stand for.
There's a gentleman from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Colfax Moa Reba,
San Miguel, and Tai.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Um
I'd really like to get on the
right bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um.
When does unemployment typically
kick in.
Mr. Speaker, uh, from what I
understand, it takes a week, but
this would waive that week.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
Over the last say several years
with
Our natural disasters.
Can you tell me how many days it
takes for our executive to
Um
Call call have a.
Identify it as a state disaster.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
sorry, I don't know the answer
to that question.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's uh I guess kind of the
crux of this.
Historically, you know, you
start firing and you figure out,
OK, the fire starts and how long
it gets into it before you get
to a point where you call that a
natural disaster.
Or a flood, the same thing.
With respect to that, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
That's where I guess I get the
concern is because we get to a
point where all we're doing is
removing a week.
of unemployment or getting it a
week early, but we may be
several weeks into a disaster
before the emergencies is
declared.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, like
I said, this is just to help the
situation, uh, what we can
control, so this is uh cutting a
week off that waiting period
potentially.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, have
you looked at, I believe this
page 113 of the performance
analysis on how workforce
solutions is performing with
respect, respect to unemployment
services, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I have not.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
they're in the red and so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, my
concern is that we're giving
somebody a request.
The act a week faster.
When their overall performance
as indicators say they can't do
that.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I just wanna
introduce my expert secretary
there, uh, the reason for the
delay and for the what you
mentioned is because they're
dealing with COVID backlog.
But uh once they catch up, they
shouldn't be a concern, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
are we gonna catch up on COVID
backlog.
Well, that's gentlemen, that's
got nothing to do with the bill.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker this is
anything to do with the bill
didn't the gentleman just say
that
His expert was saying that
they're working on their COVID
backlog.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, by the
end of this summer they should
be caught up.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what we need to hope for is no
natural disasters between now
and
August or September?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I hope
not.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
from the reviews that I've read
on, on hospital 249, some of the
technical issues.
written on
The departments
The feasibility that the
department could process the
waivers effectively.
And efficiently.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think there's good things about
this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
will say that the other side of
this, if we go back to 2003 when
we decided to give
Executive extend our legislative
power to the executive.
That each year we tend to creep
a little bit more with giving
away different powers to the
executive and, and the
departments.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm just not really sure that I
can support something that
It event is essentially an
expansion of the government.
Discretion
With respect to this aspect,
which would be unemployment
compensation.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is
there anything that you would
like to say with respect to
expanding the powers of the
executive to do this.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate the attempt and the
uh
Desire to push forward one week.
With respect to getting
unemployment payments out.
Understanding the fact that
several times the declarations
come way, way later than the
event that happened.
Adding to the fact that we're
expanding government.
Capability, the executive's
capability.
Neither one of those two.
Or positives and the third, the
analysis that the that
Right now the department
couldn't process the waivers
effectively and efficiently if
they needed to.
I cannot support your
legislation. I appreciate your
time further debate, the
gentlemen, close. Speaker, I
move the House Bill 245 now do
pass. We are on final passage of
House Bill 249.
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 3 in
the negative, House Bill 2, 49
has duly passed this house.
lady from Chavez Curry, and
Roosevelt, Representative Reed,
are you ready on item number 2?
I am Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point that action
replacing House Bill 103 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment, or substitution to
general lady to explain the
bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, House Bill
103 increases the penalty for
aggravated battery upon a peace
officer bringing this penalty in
line with other crimes against a
peace officer.
Seeing no debate, generally a
close.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I ask that
House Bill 103 do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill 103. The vote is now open.
Boat is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 66 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative House Bill 103 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 553,
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Matthew
McQueen, chair.
We're in a, we're an adoption of
a commit we're on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 553. All those in
favoring Papa C 9.
I suppose nay, the ISA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 419
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
that's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Linda Sorato, chair,
Mr. Speaker, of adoption of a
favorable committee report of
House Bill 419. All those in
favor of C5 but say 9.
All the supposed name, the
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 519
has had it under consideration
report seen with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Linda
Serrado, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 519. All those in
favor by C and I.
I supposed, the ISI committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee to
him has been referred House Bill
521 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Linda Cerrado, chair,
Mr. Speaker, of adoption
favorable committee report in
House Bill 521. All those in
favor and if I say no.
I suppose nay, the Iadic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
310 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do not
pass but that health
transportation, public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for House Bill 310 do
pass and he referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Art de la Cruz,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 310, but a favorable
committee report on house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
substitute for House Bill 310.
All those in favor of signified
by say 9.
I'll suppose nay, the IA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
371 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted art de la Cruz's
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
please. adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
371. All those in favor
signified by say I.
I suppose nay, the Islamic
community report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your transportation
public works and capital
improvements Committee to has
been referred House Bill 372 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
art de la Cruz chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption,
please adoption of a favorable
committee report House Bill 372.
All those in favor signified by
say 9.
I suppose nay.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 13, Senate
Bill 92, and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson at chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 48 as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 220 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business objection is ordered.
The gentle lady from Dona Anna
Sierra Socorro observed out with
some miscellaneous business. Mr.
Speaker. I would like to
announce that there will be a
Republican caucus immediately
following the floor session in
room 318. Um, also, you guys do
have a beautiful gift in your
office. It was sent over from
Jasper Riddle, noisy River
Wineery is New Mexico-based
family owned winery run by 5th
generation farmer Jasper Riddle.
He's known for winemaking and,
and commitment to showcasing the
new terrier, the unique
territory of our region. So he
started in Ruidoso and it's
grown to a statewide brand. What
you have in your office is known
as green chili wine. You may
have green chili wine, Basitto
caliente is made with crisp win
infused with hatch green chili,
and you may have a rojocaliente,
that is the red chili wine, uh,
which these features hat.
chilly. So, um, we're very happy
to have that. They have tasting
rooms throughout the state,
maybe even in your district. So,
um, hope you guys enjoy that in
anticipation of red and green
chili Mon passing the House
floor.
I mean, assuming it passes the
House floor. I heard the votes
are real close. Speaker, I'm
speaking in very positive, I'm,
I'm giving positive vibes
according to our web count, it's
gonna be a close one.
Gentlemen from Rio Riba, San
Juan and Sandoval,
Representative Lente Speaker
friendly reminder that your
capital outlay worksheets are
due tomorrow. Legislative
council service by 5 p.m. again
tomorrow 5 p.m. Thank you.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, consumer and
public affairs Committee will be
meeting tonight. We just have 3
short bills, but we'll do it
right after the um Republican
caucus.
Members take no young lady from
Bern Leo. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. How's Health and Human
Services Committee has been
cranking out the bills and we
will meet at 8:00 a.m. tomorrow.
Members take note.
And the other announcements,
young lady from Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just
like to announce that house
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs will meet.
Immediately following the
Republican caucus and we will
have um.
2 bills and hopefully we can get
through before 3 o'clock in the
morning. Thank you.
Members take note, gentlemen
from Donana. Speaker, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will not be meeting
today, but committee, we will
have our committee dinner, uh,
beginning around 6 and 6:30 at
Austria. See everybody there.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker from the
chamber.
On the committee.
Mm
Special exceptions exist, Mr.
Speaker back from yesterday.
Motion to reconsider.
gentle lady from San Juan and
McKinley, Representative
Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Your government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee. We'll
meet tomorrow morning at 8:30.
Thank you. Members take note,
gentlemen from Burnley or
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow at 8:30 in room 309.
Members, um, I've, we've got to
expunge a couple of committee
reports or um team has spoken to
both leaders. House Bill 339,
that committee report when it
was read in was listed, uh,
listed the vote incorrectly. It
showed Rubio voting no and Lord
voting yes. We need to expunge
that report, uh, and correct it
to show Lordoring no and Rubio
voting yes.
In objection, it is ordered.
The other one is House Bill 65.
Um, the bill should be referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, that's House Bill 65.
The report was incorrectly read,
the bill should be referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee. no
objection. It is so ordered.
gentleman from San Juan
represent Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Knock
knock.
Who is there?
Boo
Boo who.
Don't cry, Mr. Speaker, it's
just a joke.
Hm
That was a great dad joke. Mm.
There's no crying in baseball,
gentlemen from San Juan.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr. Speaker, I move the House
stands recess until 10:30
tomorrow morning. The house was
recess until 10:30 tomorrow
morning. Great work, everybody.
