Press the button Representative
Block, press the button.
That's good. 3, 3's good.
If you miss roll call, I take
your bag of chips.
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Offered by the gentle lady from
Donana Enotero Representative
Silva.
Prayer by Jesuit Pedro Arupe.
What you are in love with, which
seizes your imagination will
affect everything.
It will decide what gets you out
of bed in the mornings, what you
do with your evenings, how you
spend your weekends.
What you read, who you know.
What breaks your heart?
And what amazes you with joy and
gratitude.
Fall in love
Stay in love.
And it will decide everything.
Creator who goes by many names,
we pray that you that we do not
cease and being amazed that we
may always be make ourselves
open to falling in love with
your creation and find comfort,
mercy and compassion in our
heartbreak and the heartbreak of
the world we ask this in your
name. Amen.
Gentlemen from Chavez Erino
represent of Henry with the
pledge of allegiance.
And the pledge the New Mexico
flag offered by the gentle lady
from Donana, Representative
Gallegos.
ball
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Happy Thursday, Mr. Speaker.
Happy Thursday,
Mr. Speaker. I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
businesses.
Happy Thursday members.
Happy Friday Junior members.
Happy Friday eve.
Announcements, let's go to the
gentle lady from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and good
morning, everyone. Today I'd
like to, uh, let you know it's
my privilege, uh, to uphold a
long-standing house tradition
primarily in recognition of
former state representative Leel
Co.
For 12 years, Representative
Alcon provided red chili chips
to the members of the house and
um because they're made from my
my home community, the village
of Milan. I thought I would fill
that gap for this year, Mr.
Speaker, until we get someone
appointed into House District 6.
But uh it was interesting. I was
just talking to one of the, uh,
freshman members today and she
said these are legislator
endorsed, so I'd like to warn
the members these are major
trading articles. I mean, don't
trade votes for them, but you
never know. You may be asked,
but Mr. Speaker, I think it's
important that we remember these
long-standing traditions for red
chili chip day. Thank you. Round
of applause to Representative
Lindstrom and the late
Representative.
Falcon.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative
Supansky.
Mr. Speaker, today is Santa Fe
day in the New Mexico house, um,
and as you all know our
wonderful city is the our
temporary home away from home
for all of our legislators and
it's also one of the most
historic site cities in the
country, uh, it is the only
capital city that has served as
the capital under 3 different
countries, Spain, Mexico, and
the territory and state of New
Mexico in the United States, um,
I
want to think, uh, everyone, all
of our staff, and all of our
community who just display
enormous hospitality to the
legislature and to all of us,
um, as we do the people's work
here in the building, um, and so
today I'm uh excited to have so
many guests, um, our elected
officials, leaders and staff,
and I want to thank all of you
for your generosity, for your
accomplishments, um, uh, for our
city and so with us.
Today I want to welcome our
mayor Alan Weber.
Our brand new managers, city
managers Mark Scott.
Counselor Sig Linde.
District one.
Councilor Michael Garcia
District 2.
Councilor Jamie Cassett,
District 4.
Councilor Carol Romero Worth
maybe in the other chamber, uh,
Councilor Lee Garcia, District
3.
Councilor Alma Castro District
one.
Councilor Amanda Chavez District
4.
And councilor Pilar Faulkner,
District 3.
Welcome to our city leaders and
then we also have some wonderful
city staff members here from the
city of Santa Fe, Ron Gould
senior advisor, Randy Randall,
executive director of tourism,
please stand when I call your
name, Regina Ruiz communications
director.
Andrea Salazar, city clerk.
Emily Oster finance director.
Regina Wheeler planning
director.
And thank you to all of the city
of Santa Fe staff, uh, that are
with us today. Uh, thank you for
the very hard work that you do
to maintain our very special
city, um, and I do have some
certificates that I'll be
presenting you all with, and I'm
sure some of my fellow Santa
Feinos will want to recognize
the city, Mr. Speaker.
thank you gentle lady. Let's go
next to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, uh, floor
leadersansky, this, this is our
day Santa Fe day and I'm very
honored to, uh, be born and
raised here in the city
different and uh have all the
representation and interactions
that we always get to, get to do
um and working with our with our
government, uh.
From the city and from the
county and everyone that showed
up today, thank you for all your
hard work. You are all public
servants in your own right as
just as we are here and it
doesn't doesn't happen alone. It
takes all of us working together
to improve all the wonderful
things that we do in our, in our
city, in our capital city, and
I'm
I've been with, with pride
because I look out and I see you
and I see all of us here and all
the things that we do, um, and
thank you as.
Big as I can say, thank you for
all that you do and continue the
work and um happy to continue to
work with you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
There are more comments on this,
but before I wanna also
recognize city attorney and
former law schoolmate of uh Miss
Dorsey and mine, airing
McSharry. Thank you for being
here.
She may have been top of class.
I don't quite remember, but
that's probably a safe bet.
And it is also a safe bet that I
was not top of class.
Or Miss Dorsey.
So there you have it, young lady
from Santa Fe and Represent
Romero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Been Benitos, welcome to the
people's house. Um, of course, I
have the honor and privilege of
living in the city of Santa Fe
repping for the Norte, um, I was
also raised in the city of Santa
Fe, and I'm so grateful to the
folks here that have just seen
the uptick for all of the things
that kids have access to today
from when I was a kid, um, what
you guys have done to create
such a vibrancy and invitation.
to community, to families, and
the folks here. We're working on
affordability, no question, Mr.
Speaker. I think the city has
been a victim of great success
for many, many years, and that's
a testament to you all, um, but
we're working on building more
housing. We're working on
affordability for our families,
and I just want to welcome you,
um, to the people's house that
your issues are our issues that
we live in your communities and
for all the amazing people here,
um, serving today that you guys
create such a welcoming place.
For across the state to our
home, um, which is the capital
city. So it's my honor and
privilege to have you come say
hi, bring your friends, bring
all the kids, um, and also bring
a burrito if you want because I,
I, I will take it. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, um, and welcome to
the folks here.
Thank you gentle lady.
Other comments on Santa Fe Bay
generated from Bern Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
always feel like the interloper
on this one because, um, you
know, I am the House District 15
representative from Albuquerque,
but I am a child of Santa Fe.
Um, I heard of groan. Who was
that?
Um, it is our beautiful city
different. I'm lucky in that I
get to come home every year for
the legislative session, and I
want to thank every one of you
for the work that you do and
keeping Santa Fe beautiful, um,
and when you go around the world
and you tell people you're from
Santa Fe, New Mexico, you get
this reaction of like, oh my
goodness, first of all, they
don't believe that. They're
like, oh, people are from Santa
Fe and then second all, they
say, what a beautiful city, what
a privilege, um, to be in Santa
Fe to be
from Santa Fe and of Santa Fe
and um thank you very much and
I'm glad that we're celebrating
Santa Fe's today, and I too was
in Miss Dorsey's law class, and
I'm sure I too was at the bottom
more than the top. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. I think
you were a class behind us.
The class of 20,011,010.
Best class 2010.
I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna
argue on that one actually.
Gentle lady from Bernard Leo,
are you on Santa Fe Day? I am
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. um.
I just wanted to welcome Mayor
Weber and all of his staff and
my fellow counselors and um I
was a counselor in Albuquerque,
so, um, I too spent much of my
childhood in Santa Fe, have a
big family that still lives in
Santa Fe, matter of fact, my
grandfather used to own the
property where Jackalop Pottery
is, uh, today, so, um, spent
much of my childhood here taking
piano.
lessons and ballet, um, and you
know, didn't realize when I was
a child that um the cultura and
the culture and the traditions,
um, would influence me later in
my life and I, I deeply
appreciate all the work that you
all do to keep our traditions
and our culture and our
beautiful Santa Fe alive and
well. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. Any
other comments on Santa Fe day?
I will add my own two cents, um,
just grateful to the city, to
the mayor, to the councilors, to
the staff, uh, and to your
entire city for hosting us every
single year, not just during
session, but quite frankly
during the interim, I come up
here quite a bit in this role
that I'm in now, um, and I
always feel welcomed and
respected and appreciated. And
so I just want to extend my
gratitude to you all. I'm glad
you guys are here today, uh,
and, uh.
Welcome to the house, City Santa
Fe.
Staying on the theme of Santa
Fe, we've got a couple of
special guest members you have
on your desk.
next to the chips, a scarf.
For the New Mexico United.
New Mexico United is New
Mexico's professional men's
soccer team dedicated to
bringing New Mexicans together
through art, sport, and a shared
pride in and care for the land
of enchantment in Mexico United
is proud to utilize its platform
to export New Mexico to the
world and show exactly what us
New Mexicans are made of with us
today we have Pete Trevisani,
the owner and CEO of New Mexico
United.
Big round of applause. Welcome
to the house.
Peter is originally from New
England but has lived in Santa
Fe and Albuquerque for the last
several decades, raising his
three children along with his
wife, along with his wife Wendy.
Peter is dedicated to fostering
the growth of New Mexican art
and opportunity, uh, sitting
next to Peter we have Ron Patel,
who is the president of New
Mexico United.
Welcome to the house.
Ron was born on the other side
of the pond and Liverpool,
England. I heard they have a
soccer team too. I'm not sure.
He co-founded semi-professional
club, uh, in Albuquerque, the
Albuquerque soul, and I have an
Albuquerque Soul jersey, no one
else has one in the state except
for me. I think it's the last
one remaining, so I'll put it on
eBay later, make some money, uh,
he's also been a proponent of
local soccer in New Mexico for
more than a decade. Ron and his
wife Isabel and their children,
Jose, Nikki and Nadia are proud
New Mexican.
working to bring New Mexicans
together, um, as you probably
know from my social media
accounts, I'm a big fan of
United. I go to their games, any
opportunity I get, if you
haven't been to one, I hope you
get the chance to go to one, it
is truly, truly the melting pot
that tapestry that makes up who
we are people from all walks of
life, New Mexicans from every
from every race, culture, from
every part of the state show up
and at least for 2 hours are on
the same team.
Uh, rain, shine, or snow, no
matter what the temperature is
outside that stadium is always
packed with fans. United, thank
you for what you do for N Nuevo
Mexico, and we look forward to
what's coming next.
Congratulations.
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from Ber Leo Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am
very excited today to, um,
recognize guests that I have on
the floor, uh, Mr. Speaker, may
I tell you about them? Please.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, so
today I have with me 3 guests,
uh, Bridget Han, Lee May, and
Michael Julian with Cairo's
power. Do you guys wanna stand
up?
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, uh, many folks here
may not know, and so first off,
there is a handy printout, uh,
presentation on your desk along
with a patch from Cairo's power,
um, and as a reminder there will
be um a meet and greet at one
o'clock in room 305 for folks
who want to learn a little bit
more about Cairo's power, but
Mr. Speaker, um, really quickly,
I'd like to provide just a
little bit about
Uh, a background about
Cairos and why they are here
today.
Um
Cairo's power, uh, has
established a major presence
right here in New Mexico through
their manufacturing development
campus in Albuquerque. It is
located at Mesa del Sol and I
just learned at one time housed
uh lockers, locker rooms for New
Mexico United. So it's a perfect
coincidence.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Cairo's powers
mission is to enable the world's
transition to clean energy
through their innovative
fluoride salt cooled high
temperature advanced nuclear
reactor technology.
And just in case anyone wants to
see, I have a little model of
the triso here, uh, so feel free
to come see me.
It's super special, so I'm not
gonna give it to just anyone.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, advanced
nuclear reactors, uh, uh,
represent the next generation of
nuclear power technology, uh,
building upon decades of
operational experience while
incorporating innovative
features for enhanced safety,
efficiency, and flexibility.
One of the most important
innovations in these designs is
their use of passive safety
systems. If you don't know what
passive safety systems are,
please, uh, join us at one
o'clock, but if you can't, I'll
just let you know that um these
reactors use natural forces and
basic physics.
To maintain safety without
requiring operator actions,
electricity, pumps, or moving
parts.
Pretty interesting.
Um, the reason that Cairos is
here is because they do have a
major presence in Albuquerque at
Meza del Sol, and they have
brought over 130 high paying
jobs to New Mexico, um, and it
may actually be higher than 130,
but that was the last figure
that I had.
So their growth demonstrates
both their long-term commitment
to our community and New
Mexico's emerging leadership in
clean energy innovation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, the work being
done at Cairo's Power in Mesa
del Sol isn't just about
creating jobs today. It's about
positioning New Mexico at the
forefront of clean energy
innovation for decades to come.
Mr. Speaker, I do believe, uh,
that I have a certificate as
well.
I believe you do.
Mr. Speaker, would you be so
kind as to allow the clerk to
read the certificate.
clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025, Res Cairo's
power, whereas Cairo's power is
a mission-driven engineering
company and a pioneering force
in the development of advanced
nuclear reactor technology that
is innovative, clean, safe, and
affordable. And whereas Cairo's
power has chosen the Mesa del
Sol community in Albuquerque as
a site of its new.
Engineering Center for
non-nuclear Research and
Development, and whereas over
the next 10 years, Cairo's power
expects the Mesa del Sol
facility to generate more than
$450 million in economic impact
in New Mexico and we'll create
100 new jobs, including career
pathway internship programs
through the University of New
Mexico and Central New Mexico
Community College. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
Cairo's power for its selection
of Mesa del Sol as the site of
its new engineering center, it's
groundbreaking leadership in
advanced nuclear energy
technology and its development
of emissions-free pathways that
support and grow New Mexico's
economy, signed and sealed at
the Capitol in the city of Santa
Fe.
Thank you for being here.
Cairo's power and welcome to the
house.
Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Lee, Representative Senna
Cortez.
Mr. Speaker. With your
permission, I would love to
introduce my esteemed guest.
Please go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. This is also on behalf
of Representative Randy
Pettigrew, who also serves with
me in Lee County. As you can see
standing on the rostrum, this is
my dear friend, Robert Guthrie.
And before I get into this
introduction, you should know
about my friend Robert Guthrie,
Mr. Speaker, my two older
brothers had him for accounting
classes in college, and one
brother, it inspired him to get
his major in accounting. The
other brother, it inspired him
to.
Temporarily drop out of school.
So take that as you will, Mr.
Speaker. I'll continue with the
introduction. Robert Guthrie is
here representing Option Inc.
and he has been there for 46
years, and that is how long
Option Inc. has been in
operation. He is married to
Teresa, and they've been married
for 40 years and they had 2
sons, his late son Shaw was a
lieutenant in the National Guard
and his other son Philip.
It was in the artillery unit in
Afghanistan. Now, let me tell
you, Mr. Speaker, a little bit
about Option Inc. It's a
domestic violence shelter and
service agencies serving Lee
County since 1978.
Mr. Speaker, option Inc was
founded by Dinora Carrejo
Guthrie, which is his mother who
led the agency and served the
community for 43 years and then
passed her legacy on to her son
who's now the executive
director, Robert Guthrie. He is
an Army Ranger veteran, CPA and
as you heard about his
inspiration to my brothers and
retired college professor of 20
plus years and it's been with
the agency since 2013,
fulfilling his
mother's vision of love,
strength, and grace for those in
need, and I have watched it. I
have worked with you in my
community and I am amazed by
your love and your commitment to
carry out your mother's legacy.
Mr. Speaker, Option Inc is a
nonprofit organization that
provides a safe haven and
support for victims and
offenders of domestic violence
while working hard to reduce
incidents through education and
awareness. The services offered
for victims are
emergency shelter for women and
children, men and families, a
crisis hotline, legal and court
advocacy and also skills
education and DV education
one on one. They also offer
offenders a violent offender
treatment intervention program
and then they also do extensive
outreach to hospitals and
schools and civic organizations,
law enforcement, and the list
goes on. Mr. Speaker, some of
the recent projects were on
site.
Medical treatment, the homeless
backpack initiative, Teen dating
violence awareness, law
enforcement outreach, the Option
Inc blessing box and the
domestic violence Awareness Day.
Mr. Speaker, Robert Guthrie and
his team in the services that
they have provided for so many
years have changed the landscape
of Lee County.
And I also want to give honor,
Mr. Speaker, to the New Mexico
Coalition Against Domestic
violence that is also in the
gallery. Thank you so much for
letting me recognize my esteemed
guest and his amazing team.
Would everyone please join me in
giving him a big round of
applause. Welcome to the house.
And just as a reminder if you
all are in the gallery. I get to
recognize from this side
coalition, uh, Against domestic
Violence, good to see some
friendly faces up there. Thank
you for all of your work.
Gentle
lady from Donana and Otero
Representative Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Permission to introduce some
guests.
Are they in the gallery on the
rostrum? They're here on the
floor. Go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'd like to announce
that we have a blue ribbon
school in the house today, very
exciting a white sands school
has been has the distinction of
being one of the three blue
ribbon schools recognized for
their academic excellence,
leadership and teaching this
program through the United
States Department of Education
honors these schools and I'm
proud to be the representative
in House District 53. I'd like
to introduce my guests on the
floor if you could stand when I
call your name, Principal James
Dickerson.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you, Melissa Juarez.
Alice Jones, Thomas Gunn,
Mikaela Smelker, Maria Blum, and
Mike Brewer.
I am so proud to present the
certificate to White Sands
acknowledging their commitment
and success to the students and
families. Thank you for your
commitment and dedication and
all you do. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Speaker and welcome
to the house. Thank you for
being here, uh, gentle lady from
Bernon Lee or Representative
Hochman Vi.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, um, I was hoping to,
um, ask you to introduce some
folks in the gallery. Why we're
here for Juando de losinos.
Quando losinos if you're in the
gallery.
Are you in the gallery, Quando
Los Ninos? I don't see them, but
this is being webcast and
archived souandolos ninos, thank
you for your incredible work.
Welcome to the house.
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, um,
just a little bit about them.
They're dedicated to breaking
the cycle of homelessness for
children and families by
providing early childhood
education, supportive housing,
case management, and parent
education, um, curando provides
high quality early childhood
education combined with support
services to stabilize homeless
families by ensuring children
children by ensuring children
receive a strong educational
foundation while supporting
parents with case management and
housing assistance. I also help
with families transition, help
families trans.
from homelessness to
self-sufficiently sufficiency,
but also be hosting a meet and
greet tonight at the La Fonda in
the Santa Fe Room from 4:30 to
7:30. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thanks, take note, gentlemen
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Point of
personal privilege?
Mr. Speaker, I was gone
yesterday when uh we had uh
family day and, and honored our
families. Mr. Speaker, I am a
father of daughters, 4 of them,
my wife and I have 4 daughters,
and, uh, I couldn't be more
proud of them. They've given me
14 grandkids so far. I'm pushing
for a few more and
And maybe I'll be successful,
maybe I won't, um, but, uh, I, I
spoiled the heck out of them.
I'm just grateful for the human
beings that they are, Mr.
Speaker, while I'm incredibly
proud of what we do in this
chamber. Nothing will beat what
I do in that chamber ever. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Serious question. Do you
remember all the names and
birthdays?
Of my daughters, yes.
Yeah. Good answer. We'll leave
it at that.
Gentle lady from Berta Lee or
Representative Thompson. Mr.
Speaker, um, I'd like to
announce that today is
disability rights Awareness Day
they are in the rotunda they've
done some some classes this
morning on supported decision
making and rather than have the
certificate read, I'll just, um,
summarize it so hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans of all
ages from infants to seniors
have disabilities that may be
physical, sensory developmental,
intellectual or behavioral or a
combination.
thereof disability is a natural
part of the human condition and
maybe due to varying reasons and
all of us may end up there in
the blink of an eye.
Uh, people with disabilities
prefer to live independently and
participate in communities
they're capable of being
productive participants in
society they can and wish to
engage in paid employment with
appropriate supports and they
may need services and supports
to enable them to live
independently and achieve their
highest potential, um, and so
I'm gonna end it with that but
say that we I'm, I'm urging all
of my colleagues to please
support.
The disability that we hear
about the the developmental
disability waivers and how
underfunded they are, so when
you're when you are if you are
on appropriations or tax, please
remember that um people like my
son really need.
To be cared for and I would
appreciate your support and
could we please have a huge
round of applause for the
disability community applause.
And just as a reminder folks
during announcements, let's
refrain from lobbying or
advocating for bills. I'm gonna
be a stricler for that, um, on
no matter what the issue is, no
matter who's making the, the
propositions, so just so a
reminder of that. Thank you. Uh,
we're gonna, I know people have
shadows and other guests to
introduce, I'm going to move to
committee reports for a little
bit and then I'll come back to
announcements so that we can
introduce our other guest,
gentle lady from Santa
Feresentative Sippansky.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 35 has had it
under consideration in report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable report on house energy
environment Natural Resources
Committee substitute for house
about 35. All those in favor 25
but say I.
I suppose, the I have a
committee.
Oh, that was good. The I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill
171, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, and he referred to
the judiciary Committee,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
171. All those in favor 75 by
79.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 178
has had it under consideration
report, same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, and he referred to
the Judiciary Committee and
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
178. All those in favorse if I
say 9.
Oppose me.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 214
has had it under consideration
report same recommendation that
it do pass and it's referred to
the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of a favorable
report now Bill 214. All those
in favor say ay.
All the supposed name.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 217
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson's chair.
Move adoption
For an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
217. All those in favor if I say
9.
I suppose.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 8 has had it under
consideration report see
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 to pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 8, but a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8, all those in
favor X5.
name
Yeah, I have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 103 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass.
Buckley submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption adoption of favorable
report in House Bill 103. All
those in favor of 75 but say 9.
I would suppose nay.
Wow
Do I have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to who has been referred House
Bill 14 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the taxation
of revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Y
Gallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption favorable report
in House Bill 14 and all those
in favor sign up but saying aye.
All the supposed nay.
Yeah I saw that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 22 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Doreen
Waige's chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report in House Bill
22. All those in favor signified
by saying I.
I suppose nay.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 289 has
had it under consideration
report same recommendation that
it do pass and it's referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 289. All those in
favor, if I say no.
I suppose.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee to me has
been referred House Bill 333 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair.
Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 333. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
I suppose, nay.
Yeah, have a community report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
on announcements, the gentleman
from Curry debaca, Guadalupe,
Roosevelt, and San
Miguelpresentative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'm very proud to say that
Clovis also has a blue ribbon
school here today sitting in the
rostrum.
Uh, celebrating Z Elementary.
It's an incredible honor for me
to stand before you here today
and celebrate the outstanding
achievements of our students,
teachers and community.
The Elementary has been named
2024.
National Blue Ribbon School, one
of only 3 in the entire state of
New Mexico to receive this
recognition.
For those of you who may not be
familiar, the National Blue
Ribbon School program runs by is
run by the US Department of
Education and honor schools
across the country for their
academic excellence.
And their commitment to student
success students that earned
this prestigious award have
demonstrated high achievements.
Or significant progress in
closing achievement gaps, making
them models of.
Effective teaching and learning
the Elementary has had a long
shining example of what makes
our public schools great the
dedication of our teachers, the
hard work of our students and
the support from the parents and
the community have created an
environment.
We're learning thrives.
This award is reflective of
Zia's commitment to academic
excellence, innovation, and the
classroom and the belief that
every child deserves an
opportunity to succeed, to be
one of 3 schools in New Mexico
receiving this honor, speaks
volumes about the incredible
work happening at Zia. This is
not just a school, it's a
family, it's a place where
students are encouraged to dream
big and teachers go above and
beyond.
The entire community runs
together to support the generate
this generation. Today we
celebrate achievement, but we
also look forward to what's
next. Blue Ribbon School
distinction is not just an
award, it's a challenge to keep
pushing forward, continue
setting the bar high and inspire
excellence for years to come.
Congratulations, Zia Elementary
and their students. Welcome to
the house.
Please rise to be recognized.
Incredible work. We're proud of
you.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, may I please
read their bios of the people in
the rostrum or.
Or are we pushing for time or?
We're always pushing for time,
but you're welcome to read the
Bibles. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Kimberly Trujil Bates, a
passionate educator in New
Mexico in her 4 years of
teaching, she has been nominated
Teacher of the Year 3 times and
has secured two grants to
support students with
disabilities at her school.
Thanks to the resources and
opportunities provided by the
state. She has been able to
enhance student learning and
foster more inclusive cash
classroom environment.
Her commitment to student
success is evident in her.
In her advocacy for additional
resources benefit to benefit
both her school and a broader
community continued grant
funding will allow her to
further enriched enrich
educational experiences,
ensuring that all students,
especially those with
disabilities have the tools they
need to thrive. Thank you for
your ongoing support teacher
for.
Of teachers like Kimberly who
have been making a difference.
We, we also have Kathleen Kate.
Has been the principle of Zia
Elementary in Clovis, New Mexico
for 3 years and has dedicated 28
years to the field of education,
a proud New Mexico native Miss,
Miss Davis.
Decided to pursue a career in
principle as, as a principal to
apply her skills and talents and
coaching and leadership.
Under the leadership of Zia
Elementary was honored with a
prestigious National Blue Ribbon
Award for the first time this
year, recognizing the school's
exceptional curriculum
dedicated.
Dedicated teachers, outstanding
students, strong community, Ms.
Davis believes that the
continuance part of the state
legis legislature is vital to
follow to fostering strong
communities and advancing the
quality of education of our
children.
Mr. Speaker, Emma Starr has been
teaching at the Elementary
school for 3 years.
She and her family relocated to
Clovis due to her husband's Air
Force career and has become
deeply appreciative of the local
community, Mr. Starr's 2nd grade
the Elementary recently awarded
a grant to purchase century
sensory tools designed to
enhance the productivity of, of
their students.
She is committed to fostering a
positive and supportive learning
environment for all her
students.
And Mr. Speaker, last but not
least, charisma Pyle, a guard, a
kindergarten teacher at the
elementary school.
With 3 years experience, she
became a teacher driven by her
passion for seeking.
The look of joy on a child's
face.
When, when they grasp something
new.
After, after a successful career
in the insurance industry, Mrs.
Pyle pursued a career change and
obtained her teaching license
through the alternative teaching
program. She is on track to
graduate with her master's
degree in elementary education
this May.
Mrs. Pyle is deeply grateful to
the resources professional
development opportunities
available through to educators
which play a role in proving.
Improving the quality of
education for students in her
community she's proud to
contribute to their academic
success, Mr. Speaker.
These, these
We're, we're very proud in the
in Clovis of Z Elementary and
these people that are at the
rostrum and if you would, Mr.
Speaker, the clerk has a, a, uh,
A certificate to read, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you.
Click to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session 2025. Congratulates Zia
Elementary School, whereas Zia
Elementary School in Clovis has
been named a 2024 National Blue
Ribbon School of Excellence for
its exemplary high performance
and whereas achieving the
prestigious title of National
Blue Ribbon School is a
testament to the unwavering
commitment to academic
excellence, innovative teaching,
and a supportive learning
environment demonstrated by the
dedicated educators, staff.
Parents and students of Zia
Elementary School. And whereas
this esteemed recognition
reflects the collaborative
efforts and outstanding
achievements of the Zia
Elementary School community,
highlighting their exemplary
commitment to fostering an
environment that promotes
student success, character
development, and community
engagement, and whereas the
National Blue Ribbon School of
Excellence Award acknowledges Za
Elementary School.
As a model of academic
achievement and a source of
inspiration for educational
institutions nationwide and
whereas the educators, students,
staff, and parents of Zia
Elementary School are to be
commended for their exceptional
accomplishments and for the
dedication, hard work, and
spirit of excellence that
defines this outstanding
institution. Now, therefore, be
it resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that congratulations
be extended to Za Elementary
School for being named a 2024
national.
Blue Ribbon School of
Excellence, signed and sealed at
the Capitol in the city of Santa
Fe.
Congratulations, the Elementary.
Welcome to the house, gentle
lady from Bernalilloa Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
members. I want to introduce to
you my shadow for the day Latino
Attino Maya is a student at the
Master's program in Santa Fe,
New Mexico. She involves herself
in legislative meetings and
several leadership programs, one
of which is a teacher's
assistant. She enjoys involving
herself in order to get back to
her community.
Athena is very smart,
determined, considerate, and
understanding whatever Athena
puts her mind to, she's
certainly achieves.
After high school, Athena will
attend college, possibly UNM,
which she plans on majoring in
business in hopes of opening her
own business in the future. She
participates in the freedom
ambassadors program and helps
teach student leadership level 1
to 9th and 12th graders. She is
a first generation uh young lady
going to college and her family
and believes in women
empowerment.
I ask that you help me warmly
welcome Athena Maye. Welcome to
the house.
Gentlemen from Bern Leo
representative Romero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um,
For members of the body this
week, the New Mexico School
Board Association is having
their conference here in Santa
Fe and tomorrow morning, members
are invited at 7 o'clock to the
El Dorado to attend the annual
breakfast that they have for
legislators, so you get to go
out, maybe your for the first
time, hopefully not, but your
local school board members as
well as meet school board
members from across state to
hear how the educational issues
that we work on here.
As a body effect, um, large
school districts and smaller
school districts, uh, rural and
urban schools, so, um, please
come to that, but I would like
to um introduce, um, my guests
from the school board
association here in New Mexico,
so as I call your name, folks,
if you wouldn't mind standing up
so we could acknowledge you, um,
but Pauline Jaramillo.
Marvin Jaramillo.
See.
And I should say Pauline is a
New Mexico school or association
president from Socorro and
Marvin is the president-elect
from uh Mesa Vista.
Uh, Terry O'Brien.
vice president from Hobbs,
Arlenerio.
As Secretary Treasurer from
Gadsden.
Christine Rudy, the past
president from West Las Vegas.
And then we have Virginia,
McCotter Jacobs, the executive
director of the National School
Board Association. So welcome to
New Mexico. And then Joe Guilin,
the New Mexico School Board
Association executive director.
All right, so welcome to the
House of Representatives, and we
look forward to talking with you
all tomorrow morning. Um, I
will, Mr. Speaker, I also like
to introduce my inlase um shadow
for today. So this is Jade
Romero. She's from a Trusco
Heritage Academy High School,
which may sound familiar because
that's the school that I teach
at.
Go Jaguars. Jaguars.
So, uh, Jade is a junior senior
because she's ahead on our
credit, her credits and looks to
graduate over the summer, so
she's hoping to use her this
experience and her advocacy to
look into issues that affect low
income, um, neighborhoods and
the education that these folks
and opportunities that these
folks do receive. So hopefully
if you see her around, give her
a warm welcome, um, thank you.
Welcome over to the house.
And if the Gatsden Independent
School District is in the
gallery, you and your
representative uh Representative
Lara, uh, wants to welcome you
to the house, as do I. Welcome
to the house, Gatsden
Independent School District.
Gentle lady from Berna Leo
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Mr. Speaker, I am so excited to
introduce my first guest, my
first intern, my first shadow,
and this is Danielle Melendez.
Daniel Melendez is in in Lasi
student and lost the intern from
Gadsden High School where she is
a junior and she's taking dual
credits, and she plans to attend
Yale to acquire her PhD in
Chicana and Chicano studies.
Mhm. She's passionate about
opening new opportunities for
Chicano success in her
community.
She is heavily involved in
school in groups such as
Aerospace engineering, softball
best buddies athletic training
and is 4th in her class of 315
students.
This brilliant young lady, I
hope will return sometime to
this chamber as a legislator and
do and she's incredible. She's
gonna do some wonderful things
and Mr. Speaker, I just wanted
to mention that this opportunity
to um to you and to Danielle as
well that when I was in junior
high way back in the late 1960s,
I had the opportunity to be an
intern as well.
And that is what sparked my
interest in becoming a
legislator. I was in this house
chamber many years ago and so
you have a whole lifetime to
come back and and contribute to
the state in any way that you
wish, you're gonna do wonderful
things and thank you for joining
us today. It's my honor to host
you and we are, um, sharing, uh,
Representative Gonzalez and I
are sharing this fabulous
intern, and we're presenting her
with a certificate.
Very cool. Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Catherine
Sierrascoro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
That was a mic drop.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to introduce some grand
people here, um, in the house
today, Mr. Speaker, um, all of
these wonderful young adults are
from the ranches. Their motto is
guiding children and united,
uniting families since 1944.
Uh, first, I'd like to start
with Makayla Cole.
Uh, she's the president, Lanny
Cole, vice president of Program
Services, Travis Yoakum, vice
president of operations, Maria
Rivera, a member of the board of
directors.
Next, I would like to introduce
some outstanding young men and
women.
Uh
I'm gonna butcher this name. I
know it. Uh.
Jerislen
Um, she's 18 years old and has
been at the ranches for 3 years.
Uh, she grew up in Valencia
County. She is, uh.
Uh, has expanded her skill set
to learn about various trades
and has been OSHA certified.
Uh, next is Aiden. He's 6, 16
years old.
There is, um, he's been at the
ranches for 2.5 years,
originally from Oregon. uh, he,
um, has worked to catch up in
school and he's on track to
graduate on time. He has shown
interest in the ranch's trades
program and has worked to become
OSHA certified as well.
Christina 17 years old, she's
been at the ranches for 3 years,
uh, originally from Donana
County. She's interested in both
the trades and trades work and
cosmetology um and is a path, a
career path for her, um, she was
in and out of foster care and
constantly moving around. The
ranches has
been her longest placement and
has allowed her stability and
focused on learning.
We have AB who's 17 years old
attending the ranches for 6
months originally from Santa Fe
County, Abel decided to attend
the ranches in order to have a
stable place to ensure that he
could complete his high school
requirements and graduate on
time.
Uh, he's living one of his best
lives there. Danica is next.
Uh, she's 15 years old and been
at the ranches for a year and a
half. She has worked to catch up
in school. She enjoys being able
to learn about the trades and
working with horses, uh, she
struggled with navigating her
household dynamics and strained
relationships with parents after
she graduates, she would love to
find a career path that allows
her to work with animals while
being at the ranches, she has
been able to begin strengthening
her relationship with her
parents.
Mr. Speaker, the ranches of the
New Mexico Boys and Girls Ranch
is a residential group home that
has been serving at-risk youth
since 1944. The ranches is
privately funded it is and does
not accept any government
funding. The purpose of the
ranches is to provide assistance
to children and families who are
struggling through teenage
years. The focus of the ranches
is to provide education and life
skills to these children in
hopes that they will be able to
successfully navigate
relationships and situation.
that they will face in
adulthood, adulthood.
In order to provide these
services, the ranch is utilize
many avenues including equine
coaching.
For each therapy on-site
schooling, leadership classes,
and many others. Additionally,
the ranches offer offers an
introduction to the trades for
the kids that are interested in
pursuing that career path. When
possible, the goal of the
organization is to help children
and their families improve their
relationship with hope of
reunification and accessible
reintegration into their home.
Mr. Speaker, the exit of
Bernardo.
If anyone knows where that's at.
You pass by it all the time.
Nobody knows where it goes. It
leads to the ranches and
mountain air, New Mexico. So I
have seen these young students
and all of the adults that
helped them.
Uh, participate in our fair at
Socorro County, and you would
not believe how enthusiastic
they are for each other. We love
it when the ranches show up
because they are working hard,
they're helping each other,
they're helping all the other
kids at the fair. They're
loading, they're unloading,
they're cleaning so respectful.
And we just love having them, my
grandchildren's show at the
Socorro County Fair, a few of
them. I have 12, so a few of
them show at the fair, and, um,
it's just when the kids come in
the ring and everyone cheers for
them. Um, it just brings a
breath of fresh air to what
unity and getting along and
learning hard work and, and
cheering each other on and being
there for each other and I
couldn't be more proud, Mr.
Speaker, to.
the ranches, and thank you for
being here. Please give them a
round of applause.
Welcome to the house.
Gent lady from Berlio
Representative Herndon.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and Mr.
Speaker, it's my esteemed honor
to present or to introduce to to
you and to the chamber an
amazing young woman. Her name is
Arielle Manyweis. She's from Las
Cruces, New Mexico, a senior at
Mayfield High School and she is
here representing in Laa of
southern New Mexico and Mr.
Speaker, I'm also uh happy to
inform you that she is a member
of the Hispanic honor.
Society, the National Honor
Society, the mock trial team and
Josa, which is the health
occupation students of America.
After high school, Mr. Speaker
and members of the chamber, I
want you to know that Miss
Moy We will plan to attend New
Mexico State University to study
Kinesiology. Please welcome my
uh my
Let's see
my sin student who's shadowing
me today. Ariel Moyra. Welcome
to the house.
Gentlemen from Berley or
representative of de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. You know,
as a former Parks and rec guy,
it's always warms my heart when
we have any issue that involves
and improves the lives of young
people and so when we have
shadows that to me is an
extension of that and so Mr.
Speaker today, I also have a
student from Elai. His name is
Alexis Campos.
And he is from Farmington in San
Juan County. I'm gonna have to
introduce him to our
representatives from that neck
of the woods.
Alexis is a senior at Piedra
Vista High School. He is heavily
involved in sports like football
and track, and he also told me
he really likes weight lifting.
He is, he is also enrolled in
dual credit classes and he hopes
to start his own business and
build engines and I'm sure that
after having visited with this
young man, he will do that and
much, much more. So Mr. Speaker,
can you help me welcome this
beautiful day Alexis Campos.
Welcome to the house.
not.
Any other announcements?
Committees, are you meeting
today?
Announcements going once, going
twice.
Uh, on, folks, you lady from
Berlio.
me.
Oh thank you Mr. Speaker. I'm
having a slow start today, uh,
house labor veterans and
military affairs Committee will
be meeting.
At 1:30 in room 315 and I'd ask
that everybody please uh
assemble promptly thank you
members take note, gentlemen
from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House Education
Committee will meet at 9 o'clock
tomorrow morning, so 9 o'clock
for members. Please note so you
can go to the school board
association Breakfast tomorrow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Members take note.
And the school board association
breakfast is tomorrow morning.
Take note of that too.
Channel gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your house
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee will be meeting in
room 317 at 1:30 p.m.
Today.
Members take notes, gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, your house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow at 8:30, room 305.
Members take note. Other
announcements, the gentleman
from Donana. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your house
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30 in
room 307.
Members take note any
announcements before I go to
Bill introduction.
OK, have an announcement, um,
members, I will direct your
attention to House Bill 37 axis
sculptural Observatory
in consultation with the sponsor
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
and the chairs of House
Education and rural development
will be swapping out the first
committee referrals, so House
Bill 37 was originally referred
to the House Education
Committee, the House
Appropriations. We will swap out
that first referral.
House education for rural
development.
See no objection that is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m. will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon's session is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
written in full and approved,
subject to provision and
approval of the rules in order
of Business Committee.
Gentle lady from
Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I'm gonna go to the
next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
Clerk Reed.
House Bill 421, introduced by
Representative Serrado, an act
relating to business, enacting
the business security Assistance
Act, providing definitions
requiring rulemaking, providing
rebate payments to certified
vendors that sell discounted
security equipment or security
services to businesses, creating
the business security assistance
fund, creating a gross receipts
tax deduction for sales of
security equipment and services,
providing a delayed repeal,
making a transfer from the
general fund to the business
security.
Assistance Fund making
appropriations. House Bill 421.
House Bill 421 have been rew by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee,
the then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 422 introduced by
Representatives Sareana.
Garrett Coola, Mirabel Moya, and
Bacca.
An act relating to teacher
preparation, increasing stipends
for teaching residents,
providing health insurance
during residency, providing
additional funding for
participating public
post-secondary educational
institutions and tribal colleges
House Bill 422.
Is 422. Haven't been to us by
toddlers or printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House of
Operations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 423 introduced by
Representative Sareana, Garrett,
and Guola, an act making
appropriations to the office of
the State Engineer for Water
Security Planning Act Water Data
Act, and Rio Grande Compact
compliance measures, House Bill
423.
As will 423 have been read twice
by titles or printed and
referred to the house.
Agricultural ass and Water
Resources Committee, there's the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 424 introduced by
Representatives Dow and
Armstrong, an act relating to
children enacting the pregnancy
and Family Care Act to provide
for the screening of pregnant
patients for substance use
disorder. Prioritizing treatment
for those patients, including
the development of family plans
of care to provide a range of
services to address related
needs requiring the Department
of Health to develop a system
distinct from the system used
for reporting allegations of
child abuse and neglect to
require healthcare providers to
ify the department regarding the
birth of substance exposed
infants.
Including disaggregated
non-personal identifying
information requiring hospitals,
birthing centers, and other
facilities to provide all
postpartum patients with
information regarding the
development of voluntary family
care plans requiring the
department to develop
educational and training
materials for healthcare
providers and other others
providing services.
The pregnant and postpartum
patients regarding family plans
of care, establishing statewide
and county advisory councils to
provide recommendations to the
department related to the
implementation of the pregnancy
and Family Care Act, providing
for reporting, repealing
sections of the Children's code,
House Bill 424.
House 424 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 425 introduced by
representatives Armstrong, Dow,
and Parajun.
An act relating to rules,
amending the state Rules Act,
requiring an agency to respond
in writing to public comments on
a proposed rule before the rule
is promulgated, requiring
publication in the New Mexico
Register of Agency Responses to
public comments. House Bill
425425 haven't been read to us
by tilers or printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 426 introduced by
representatives Parajon.
Matthews, Andrea Romero.
Silva
As well as Senator Maestas.
An act relating to property
enacting a new section of the
mobile Home Park Act to require
notice before the sale of a
mobile home park, creating an
opportunity to purchase. House
Bill 426. 426 have been read to
us by title is ordered, printed
and referred to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
uh, gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Any final announcements.
Folks, I have an announcement to
make.
Reminder tomorrow, joint session
for African American Day here in
this chamber also.
In about
2 hours and 16 minutes.
Capital reauthorization forms
are due.
3 p.m. today, Capitolali
reauthorization forms are due.
You
Any other announcements?
OK
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
The house we'll stand in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
because we don't have any
The
that
I
I
now.
members to committees
I don't
