Thank you, Representative. Are
you ready on HB 580.
E license plate.
Let me just
reminder group.
You speak, turn your mic on and
when you're not speaking, turn
it off, please, because we've
had some really bad feedback in
the room.
And I'm gonna move this back
here just a little bit because I
know from being on that side
because these are very
sensitive. Thank you, um.
say I call you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you everybody. So this is
interesting I know plates are so
controversial in the state
because we seem to have a lot of
them, but
The reason I brought this
forward is because one of my
constituents said, why is there
no el plate, and I was like
surprised because I went to look
and
To represent McQueen with talk
about him a little bit, and he
said, no, we have one, and he
pointed to said that's a deer.
So we don't have an elk plate in
New Mexico and the reason I
think this one is important is
because elk is a huge industry
in New Mexico, not only for
hunting, we, they, when someone
buys a plate from out of uh a
tag from out of state, that's
like 7.
For them to get that. So it
brings in millions and millions
of dollars into New Mexico.
Hotels, restaurants, guides,
hunting, but also I learned that
people come from all over the
United States, actually all over
the world, especially up in uh
Los Alamos area to take pictures
of the deer, so it brings in a
lot of money. It's um, it's good
for our environment. It's part
of New Mexico as part of our
culture, and I think it's an
important thing to have in a
license plate in Mexico that I
stand for questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the room in favor of this bill?
Raise your hand if you favor.
If you're in favor, please line
up.
And wished to speak line up
behind the presenter and we will
uh take your comments. Nobody
wants to talk up on online.
Anybody online in favor? No,
Mister Chair.
in opposition to this.
Bill
Anybody in opposition online.
No, Mister Chair. Thank you.
Questions from members.
Representative Dow.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I need to tell
you that if my husband was here,
he would raise his hand in
support of your bill.
That's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Representative
Lustrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
think the most important piece
of this bill is on page 3.
That's the key to the bill.
In my opinion, and that's the
whole issue around
The department going back and
comparing the number of special
registration plates issued and
renewed go forth and basically
those that haven't been
purchased or
Aren't wanted any more set
aside. The question is, is why
2031.
I'm sure I don't have the bill
in front of me. Can you repeat
the question or can somebody
hand me the quick hold on.
Madam Chair and Representative,
when I give the, when I gave
this off to the people that
drafted the bill. This is the
day they came up with, and I
could not tell you why 2031
cause I'd rather have it right
now, but.
Let me ask, uh, does the
department know whether or not
this is done on a regular basis.
Does anybody know?
I mean, we've been doing license
plates for 25 years.
And there's some that I know
I've never seen the light of day
because they are a specialty
plate that may be a handful of
people want.
Are they not
Oh
kind of rotated out, so to
speak.
This curious, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tarrant representative, that
is a great question. Um, I know
when I give it to the drafters,
I trust in them and I could go
back and look at some of the
other bills cause I know there
are, there's actually another
bill today. Can you hold on just
one second, um.
Mr. Mr. Taran, representative.
The term represented the
isotopes pill that's coming up
has the same thing on that.
I'm being told Representative
that standard language for bills
to have license plate. Thank
you.
I don't think it's standard
language. I think it's something
that the bill drafters want. I
mean, if we wanted them to do it
next year, we could make them do
it next year and go through and
get rid of those bills or those
license plates that we don't
use. That's all I have. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lauder.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, representatives. I, I also
wanted to mention the page 3 and
how I appreciate that.
Uh, one question that I do have,
representative, is.
Who determines what the artwork
is on the license plate.
Mr. Chan says that's a great
question because that deer does
look a lot like an elk, so, uh,
I would imagine that that's
going to be left up to our motor
vehicle department to drafted
the artwork. If not, I would
like to offer them suggestions
and make it look like a very
elk.
big rack like 6 on each side.
You know, cause that's what I
got my last hunt. I can give him
a picture of mine if they'd like
to use that representative.
Thank you, thank you for that
representative, Mr. Chair, you
know, I, I would strongly
suggest maybe uh during that
process that we consider uh
Native American art.
When it comes to those license
plates, I think that would make
it.
Uh, a lot more aesthetically
pleasing.
Mr. Taran, I agree with you. I
think that's a great idea. Uh, I
will figure out how I will make
that happen. Thank you for that
good suggestion.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair.
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, you
know, I've said in previous
committee hearings we have plate
bills we have a saturation but I
really believe this will be very
popular and uh it will be um
justified because of the number
of the sales that will occur in
Mr. Chairman, I, I really do.
I'm always interested when we do
a specialty plate.
A representative, um, where that
extra money goes beyond the cost
of the plate itself and um this
is into the wildlife protection
or wildlife program uh game
protection fund, so it's logical
if you it makes good sense, so
I'll be supporting your bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, I've mentioned
that I'm an automatic yes for
all license plates. I just feel
like I've transported into a
different committee this
morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. I don't think we have
anybody, any other members with
questions. What is the will of
the committee?
We have a motion by
Representative Romero and a
second by Representative
Armstrong.
Take the roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brigo.
Representative Brown.
Representative Doub.
Representative Fernandez, yes.
Uh, Representative Bachman B.
Hill.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
your love.
Yes.
Ara de la Cruz. Yes, uh, we had
a pass, didn't we? It passed.
Uh, I, I'm a no, and I like to
play my boat.
Oh, sorry. OK, we'll start with
you after school.
We will start with
representative Hoffman v. Hill,
and he would explain your vote,
and we'll go to death.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
usually being a former chairman
of this committee, I'm an
automatic no on any new special
license plates, but the fact
that you seem to have solved.
An age-old problem here that
we've had with the uh let's say
the overzealous, um, special
license plate appetite that
they, this body has had for
quite some time. I really like
this solution, so, um, I will
give you your license plate in
exchange for good process, so
thank you.
Representative doubt to explain.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I passed and now
I get to stay true to my no
votes, but also, um, I'm sure my
husband will want to be one of
the first ones to purchase and
I'd love to help. I think it
would be great to get with the
Indian cultural Pueblo Center
and get a really cool design
and, and I might, we might put
on both our cars. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
You have a due pass. Thank you
and thank you everybody. I
appreciate all the feedback,
especially like that one, so I
will find out how that process
works. I'm just happy to have
the elk on a license plate
because I couldn't believe that
that was missing. We have the
iguana and a roadrunner and a
fish and a deer, but we don't
have an elk, which is our
biggest industry in New Mexico.
So thank you for that
representative, are you ready on
HM 38.
Yeah, hopefully this will be
quick. Um, so what happened was,
and I was just
Sorry, I don't want to call
anybody out. We were just
discussing back there about what
happened with Route 66. I don't
know if you know, we have a
musical highway, and those are
important because there's not
many of them left in the United
States, and so what happened was
the road got fixed and you can't
see it anymore in the sign is
missing, so I was just working
with somebody back there won't
mention her name, that we were
working on getting the sign, he
didn't know that the sign was
not up, so I brought this
memorial forward to memorialize.
Thank you.
To memorialize our Route 66
musical highway, and it was on
National Geographic. It's had a
lot of attention, um, we want to
make sure that we preserve this
and the memorial is just saying
that this is an important part
of New Mexico and we want to
make sure that we preserve our
only musical highway in the
state of New Mexico without a
time for questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
favor in the audience regarding
the pill.
If you wish to speak, please
line up behind the presenter and
we will take your comments.
Is there anyone
But we do have a speaker, great.
Hi, uh, thank, thank you,
Representatives. Um, I would
just say as a a resident of the
area and a frequent uh driver on
the musical highway. It's
somewhat uh deteriorated.
I wonder if there's anything
attached to this that would help
store.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online in favor?
No, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition in the audience
related to this bill.
Anyone in opposition on online.
No, Mister Chair.
Thank you members questions
Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. I, I think
this is such a great idea. And
I've got 3 grandsons that are
obsessed with cars right now and
it just, it just screams New
Mexico true and um anyways, I,
I, I think it'd be really cool
of us to even put some money
behind this and restore those
old signs, those route 66 signs
and just really lighted up and
um
Maybe be a little bit of, of uh.
Apologies and recognition of
what art did to some of those
businesses, especially around
the, the Knob Hill area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Um, I was just
in talks with the DOT about they
are putting signs up, they're uh
in process and they'll have a
centennial underneath them all
along Route 66. I didn't know
that till this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Lord. So I've not
been on this highway before and
I have not heard it saying, but
I think it's interesting, uh, in
this memorial, it mentions that
National Geographic Channel got
permission.
To, uh, to build this, and it's
a 1300 ft long.
And plays a uh
of um
Beautiful.
So with uh Mr. Chair and
representative with the um
anniversary of Route 66 coming
up. This seems like a good time
to, to do something about this,
um, but Mr. Speaker, uh,
Representative, it says it's
requesting NMDOT to consider
restoration. Do we have any idea
what kind of, it maybe National
Geographic won't be involved
anymore for round two here, but
Do we have any idea what this
might cost.
Sure.
Uh, Mr. Chair and represents a
great question. I have a good
relationship with DOT cause they
did an amazing job. We had an
issue with the freeway that they
actually fixed. Uh, we had,
there was grumble starts put in
that were in the lane and keep
people awake all night and they
worked as quickly as possible to
get that fixed. So I have a very
good relationship with them, so
in the next session because it's
a budget session, I will bring
that forward with an amount.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I
may, I'd like to ask our cabinet
secretary.
Tricky.
Mr. Secretary, would you please
come up and have a seat.
Can you tell us what the
condition is of this stretch of
road.
Um, yes, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I do believe
that a portion of the road has
been worked on, which means that
in its entirety, it's not
available the way it was when it
was first developed.
But our understanding is, is
that it was part of a project
and I believe and I could be um.
Incorrect, but it was funded as
part of that project. We are
aware of the contractor that
placed it on the highway, and so
we'd like to be able to pull
together an estimate on what it
might cost today to get that put
back in place, but um if you are
interested in hearing what it
was like, there are videos
available online of folks who
have driven across the country
with intent to visit some of
these um key um areas on these
interesting areas or areas of
significance on Route 66 and
It's available. You can hear
Chairman, I'm more interested in
whether or not this could be
covered under maintenance funds
for that highway district.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
mean, I imagine that our
maintenance funds could
could be used for it. It's a
state road. It would be
considered maintenance, but it
would be a state road and with
state road fund, we could
probably swing that, but more
importantly, I'm, I sit on the
states, Route 66 planning
commission, and that commission
is attached to the national
commission that is planning for
the anniversary from Chicago all
the way to Los Angeles, and I
imagine that this could be a
project that the commission
embraces and perhaps get it
funded through a number of
various ways along with other.
other projects that we've
already floated for the national
committee's consideration.
Do you know how much that is in
the budget now for the national
commission or the state's
commission's work.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe that economic
development department got a
small sum of money. And so some
of those projects are going to
be funded, um, with that small
sum of money. I think it was 2
or $3 million. I don't believe
it was significant, but then the
projects that are being elevated
to the National Committee will
become part of its national
campaign. There again, we'll
have to identify the resources
through capital through other
venues to ensure that those
other projects materialize, so
for example,
Yes, um, it's to restore all of
the, um, the lights, uh, the
historic lights on Route 66 or
if it's to create, um, there's a
projects to create a corridor of
Route 66 golf courses to promote
tourism and local spending. We'd
have to make sure that all those
golf courses are, you know, no
pun intended up to par.
I'm done. I'm leaving after
that.
Mr. Chairman, I hope though is
that there is coordination
between the state commission,
which is chaired by our.
Uh, Chamber of commerce director
in Gallup.
And you guys with DOT.
Because they're doing their own
planning work.
I know that because I know
Gallup's got a big to do, you
know, when this all, when the
ribbon gets cut, so to speak,
for people to travel down,
travel down Route 66.
That's all. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
My questions have been asked and
answered. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. I, I have a question.
Secretary, is there?
On your maps, do you show Route
66. I know it's not.
Contiguous all the way to.
You know, Eastside and stayed
all the way to the west side.
That being said, do you have a
map that shows, and the reason I
ask is because people actually
want to tour the road and I've
been curious of where I can get
on and get off. You have a map
available that shows the
sections that are available to
the public.
Mr. Chair, we do, and we, and we
could prepare one in short order
too that would be part of a more
digestible effort with tourism
or economic development to make
them available because we do
print paper maps, but equally
important to showing that route
that most people identify with
today is the historic route,
which includes portions of
Sanofi too, and that's a measure
that the the planning commission
is taking into consideration is
what the route looked like
originally and now, uh, as it's
identified, so, um, we'd be more
than happy to put something.
together, um, we're excited as
the representative said to um to
bring um.
We're inventoring all of the
signage, for example, we had all
of the districts inventory, all
the signage along the corridor,
which is primarily districts 54,
and 3.
And parts of 6 and we've
identified which signs need to
be replaced. At a minimum, we've
got to get our signs to look
good again, and one was pointed
out that's just gone altogether
which would fall off the radar,
so we're gonna get all of those
signs replaced in short order
given the team 6 months to do
that.
But then through the commission
is also work on the design for a
centennial sign that we can add
to the post of the existing
signage as well. And if we have
enough resources, we'd like to
work on some pavement markings
that help identify the route for
visitors too. And so, um, we're,
we're really excited about
playing a role in this and much
of this will tie to
transportation upgrades that
need to be made and so perhaps
what the representative was
represented Lustrom was alluding
to is how might the state.
Come together to identify
resources that could support
some of these initiatives
because not all measures to be
sure will be related to road
infrastructure, there'll be
others that will support local,
um local project development
that will support local. Thank
you, Representative Lustrom.
Big one also is cultural affairs
with historic markers.
All those were torn down when
you whitened roads and and that
kind of thing I'd like to see
that back if possible. Thank
you.
Thank you. I'm glad you brought
up the old rout pre-1937 Route
66, you know, people come, like
I said, from all over the
country, there's motorcyclists,
there's car enthusiasts, and
they're international, so in
Mexico represents as I'm sure
you all know this, has some of
the longest stretches of
contiguous Route 66.
And so for us to, you know, take
the lead.
Uh, and make sure that we
preserve and uh.
Sign, signage that is relevant,
just be very, very much
appreciated by
the United States population as
well as.
great for you to do that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, if I can say
something real quick, um, it is
you hit on a highlight there
that people come from all around
the world on motorcycles. They
rent motorcycles on one end or
the other, and they come across
this whole track I ran to people
who spoke German and many people
don't speak any English at all,
and they're riding the bikes
across here, riding on Route 66.
Thank you. It's, yeah, it's,
it's a great for tourism, it's
great for economic development
in New Mexico, um, one of the
things that I'm very proud of
that I'm sure the members know
this, but Albuquerque is the
only place in the country where
Route 66 comes.
Or points.
On 4th Street Central.
So there I believe there's a
plaque there, so if you ever
want to take this unique
photograph of yourself at the 4
points of Route 66, you can do
it in Albuquerque and 4th Street
and Central.
Representative Bore.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
um sorry I was late. I had
another bill that I was
presenting, um, but I just
wanted to mention that
Albuquerque does have a um a
whole uh program on Route 66
from traveling to um about like
100 and wherever the end of the
city limits are, so it'd be
great to tie these all together,
just mentioning that. Thank you.
you
Thank you. We have emotion. I do
pass from Representative
Lindstrom the 2nd from
Representative Armstrong. Take a
roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Borrigo. Yes.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative De.
Representative Hernandez? Yes.
Representative Hockman B Hill?
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
Representative Lungstrom.
Representative Romero.
Um
your life.
Yes.
Yes.
110 to pass. You have a do pass.
Thanks very much. I hope you
guys have a very short day.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have HB 507 representative of
Andes, are you ready?
It's not here.
I thought he was here. Go ahead,
please.
We're gonna go ahead and roll.
HB 507.
Next we have Representative
Hoffman v. Hill, HM 41.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I'm sure all of you
can appreciate this time of
year. Everybody has to be a
million places at once, so thank
you so much for accommodating
us. So, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh, HM
50 came from, if you remember
the, uh, railroad safety bill
this committee heard of a couple
of weeks ago. Um, this was
actually the compromise.
One of the compromises that we
came to when we were discussing
with uh the railroad, how to
address this issue, which is um
very long trains having issues
and for whatever reason being
stopped on railroad crossings
for elongated periods of time,
which can lead to safety issues,
um, and, and other, um,
unintended effects, so that's
basically what this does is this
memorial of directs DOT.
With the assistance of the uh
railroads and the um the unions
representing the railroads to
look at this problem, assess it,
and see if they can come up with
any operational, um, suggestions
to kind of help fix this since
it is something that is
affecting many New Mexicans
almost daily, and then I'll
reintroduce my expert, um, Pam
Harris, who's from the
International Brotherhood of
Locomotive Engineers, and he
wants to.
say anything.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for your time. One of the things
that we've heard loud and clear,
uh, in this particular session
is data.
And that the committee wants
data this is.
How we get that data.
Uh, and to the fiscal impact uh
report uh that noted that
there's 1400 crossings in the
state, 700 private, 700 public,
um, to the fiscal impact reports
concern that that's kind of an
excessive number to study there
realistically, you shouldn't
have to study 1400 crossings and
labor's involvement in that
process can really help narrow
that down as we know where these
crossings are that we spend more
time on than others.
Um
I don't want to see the rural
peace left out of this on the
private crossings because
they're, uh, there's a lot of uh
crossings and rolled in Mexico
that we wind up stopped on for
extended periods of impact,
sometimes even if it's just the
rancher and his family.
Uh, that, so.
With that, uh, I, I, I don't
have anything else. Thank you.
Rosin, have you done?
And with that we'll stand for
questions, Mr. Jim, and I'm
sorry, it's it's House Memorial
41, not 50.
Thank you. Do we have anyone in
the audience in favor of this
memorial.
If you wish to speak, line up
behind the presenters.
Yeah, now with the the
relatives.
Downgrading their train makeup
and
bigger, longer, more dangerous
planes.
Um, I worked for the road
actually, and I've seen many
deaths in ambulances by
crossings, and there's gonna be
a lot more of them.
So I really think this is.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
online in favor.
No, Mister Chair.
Do we have anyone in opposition
of the memorial in the audience.
Raise your hand if you do.
Do we have anyone online in
opposition?
No, Chair.
Thanks.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you all for the memorial, um.
In, in my neck of the woods.
Uh, we know which crossings are
are the problem and we've
actually, uh, like the Herales
crossing over by Berlin, you
know, we worked together with
DOT to get funding and we built
an overpass and and did all
that, so I don't know why it's
really a study is needed if they
know where.
The problems are and they're
working on fixing that. I, I
have a list of 4 that they're
working on and they're waiting
for funding and they're, there's
things that have been done
already, um.
Mr. Chairman, the design is
complete, uh, one of them lacks
funding, uh, two of them lack
funding, so the design is
underway for the overpass in
Gallup, uh, the design is
complete in Laguna, it just
lacks funding. Clovis, the
crossing just received funding.
And then Horales, we, we've
already been doing all that. So
I'm just concerned about the
price tag, but I hear what
you're saying about the price
tag that it's, but doesn't DOT
already do this and can't they
do it at any time without a
memorial?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and, and Madam,
a leader, that's a great
question and um it will be one
that I will turn around and ask
DOT right now or later today,
uh, because the list exists, we
certainly don't want to be
redundant in any ways or
reinvent the wheel. So this work
is already being done, more than
happy to, that's great and um
and we'll work with them on that
list.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
all. Thank you, madam.
Do we need an expert?
I, I was talking to my LA did I
miss something?
Uh, vice chair, did I miss
something?
Thank you. So,
Representative Armstrong, Leader
Armstrong, do you want someone
from DOT to respond? No, that's
OK. They, um, the Madam Whip.
Made it clear that she'll get
with him.
You. Next we have Representative
Boreco.
I do pass on House Memorial 41.
We have
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative. I, um, I've had
some mixed experiences with
railroads in my district, um,
I've heard of the fifteen-minute
rule that I'm reading here it
says um train crossings can be
blocked for up to 30 minutes, so
I'm just needing some
clarification, Mr. Chair,
Representative. What, what is
the, the time maximum allowed
for blocking and pressing.
Mr. Chairman, uh Representative,
I don't think there is a maximum
time, but I, I could be wrong.
OK. Yeah, maybe we could get
someone who can answer that
question. Perhaps the expert
witness, Mr. Chair.
Expertressa.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Brown, currently there is no
federal statute or law in place
that uh dictates how long a
train can occupy a crossing, um,
there has been, uh, because of
the issue of federal preemption
when it comes to crossings, the
railroads have kind of will
sometimes do what they want to
do, which results in crossings
being blocked for extended
periods of time. Texas at one
point had a 10-minute law in
place, but has since been struck
down.
by, uh, believers attorney
General Ken Paxton and while the
law is still in effect, they
don't have any teeth to enforce
it at the state level.
And if I may, Mr. Chairman
Representative Brown, that was
actually one of the things that
we were trying to do in the
original bill, but because we
did have preemption issues and
we didn't want to risk, um, you
know, putting the skate, the
state, um, into a, a possible
litigious situation when put it
down to a memorial so we could
just study it.
Yeah, um, thank you for that,
Mr. Chairman. I, um,
I, I know too where the problems
are, and I've talked to um
The railroad, uh, we have trains
and they're very important. They
carry valuable commodity, and
they have schedules to keep, but
Uh, thinking of an area in my
district where if the train
crossing is quite for
too long.
Emergency vehicles have to
reroute.
Miles.
And that bothers me, and I've
even suggested the railroad
reroute its track a little bit,
but that didn't go anywhere
either, so probably because it's
very expensive. So, um, I think
what the solution for me, Mr.
Chair and Representative would
be.
To whom do we report? If there's
a, a, a long delay in that train
crossing.
Who do we call if we want to
complain about it.
Other than the state
representative.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and, and Representative,
that's really funny because when
we were having all the
discussions leading up to this
memorial, and we were throwing
some ideas around and we were
talking about like, well, yeah,
maybe a 1-800 number, maybe a
sign that someone could call
that leads them directly to DOT,
you know, hand block, we're
gonna go, but that's, that's
definitely where we're on the
same thinking track.
Very good, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
I'll be quick now. I, um,
I saw the $500,000 price tag.
Did I see it on this bill?
They're all running together,
um, and it, it says here
requesting the Department of
Transportation.
Um, to do basically the study
and so, you know, mandatory, I
believe that they must do it,
but I, I would just encourage
Mr. Chair for DOT to be hearing
what's being said today.
And um get more proactive in in
helping, but I, I don't really
want to order them to do. I
mean, it's a request, but um I
think they, they know we'd like
to have this looked at.
And um
Let me see.
But yeah, I think it's not an
issue in most places in the
state, but it is in a few and uh
we need to
Probably just get together on
this, but um, anyway, thank you
very much, Mr. Chair
Representative Vice Chair
Lauder.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Whip.
Quick question.
Are these railroad crossings.
On state roads, county roads,
private roads.
What, what, where, where the,
where the crossings that we
issues with.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Mr. Vice
Chairman, all of the above. I
think that they they're various
locations throughout the state.
Sounds like we already have a
pretty good list going of just
anecdotally where we think the
problems are, and again, just
probably another reason why we
need to huddle everybody
together. I do intend to study
this issue during the interim
and bring back the a full report
to the committee.
Thank you for that, ma'am. What
I, Mr. Chair, because I tune
know where the problem is in my
area.
But it's a county road, it's not
a state road, and we've already,
the county has already received
funding from the feds.
And the county's put in so
they're working on that
overpass.
So, uh, I, I
I like the attention and I think
it's, I think it's something
worth studying. I really do.
Thank you.
Back to Representative Borego to
make a motion.
I think I really did, Mr. Chair,
but I'll do it again. Um, in
uh, regarding, um,
House Memorial 41 and moved to
pass.
We have a motion by representing
Borrego, do we have a second?
Thank you.
We have a second by
representative Romero. Take a
roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Gorigo.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Do? Yes.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hogman B. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
Representative Langstrom.
Representative Romero.
I hear a lot.
Yes, de la Cruz.
Yes, 1102. You do pass on your
memorial. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
We are now our own house.
Memorial 50 Trinity Site Restop.
Representative Ferrari.
Please proceed when you're
ready.
Mister Chair, may I just say to
the lady in red looks beautiful
today. Mr. Chair, do you want us
to go ahead?
Please proceed, chairwoman.
Thank you. Um,
House Memorial 50 would um
create a memorial rest stop with
a plaque.
Um, on US Highway 380 and um
It's near the entrance, uh, near
the entrance near the Trinity
site, and it's to commemorate
for the.
The first nuclear weapon, um,
detonation in the US and on its
80th anniversary, which is um
July 16th, um, of this year, and
um the uh commemoration would
also have the downwinders
Consortium who were affected by
the nuclear detonation, um, be a
part of this um dedication.
Um, and we have a message from
uh the Tularosa Basin down
winters that um my expert um
Doris would like.
My name is Doris Bha McBride,
and I'm here to represent the
Tularosa Basin downwinderss
Consortium, TB, DC, and the
people of New Mexico.
Who have long suffered the
effects of being overexposed to
radiation from the atomic bomb
that was detonated at the
Trinity site 80 years ago this
year.
We are asking the house
transportation Committee to
please support the passage of
pass memorial 50 regarding the
Trinity rest stop.
I'm a cancer survivor who has
dealt with bladder cancer, lung
cancer, and a brain tumor.
I lost my father to brain cancer
26 years ago at the age of 65. I
have been working with the TV DC
for many years, I fully support
their efforts to stand up for
those who are the innocent
victims of the Trinity bomb tens
of thousands of people in New
Mexico and from New Mexico have
likely suffered with or died
from cancer as a result of
simply living where an atomic
bomb was detonated. It is time
to acknowledge sacrifice.
And the suffering of all the
people who have been affected.
We would like to see a permanent
memorial place at the Stallion
Gate entrance to the Trinity
side of Highway 380. Every year
when they opened the site to
visitors and thousands of people
enter. There's a historical
marker.
There are details the history of
the science and industry, but
nothing acknowledging the people
that lived 12 miles away, 35
miles away, 45 miles away, 150
miles away. This is the 80th
year since the bomb was
detonated and it is time to make
this happen.
We envision a covered concrete
pad with a picnic table placed
at the site, that would
encompass a permanent memorial
stand with a plaque. The plaque
should be designed to
acknowledge the people that lost
their lives, to include the
babies that died after the test.
Eventually it would be great to
have a portable toilet placed
there also. The goal is to give
every visitor an opportunity to
reflect on more than just the
science.
We want them to know the whole
history, the whole truth. The
TBDC and I are grateful for all
the consideration that has been
shown to us by the New Mexico
State Legislative legislature
throughout the years. We believe
that there is more than a
worthwhile endeavor, and we
support this effort, however we
can.
You want to know more about the
TBDC, please go to our website
at www.trinityDownwinders.com.
Also, there will be a public
screening of the documentary
first we bombed New Mexico, that
tells the story of our work this
Friday, the 14th at 7 p.m. at
the Mexico State Land Office,
the documentary has been winning
awards at film festivals all
over the country, and we're
doing all we can to get
distribution, please join us.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, and with that we
stand for question.
Thank you
Is there anyone in the audience
in favor of this bill, a
memorial.
If you wish to speak, please
line up behind the presenters.
Good morning. Excuse me. I'm the
Reverend Holly Beaumont,
organizing director of
Interfaith Worker Justice New
Mexico and also hold on a
second, Sergeant, bring that mic
down a little bit so really loud
Also a member emeritus of the
Tularosa Basin Downs. I can't
tell you how many afternoons I
have spent on Highway 38,
watching the thousands of people
turn into the Trinity site,
which is another
13 mile drive.
This, this historic site is a
magnet.
For people all over this country
and all over the world. Every
year we have people from Japan,
Europe, everywhere.
I did a list one year of every
license plate that I saw coming,
and there were only 2 states
that year that were not
represented. I mean, people came
from Alaska, Hawaii, Canada,
Mexico, Rhode Island.
To see the Trinity site. It is a
magnet, as I said to New Mexico,
and we have an opportunity to
educate people not only about
what Trinity did to us, but what
the state of New Mexico
contributed to winning World War
II. I share this information
because it's the research I've
done supporting the radiation
exposure compensation Act.
Did you know that more New
Mexicans.
Do we have anyone online in
favor of the bill of the
memorial. No, Mister Chair.
Do we have any anyone in the
audience in opposition to the
memorial.
Do we have anyone online in
opposition.
No, Mister Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
a question again for the DOT
please, Ricky. I may, Mister
Chairman.
About, I think it was about 220
22 or 2023 Senator Smith and I
put money into the budget for
rest stops.
Can I get an update, Mr.
Chairman, on what?
Where you're at on that rest
stop plan.
Secretary.
uh representative, what was the
year again 223 the rest
when we started the whole
process for rest stop, Mr. Chair
Representative, I believe that
was a NARA allocation to the DOT
we are we are expanding the last
of that allocation, which is to
improve rattlesnake rest areas
on both directions of I-40 near
Klein's Corners, and that'll be
the last of that allocation. Mr.
Chairman, did we have anything
for 3 AD on there?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, I can't
recall. I can provide you the
list probably in short order
before the end of committee, um,
but the, the commitment there of
course was to get all of that
money obligated under contract
by this past December, which we
were successfully able to do.
Let me ask Mr. Chairman, uh,
rest stops, in my opinion, are
incredibly important uh for the
state with uh all the tourism
that we have and what have you.
It would make sense to me that
this would be more than a porta
potty.
That's just, if we're gonna look
at this, let's do it right, and
it needs to be on the rest stop
plan, Mr. Turman, and I'm
wondering, is there any
opportunity at all that now that
Senate Finance has the, has your
budget.
that there might be some funding
put into Senate finance through
the amendment process to start,
whether it's this rest stop or
not. I just don't like the idea
that we're.
Expended all those dollars and
we're not representative,
that's a great question. This,
this would be a new rest stop,
um, our commitment with the last
allocation that we received
throughout the funding was to
improve and enhance existing.
And so that in our discussions
with the sponsor would be really
the heavy lift, the marker, and
even a ceremonial dedication of
that marker would be simple, um,
and I know that the site is
definitely entitled to more than
just that, but identifying the
space, securing the right of
way, the cost for facilities and
perhaps utility to those
facilities would be the heaviest
lift. And so whatever resources
could be allocated to that end
would expedite the Mr. Chairman,
even if it was in
planning like he like the
secretary saying that they could
bring it up for next year into
the budgets into their budgets
specifically, they do a good job
with that.
And the rest stops are,
sometimes they're complicated
because it it slows down
traffic, it slows down the
traffic patterns, uh, there has
to be places for people to park.
There has to be places to pull
over. I assume that's a two-lane
road. I've, I've been on that
road before. Is that, is that
correct? I'm your
representative, that's correct.
What we would do is identify the
space for turn lanes in
acceleration lanes out to ensure
that, you know, access to and
out of that onto the roadway
would be safe.
Anyway, that'd be my suggestion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you ranking member Brown.
Mr. Chair, thank you and uh
thank you, Representative, um.
So I
I just need it, and I, if I
could get the secretary to help
us with a couple of questions um
just to continue the discussion.
Um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, Mr. Secretary,
does NMDOT do traffic studies or
any kind of other evaluations to
determine where to put a new
restaurant.
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's, that's a
great question. Um, I, and, and
I don't have the answer. If, if,
um, right off, meaning do we use
traffic studies to identify
where one would best be located.
I can get you that response
Representative Lunstrom.
on that point, the rest stops
are maintained by the Department
of Tourism. They failed them
unless you guys have accepted
them, but tourism usually
provides those numbers.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and secretary
and I think that would be
important to know, um, I'm, I'm
just thinking of the Masa stop
on Highway 285. Uh, we waited
years and years and years to get
even an upgrade on that and it
was the way I understand because
uh Mr. Chair, there was a need
to uh to bring water in, and
there were problems drilling a
well, and they had to go out
several miles, I believe, and
even that took a long time just
to get all that figured out, so.
I, I believe, um, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Secretary, that we, we, we
all agree that stops are
important, uh, for the traveling
public. Next question I have is
related to that, Mr. Chair. Uh,
where are the to this area where
the nearest rest stops or I
guess you call them convenience
stores, no pun intended, but
we're, where can people stop
for, for respite, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh, we, we could check, um, to
give you proximity to where
those locations are provided
that as well, but just to
clarify
overseas is responsible for the
maintenance of 11 rest areas
across the state. We also have a
partnership with the tourism
department for maintenance of
visitor centers as well, even
though those visitor centers may
be owned and operated by
tourism, so it is a financial
responsibility for DOT to
maintain.
those rest areas, the bulk of
which I believe are in this
transportation District one.
Um, uh, so for example, the
closest one to us would be
coming in from Albuquerque and
I-25. We're responsible for the
maintenance upkeep contractor
um.
Activities around security and
cleaning of the restrooms, etc.
So, um, identifying that budget
comes from the transportation
districts to maintain those
facilities and so if we were to
pick up this space as a new
facility.
Then the transportation district
there would oversee its ongoing
maintenance and.
Thank you for that information,
Mr. Secretary, Representative,
and Mr. Chairman, I
Next would like to ask about the
availability of water, you know,
with the rest, we really need to
have water, uh, again, it was a
huge problem at the Mesa area.
What do we know about the uh
water availability in that area,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
going back to the
representative's points is
that's exactly what the study
would determine, it would, um,
it would determine, um,
ownership of the right wing.
The place, uh, the most ideal
location, the alignment of where
the off-ramps and on ramps would
come uh relative to 380. What
utilities the access to those
utilities, etc. and what we
could get done there, um, so.
To the representative's point,
even just resources to conduct
that study to answer these
questions about
Um, ideal location, the amount
of right away the ownership of
the right of way and the utility
access, that's what we would
hammer. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I, um, I've
heard it said there's a
historic, there's an historical
marker out there already. Do, do
we know what that says? Do we
have a photo? Do we have a text?
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, yes, there's uh it's typical
of the historical markers
throughout the state, which is
the wooden posts and the um it's
uh.
Trying to remember the size and
dimensions, but it's typical of
the wood posts with the um gosh,
I'm trying to remember the
color, um, the maroon, thank
you. I was gonna say I was
wearing it the other day, um, I
was gonna say New Mexico State
color now maroon, um, signage
that's there and it's a marked
Trinity site. That's on the
roadside and then of course the
site itself has its marker.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, um, I, I
know there's a nuclear museum in
Albuquerque.
I've been there. I think it's
it's neat, it's impressive, um,
so Mr. Chair, for Ferrari, do
you know if there's anything in
the museum there regarding the
dam windows the Trinity site. Do
we have anything at all on, on
record there?
Uh, Mr. Chair and of a
representative, I do not, but I
know that we have in Las Cruces,
I think it was 2 years ago, had
a nice exhibit of different art
and things like that that were,
you know, uh, recognizing the
downwinds and the
To La Rosa, the Tularosa basic.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
think the nuclear regime is the
perfect place to have something.
Something.
And um people need to understand
what happened here. Um, Mr.
Chair, I'm looking at the fiscal
impact report.
And is the secretary just
mentioned, there are a lot of
factors into rest stops. You've
got to have.
First of all, studying, you got
right parking restrooms,
drinking water, shade
structures, facilities for pets,
and so forth.
And that the price tag looks
like it's, it's in the order,
uh, in the neighborhood of $20
million and they just did one up
there in Torrance County that
they, they worked on there,
replaced that one, so.
it was new construction and Mr.
Terry guess what's stopping me
here is
This $20 million price tag,
that's money we could really use
for our roads.
And um
And I guess also, uh, Mr. Chair,
I, I see in the title of the
memorial it's requesting the DOT
to establish a rest area.
I think the first step really is
to study.
That do we, do we know, what are
the implications? What's the
cost?
And um so I think we're just a
bit premature with this
memorial.
Although I fully understand the
reason for it.
And um I, I fully sympathize. I
really do.
So I, I guess, rather than to
say to establish to make that a
verb, it ought to be to study.
And so I think this memorial is
just a step ahead for me. Thank
you.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, and I, I think
my questions would be for the
secretary.
Uh, Secretary Serna, I have um
The same concerns about
maintenance and the resources
funding we're putting into
maintaining the the rest stops
that we already have. I have a
rest stop that's been closed, I
think for more than a year and a
half. I wonder if you have an
update on when that would be,
um,
Open again. It's the, the one
westbound I-10, which is very
busy.
And it's, it's a long stretch of
road without.
Um, a rest area.
Representative, just to give you
some updates as I'm getting them
from the team. We, we do have
one rest area on 380. It's wall
drop.
Ultrare area
and so it's near there I could
get the exact proximity, um
from, again, from perhaps just
the turn off of 380 to the
Trinity site, um, as just a, a
guess the measure and provide
that to the committee and um we
didn't get an update on the
reopen timeline for the I-10
restaurant and I can provide
that to your representative.
OK, thank you very much. So, I
was disappointed to hear um the
answers to Representative
Lustrom's questions about
funding and that those funds
that were dedicated to
maintenance have been or it
looks like they're, they're
gone.
Because I've been, I've been
asking for updates on
Mr. Chair, representatives,
secretary, asking for updates on
this uh restaurant for, you
know, regularly for at least a
year and a half, and so I guess
what I need to add to this
conversation is that I um
would be
It would be difficult for me to
vote for it this in in this form
here dedicating a lot of money
toward a new restaurant when we
can't maintain those that we
already have, especially in my
district, so thank you for the
answers, appreciate that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Jones.
We aren't looking to have a full
blown rest stop. It was more of
just a.
Hold off and um place for people
to see the plaque that would
honor the downwinders, um, it
kind of jumped to, you know, if
we could do a full blown rest
stop, that would be great, or,
you know, just to have a shade
and a place for people to be
able to recognize the.
People that were affected by
this, that isn't recognized in
just the site itself.
And having that and if we needed
to um
Change a word, we'd be glad to
do that so that it wasn't um
You know, uh, making it so that
the um
Highway department would be um,
you know, having to do the full
blown rest stop, but we could
start the planning.
Uh, some of the tanks around are
painted very well and, and give
homage to to different things
and acknowledge different
things.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
fundamentally when we go to plan
for these spaces so we're gonna
identify the most affordable
cost efficient way to go about
putting
The facilities in place, whether
that's
A well tapping into a public
utility system, either the
county or the city or or
otherwise, but there's no
question again that in flushing
out the study, we'll identify
the safest and cost efficient
way to achieve the the goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. I think if, if we're
gonna change the language and,
and I, I'm hearing support for
this, but for this memorial, so
I hear we're gonna look at the
historical marker.
Parks are for rest areas.
We're gonna hear a report from
the secretary, but for this
study, it looks like the
language here is to establish
on, you know, in the title and
then again on
Um, page 2,
They will construct an
appropriate rest stop, and
that's, that's
Much more
Um, substantial, and that's why
the FIR has 20 million. So, Mr.
Chair and Representative, what
do you want to change and, and
are we, do we haven't made a
motion, um, an amendment yet in
this committee without a 24 hour
notice, but what is it that you
want to change? Um, if we could
just change um in the title, uh,
requesting the department to uh
evaluate.
Arres off and then that could be
reflected on page 2113 requested
to evaluate an appropriate
restaurant rest stop.
So that would be Mr. Chair and
secretary, would that be the
appropriate change?
Uh, Mr. Representative, we would
consider that to be a study,
which would be the, the first
next best step.
OK, we could say
that would be perfect.
Um, Mr. Chair. What, what do we
do?
Protocol
Representative.
Representatives representative.
if you're immunable to it.
Represent a priority then we
could do it here on the.
In committee. It's just a very
minor change.
It's, it's not substantial, so I
think it'd be OK.
Members in the opposition.
study. So requesting the
Department of Transportation to
study a rest stop.
That's on the title and then.
9/11 on the title, and that was
the only place
13 page 2 requested to study in
appropriate res.
immemorial.
Is there another one?
Armstrong where was that 2nd 1.
Uh, Mr. Chairman also would need
to change on online 18.
Install to study.
She's teaching to study.
Uh
Representative Ferrari, were
those the only two places in the
bill.
2013.
I believe so, mister.
OK, so we have page 2 line 13.
that were constructing them.
Mister Chair, um, uh, in the
title, the word established,
strike established, replaced
with study.
On page 2, line 13.
Uh, strike construct, replace
with study, line 18, strike
install replace with study.
Ferrari, is that acceptable?
Uh yes, Mr. Chair, thank you
representative.
Yeah, any discussion.
the
I'll move the amendment for
discussion.
We have, we have a motion from
Representative Rome
Representative Brown for
discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
think we have a lot of cooks in
the kitchen right now.
And
I, I really think we need to
send this back up to drafting to
get it done right. I see some
word changes. I still think need
to happen. It's the studies
established study the
feasibility of.
Uh, building a restaurant there
and another question I have, and
this might be really important
to the bill.
And Mr. Chara could ask.
The secretary, one more
question.
Mr. Secretary.
Does NMDOT handle all the
historical markers, the
placement of those, and so
forth, the writing of the text,
uh, or is that cultural affairs,
is it tourism? Do we need to
bring in another agency to be a
part of this process is my
question, Mr. Chair.
Great question, Mr. Chair
Representative. Yes, we would
work with uh a partner
organization. So for example,
with historical markers, it
would be cultural affairs for
the women in history, it would
be that organization and so we
would work with them. We have a
contractor that um that
constructs makes based on the
current design to ensure
consistency and then we work
with that partner organization
on the language.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I guess at
this point I, I don't support
the amending because I think
we're not doing the job fully as
we should, and I think we do
need to specify that DOT would
work with the obvious agencies
on something like the marker,
but in terms of um the bill
could still talk about uh NMDOT
doing a feasibility study, and
you're looking at rights of way,
water, all those things and and
do it right.
And but uh I agree with
Representative Armstrong, that a
marker could probably be.
Uh, designed, built, and
installed by July, if all goes
well, I think it could be done,
Mr. Chair, that those are my
thoughts. Thank you.
Is there further discussion on
the.
Never mind, I'm
Zererman.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
if we were to strike.
Like on page 2, line 13 study
um.
I don't see an issue with that
because, I mean, Mr. Chairman
and and presenter, um.
Our memorials binding.
Oh. Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't believe
they are. It's a suggestion and
to put together, you know, a, a
Yeah, do the work, the
feasibility study.
And
And
Mr. Chairman and, and
representative and I heard it
across the panel on asking an
obvious question because we're
expressing a will of the
legislature in our case of the
Transportation Committee in this
case with the amendment to study
the possibility of a rest stop
to study the possibility of
putting a a marker down, um, and
it's all within the realm of
possibilities, so I don't know,
we have very little time. We
could sit here and him and Hall
over the
It's a study about an issue that
we've deemed as we've already
heard it from everybody, that is
an important issue to bring to
light, and I don't see what the
issue would be to move the
amendment along um and vote up
or down on the merits of.
Study.
a study. It's not binding even.
I, that's my opinion on.
For with the amendment and then
we move forward on voting up or
down on the bill itself, the
memorials.
Thank you.
Representatives.
I never thought I'd say this as
a city planner, but I agree with
the representative Romero, a
study could be like for the next
20 years, the next, you know,
there's no teeth in it and it
really concerns me because I
think that uh we owe it to these
downwinders, especially in their
plight of what they've been
through and
And just for the record, um, Mr.
Chair, um, uh, just to answer,
um, and representative, um, just
to answer, uh, Chair Brown's
question about whether the
nuclear um museum does have
information about the Down
winters, but I just, you know, I
I know how long studies,
sometimes studies get put on the
shelf and they're just shelved
and they're there forever and
perpetuity. I think that it
behooves us, um, as a
legislature to really make some
more definitive, um, put a
little more teeth into this, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Is
there any more discussion on the
amendment?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
of one, I don't know if it's a
good concern or not, but, um, a
line 21 on page 2 of
transportation uh Department of
Transportation to hold a
dedication ceremony at the
memorial site on July 16, 2025.
a little concerning.
To me, I mean, it says study
other places, but this is kind
of a directive. And so I, I am
concerned about that portion. I
just read that, so.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
don't know if that was a
question that I can answer, um,
but the highway department is um
Uh, committed to helping make
that happen.
the dedication.
Sorry, Mr. Chair, and you know
again I've been asked a question
necessarily, but I think
A commitment to a marker and our
participation with um to
represent Brown's Point, the
appropriate.
Organizations could work on the
dedication of that marker in
pretty short order.
And so I know that sounds like
an administrative commitment,
but you know, it's, it's here in
front of you all to the extent
that the memorial includes a
rest area.
Conducting a study of
feasibility study on the
placement or the construction of
a rest area would be, I think, a
good next measure for us so that
we could identify if there's a
need for resources to conduct
that study and what, if
anything, it would cost to
construct a rest area.
Reserve that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative and
secretary. So, so the memorial,
it doesn't carry an
appropriation. It doesn't
require the, the agency to
undertake any action, but we're
hearing goodwill and a
commitment. Do you feel that the
memorial is too burdensome. I
mean, you can completely ignore
it if you want.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I mean, we, memorial
resolution or otherwise, we take
what the legislature is asking
for us to do seriously, but to
the extent that we have the
resources to do it is another
question, right? And so the
memorial does ask for an
appropriate rest area.
And um it
We wouldn't be able to afford to
do that, in short order without
some resources. I think that's,
that's just the honest response
to it, so studying what it would
cost to do that properly and
appropriately would be the next
best step.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Is there any further
discussion on the amendment?
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, you know, I, I think we're
all trying to rush this out the
door so we can get something by,
is it July 1st 16th.
But I'm also a realist and I
know things take time, and so I
think
I would rather, instead of take
these few little
And that's
Just take it back to drafting
and have it done quickly, um,
have them.
fix it up, so we take, so we
really word it right.
Even though it's a memorial, I
think we always should do it
right in terms of how we phrase
it, set it up, and I think we've
got a clear
Uh idea here of what needs to
happen step by step. And so I'd
just rather have it cleaned up.
And then I really can support
it.
Thank you, Representative, uh.
And we called it we have a
motion to adopt the amendment.
OK.
There has been a motion by
Representative Breo.
No.
Yes,
now we're we're on adoption
and so Mr. Chairman, I would
move adoption of the amendment
with one edit, if I may, since
we're all cooks in the kitchen
today, apparently is that and as
as the sponsor, if this would
work, or we go to the study
language, but the memorial site,
we just strike on page 2, line
23, strike on July 16, 2025.
So you would strike on July 16,
2025. So that we don't have the
issue as far as the time rush if
DOT is willing to do it on that
date, it's fine, but it doesn't
commit us in the memorial to a
fixed time.
But I'll leave that up to you
all. Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I appreciate
the motion, but um the highway
department thinks that they can
make that deadline for just some
type of ceremony and dedication.
Hopefully we could get into an
historical marker, um, by that
time.
But if not, we would be glad to
just have some dedication, they
might even get, um, you know, a
plaque or something.
Represent.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you. So,
the next place is the floor.
And if there's concerns, that'll
be the discussion on the floor,
and for the expe I, I'm not
looking at July 16th as the
deadline because the secretary
has said he's going to honor
this. I'm looking at 8 days of
session left, I think 9 days of
session left. So I think it
would probably be prudent to
strike it if there's already
commitment. This doesn't matter
if it's there or not, except for
discussion on.
That's up to you. I mean,
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the whole idea
is to have it for July 16th, but
if we
Um, can't make that time. I, I
guess we would.
still have a dedication, but
It is, you know, um.
A point to
have something that would be a
dedication and and a goal, Mr.
Chair and secretary, are you
guys committed to that date?
That is the day of the
anniversary.
Uh, Mister, um, Representative
to get the, the the memorial
lab, I think is definitely
realistic and, and to work with
partner organizations to
coordinate that event so that
it's proper, appropriate and
hits the right notes with a
commitment from the
representative of those
organizations, we can do
something about that. So, so,
Mr. Chair and Representative
secretary that ceremony, there's
gonna be a ceremony on July
16th.
And period. So the question is,
how bad do you want the memorial
to pass as I think is what
This committee's
putting before you.
Cause you don't need the
memorial. Everything's gonna be
accomplished, so this is about
acknowledging it as a body, I
think. Yeah.
So Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
does provide a goal.
And
Preserved for or are you open to
representative Romedo's
suggestion.
Uh, Mr. Tay, I unfriendly I mean
so, so then in that case, Mr.
Chairman, if I may, then I would
move adoption of the page one
line of 11 insertion of the
evaluate in the title, and then
on page 2 line 13 striking
construct and study and in
place, insert study.
inappropriate rest stop.
As the amendment for adoption.
Representative Farry.
Yes, and I would like to add
that line 1818 strike install.
Yes, to study. I thank you.
Lieder.
Thank thank you. um, Mr. Chair,
I just wondered if the secretary
wants to, he had those.
tracings or do you want to say
study the feasibility of.
Is that really the correct
wording you think? Sure.
Um, just study will be just
fine.
Thank you. Um,
So just to make sure that we
have everything on the record.
Page 1 line 11, you, you want
this evaluate or study.
Right, OK.
H2, line 13, strike construct
and play steady.
Page 2, 18.
strike installed and place
study. Correct.
Thank you.
There's been a motion to adopt
the amendment.
Uh, do I have a second?
Take my who have real.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Borego. Yes.
Representative Brown. Yes, on
the amendment.
Representative Doo.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
your life
Yes,
yes.
is 10 to 0.
Representative Lestrom.
I like to do is I'd like to make
another motion for the
committee's consideration is
that um
You signed a letter basically
asking that a marker be
provided.
In preparation for this event.
Um, I know that we've got this
memorial and everything else,
but if we have the
transportation committee, also
sending a letter, I guess it
goes to you or does it go to
cultural affairs?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, it would come to us, we can,
we can work to get that done in
partnership with cultural
affairs I would like to see
that. I think it adds to, I
mean, there's a lot in here.
Um, but I'd like to make that
recommendation at a letter come
from House Transportation.
7.
I don't think we need a motion
for that. We'll just duly noted.
And do it, uh, Representative
Davi side on the floor.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Du pass.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'll be
brief, um.
First off, Mr. Chairman, I
really appreciate this, uh,
robust discussion, uh, and also
the acknowledgement of the um of
the advocates.
From Tolorosa Basin.
Mr. Chairman, as you know,
I've been very vocal.
About, um, my family's history
in this, um,
My, my grandfather, both of my
grandfathers were Navajo uranium
miners.
One of my grandfathers was a
miller, so he would transport.
He would transport the uranium.
Um
Uh, from the mines and so Mr.
Chairman, I, I have seen.
The, uh, sacrifice that uh our,
our people, all of our people
have made.
Um, and, and to know that there
is a strong advocacy to ask for
a just compensation or to ask
that the federal government
government be held accountable
for
Responsibility.
To, uh, well, I'd like to say
is,
you know,
These are patriots. We were
the Cold War Patriots, uh, we
were the ones who helped.
Uh, ensure our, our that that
the United States won World War
II, and Mr. Chairman, I, I hope
through this dedication that we
could not just tell the
Pass, but Mr. Chairman, that we
tell the story going forward of
the advocacy of many, many
people who are not here today,
but especially those that are
like Mr. Paul Pino.
Uh, uh, Miss Tina Cordova and
many others that I have met, um,
Mr. Chairman, that, uh, again,
thank you very much and I, I am
myself working on a memorial for
the minors.
And I'm working with the
Department of Cultural Affairs
and uh and I'm actually working
directly with them and not
having to introduce a house
memorial and uh and they're
really helping me do that
effort, Mr. Chairman, so I, um,
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward and
looking forward to supporting
you and being at the dedication
site on July 16th, 2025. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Doll,
do you want to, uh, do that
motion again.
Mr. Charamova do pass.
As a mental
As a minute, we have a second by
Representative Orego Roco,
please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Borego.
Yes. Representative Brown.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote. Representative Dow. Yes.
Is that
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice chair a lot of.
Yes. De la Cruz. Yes,
Representative Brown to explain.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I
think we've arrived at a
reasonably um
worded um memorial, um, Mr.
Chair, I,
I would have liked to to go to
drafting because there are still
some pieces in here that really
aren't appropriate anymore, and
I'll just point out
Page 1 line 20, it says there's
currently no plaque or other
marker informing travelers in
the area of the great historical
significance of this site.
But in this area, in this area,
there's something I haven't seen
it with my own eyes, but there's
apparently some historical
marker regarding the Trinity
site, but this isn't actually
accurate.
And uh, but anyway, I'm not
gonna stand on that, uh, I gave
you a yes vote, um, uh, so I'd
like to see us move forward.
Thank you. We're moving on to SB
123 Regional Transit District
law enforcement,
Senator, thank you so much for
your patience your support on
this.
I have to note for the members
that uh Senator Jaramillo has
the best pen I've seen so far.
Mr. Chairman, it was given to me
from one of the best guys in
Albuquerque.
We want to see a singyamu. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for listening to
Senate Bill 123. Now what this
bill does is we look at the
regional transit district in
northern New Mexico
specifically, that covers more
than 10,000 square miles in
several counties and tribes and
pueblos. And what we're trying
to do is get
on these buses to ensure that we
can help riders feel safe when
we're traveling that many miles
in northern New Mexico, if
there's issues that come up on
the bus, there's issues that
take time for police officers to
respond to. This would ensure
that somebody is trained on that
bus to ensure that they can
handle the situation until law
enforcement gets there. And so
what this definitely does is it
grants the peace officer powers
and that the district officers
would be required to attend
basic academy.
which is offered twice a year,
and we're hoping that this would
increase ridership at Trust in
the Blue bus when they want to
take that bus between counties
or between pueblos and tribes.
And with me as an expert witness
who will answer questions when
we're ready, and we're ready to
entertain questions, Mister
Chapman.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
If you wish to speak, please
like he does not wish to speak.
Do we have anybody online in
support? No, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in opposition?
to the bill.
Anybody in opposition on online.
No, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
remember questions
Representative Lindstrom.
Mr. Chairman, when you're ready,
I'd move for Du pass.
2.
Representative Armstrong.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, good to see you.
Um, I'm curious, do they not
have the ability to be able to
hire?
Law enforcement now, and we need
a bill for this. We need the
bill, Mr. Chairman and
Representative in order to get
the, get them to be able to hire
in that peace officer capacity.
Thank you for that. And Mr.
Chairman, um, the training is it
basic training or how, how long
is the training?
Chairman Representative, it's
the basic training that every
officer goes through, they would
only be required to do the first
year of that basic training. And
I believe it's a two-year
training program for the full
officer training, this would be
one year of basic training.
Thank you for that. And who pays
for that?
Representative, the RTD would be
responsible for funding.
Uh, both the training and then
paying the peace officer who
ride on that bus.
And tell me what that acronym
is.
Regional transit district, Mr.
Chairman. OK, thank you very
much.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative, I'm sorry, vice
chair Lata. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator. A
couple of quick questions. So,
uh, this, uh,
But
Is this a requirement for the,
for the Chairman uh
Representative, it's not a
requirement, but it's been a
mask from the RTBs.
So, so my, my RTD would be able
to take advantage of this so
they wanted to, so they wouldn't
be obligated to, correct, Mr.
Chairman Representative,
absolutely.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, good to see you. Your
bill passed yesterday, by the
way, and it broke. Um, so, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um,
I, I, I support the bill. Um, I
heard you mention, I don't know
this district um that you're
talking about that the blue bus
and you talked about.
buses, and I see in the bill,
Mr. Chair, it covers vans,
railcars, locomotives, and so
forth. So it, it's, it's, is it
just written broad to cover
anything or you just looking at
buses, Mr. Chair. So Mr.
Chairman, uh represented great
question. So there's already
something in statute that covers
trains. This would take what's
in that type of transportation
in me for just the RTD so just
for bussing. Thank you for that.
And then last question, Mr.
Chairman.
I've heard the word peace
officer a lot this session, but
several bills relating to that.
Could you just tell me the
definition of, I know law
enforcement, what is a peace
officer specifically is that
person, I take it not authorized
to carry a firearm.
Could you just give us a brief
overview of those categories,
please, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I'm going to
yield to my expert witness.
Anthony Mortlaro, uh, executive
director for the Regional
Transit District, North Central
New Mexico.
And um peace officer, police
officer, those terms are used
synonymous, and they do carrying
lethal weapons.
OK, and, um, Mr. Chair, I mean,
I, I, I even have a bill where
we're setting up school cert
security personnel categories. I
know it's different per act um
statute, but, um, so the answer
is, Mr. Chair, Mr. Expert, they
may carry a firearm. They've had
training.
Uh, they've been certified, they
have a badge, and they wear a
uniform. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, representative,
yes.
Thank you, Representative.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and, uh, uh,
Senator, thank you for uh being
here and your guest. Um, I just
wanted to mention that we did
this in Albuquerque. We had to
do this in Albuquerque, and it
has worked. So I, I very much
support your bill. I think that
it's important for um the
average citizen to know that
they are safe when riding a bus,
and, you know, unfortunately,
sometimes we have elements that
get on those buses and sort of
wanna use them as their own
little taxis.
So, um, I very much appreciate
that you're bringing this
forward. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be
brief. Uh, I am supportive of
this. Thank you, Senator, for
bringing this forward. My
question, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator, is, uh, there's a
public transportation, uh, bus
that goes from Farmington to
Mexico
to a hickory,
then there's an overnight stay
in Hickory, and it comes the
next morning from Hickoryia to
Chama, then you have to get on
another bus from Chama to
Espanola from Espanola, you have
to get another one to go.
to the Capitol building.
Is this the regional transit uh
that we're talking about, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, Mr. Chairman
Representative, that's exactly
the one we're talking about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
because, uh, Mr. Chairman, my uh
car broke down during my
campaign and uh I was gonna
write this from Shiprock to
Farmington, which Navajo Transit
has a, a free bus ride and I
was, I was looking up how to get
to the state Capitol building,
um, and I was fortunate enough
to, to get a vehicle, but
I, I, I want to acknowledge this
route that, that you could ride
a bus from Shiprock to the state
capitol, but you have to stay
overnight in Hickory.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman Representative, and you
know, I have gone to Facebook
Live to show people in Ri Riba
County how easy it is to get the
blue bus to the Capitol. So you
were on the right track.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman, so
if we get stranded up in
Farmington, do we come see you
Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I, I
don't have any questions about
the bill, but I was just a
little distracted by your
signature. So I took a picture
and like looked up what your
signature means. It says that
you love to claim your space and
you live, you love living
outside of the box.
That seems appropriate.
I think it's, it's right on
target. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Lunch from, would you like to
restate your motion, please
thank you Mr. Chairman, I move
for Du pass.
Second we have motion and uh to
do pass from represent Lustrom
is seconded by Representative
Borego roll call, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative forgo.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Dow? Yes.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lungstrom.
Representative Romero.
your lot.
Yes, de la Cruz.
Yes, 10 to 0 to pass. Senator,
you have a due pass on SB 123 or
123, I'm not sure. Mr. Chapman,
I'll take 123. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, and best of luck to
all of you in the 9 days we have
left, we got this.
