My
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Altero with today's invocation
Representative Vincent.
Would you pray with me?
Dear Heavenly Father,
We come before you today.
With gratitude.
For the opportunity to serve the
people of New Mexico. We ask for
your wisdom and your guidance.
As we make the decision.
Lord, grant us the discernment.
To lead with justice.
Humility.
To listen with open hearts.
And strength
To act with integrity.
We lift up those who dedicate
their lives to service of
others.
Our veterans and first
responders.
Bless the brave men and women
who have defended our nation and
preserved our freedoms.
May they find peace, healing.
And honor for the sacrifices
that they've made.
Watch over our police officers,
firefighters, paramedics.
In all the emergency personnel
who stand on the front lines to
protect and save lives.
Grant them safety, courage.
And resilience.
As they fulfill their calling.
Lord, we ask for your blessing
upon the people of our great
state, our children, our elders,
those in need, and those who
work tirelessly to build a
better future. May we govern
with compassion, unity, and an
unwavering commitment to
justice.
And peace
We ask all these things to your
son's holy name. Amen.
The lady from earlier said of
Thompson with the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentleman from Grant
Hidalgo and Catherine represent
the Razas with the pledge of the
New Mexico fight.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning members.
Happy
Fat Tuesday.
Whatever that means, well,
generator from McKinley is ready
to party.
Generated from Otero and Donana
Representative Silva.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, a point of
personal privilege.
Um, speaker members of the house
today is my daughter's 17th
birthday, um, Eva Guadalupe is,
uh, it's her name, she's a
junior at Centennial High School
in Las Cruces. She's a track and
cross country star, um, and, uh,
I'm really missing her because
I'm missing her birthday today,
so, um, I hope that you all can
wish her and I brought a picture
of her to the house.
Um, which are all so happy 17th
birthday. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
All right, you're gonna have to
help me out. Uh, her name's Eva.
Happy birthday
happy birthday too.
Happy birthday, dear Eva
happy birthday
to you.
Thank you Speaker.
If you want to embarrass her,
you could put baby pictures up
on the screen.
I might, I might.
I might do that for my kid's
birthday one of these days.
The lady from Santa Fe with uh
special announcement and special
guests. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we
have some state champs in the
house today.
Mr. Speaker, we're so glad to
host the Saint Michael's High
School Horsemen football team
that won the state class 3A
state championship.
Uh, and Mr. Speaker, this is uh
an incredible team because that
was not only, that was not the
first time they had won the
state championship. They are a
two time back to back winning
team, um, having won the state
championship in 2023 and they
had a perfect 2024 season, um,
they finished with 13 wins, 0
losses, the first back to back
state champions in Saint
Michael's high school history,
um, and the team was guided by.
the leadership of head coach
Joey Fernandez, who's with us on
the rostrum, please stand.
Coach.
And they have a devoted group of
assistant coaches, support
staff, parents, family, fans,
um, completing the season
undefeated was an incredible
feat, but winning these back to
back state championships speaks
to the hard work of these young
men, uh, all these student
athletes, the coaches, all of
the staff, um, and Mr. Speaker,
I'd like to introduce the other
guests on the rostrum. We have
Tom Manning, assistant coach.
Mhm
Kevin Hawk, assistant coach.
Jerry Archuleta, assistant
coach.
Don Gorman, assistant coach.
And I want to uh introduce our
team captains Reed, please stand
when I call your name and we'll
congratulate you all together.
Read Bass.
Paul Sandoval.
Son Annan, Pete Johnson, Joel
Griego, and Joseph Sanchez.
These are our seniors and our
team captains. Congratulations.
Welcome to the state champs.
And Mr. Speaker, I want to
introduce all of the coaches and
athlete names and then we'll do
applause at the end for all of
the athletes and then Mr.
Speaker, um, there's also
parents and fans, family in the
gallery, um, so let me read
this, this list of names because
I think this is such an
incredible accomplishment. I
just want to go through so other
assistant coaches are Joey
Butler, Trey Spoonhauer, George
Dominguez, John Martinez, Chris
Meyer, Don Gorman, Phil Civaca.
Jeff Jeff Nicholas Henry Lozada,
Valerie Michos brother Mariano
Lopez is uh the Lassalian
brother, Charlotte Herman,
photographer, and then we have
our athletes. So if you're here,
you can go ahead and stand up.
Ray Griego Camo stealth, Alex
Duran, Nick Angeli Saiani Rios
Guevara.
Carson Patton, Elijah Gutierrez,
Brandon Meyer, Aidenidio, Jason
Bowen, Roman Roman Barrera.
Braden Hollis, Gile Wood.
Esteban Gonzalez, CJ Valdez,
Kylie Archuleta Isaiah
Dominguez Angel Montoya, Jay
Gorman, Ricky Griego, Leanne
Lyette, Noah Sanchez, Dylan
Garcia, Mario Maturin, Preston
Civaca, Melisandro Royal,
Zachariah Salazar, Devin Ree
Sommer, Griffin Angeli Zion
Lucero, Don Gorman, Jedrick
Lewandowski.
Chris Carrillo, Michael Angel,
Jack Trujillo, Victor Carra,
Tristan Jameson, Isaac Barrago,
uh, all of our athletes who
stand, let's give them a big
warm welcome.
Welcome to the house Saint
Michael's Horseman.
Hey champs.
Back to back.
Our whole Santa Fe community is
very proud of you and Mr.
Speaker, there are parents and
family in the gallery, if you
wouldn't mind introducing them.
Thank you, athletes.
and other friends of these
incredible young man and woman,
uh, we'd like to have you rise
and be recognized for all of
your support of these young
athletes and scholars. Welcome
to the house. Saint Michael's.
Forcemen
Are there any other Saint
Michael's grads that might be up
here on the rostrum, gentle
lady.
00, look at that, our, our chief
clerk or deputy clerk and Joseph
Martinez in my office all Saint
Michael's.
Grads what class, Robin?
Class of 1981 for Robin.
That
1985 from Adam Clerk. So now we
know who's older.
Oh.
And Joseph Martinez in my
office, class of 1981.
Mr. Speaker, I, I imagine that
many of the sergeants are also,
uh, Saint Michael's grads and
many of the staff as well. We're
so very proud of you all. I have
certificates that I'll be giving
to your coaches and um thank you
to the parents and family to get
uh a team to the state
championship, takes a lot of
work from the family side too,
so we appreciate all of you.
Thank you for being here today.
Thank you gentle lady, and
there's also Ryan Hunt with the
Horseman.
Welcome to the house.
I think Ryan's the one who
scored the game winning
touchdown.
All right, well, happy to have
you guys here and
congratulations on your
achievement, July, uh, gentleman
from Lincoln on 30% of Vincent.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and I
just wanted to apologize to the
football team because I was
asked to do some trash talking
on a video today about the
Senate basketball game that
we're fixing to play the Senate,
and I noticed that you guys were
up there in the gallery and
everything that I said was not
really that true. I was
just trying to, uh, intimidate
him a little bit because we want
to keep them trophies in the
house. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
is good. Good job, gentlemen.
I am curious who made you do
that video though?
Nobody really made me do it. I
kind of wanted to do it.
Just wanna make sure I'm uh I'm
prepared for all the complaints
I'll get tomorrow from the
Senate after they lose um on
Thursday, gentle lady from Ria
Riba Sandoval and those other
beautiful counties. Speaker, I
have to rise today to
congratulate all these boys
that's, it's really quite an
achievement. My son played for
Saint Mike's. He loved football.
He loved it. He went on to play
for the Lobos, and he was
telling me that kind of the
lobos team they were.
you know, sitting around talking
one day and they're saying
talking about college football,
and they all said, really high
school football was kind of the
pinnacle. It was the most fun.
They had the most fun in high
school football, so I hope you
all have enjoyed this and, and
we are so proud of you and so
happy for all of you. It's quite
an achievement and I also have
to give a shout out to uh um
coach Kevin Hawk because he's uh
from Espanola and he's been
coach for many.
years and known throughout the
valley. In fact, one of the um
sergeant of arms said, how do I
know that guy? I said, do you
follow high school sports? He
says, oh yeah, I said that's how
you know him, that's Kevin Hack.
He's been a coach for years, so
welcome to the house. Thank all
of you. Great job, and I hope
that you'll go on to do even
more things in the future.
Fantastic.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Gentle lady from Donana Socorro,
Sierras representative now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I
just have to stand up and just
point out that one of our former
members step-grandson is here.
That is number 77 Chris Carrios
is the grandson of, of our
former chair of commerce, Debbie
Rodella. So we're super excited
to have you here today. Thank
you.
Welcome to the house.
gentle lady from Vernon Leo
Representative Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
just wanted to congratulate all
these young men, our future
leaders of America, um, so I
attended McCurdy High School,
and we were rivals to the
Horseman and I just thought I'd
mention that that was a few
years ago, but we were AA, I
think you guys are still AA. I'm
not sure, and I also wanted to
recognize the young young man
that I heard Borego so somewhere
there you are. Thank you guys
for being here today.
and congratulations.
Congratulations, the AAA.
Saint Mike's Horseman.
Any other notes of
congratulations for the
Horseman.
All right. Well, uh, folks,
you'll get these amazing
certificates, uh, courtesy of
our esteemed majority leader,
uh, once again I wanna add my
congratulations to you, uh, keep
up the good work to the coaches.
Thank you for working with these
young people, uh, the work that
you do is tremendously
important, um, I would argue
it's one of the most important
jobs because
Uh, these are the young people
that, uh, voluntarily seek out
the support and uh for them to
have those role models and to
have those, um.
Uh, you know,
Proud and hardworking, um.
Adult figures in their life is
it makes a whole difference. So
thank you for what you do. Um, I
know it's hard. I know the pay
is probably not nearly what it
should be, but we truly, truly
appreciate the work that you
guys do. Thank you so much.
Welcome to this house.
You know the announcements
before I go to committee
reports.
Alright, gentle lady from Santa
Fe, Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports. It is so ordered.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 437 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendation that
it do not pass, but that health
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 437 do pass and it's
referred to the taxation revenue
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of an unfavorable committee
report for OB 437 by a favorable
committee report for House
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 437. All those in favor and
if I.
say I.
I was supposed,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
human services committed to him
has been referred House Bill 465
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house with 465 all those in
favor signified by saying aye.
I suppose.
The ISA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 503
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption. We're an adoption of
report for Asville 503. All
those in favor of C5 but say I.
I supposed me
The IAA committee reported out.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to whom has
been referred House Bill 167 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption adoption of favorable
for 167. All those in favor, and
if I would say no.
I was supposed
Yes, I reported out.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and finance committee to who has
been referred House Bill 209 has
had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption for 209. All those in
favor of 5 by 9.
I was supposed
Yeah, I have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 62 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable report
for House Bill 62 as amended.
All those in favor of the public
say aye.
suppose
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 217 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair, Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
favorable report for House Bill
217. All those in favor of of
say a.
I suppose the I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 243 has had it under
consideration report, same with
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of a favorable 243. All those in
favor say aye.
All the supposed nay the Saba
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee's
substitute for House Bill 296
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 296 Du pass respectly
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair, uh, Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We adoption favorable committee
report for House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 296,
but a favorable committee report
on how you.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 296.
All those in favor of signify by
saying I.
I suppose name,
the IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 323 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee reports 323
of those in favor of public
saying a.
I suppose nay.
The ISR that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
him has been referred Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bills 21 and 22 has
had it under consideration
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee respectfully
submitted Cristina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bills 21 and 22. All those in
favor C59.
I was supposed.
Yeah, it's have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, energy environment
and Natural Resources Committee
to has been referred Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 23 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
All those in favor of the public
in a.
I suppose Nate.
The eyes habit committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment and natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen's chair.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate.
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate conservation.
I'm gonna try that again. I, I
don't know the Senate acronyms,
guys. Cut me some slack.
We are on adoption of Fabrook
committee report for Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33.
All those in favor of 25 but say
a.
I suppose.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling in
a grossing committee team has
been referred House Memorial 23,
has had it under consideration
in reports that same has been
duly enrolled in a gross
preparatory to designing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Mariana
Anaya chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption. I'll a committee
report and House Memorial 23.
All those in favor 759.
I was oppose the IAA committee
report adopted.
The direct reflected the duly
enrolled in grossed copies of
House Memorial 23 were signed by
the officers of the House in
open session.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed the Senate Bill 201 as
amended. Senate Bill 299 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 57, Senate
Bill 73, Senate Bill 142 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 113 as
amended.
Senate Bill 417 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson, a chief clerk.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Bill 201 as amended,
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
for the legislative Finance
Committee, an act relating to
public school finance, changing
the use of the public education
reform Fund to allow funding for
a reform projects included in
accountability and evaluation
plans approved by the Department
of Finance and Administration.
Requiring the Department of
Finance and Administration to
consult with the legislative
finance Committee and the
legislative Education Study
Committee prior to approving
instructions for accountability
and evaluation plans. Senate
Bill 201 as amended.
Send a bill 201 as amended have
been red to by title is referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 299 as amended,
introduced by Senator Tobiasson
and others.
An act relating to the
legislature requiring the
Secretary of State to provide
notice of a legislative vacancy
to the county commissioners of
all counties in the district of
the vacant legislative office.
Senate Bill 299 as amended. 299
as amended have been twice by
title is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 57 introduced by
Senator Wirth and others, and
act relating to public records,
amending the inspection of
Public Records Act to accept
from disclosure any record
containing personal identifying
information or sensitive
information related to the
practice of a medical provider
who performs medical services
related to abortion. Senate Bill
57.
And about 57 have been read
twice by title is order is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 73 introduced by
Senator Cedillo Lopez, an act
relating to the operation of
bicycles.
Requiring a person riding a
bicycle and approaching a stop
sign or a yield sign to stop
when required for safety,
amending sections of chapter 66
NMSA 1978 Senate Bill 73.
Senate Bill 73 haven't been
written to us by title is
referred to the House
Transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee.
Senate Bill 142 introduced by
Senator Senator Munoz and others
and act relating to the grid
modernization road map and grant
program requiring the energy,
minerals, and natural resources
department in consultation with
the public regulation commission
to develop a roadmap for grid
modernization.
Adding school districts and
charter schools as eligible
locations for proposed projects
amending the definition of grid
modernization, making
appropriations. Senate Bill 142.
Senate Bill 142 have been read
to us by title is referred to
the House Energy, Environment
and Natural Resources Committee,
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 113 as amended,
introduced by Senator Campos for
the legislative finance
Committee and actually relating
to professional licensure
extending sunset dates of
certain boards and commissions,
Senate Bill 113 as amended.
Senate Bill 113 as amended have
been read to us by title is
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 417 introduced by
Senator Stewart, an act relating
to adoption, amending and
enacting sections of the
adoption Act and the New Mexico
Uniform Heritage Act to provide
for.
Confirm confirmatory adoptions.
Senate Bill 417.
Senate Bill 417 have been read
to us by tilers referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Memorial 50 introduced by
Representative Ferrari, a
memorial requesting the
Department of Transportation to
establish a rest stop on United
States Highway 380 at the
entrance to the Trinity site
near Bingham, New Mexico.
House Memorial 50.
Has more of 50 have been read to
us by title is referred to the
House Transportation Public
Works and capital Improvements
Committee.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Remembers we're gonna do some
3rd reading at this time, uh,
but before I go to 3rd reading
announcements, you know from
Berlinostas de ladios. Estema
speaker, uh, we're going to do a
uh condolences.
Uh, certificate in the presence
of the family of our late um
diseaseased colleague uh
Representative Eli Alcon.
Unfortunately, as the speaker,
uh, we had to postpone that.
There was a blizzard that hit
Milan uh.
Uh, last night and early this
morning and uh the wife of uh
our comrade was unable to make
it up.
And uh aside from that, she's a
Romeo Rosa when it comes to
driving in the snow. I still
loudspeaker. So I know that a
lot of our members uh have, were
kind of organizing their
thoughts and preparing little uh
statements, uh, but we'll be
able to do that as the speaker.
We're shooting for the 18th or
20th, and we should have a
definite date by uh late today.
speaker representative for
helping organize and and we we
look forward to having the
family here for that
celebration, um, I do want to
remind folks that uh tomorrow
for Ash Wednesday ashes will be
distributed starting at 8 a.m.
in the Senate Finance Committee
room for Ash Wednesday, Ash
ashes will be distributed
starting at 8 o'clock in Senate
Finance Committee meeting room.
Any other announcements before I
go to 3rd reading.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. It is so
ordered.
Is a gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Valencia.
Cibola McKinley, San Juan.
And Sokoro.
Almost ready on item number 44.
Yes, Speaker, would you please
get me to that point that the
record reflect that all action
is served for placing House Bill
5 as amended on final passage
has been taken.
And it is not subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution wait
for the right bill to appear on
the board, generally explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 5 Office of the Child
Advocate is a bill that's gonna
provide solutions for our
children here in New Mexico who
are in state custody. If I could
for a moment, if you all could
think back to your childhood and
you think of that one person who
was always in your corner,
whether it was your mom, your
dad, your grandma, your grandpa,
and aunt and uncle, you had
someone in your corner
advocating for you.
Unfortunately, far too many
children who are in state
custody do not have someone
advocating for them and that's
exactly what House Bill 5 Office
of the Child Advocate will do.
We are well aware that children
are harmed and dying in CYFD
custody, and this problem has
been around for decades.
But who is listening to them?
Who is helping?
These children need an advocate.
HB 5 would create an independent
office of the child advocate to
improve accountability when the
government takes legal or
physical custody of children and
promote the safety of young
people who are in the state's
care and with that I stand for
question speaker.
There is the gentle lady from
Katherine Sierrasoro
Valenciaresentative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a
kind gentle lady yield.
I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I cannot
tell you how much I appreciate
this bill, first of all, we've
been trying to do this for some
time now, and, uh, you know, it
takes a village, uh, to, to hold
people, give people an avenue,
uh, when there is something
that's wrong. So I uh I
appreciate you bringing this
bill. Um, I did sign on to this
bill because I believe that uh
it's been needed for so many
years, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
um, but I did see a little piece
in the, uh, bill.
that I had a little bit of an
issue with and so with that, Mr.
Speaker, I have an amendment.
Will you please bring the
amendment to the.
gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's
231-658.1. Give us some time to
get this passed out and post it
online and then we'll come back
to you to to explain the
amendment.
Right Jale, it looks like the
amendment has been passed out
and it is posted online,
generally they explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, with this amendment
on page 5, line 16 after C
strike the remainder of the
line.
Strike line 17 through 21 and
strike line 22 through the
period and ultimately, Mr.
Speaker, what this amendment
does is it it gives the
Committee that has been selected
to make these, um, uh, send
these names to the governor, the
ability to do that and not have
the governor, whoever that is at
the time, say, I don't want any
of these, send me more.
gentle lady is a friendly
amendment.
Speaker, this is a friendly
amendment, and I would like to
thank the gentle lady from
Catherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia for talking about this
amendment with me prior to
bringing it to the floor. I
appreciate your willingness to
help improve House Bill 5.
Alright, we have a friendly
amendment. Is there objection to
adopting the amendment?
See none you have an amended
bill. Back to you, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady.
There is further debate
generated from Berlio and
Torrens Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from an awesome
county because I can't get to my
paperwork, please yield your
time.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Bernallio in Torrance. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Speaker Delay, so.
This bill is a huge deal and I
hope it goes through all the
way.
Mr. Speer young lady because
sometimes CYFD bills get stopped
for some reason I can't figure
out why and Mr. Speaker Dela,
this is something I've been
fighting for and CYD issues for
numerous years and this has been
one of the ones that's been
brought forward numerous times
and I'm happy to see it moving
through, but Mr. Speaker and
John lady, I do have a question,
um, on page 3.
Line 7, the head of the office
state child advocate shall be
appointed for the term of 6
years, and that is my
understanding appointed by just
the governor, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Speaker and gentle lady from
Berna Leon Torrance. I'd first
like to introduce my experts
sitting on the floor with me,
Miss Angelina Samant. She's the
deputy counsel for Impact
litigation and the director for
civil rights with the New Mexico
Department of Justice.
And to your question, uh,
speaker and gentle lady, it will
be the committee.
Who will appoint
OK, Mr. Speaker gentle lady, and
then further down when it says
on page 3, the state child
advocate, um, sorry, they're,
they're gonna be overseen, but
they can be removed from malfeas
the governor. OK, that's where I
was seeing it on page 3 line 18,
the governor can remove this
person.
How does that process, what does
that look like if the governor
or any governor decided I don't
like this particular person,
what is the process? Is it like
a recall process? Uh, can you
walk me through how that would
happen, Mr. Speaker and Jody.
make her jump to a lady from
Berna Leon Torrance. Our
understanding is that this will
follow in line with other
appointed positions and follow
suit to that process for
removal.
OK, Mr. Speaker, so there is a
process that is really in place,
Mr. Speakerdale, I'm just trying
to make sure that any governor,
Republican or Democrat, could
not just step up and say I don't
like this person, we're going to
remove them. There's a process
and they can appeal. Is that
correct, Mr. Speakergen?
Speaker gentle lady, yes, that's
correct.
OK
Mr. Speaker De Lady, how many
other states already have
something similar to this, do
you know?
Speaker, gentle lady, there are
40 other states that already
have this.
Mr. Speaker and John Ley,
that's, that's great to know.
Uh, Mr. Speer and gentle lady,
I, I also appreciate uh the
amendment that you just accepted
as a friendly amendment.
And I think
I'm hoping that this will
actually do make a difference
because Mr. Speaker, the lady of
having dealt with CYFD issues
and, and before that being
involved with an advocacy group
that actually dealt with going
to the courts. It's really hard
to hear, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the abuse situations I've
I've talked about on the floor
and they're horrific and
there're things that stick with
you forever.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I would hope that moving
forward, um.
We can make sure that we have
some sort of oversight.
For the kids because again for
years and years and years I've
just read these things and I
talked to someone who recently
was involved in CYFD who is left
who said they still have
nightmares.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
you're dealing with things that
are very, very emotional and
should be taken very seriously,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
I'm just gonna say, and I do
support your bill, I'm just
gonna say one thing.
Uh, there is a gap and hopefully
that gap will be closed at some
point where CFD sometimes does a
background check, sometimes
doesn't, and I would like at
some point for a Democrat to
hopefully pick up the bill so it
can get passed and I'm not gonna
cry because this just breaks my
heart because I wanna make sure
that that process right before
the child goes back to the
parent or the kin or any
relative that we just do a
simple check to make sure
they're not on a pedophile list
and.
They have not abused other
children because I think giving
children back to sex offenders
and child abusers is one of the
most inhumane things I have
learned about since being up
here and unfortunately that bill
got tabled, so I'm hoping that
somebody else will pick that up,
we're not talking about other
bills, stick to the bill,
please. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. I'm just sorry. I
know a lot of people get to talk
about other things, but thank
you, Mr. Speer. I'm, I'm, I'm
done. I'm done.
I was making a point.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, I
support it, but I hope that all
the other gaps that we know
about that are not being filled,
those get picked up.
And that we can finally make
this a system where children are
not being further abused, so
thank you Mr. Speaker, young
lady.
Signal for the debate generally
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
I move this body to please
support this House Bill 5 as
amended. You heard earlier in my
introduction that most of us
have had advocates growing up
and this bill will provide an
advocate for children who are in
states custody that do not have
that advocate.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
now move that House Bill 5 as
amended do pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 5 is twice amended. The
vote is now open.
What about close? The vote is
now closed by a vote of 64 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 5 is twice
amended as duly passed his
house.
Gen lady from Bernard Leo, no,
no, nope, nope, nope, nope,
nope. It, it is not, it is not
her first bill. This is her 2nd
bill. Um, and I apologize for
being jumpy, but um, we
generally don't clap during
their greeting, um, unless it's
first bill which we all just
kinda go with, um, so don't mean
to be jumpy, but it's her 2nd
bill, so no more clapping, um,
unless she wants to sing another
song which I'm sure she probably
doesn't, um, gentle lady, uh,
gentle lady from Berlio or
Dixon, are you ready on item
number?
52.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point replacing
House Bill 203 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is not subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution the
general to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This
ensures that CYFD will properly
retain
information.
And I'll stand for questions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 203 as amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 203 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Well, it's about to close.
Well it's not closed by what a
66 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 203 as
amended has duly passed this
house.
Ja leader from Berlio, are you
doing item number 45 on the 3rd
reading calendar.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, House Bill 205?
Yes. Let the record reflect that
election has served for place in
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 205 on
final passage has been taken and
it is not subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is
an LFC endorsed package of
reforms for CYFD and we will
stand for questions.
So, you know, debate, generally
close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 205 do
now pass. We are a final passage
of House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 205.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 66 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committe substitute for House
Bill 205.
Kazulli passed his house.
And apologies for reading um
some of those item numbers
incorrectly. The bills were
right.
The numbers I was a little off.
My bad.
Is a gentle lady from Donana and
Otero or of Silva ready an item
number 17.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, will you
get me to that point that action
placing House Bill 143 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution that gene lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you also, Mr. Speaker, can
I get my witness?
Your witness is walking up right
now.
Thank you. And would you kindly
introduce your witness while
you're at it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
like, do they magically appear?
They do. OK. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, my expert witness
today is Lindsay Bachmann from
the Secretary of State's office
and house Bill 143, uh, the
lobbyist activity reports Act
requires lobbyists to file
reports that disclose what bills
they're lobbying for or against,
and who their employers are.
Uh, that's it. It's a pretty
simple bill and I've been an
advocate for policies that
improve the lives of low and
middle income families since I
was in my twenties and I've been
in rooms filled with lobbyists
here and in Washington DC.
This is the first time that I'm
experiencing that from a dais.
And lobbyists play an important
role in the legislative process.
Some bring incredible issue
knowledge, relationships, and
ideas into the space, and many
of them also bring incredible
amounts of money with them.
Organized the knowledge,
organized relationships,
organized ideas and organized
money.
Those things combined can can
concentrate an enormous amount
of power for any person or
group.
That in and of itself isn't a
bad thing, but if kept in the
dark, it can, it can become
problematic and when I'm
proposing put some sunshine and
guard rails, as many of my
colleagues here have said on
positions and employers of
lobbyists to maintain
transparency for us and our
folks back home.
Again, this bill would require
lobbyists to file an activity
report once per session.
Within 48 hours of the
commencement of lobbying
activity as long as they don't
change their position.
On that legislation. That's all
they have to do.
If they change their position,
they have to file another report
indicating that.
Finally, if they haven't lobbied
at all,
But do begin lobbying activity
after the session and before the
end of the time the governor has
to sign a bill into law, they
will be required to file a
supplemental report.
So that
There's a clear picture that
includes efforts to influence
whether a bill gets signed.
The Secretary of State's office,
which supports this legislation
and is here with me today with
promulgate specific rules to
implement this change. The bill
requires that lobbyists reports
be posted on the legislature's
website, so the other change
that this would offer is that on
the end of Leis website,
there'll be a link um attached
to that website. So a person,
one of us researching a bill or
past bills could find that
report um that shows which
lobbyists are working for or
against um.
um, a bill alongside the text of
a bill, the fiscal impact report
and other documents that help us
make decisions on the votes that
we take.
I believe this is a tool every
one of us in this chamber would
find useful and so when New
Mexicans we're here to serve,
uh, and with that I stand for
questions. There is the
gentleman from Montero,
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind, gentle lady and
my neighbor from Otero and uh
Donnie Anna, please yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So from what I heard from
your introduction, this bill
would require lobbyists to
Put on the website of the New
Mexico legislature, what their
stances on a bill, is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
this would require is a lobbyist
to file an activity report and
in their employer to file an
activity report on the
legislation that they're working
for against um or monitoring,
uh, in a legislative session,
um, so they wouldn't have to put
it on.
They're not developing the site
or putting it on the NMA site
themselves. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So in that report
that they would file, they have
to have a specific stance, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no. So
if they're monitoring, if
they're like, there's a lot of
bills coming through and we're
not sure our position they can
just say they're monitoring and
then update as that position uh
changes or if they decide that
doesn't need to be monitored,
they can remove that issue.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I'm trying to
figure out then.
What, at what time frame would
they get to put a position
together. So for example, if
you're position has changed just
within the last 20 minutes
before your bill is being heard
on the floor or in a committee.
If you go to that committee and
you advocate for the bill, even
though your report says that
you're just monitoring, would
that require any changes to that
actual document before they make
that testimony in the committee?
That's a great question.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
so they'd have 48 hours to
update their, um, their reports
and so in the House Judiciary
Committee and I was really
grateful for their feedback, um,
they, um, aligned their
reporting um with the uh expense
reports, so they have 48 hours
to, to, um, also submit expense
reports and so to line it up,
they offered, why not also give
lobbyists 48 hours.
Um, so really what we want to do
is have a full picture of the
lifespan of a bill, uh, not
necessarily to um monitor or
surveil the activity of a
lobbyist, but rather what's the
life span of this bill? And can
we tell a story of what happened
here, um, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, I, I guess I
kind of understand the purpose
now. So can you tell me, Mr.
Speaker, General Liddy, I know
some lobbyists.
Maybe not currently, but in
previous sessions, I've seen
lobbyists in, in one committee.
For one client, support the
bill.
And then for another client
opposed the bill and the same
public comment period which I've
seen, I think there was a news
article about it last year. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
would that work? Would they have
to file a report that says they
are monitoring it or what if,
cause what if two clients have
two different opinions and
they're kind of stuck.
Mr. Speaker, excuse me, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
That is completely
Really the so if the lobbyist
has a client who uh wants them
to lobby for
One piece of legislation and
that same lobbyist has a
different client that wants them
to lobby against that same piece
of legislation.
This law does not, um,
Mandate morality.
For a lobbyist, they can do that
if they wish. They do have to
name the positions that they
take, um, so whether they're for
or against, and name their
employers, um, they don't
necessarily have the report's
not gonna say this employer,
this position, but it is gonna
name here's who I work for.
Here's who is employing me and
share the positions that I'm
taking on these pieces of
legislation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, so.
OK, so
The way I see it currently.
When you're in a committee
hearing and you're listening to
testimony on a bill, is it not
my understanding that a lobbyist
would have to.
Say which client they are on
behalf of and why they're
opposed to a bill already.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, in
some cases, many lobbyists do
name their clients, um, however,
that is not necessarily uh
searchable.
And so what this bill is about
again, it's not to surveil the
actions of a lobbyist, um, and
then to make judgments on that.
This is simply to get more
information to our constituents
and ensure that they are an
informed electorate on the bills
that may impact them and the
people who help shape that
legislation um throughout the
life span of about 30, 60 day or
special session. Thank you, um,
Madam Speaker and
common.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, so.
I understand the reason behind
it, but Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, is it not true then that
our constituents have exactly
the same opportunity that any
lobbyist has to attend a
committee meeting via Zoom or in
person.
Um, Mr. Speak, uh, Madam Speaker
gentlemen, they do, I don't
understand how that relates to
Um, the work of a lobbyist
during the session, um.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, so the what we're
trying to say from what I heard
before was we're trying to get
our
Our constituents more
information about how bills are
made.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
is my understanding currently
that we have public meetings
that are subject to the Public
Meetings Act.
And so, Mr. Speaker or Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Our constituents have the same
amount of ability currently to
see how this legislation
progresses, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, Madam Speaker.
Sorry, my voice is gonna try and
keep up with me, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I would argue
that our constituents don't have
that same opportunity, um,
registered lobbyists are paid to
be here, um, day in and day out,
and they're paid by multiple
interests and employers, um,
whereas our constituents have
kids to take to school. They
have work to go to, uh, they
have doctor's appointments and
much of the work that happens in
this round.
house happens 9 to 5, um, or in
some cases while our
constituents are asleep and so
making sure that they can go
back even to prior sessions and
say what happened with that bill
a year ago because it's coming
up again.
I think gives a really good
picture and again, um, has more
sunshine on um the history and
work. Thank you, um, that
happens here at the Roundhouse,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So I, I agree with
you on the point that our
constituents, at least in my
district, it is hard to get to
the capital and
And come here in person, take
off work, etc. But Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, it is my
belief.
That my constituents, they
elected me.
To be that person in the room in
Santa Fe to support or not
support that bill. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, my
question is, is this, since this
is targeting only lobbyists,
would this then extend as well
to advocates.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
to the first part, yes, we have
been elected to represent our
constituents and that's why I'm
bringing this bill to the floor
is this sort of bill would help
me do my job better for my
constituents if I knew who
exactly was working um on a bill
in opposition or in support of
and so that would make my job as
a legislator much more effective
for folks back home.
As you know, who live hours and
hours away from the roundhouse
and can't make it up. So I
appreciate that question, um,
into the second point, um, Mr.
Speaker, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, remind me your second
point again, sorry.
Madam Speaker, generally my
question was, does this extend
to lobbyists.
I'm sorry, not lobbyists, of
course, doesn't extend to
advocates because the way I see
it a lot of the time in this
legislative session, it's not
the lobbyists who are the ones
with the dark money who are
trying to pass and ram through
bills, which is my concern with
this entire legislative process,
a lot of the time. These
advocates who work for Dark
Money groups that are forced to
come here to Santa Fe and they
are paid to advocate for and
against bills and their entire
job is to be a community
organizer or some kind of dark.
money advocate, those
individuals, it's my
understanding they don't have to
report to the Secretary of State
on which bills they're
supporting or not. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, would
those individuals be forced as
advocates, quote unquote
advocates also to be filing
these reports alongside these
lobbyists.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so,
um, according to the Secretary
of State website, um, a lobbyist
that has to register um in the
state of New Mexico means any
individual who's compensated for
the specific purpose of
lobbying, um, so, uh, what you
described might include that,
um, 2 is designated by an
interest group or organization
to represent it on a substantial
or regular basis for the purpose
of lobbying.
So again, that might include
that and third in the course of
his or her employment is engaged
in lobbying on a substantial or
regular basis, um, so, uh, to
your point, um, that may or may
not be true depending on, on
those um definitions, uh, Madam
Speaker, uh, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. So I guess my, my
concern is that I see some
people who.
It's hard, it's hard to track
it, right? It's hard to track it
because they're not actually a
lobbyist that's registered, they
may be.
In some committees, not all the
committees, and certain bills,
they, they support some bills
they don't support and so I
guess the, the definition of
lobbyists is a little difficult
for me to, to pin down when it
comes to certain individuals who
do advocate for or against
bills. So from what I heard,
they have to have a substantial
or regular basis, so they have
to be here a lot and they have
to be paid for their work, but
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, how
do we ensure
That we know they're being paid
for their work cause a lot of
these people are paid by
entities that are not trackable.
They do not have government
government affairs offices, they
are an advocacy group, so if
their role as advocate and they
do a minority of their work is
here at the session. The rest of
it is out somewhere else doing
some other kind of work. How do
we pin that down to ensure that
those people as well are indeed
making these reports.
Um, madam, uh, Madam Speaker,
and gentlemen, so I think you
point out a very clear gap in
our lobbyist regulations in New
Mexico. We rank in the 40s in
terms of transparency and
holding lobbyists accountable in
the state of New Mexico. Does
this bill go all the way to
encompass all of those who might
substantially lobby, um, in New
Mexico whether they are.
defined in this as a Secretary
of State. No, I don't think it
does. And so I think you make a
point about strengthening our
lobbying laws here in New
Mexico, and I would certainly
agree with you, um, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, and I also
think like as a as a nonprofit
when I was a nonprofit director
in the early 2000s, I hired a
lobbyist, um, and you know I had
a 501c3 and we needed to lobby
on economic dignity issues. I
hired a lobbyist they
registered.
Um, here in the roundhouse and
they lobbied on issues, but they
did use this exact process, um,
so that they were um above board
in holding um and I wanted to
make sure that I was being
transparent as an executive
director and um ensuring that
resources that were being used
towards lobbying were in fact um
named such in our in our budget
line items, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and I, I share that
concern, but I also want to make
sure that there's parity when it
comes to nonprofits versus for
profits and so where in the
legislation can you just tell me
or maybe in the current
regulation.
We nonprofits would also be
disclosing.
Their lobbying activity
alongside for-profit entities.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
would welcome such a, a, a bill
that would include that, um,
because right now we are working
within the parameters of the
Secretary of State and what they
define as a lobbyist, um, and
again, this is a good next step
in strengthening our lobbyist
laws. We've, I, I know this body
has tried in the past to
strengthen and broaden its uh
lobbyist regulations.
And when we do bills that are
very broad and include very many
people they tend um to slow down
again.
For many reasons that are yet
unknown because we don't have a
law like this, um, and so
starting somewhere small,
starting like this is where we
can start to begin to strengthen
and deepen our lobbyist uh
regulation and activities, uh,
and making more transparency in
our processes, um, this is where
I thought was a really good
place to start, um, and so, um,
again, you point out a really um
big gap in our transparency laws
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so yeah, I
do have questions about that,
but it's, it's very interesting
to me that for years, some of
these
Supposed nonprofits, which I
don't believe they really are,
it's a tax status in my opinion,
but some of these individual
nonprofits they they do certain
work that I would think was
looking like lobbying, but
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, when
it comes to the actual
Report
I think I'm, I'm looking at page
2.
At the bottom, it says it shall
be filed at the time and in a
format as prescribed by rule by
the Secretary of State. So Madam
Speaker, General lady, why are
we giving the ability for the
Secretary of State to make rules
upon this because in my opinion,
it's a very political office.
The Secretary of State's office
and they're very partisan in
many ways.
I don't know about the current
one. I, I don't want to speak in
specific.
Instances, but I will say in
generalities, it's a very
partisan.
Office
So can you tell me how the rule
making will look currently, I
mean, cause I don't know how
many years are left in the
current Secretary of State's
term, but how will the rules
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen, so
the secretary of state's office
already has um rulemaking power
with the lobbyist through the
lobbyist regulation Act and so,
um, they already have the
ability to make rules, um, and,
and Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
you're also referring to um
previously amended, um, bill,
and so we took out um that
language and we
added, um, if you look on the
yellow paper here.
Yes, you can look at the
amendments in context but also
um on page 3 lines 1 and 2, we
struck that language that you
named and then in lieu of that,
we added within 48 hours of.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so I see in the bill it still
says in a format as prescribed
by rule by the Secretary of
State and so since they already
have that authority, why are we
saying that in the bill that
it's by rule by the Secretary of
State since they already have
that.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
it's compelling a specific ask
in rulemaking.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle ladies, so I'll go to my
next question here on your bill.
And
I believe it was.
The Attorney General's office, I
saw something in their analysis
and it said, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
The bill requires that lobbying
activity report includes the
disclosure of lobbyist activity
on the development of
legislation prior to its
introduction.
In a legislative session and
they said the bill is silent and
therefore ambiguous on whether
such disclosures required, if no
legislation is.
Is ultimately introduced, so
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, how
does this pertain to legislation
that has not been filed yet, but
you're, you have a position on
it potentially.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
this bill does is silent on that
matter because what we um debate
here are bills that have been
introduced, not bills that have
not been introduced, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so you're telling me that if I
was a lobbyist and I, I told
somebody we support this
legislation that's in, in the
pipeline and it would do this,
not specifically in number, but
specifically what that bill
would do, how would that be
needed to report in this because
if, if you have a position and
you're telling people to vote
for this bill, we don't have it
filed yet, but we will. How does
that work, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, again
this bill is silent on unfiled
legislation, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Madam Speaker, General Lee,
so as in silent, does that mean
no reporting required.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, so a
couple other questions here that
I had on the bill.
That I wrote down in really
scribbly letters that I'm trying
to read. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
It says the lobbying activity
report for each specific piece
of legislation shall be included
or linked. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, so if, if I was a
lobbyist and I had
Let's just say 10 clients and we
were tracking 100 pieces of
legislation.
Is there any kind of room for
error from a lobbyist's
perspective, like if I forgot
that tomorrow the health
committee or the consumer Public
Affairs Committee is going to
hear this bill. We're going to
testify for it or against it,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, and
I forgot to file that report.
Is there any kind of an out for
someone who just said, OK, I
forgot, I apologize, didn't mean
to forget how do we deal with a
case like that, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, same as if they,
uh, filed an expense report, um,
that needed correcting or um uh
expense report that was late,
um, there's voluntary compliance
and um and then they'd have uh
time to correct and adjust as
needed.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen. OK,
thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. So the way I see it
currently, I believe each day
that I failed to file that
report.
It's a $50 fee. Is that my
understanding, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady? Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, that's correct.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle
ladies, so if I was a lobbyist
who
At the beginning of the session,
I had all these bills and I
forgot one bill that I, that I
supported and that I
That I went to a committee and
said I like this bill or I don't
like this bill. And at the end
of the session, or maybe 30 days
after the session, I forgot to
file my report. So in that case,
what I have $50 fees for 90 full
days until I filed that report,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and how would that work? Is
there any kind of forgiveness
program for a small nonprofit
that or a for-profit that is
lobbying for bills and trying to
get
Ground on this legislation. Is
there any kind of
Help for these poor lobbyists
who also come to Santa Fe and
have to buy a house and stuff
and or rent a house. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how does
that work for forgiveness in
some of these cases.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that's
already existing law in terms of
what happens if um there are
fines or um.
Mistakes that need to to be
corrected, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, but since
this is such a strenuous process
that we're now requiring for
every single bill there needs to
be a new report. If I just
missed one report because
before, right now we have
lobbying reports where, OK, I
went and paid for dinner here
for this this entity, and I
talked to these different
lobbyists or these different
Representative senators, that's
currently what's required. So
now we're also adding to that
another step for every single
piece of legislation that
someone supports or opposes, so
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, if
we're having the same amount of
rigor in enforcing this, it
would be my understanding that
probably the Secretary of
State's office would be ranking
in a bunch of dough because $50
a day really adds up when it
comes to 100 lobbyists or 200
lobbyists running around, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so how are
we going to
help, especially some of those
people who may have forgotten
one report, but they're tracking
100 pieces of legislation.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, if
there's a technical mistake, um,
you know, and I've been there as
a candidate, the Secretary of
State is more than willing to
work with folks, and I would
give my lobby lobbyists here
more credit on their ability to
follow paperwork and being able
to file um things in
inappropriate manners. Um, we've
got really highly skilled, uh,
groups of people that work in
the roundhouse, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Madam Speaker, lady,
we certainly do, but
Everyone is not perfect all the
time. And so me as a legislator,
for example, sometimes there's a
bill that comes to my committee
that it was the last on the
agenda and I haven't read it
yet. I have to read it in the
committee room during the
hearing on the on the bill, and
I have to ask questions about
that because I haven't read it
before because Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, even though we
appear to be perfect, we are not
perfect. So Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I guess I just kind
of find that to be a little
confusing and a little strenuous
when it comes to actual
reporting every single piece.
of legislation. So I, I do have
some concerns about that and I
won't belabor that point, but I
will certainly listen to the
debate and what other people are
saying in this debate, but I do,
I do want to caution that if
we're going to make this a
really strenuous process, there
needs to be some kind of.
Of buffer for error because I
know that not everybody is
perfect all the time and also
with these included.
Requirements that could, that
could really get a little dicey.
Also with the nonprofit
entities, I think that that
needs to also be if we're going
to go doing this for for profits
mainly and any kind of lobbyists
mainly who are registered, I
believe, Madam Speaker, it
should be equal to every single
person, entity, and so I don't
necessarily agree with the new
strenuous process, but I do
think that if it is required, it
needs to be equal, so that's
pretty much all I had, but thank
you, Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Seneval
represented Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I.
Wasn't paying attention.
Um, as usual, will the kind lady
from um.
Dona, Anna, and.
Or terror yield.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, um.
We heard this bill in judiciary,
and I.
There was, there was some pretty
spirited debate on this, and I
don't wanna exactly cover
everything that we covered in in
judiciary.
But I did have some questions
that I'd like the body to think
about.
So I'm looking at the amendments
that were made in judiciary, can
you kind of, other than the real
long one at the end.
Can you kind of go over those?
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, so, uh, these
amendments, uh, again were made
in judiciary to clarify, um,
The language so that we're very
clear about who are we talking
about? And so, um, on number one
page 1 line 12 instead of um or
we put an end so that we're very
clear that, um, that we want the
legislation lobbied and the
position taken and so we
adjusted that, um, and then on
page 2, or excuse me, on page 1
lines 20 and 21. Again,
clarifying, um, when that should
happen. So again,
giving some more guidelines to
the Secretary of State, uh,
rather than leaving it open
ended for the Secretary of State
to uh promulgate all the rules
and um and guidelines on that.
Uh, and then again clarifying
and or or making sure who and
what we're including, uh, and
then finally, as, as you
mentioned, um,
tightening up the guidelines
and, and giving and giving
guidance to the Secretary of
State rather than um allowing
them to promulgate their own
rules, uh, Madam Speaker, and,
um, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind lady, and this the changes.
Um, that were made require both
the lobbyists and the lobbyist
employer to file these reports.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes, that's correct.
Thank you Madam Speaker and kind
lady, does this include say
nonprofits as the employer,
would they have to file the same
reports?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, if
they are, um, if they have a
registered lobbyist and they are
the employer, then yes, then the
as required by the Secretary of
State when they have an expense,
um, just the same as they would
when they have expense reports
or make expenses, uh, they would
coordinate that together, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind lady, would this include.
Uh, for instance, you bring in a
nonprofit to serve as an expert
witness on the bill.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
no, that would not, uh, that,
that is not lobbying.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
ladies, so that would not be
considered advocating for the
passage of a bill.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
according to the Secretary of
State's definitions, there are a
number of reasons that someone,
that one would come to the
roundhouse, um, and, um, there's
descriptions of what lobbying is
and then what all the other
things that would exclude you
from lobbyist activities that
are different activities.
And Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, that's also included
currently in the lobbyist
regulation Act and then they're
required to file a different
paperwork for that sort of
activity, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you kind lady, uh, thank
you, Madam Speaker and kind
lady, so if that uh.
Expert witnesses paid for a
lobbyist during the interim,
would they be required to file
reports?
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, the Secretary of State
informs me that um they'll have
to look into it but um that
their initial understanding is
that yes, that they would have
to.
Thank you Madam Speaker, um, and
kind lady and the all all these
reports are gonna be electronic,
correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, um,
and kind lady and what is gonna
happen if.
Last two weeks of the session
when everything is blending
together and.
We're not sleeping and what
happens if they don't file
within that 48 hours, Madam
Speaker, kind lady.
Or is there a fine involved in
this?
Um, Madam Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I believe I've, uh,
that was asked and answered.
I'm sorry, Madam Speaker, I was
not paying attention, uh, so I
didn't, I didn't catch the
question and answer.
Can you go over, Madam Speaker,
and kind lady the last.
Amendment
It, it, uh.
was a little bit wordy.
And it seems to um.
Pa make uh.
Never mind, I will redirect the
question.
Madam Speaker and kind lady, um.
Is is this gonna cause a kind of
a
Chaotic situation.
When
Um
A lobbyists.
Comes to me in the morning.
With a position on a bill.
We introduced an amendment in
the morning committee.
They changed their stance.
And then the bill is stripped.
In the afternoon
That's, that's 3 different.
Um, 3 different reports,
correct?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, no,
um, they would have 48 hours and
so they can.
Um, again,
Thank you.
Appreciate it. Um, so it'd be
within 48 hours of what was my
position, what was that
lobbyist's position initially
and then what was it, um, in the
conclusion. So again, this bill
isn't to be punitive for
lobbyists, um, it's not to
surveil, uh, lobbyists but
rather this is about what is the
life span of a bill.
And can I, as a constituent, can
I as a legislator understand all
the hands and influences, um,
that have shaped this
legislation.
So that's really the, the focus
of this bill. It's, it's not to,
um, punish or surveil or to even
make perfect, um, a lobbyist's
work, um, nowhere in the bill
does it ask for perfection. uh,
what we're asking for is
transparency, uh, Madam Speaker,
uh, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, that's good because
I have yet to see perfection in
this building.
Um, so, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, would that be 6 different
reports that are filed then.
3 from the lobbyists and 3 from
the employer.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
currently, um, and then I'll, I
wanna, um, phone a friend here
with my witness, but currently
an employer and a lobbyist have
to coordinate what gets
reported, um, depending on who
is engaging the activity. So if
the employer initiates an
expense, so right now is an
expense reports if an employer
initiates the expense, then it
is up to them to report it
because the lobbyist was not
involved in that.
expense. If the lobbyist
initiates the expense, and it's
up to the lobbyists to report
that, um, I would imagine that
something similar like this
would um would take shape so
that you're not getting double
reports.
And my witness, um, confirmed
that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, because then I'm, I'm kind
of confused because in
judiciary,
Um
There was an amendment to change
the word or to the word and.
To me that I would assume that
we're not requiring both the
lobbyists and the employer to
file the, the reports.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yeah,
before, um, the lobbyists would
have to do all the reporting and
so the initial language did not
take into account what happens
if the employer is engaging in
um in that lobbying activity
instead. And so that's why we
wanted to clarify that language,
um, so that we were very clear
that it's not just solely the
lobbyists doing the reporting,
but it's also the employer and
as stated in the
current lobbyist regulation Act,
it is up to the lobbyists and
the employer to uh get on the
same page, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
You, Madam Speaker, and kind
lady, so
If the employer never lobbies me
for anything.
Just the lobbyist is that
employer required to file a
report?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Can you show me where in the
proposed legislation.
That it separates that out
because I understood.
That if an employer employs a
lobbyist, they're both on the
hook for these reports.
And now I'm hearing that.
Unless I have direct contact
with the employer.
They're
No longer on the hook to file a
report.
Because I thought testimony in
committee was different.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
I
I don't quite understand the
questions. So if they're giving
testimony, um.
Then they are then required to,
um, file a report and say this
is the position we're taking.
It's not necessarily am I
interacting with a legislator as
a lobbyist. It is what is the
activity that I am engaging in
and again, there's a definition
in the lobbyist regulation Act
currently for lobbying.
Um, and so am I engaging in that
activity as defined currently by
the lobbyist regulation Act, and
if so, now this bill would
require that person, that
lobbyist or employer to then
submit activity reports, um,
depending on the activity
they're engaging in, so the
position they're taking, um,
and, um, and the, and then which
um legislation they're working
on, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, so.
I thought with the change from
the word or to end.
Um, it would kind of hold them
both responsible for the
reports.
Because
And would include both of them
in the activity. So what you're
telling me, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, is that.
I employ uh.
Joseph Smith is a lobbyist.
And Joseph Smith stands up in
committee.
Madam Chair
Kind lady and says on behalf of
Valen Martinez.
I stand in support of this bill.
Would I
I'm, I'm trying to understand.
The, the
I guess the mechanism.
I know the lobbyist is going to
have to file a report. When does
it kick in that the employer's
gonna.
Have to report something.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, at
the point that they engage in
lobbying activity themselves so
just like it currently stands,
um, the, when there's an expense
report.
Filed with a lobbyists and their
employer first of all, the
Secretary of State requires that
these two accounts be linked.
So a lobbyist and then their
employer will be linked so that
we're not seeing duplicative
events.
And I think that's what you're
getting at, um, gentlemen, is
that.
The Secretary of State does a
very good job of ensuring that
events and expenses aren't
duplicative between employer and
lobbyist already.
And so this is merely a, a
mirror of that, but for lobbying
activity rather than expenses,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady. So can you tell me what's
going to trigger the employer?
To have to file a report.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, it's
the engaging of lobbying
activity, um, and I can bring up
the definition of lobbying if,
if that would be helpful, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, kind lady, I, I
wouldn't want you to have to go
through all of that. I'm just
trying to understand, is it, is
it a phone call?
Just the fact that I hire a
lobbyist.
Does not um.
Require me to file a report.
I, I, I assume that's why we
changed.
Those two words, and I'm just
trying to get
I don't want to belabor this
point. So I, I'm not gonna keep
asking, but I thought that's why
we changed the word or to end.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
part of um the, the language
change was to also bring in the
activities done by uh an
employer and so again lobbying
means, according to the lobbyist
regulation Act, uh, attempting
to means attempting to influence
a decision related to any matter
to be considered or being
considered by the legislative
branch, a state government or
any legislative committee or any
legislative matter requiring
action by the governor or
awaiting action.
By the governor.
And so, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um.
At that point that the employer
engages in that activity to
influence legislation as
prescribed by this by this bill,
um, then that's when they would
have to um submit an activity
report, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, kind lady, um,
I thought that just the fact
that I was hiring a lobbyist.
would include me in that in that
group, uh, so thank you for the.
Thank you for the clarification.
I'm sure a lot of employers are
going to be happy about that.
Um, the, the whole idea behind.
This bill
Is basic transparency, am I
correct?
Madam Speaker, um, gentlemen,
yes, if you look even now at my
uh record of bills that I'm
carrying, um, that is one of my
values as a legislator is
transparency and good
governance.
Good.
Um, with that, Mr. Speaker, I
have I Madam Speaker, I have an
amendment.
Um, and I'd like a roll call
vote on this.
You have a roll call vote.
Could you please bring it up to
the clerk.
Uh, gentlemen, if you'll be so
kind to read the number on the
bottom left of the amendment.
Boy, my heart started beating
awfully fast. I thought I didn't
keep one.
The uh.
231 number.
Madam Speaker, is 231-553.3.
Great, we're gonna take a minute
to pass it out and get it up
online, stand by.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um,
this amendment.
kind of further tries to
professionalize the lobbyist
cop.
Um, it, uh, it prohibits
lobbyists and lobbyist employers
from providing food.
Beverages, gifts, entertainment.
For any elected official and or
staff.
During the prohibited blackout
period, which is basically the
legislative session.
Uh, second, it places a $50 cap
on any expenditure for lobbyists
or lobbyist employer.
To elected officials and or
staff during the remainder of
the year.
Thirdly, it
Uh, lobbyists.
Or lobbyist employers would
still be able to host
receptions.
Open to the general public.
During the session, so cattle
growers, suppers, that would be
fine.
Uh, but if they're hosting the
Republican dinner that's not
open to the public, that would
no longer be allowed.
Um, and this, this kind of
brings it.
A little bit closer, I think, to
what.
What was um.
hoped for
And it brings us in line with
what some of the other states
are currently doing, Madam
Speaker.
Uh, back to the sponsor, is this
a friendly amendment?
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
just give me a minute if that's
OK. Thank you.
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
can I ask a few questions?
Madam Speaker, kind lady, yes,
ma'am.
Um, is this, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, is this your first,
um, transparency bill that
you've introduced um in your
tenure, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, kind lady in my
vast experience of 3 years, I
believe so.
Well, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
it's way more than mine, so I
appreciate it. Um, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, and what
was, um,
What was the impotence or
experience that you've had here
that made you want to introduce
this amendment, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, kind lady, um,
just wanting to make sure that
if it's about transparency that
we keep
As much of the process
transparent as possible.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, and
can you, um,
Help me understand more like
why.
Um
As an elected leader, why is
that important to you as you
know, transparency. I talked a
little bit about my background.
I'd love to hear yours, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, kind lady, I'd
love to sit down over a cup of
coffee with you one of these
days, but I'd, I'd like to keep
the discussion to the
To the amendment.
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I,
I appreciate that just wanted
to.
Keep it on record and make sure
it was, uh, again, transparent.
So, thank you. Um.
So
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
would
What do you think the impact of
this would be in terms of just
the, um, the day to day of a 30
or 60 day session, uh, madam,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
I'm sorry, what would be the
impact, Mr. Speaker, kind lady?
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, like what's, what's
the impact? How might this make
um our 30 and 60 day sessions
look, feel, um, or be different
in any way, um, Madam Speaker,
and gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, kind
lady, um.
would be a lot less free meals.
There would be a lot less stacks
of water, soda, chips.
Food, um.
I think that would be the
biggest impetus of this.
Um, it would require us to pay
our own way.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and um
I, um, I just, um, I have to be
honest, my head's reeling a
little bit because um
The very minimal House Bill 143
that we had in judiciary, um,
got out of committee on party
lines.
And, um,
And then I, uh,
Had a colleague here, you know
my colleague from Otero also
talked about um
The need to expand, you know,
who's defined as a lobbyist even
more and, um,
And then I'm also as a new
legislator taking into account.
Like you said, all the gifts and
things that we receive on our
desks that show up, um, some
that have been sponsored by, by
you gentlemen, uh, from your own
district and so that's why I'm
I'm a little surprised that um
this bill, this amendment would
be introduced solely because it
does broaden transparency and it
does hold lobbyists accountable
even more than what the current
bill does. And so, um, and so
I'm wondering, are you also
saying that, um, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen that this would
eliminate events like Agfest,
like the 100 Bill party where we
celebrate our staff here in the
Roundhouse, um, and other events
like that, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, kind lady, I
always try to be respectful in
committee and on the floor.
And the implication that I'm
trying to do something.
Non-transparent by introducing
this amendment.
Um
It, it kind of bothers me, I
have to say, Madam Speaker, kind
lady.
Um
Because I've always been fairly
transparent with everything.
Um, and to be to have a veiled
accusal that somehow I'm not by
introducing an amendment.
Um, I, I do have to say much uh.
Madam Speaker, kindly, I take
offense to that. I've put up
with a lot, especially this
session.
From chairs, from
Members of, of the other side
and now this attack on my
reputation.
Because I'm following the rules
and introducing an amendment.
Madam Speaker, kind lady, I take
offense to that.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I mean no offense, uh, I don't
mean to hurt feelings. Um, I am
just simply trying to understand
uh that there um there's a
cognitive dissonance when um
I for the last 15 or 20 years
have um been working as an
advocate here and across the
country and really when it comes
to transparency issues, um, I, I
don't see a lot of um folks on
the opposite aisle rushing to uh
to create such a Mr. Speaker,
please.
folks, gentle lady, is this a
friendly or not friendly
amendment?
Um,
Is there something in between,
Mr. Speakerly or unfriendly.
Uh, this is a friendly
amendment. OK. Is your objection
to adopting the amendment?
See none you have an amended
bill.
Gentlemen, back to you.
Mr. Speaker, I have to say that
the occurrences in this body the
last two days.
really has me bothered and.
Personal attacks have no place
either in committee or on the
floor, and I'd like to file up.
A formal complaint on this.
Mr. Speaker, I'm, I'm sorry
about that, but I've always
tried to be extremely
respectful.
Committee on the floor.
Follow protocol, never.
Never in my life have I been
treated like this.
And I feel personally offended
by this.
And I would hope, Mr. Speaker,
that this kind of behavior.
would not be tolerated,
especially on the floor of the
people's house.
There's further debate on the
bill.
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan, Mr.
Speaker, I haven't given up the
floor. OK, my apologies, uh, you
still have the floor, sir.
Mr. Speaker
Lady from Dona Anna in Otero.
The new amendment now broadens
it.
Or whatever personal reasons.
To include more than just
Advocating for a bill.
And
Now
Brings more transparency for
whatever personal reasons that
might have happened.
Uh
To, to clearly show.
That we should be responsible
for our votes.
Responsible for what we use in
debate.
Responsible for
The decisions we make up here
and hopefully for the way we
treat each other.
Kind lady, do you see this as an
expansion of
Uh, transparency or
Overreach.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
first, I hope I can extend an
apology, uh, I'm still learning
the ropes here.
And um,
As I would call myself, uh,
since I'm 5'3 pekenya pero
picosa.
So, uh, again, I want to extend
my apology to the gentleman.
And, um,
And also I, I do think that this
is.
An amazing amendment, um, I hope
my colleagues.
Here in the house and also in
the Senate, um, would see the
same and pass it, um.
And so, um,
With that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, yeah, I would
agree with you this.
I would support something even
more broad as, as long as you
know we bring in good
stakeholders, um, people who
would be impacted by this and
um.
As I said, you know.
IPRA, the Open Meetings Act, um.
Things like this that help
broaden transparency and
sunshine on the work that
happens in this house, um, is
deeply important to me and so
um.
Again, I apologize for the
impact that um my comments had
that was not my intent and um.
Do you hope that you believe
that. I, I do believe this is a,
a good and friendly amendment,
Mr. Speaker, and, uh, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, lady from Donnaana
and Otero, do you think this is?
This goes along with some common
sense restrictions on what goes
on.
Uh, in this building.
Madam, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm sorry, can you
repeat the question?
Mr. Speaker, lady from Dona Anna
in Otero.
Would you consider this a common
sense approach to
Kind of
Clean up the system.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
By the system, do you mean our
legislative bodies, um,
Government transparency, can you
be more specific, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, lady
from Donaana and Otero.
Uh, what I'm talking about is
the legislative process and the
influence that.
I brought upon this body.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
without having read the
amendment fully and completely
in depth, um, yeah, I think it
would help bring more
transparency. I don't
necessarily think anything is
dirty about the legislative
process, um, I do think that
there can be more transparency
and sunshine and guardrails on
the people who influence this
body and are paid to influence
this body, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, lady from Donana
and Ortero.
What, there's been a lot of talk
about
Bringing more professionalism to
the body.
Bringing more transparency to
the body.
With the acceptance of this
amendment, do you think we get a
little bit closer to that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I
do.
Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to hear
Gentlemen, what is the number on
the bottom left?
Mr. Speaker, the number is
231-557.2.
And I'd like a roll call vote,
Mr. Speaker.
Generally from McKinley. Thank
you. uh I have a question, Mr.
Speaker.
Um
Give
Give me 1 2nd, gently.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, um,
Amendment number
Or this amendment.
Um
Basically prohibits registered
lobbyists from making political
contributions to any elected
official PAC or political
campaign at any time.
It also prohibits nonprofits or
for-profit entities as well as
owners and shareholders of those
entities for making political
contributions.
To any elected official PAC or
political campaign.
If those entities or individuals
receive grants.
Appropriations or other funding
like capital outlay from the
state.
Have contracts for services or
goods with the state in excess
of $15,000 a year.
are currently engaged in
litigation against the state or
a political subdivision of the
state.
And Mr. Speaker, that's, that's
a quick and clean explanation of
this amendment.
Yeah, I'm gonna go back to the
sponsor.
Sponsor is this uh friendly
amendment. Do you need more
clarification, you're free to
ask questions if you need more
clarification.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen, um.
This is not a friendly amendment
and can I ask a few questions.
You may.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen so first this seems
outside of the.
Bill that was originally
proposed, um.
One, it seems like it could.
And in fact does uh
Impede on someone's First
Amendment right, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
by the language written. I'm not
a lawyer but uh it also seems
like this restricts individuals
from making contributions to
political candidates, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, what it would do is
restrict uh campaign uh
contributions.
If you're involved, if you're
getting money from the state.
Um
And I don't, I don't
necessarily.
I think that it's, it's gonna
restrict, um, any constitutional
rights.
Section section 3 will also not
allow a lobbyist to serve as a
campaign chair treasurer.
Funding chair for a candidate.
For the legislature or any other
state in my opinion, it just
brought even more
transparency to this bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I.
I believe this is a separate
bill, um, partly because
transparency and then
restricting people's abilities
to contribute are two different
things, um.
And so again,
And I, I also believe that this
uh restricts someone's First
Amendment rights, uh, whether
they work for a nonprofit or um
are a shareholder, so a board
member, uh, would be restricted
from making political
contributions as they see fit in
their personal lives, uh, and so
again, I don't think this is a
friendly amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
All right. Is there a debate on
the amendment. The gentle lady
from McKinley.
Representative Lunstrom? No, Mr.
Speaker, I
lady from Santa Fe Romero.
I think, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Let's try this one. does the
gentleman yield, Mr. Speaker?
Just kind lady, I, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
was just reading through C,
which I think is acceptable, and
I understand the intent of that,
um, as, as far as being able to
look at contributions from a
lobbyist and carrying those
contributions. That makes sense,
um, and agree with that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, on line
deep going down, however, I'm
just trying to get some clarity
about who we're encumbering
within this clause, the various
clauses here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so if someone
receives money from the state in
form of grants, appropriation,
or other public funding we're
talking about retirees. We're
talking about those on benefits
for various reasons. We're
talking about those that
essentially receiving
any form of a payment from the
government whatsoever, is that,
was that the intent of this
piece for those that may be in a
nonprofit or for-profit
participation in, in one of
those entities, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um, yes.
Uh, so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
who would you envision would be
not exempt from this type of
legislation because I'm thinking
when we look at the landscape of
our state, all the different
fabric and textures of people,
demographics and otherwise, who
would be able to make a
political contribution.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, anybody
who's not lobbying.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry,
who's not lobbying or um is.
Paying the lobbyist.
Um, or trying to influence
legislation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
don't think that's what this
says necessarily, um, I, I think
the intent of what you're going
after in item C would be one of
those things that covers that,
which is why I agree with with
um section 3C, the addition
there, but when we get to D, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we're
looking at who is encumbered as
those who would be potentially
owners or shareholders or
participants in a nonprofit or
for-profit entity if I'm a.
Shareholder in any sort of
private entity and I received
money from a state in form of a
grant appropriation or other
public funding. So if I'm a
retiree,
And I
I would like to make a
contribution to you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I can't
under this legislation do that,
um, in the way that I'm reading
that, can you clarify that for
me, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, as long
as you're not lobbying me, I
would accept the contribution.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can
you show me where it's limited
to just lobbying.
If you look at the entire
entirety of
The um.
Amendment
Um, I believe it, it fits right
in.
Uh, with those activities, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but this
is adding a restriction on
campaign activities and
contributions that is not
limited to lobbying. This is
encumbering all um, possible,
uh, contributions that one could
make to a campaign, to a
candidate for elected office,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so under
this clause.
If I am currently
Again, retired or perhaps
receiving a benefit from the
state in some shape or form if I
am working for the state because
I run a, uh,
Anything from an early childhood
center to something like that, I
am no longer able to support a
candidate under this clause, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, was that the
intent?
Uh, the intent was to bring more
transparency and
Just try to
kind of bring us into line with
some with with some of the other
states are currently doing, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I would just caution
the body that this really
prohibits, I think, folks from
supporting the candidates that
they really like just because
they may have some sort of
affiliation with the state
because they receive a benefit
or a retirement, um, or perhaps
work in some grant form for a
state funds that a state funded
entity that would be
unfortunately under clause D,
um, and I don't, I don't, I
think that's the intent. I think
I agree with your intent about
lobbying.
activities, but unfortunately
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I can't
support this because I believe
that it would take away the
right of folks to endorse the
candidates that they really want
to see an office, um, and for
that reason, Mr. Speaker, I
can't support this amendment.
debate on the amendment, the
gentleman from Donana
Representative Small.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. uh, with the gentleman from
uh Sandoval, please yield.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I,
uh, with the gentleman from
Sandoval, please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, kind
gentleman from Donana.
Should've recognized your voice,
knew exactly what was going on,
of course I, I yield. Mr.
Speaker, thank you, gentlemen.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, first
looking through see uh Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would that
prohibit um in your
Amendment, uh, sort of a,
somebody who's running for
office, if they're not yet
elected to that office, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker kind gentleman from
Don and I, yes, they'd be a
candidate.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thank you, gentlemen. Um,
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I appreciate very much the
gentleman's sort of uh bringing
this forward. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
my, uh, sort of layman's
understanding of particularly
Supreme Court is that our, uh,
uh, freedom of speech has been
interpreted to be, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, also to include, uh,
not only what we say but uh
should people choose to uh
exercise their free.
freedom of speech in the form of
political contributions. Would
you agree that that's your
understanding of what the
Federal Supreme Court has said.
Mr. Speaker, uh,
My friend from Donana, I've,
I've not read a.
A Supreme Court decision on
this, but.
Um, I would, I would.
Offer up that if
Um, I'm trying to influence you.
Um, there should be some
prohibit some some uh.
Guardrails in keeping me from.
You know, giving more and more
money just so I influence
influence your vote on
something.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on this, it's not
more and more, it's any. Would
you agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, would this apply
to federal candidates as well as
state candidates.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, it
wouldn't, not according to the
statute that we're trying to
amend.
Got it. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the
Uh, I share some of the same
concerns that the gentle lady
from Santa Fe brought up, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, you're
confident that uh somebody who
say receiving a retirement or
other forms of payment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that this
does not touch them, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Donana, um.
I, I
May have added extra language in
there and if you'd like to offer
up an amendment to this to
strike that language, I would,
we, we can't amend an amended
amendment. So if you'd like to
withdraw the amendment, that's
fine, or we'll vote this up or
down. I'm ready to run with it
as it is. Fair enough. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, also the litigation
against the state, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, would you agree that
there is, um, sort of oftentimes
really good cause for
litigation.
the state. I can think of Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, sort of a
broad swath of areas, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, one of those
areas, would you agree that
litigation against the state
currently against CYFD other
departments, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
reason I, I included that is
because we're, I mean, right
now,
Um, dealing with CYFD.
We see a wide range of bills
that are now trying to fix this
and fix that, fix the
governance, fix.
Um, and if I'm as a lobbyist and
I'm, I'm for one of these bills
and I'm gonna make sure that I
keep you in office because you
voted the way I wanted you to
vote all the time.
Uh, that's the kind of stuff
that I'm, I'm trying to bring
light to.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
thank you, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it seems like here uh
in uh number 3, engaged in
litigation against the state,
including lawsuits,
administrative disputes, etc.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, sounds
to me just reading this, having
seen this right now, this
catches up a broad swath of
folks, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
many of whom might be uh
engaging in legal action against
the state for really good
reasons, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, and so, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
My reading of this and tell me
if it's your understanding that
I'm wrong, please, is it
somebody who's filed suit, for
instance, against CYFD, uh,
would be prohibited, their voice
would be excluded their ability
to participate, supporting
candidates, whomever they may
choose, would be eliminated with
this provision.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I, I
see your point and, and I would
agree with you.
Um, what I'm trying to do is,
uh,
Uh, maybe, maybe the language I
offered was a little bit more
broad than than I had, uh.
Intended
I'm looking at those um.
Groups or businesses or
individuals that are, are in
litigation with the state over
permitting or all these other
things because unfortunately, we
are in a litigious.
Society right now, so what I'm
trying to do is I'm, I'm trying
to shrink the, uh,
The, uh
Picture down a little bit. Got
it. OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. I
appreciate going through it,
but, uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, I
would urge the body to
respectfully, uh, reject this
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, one sort of
letting folks participate in the
process to, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, think as we sort of
discussed this specific
provision by itself seems to um
have a lot of uh potential, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and I know
it's fully unintended to sort of
discourage folks who want to
participate in the political
process from standing up and
saying the state's not doing
something right in some other
areas. But thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
uh, I'm, I'm done. Thank you.
Speaker, am I allowed quick
response to that?
There are more debaters on the
amendment. So, I would rather
move to the next debater, if I
may. German from Katherine Grant
is that represent of Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentlemen, please yield.
Uh, I yield to my good friend
from uh
Catherine Grant and Hidalgo.
Before we move on, Mr. Speaker,
can you just go ahead and
comment on the last, uh.
On what you wanted to so I can
move on please.
Uh, kind gentlemen, I, I.
Just real quickly, I'm not
trying to keep people from um.
Being involved in the
legislative process, just trying
to keep the people that are that
are involved in some of these
bills advocating for some of
these bills to make donations to
uh any candidate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think.
And, and I want you to clarify
this because I mean I don't
think you're you're you're the,
the reason for putting this
amendment was to stifle it
you're trying to expand it. Can
you explain to me some of the
activities that you're trying
to.
Help curtail.
I, I, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I was an advocate for
20 years.
Um, never once did I
buy somebody dinner or um even
make a contribution.
Um, I advocated for the issue
and I.
I want for as many people to be
involved in the process.
I just want to bring more uh
Transparency to the money part
of it.
I think Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I think you know I was, I read
an article the other day, uh,
to.
My colleague's point of freedom
of speech and I think we have a
lot of work to do, um, we can
always be better, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, in, in the
process, I think um what you're
trying to do is say, hey, look,
there's other groups here.
Lobbying is a big is a is
actually a lot more broad than
what we're making it out in in
the definition sometimes can be
in that you have groups that are
funding people to come up here,
uh, to advocate for and against
bills you have, um, groups that
are in essentially using their
lobbying through.
Through their techniques, right,
to come up here and do that and
I think that's what you're
trying to address.
Um, and when it comes to freedom
of speech, I, I was kinda
wondering in the process, um,
that being brought up, you know,
we have people like from my from
my county they come all the way
drive 5 hours and sometimes they
only get as little as a minute
to speak on a in committee and I
think that's a restriction of
freedom of speech.
I think uh sometimes uh
individuals are.
Restricted from talking
altogether if they're not in
line fast enough or they don't
get in the room fast enough.
On hot topics, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
And so I think, you know, I
think I, I like, I'm good with
all this. I, I, the wider you
make it, the bigger you make it,
uh, so we can see everything but
the way I'm seeing it, what
you're trying to do, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is expand
transparency rather than
restrict it and I and uh through
some small wordsmithing that
needs to be done possibly
express what you're wanting to
do a little bit better.
Do you have anything to comment
about that, Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman, um.
I have so much respect for this
institution, and I want as many.
people to be involved in it to
come up and visit, to be uh
aware of what's going on up
here. I'm just trying to limit
the amount of money that it
takes, um, or that is exchanged
in lieu of
Um, influence.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. No, I think, you
know, I think many people in
here have good intentions. I, I,
I believe that the process was
put together it's a beautiful
process sometimes Mr. Speaker,
he gets manipulated sometimes it
gets.
A little warped sometimes
sometimes tensions get high and
and the intent of what we're
trying to do here gets stifled,
but I believe that um with more
transparency, you know, it, it
helps everything now, uh, we can
only talk about the amendments
so I'll stay with that. Thank
you for your comments, Mr.
Speaker. Is there anything else
that you want to express on how
you, you, what you're, you're.
I think I already covered what I
need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate on the
amendment generated from
McKinley, Representative
Lindstrom. Ah, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield, please?
Mr. Speaker, I know you already
had a chance.
I'm just kidding. I, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. This question is
about the amendment, but it's
I'd like to ask a process
question, Mr. Speaker, to the
minority whip.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and I
say kind lady, and I really,
really mean it because I feel
like I'm gonna be tested now.
Mr. Speaker, I'm, I'm a little
confused.
Um, we adopted the First
Amendment.
Now I'm trying to track the 2nd
Amendment, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I'm not, I'm not.
Able to do that very
effectively.
So I'm wondering if you could
help me, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, I'm, I'm wondering.
The 2nd Amendment that was
drafted number 231557.2, um.
Was this drafted in anticipation
of the First Amendment being
adopted, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
no, this one, this one was
drafted first.
Um, and I wasn't sure. I, I,
I've struggled with this bill
since I heard it in, in
judiciary.
So I had another amendment
drafted.
Um, and I just figured, well,
let's take a shot.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That
helps me. I'm not losing my mind
now. I was trying to, trying to
track with this, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I don't have any
specific questions about, about
the 2nd Amendment that was um.
Submitted but I did want to have
a little bit better
understanding of the process
since we are now amending for
the 2nd time unamended bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, you wouldn't be the first
one to question my thought
process.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Right, there's further debate on
the amendment to gentle lady
from Silo McKinley Socorro
Valencia Belio San Juan Babita.
Thank you, Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Sound of O Yi?
Mr. Speaker, um, I yield to my
friend from all those counties.
Thank you, Speaker. I'm just
curious about page 2 of the
amendment, section D, and going
into 12.
And sometimes 3,
speaker and gentleman, my
friend, can you please tell me
how this would impact
Navajo chapters that I assist
with capital outlay or Pueblo
communities that I assist with
capital outlay and existing
litigation that may be happening
within the state.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, um, kind lady.
I'm not sure that the tribes
would be.
Included in this, um.
Because we're talking about a a.
Uh, political subdivision of the
state am I.
Am I to understand that the
tribes would be political
subdivisions of the state.
Speaker gentlemen, yes, and I
could also elaborate a little
more on that.
As you know, I, I do serve a
large district. I tried to look
at the map just briefly a moment
ago to see if any of the tribes
had land in your district and I
see that San Di Pueblo is also
fairly close, so I would be
concerned about how this would
impact them as well. Thank you
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen.
gentle lady, are, are you
yielding the floor?
I yield back speaker. OK, gentle
lady from gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does my
friend from Sandoval yield?
Mr. Speaker, I absolutely yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, I, uh,
I love C.
When it's unlawful for any
lobbyists to contribute or to
act as an agent or intermediary
Mr. Speaking gentlemen.
My first campaign.
Uh, I went and asked the guy for
some money.
And, uh, fairly, fairly well off
family and, and, uh, they turned
me down.
Mr. Speaker
Um, so I, I ran my first
campaign out of my own pocket.
And as I was talking to a couple
of the other guys that were
getting ready to, uh,
Go on to the council with me,
one of them asked me, uh, all
three of us, as a matter of
fact, he said, uh, one spent
25,000, the other one spent
15,000 and, and I spent um
A little over $900.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, my
point is
I beat the big dog in that race.
Money does not equate to people
being able to participate.
People have every opportunity to
participate in that and going
into that voting booth and
voting.
And if we, if we really want to
get back to the nuts and bolts
of it, we'll buy each of us will
buy 2 or 3 pair of tennis shoes,
and we will walk our districts,
we'll knock on doors, and we'll
visit with people. It's not
about money, it's about
relationships, Mr. Speaker, I
endorse this and hope the body
will vote for it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 143 is twice
amended.
Right motion to House for
amendment number 2 to House Bill
143 is twice amended a vote of
yes and the amendment is tabled
a vote of no, and we're back on
the amendment. The vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The boys are closed by a vote of
30 in the affirmative, 26 in the
negative. House for Amendment
number 2 to House Bill 143 is
twice amended, has been tabled.
Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh.
I appreciated the uh.
Exchange of ideas for the most
part.
Um
That's what I love about this
body and that's why I respect
this institution so much.
Takes all kinds of people to get
here.
Um, and I try to encourage as
many people to be involved and
to be aware of what's going on,
um, and that doesn't always cost
money.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
There's for the debate, the
generator from Santa Fe and
serrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, generally I do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady for the debate
and the discussion about this
topic. Um, I did have a question
that, uh, and this is kind of
goes back to what the earlier
conversation. So, um, they
required if a lobbyists were to
change a position, they're
required to report that within
48 hours. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
that's correct. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, should that
lobbyist and I'll be very clear
our committee substitutes our
amendments are a 24 hour time.
And typically to get those
online, you're not talking 24
hours, you're talking less than
that. You know, everyone's
trying their best, but that's
the reality of it.
So again, knowing that they
might literally that morning
change their opinion and go in
and testify against a bill that
they were formerly in favor of.
Would they be penalized for that
if on the record at that moment,
it said that they were in favor
of the bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's a great question
and again, this isn't to
penalize lobbyists. This is
really to um understand the
lifespan of a bill, um, and it
doesn't have to be.
and the intent was not to have
it in real time, um, but rather
for constituents back home for
us as we're reviewing our time
here to go back and say, oh,
this is how it happened and, and
so, um, I don't expect and and
the secretary of state and our
drafters and and judiciary
Committee went back and forth
about this is that we're not
gonna get instantaneous edits,
uh, and um and.
each time someone changes their
mind and so and and so that's
not the intent. The intent is
really can we capture the full
picture, the full life span of a
bill and who is shaping it at um
in, in the point of the session,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. That's my one
question.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Grant, Katherine,
and Hidalgo representative
Terazas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Ma'am, I was just, uh,
First of all, uh, gentle lady, I
was just uh, you need to ask her
to yield, please. I'm sorry Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady please
yield.
Uh, yes, I yield to the
gentleman.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I was.
writing and, and thinking about
what's going on here. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um.
What is the exact, I'm gonna go
back so I wanna kind of.
Wrap my mind around this. What
is it that you're trying to fix
or the underlying issue that
you're.
From your address.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
again what I'm trying to address
is ensuring that the general
public and us as legislators
have the information available
to them so that we can make
decisions, um, at any point
through the session but also
after the session if we're going
back and reviewing our own
bills, uh, if we are, um, if our
constituents want to go back and
look at um who helped shape uh
and determine.
the journey of this bill and so
that's what I'm trying to do
here, um, we, uh, in the state
of New Mexico, we rank in the
40s in terms of transparency in
our legislative processes and um
this is one of the elements that
I think would um bring us up in
that list. We hate being at the
bottom of lists. And so I think
if we were to implement this
bill, um, as it was written then
it would help.
Uh, advance our ability to be
more transparent with our
Um, I really believe that a more
informed electorate strengthens
our representative government
and the more
that our constituents have the
better, uh, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker,
generally I, I, I, I, I
appreciate the intent. I'm just
trying to understand so.
Since we're 40th, you see, um,
on the bottom of that list.
What
Is causing us to be at the
bottom of that list.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I'd say just lack of
information. We don't require
lobbyists to currently report
their uh employers, uh, or the
bills are working for or against
their monitoring, um, often
that's just left up to when they
show up, uh, in our offices or
in committees and so, um, and so
that's, that's what we're trying
to, to do here, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
mean, I think we've kind of
stepped in that direction in
that when they do have to when
they are lobbying and they are
speaking for bill or against the
bill they have to identify
themselves. Would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
and, and that's not recorded
anywhere, um, besides our um our
our live streams and um and so.
For me in terms of getting a
good public record of what is
happening during our sessions,
um, and who is involved in
shaping this, um, our
legislation. It is imperative
that we, um, again track just
like we do our expenses just
like we do our campaign
contributions. If we were to
just say, you know, on, on
record, hey, I got this much
money from this donor, um, that
That would not suffice. And, um,
I would say that that would lead
our state to be more
corruptible, and so, um, again,
having um lobbyists being able
to name here's my employer, here
are the bills that I'm working
for and against, I think is a
reasonable uh request uh to get
us on the road to more
transparency, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think.
I mean, again, the process isn't
perfect. I agree with you, but I
also would say that since it is
webcast and live live and it's
archived, um, that it allows
people to look back and they can
go back they're archived.
From what I understand forever,
so that's why we have to be
careful what we say, um.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
you know that being that
happening, um, I think.
I understand what you're trying
to do. I think where I'm caught
up is and I got a list of
questions here only because I
want to understand the process.
When, when they're when they're
uh reporting.
Bills
Change on a dime.
I and and I'm thinking Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they come
in, you have some that are
pre-filed. I think I don't know
what the number we're at, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm gonna
say upwards between the Senate
and the and and the house.
We're probably at about 1000
bills. Is it 1200? That's what
I'm hearing and so if I'm a
lobbyist I'm just trying to put
myself in their shoes to
understand how this would work.
I've got 1200 bills that come in
in different at different
points.
You've got some that are
pre-filed.
As a pre-filed you got now
they're required some of them
might not even be in they might
not even be interested in some
they are and so then they go
ahead and they put Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what their position
is, whether they're for it,
against it, or monitoring, um,
and then now you got to monitor,
Mister Speaker, gentle lady.
What's happening with each and
every bill. So if they go into
committee and we know that
sometimes amendments are done on
the fly there on the on because
some chairs will allow us to do
that. Some, some are not, some
are done, um, sometimes there's
substitutions.
Sometimes a bill that I would
think I'm just trying to kind
of.
Run this through my mind some of
the bills that they possibly may
have been against or for because
of the amendments that make it
that changes their mind.
And I'm thinking about the
paperwork that we would have.
Not just for them but for us to
have and it's archived let's say
on a website. I don't know if
this is gonna be done on online.
I don't know if they're gonna
print this out and we're gonna
have a another piece of paper
here like we do the golden rod
and all that stacked on her desk
every day. Can you explain
explain how that process would
best work.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for that question, um,
to back up, um.
With your previous statement
that I wanna address.
If it were enough to have every
lobbyist, um, the status quo
that we have now lobbyists just
come and speak in front of
committees, um, this presumes
that every lobbyist that comes
through these doors, gets in
front of a camera, and that is
not the case.
And so I just wanna name that,
um, and so this again puts on
record, um, every lobbyist
that's registered here in the
positions they take or maybe
they're not working this
session. That might be important
to know as well, um, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, to your
other question, uh, the gentle
lady from Santa Fe asked this
question also that um we're not
trying to get real-time
information. Um, we're not
trying to get snapshots.
of seconds or minutes or even
hours, um, what we're asking for
is, um, what is the activity
that you're taking and if you
change position on that piece of
legislation that you have 48
hours to um to update that
report, um, and so, so that's
what we're asking for. Again,
not surveilling lobbyists, but
rather looking at the whole
picture of the bill, so, um, I
want to center the lifespan of
the bill.
Um, that people are following.
Um, and then to your other
point, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
about um it being like, oh, is
this too much paperwork, this
would be all electronic.
Much like how uh lobbyists and
their employers have to file
expense reports now, uh, we
would not be getting more sheets
of paper, um, the difference
that I think creates more
transparency that is excellent,
um, for this body and for our
constituents is that on the NM
legis website there would be an
additional link.
Um, and, um,
And the secretary of state, um
would work to have those links
set up so that you could click
that link and see um as Colorado
does currently see all the
lobbyists involved with um
shaping that legislation. And so
it would be all electronic and
then I would also say that this
is a pretty um they're already
used to filing reports within 48
hours and so I don't think this
is overly burdensome, um, to
any.
anyone um
Right now, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
before I move on to what I was
gonna ask you is what is the.
What happens if the lobbyist
doesn't uh comply with.
The 48 hour rule.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
believe that was asked and
answered um when I was speaking
with the gentleman from Otero,
um, and I will say there's
voluntary compliance, and so,
um, there's no, um,
We're not going to go seek
people out for them to update or
correct. They do have the
ability to correct if they need
to. There is a $50 fine per day
for not um submitting reports
just like they have currently
with expense reports. So again,
it tracks much of the same
practice they're doing now, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that per bill or per for just
being out of compliance.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
per report, um, and so one
report could have several bills
that they are following just as
one expense report might have
several expenses, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
Where we are at today, where
there's 1200 bills.
They're monitoring it'd be very
easy and uh I just mistakenly
not.
Keeping up or not being able to
uh see that's the substitutions
um on every bill and I and and
so I have, I have a little bit
of concern over that and so you
know you talked about not every
lobbyist speaks in front of the
the committee.
And I agree with that. I think
there's some committees that.
They're limited to just a
handful of people and they never
get in front of the camera.
Uh, sometimes with a long list
of people that are in line, uh,
I've, I've known of that
happening or they don't get to
finish their statement, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, to be
full transparent of what they're
trying to express on a
particular bill they drive up
like I said earlier, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they come
up from Silver City. It's a 10
hour 9, 10 hour round trip, Mr.
Speaker, gently, drive all the
way up here to come to a to go
come testify in a bill whether
they're.
an expert witness were there for
uh uh a particular type of
legislation or again some type
of legislation and then just to
be limited to a minute.
That is very difficult to get
your expression but you within
10 seconds of that uh or let's
say, uh, uh, 20% of your time
on, on a minute is just who you
are, where you're coming from,
and then you've got less, you
know, 40 seconds to tell
everybody what you mean, why
you're against or for a bill. Do
you think that's part of our
problem with transparency and
makes us the last 40, uh, puts
us on the lower scale of that,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle
um, first, this is not a First
Amendment bill. This is a
lobbyist bill, um, and so I, I
think
And I would, I don't disagree
with your comments. I don't, um,
however, I do think that um
lobbying is different than
Um
Community advocating and that
there, those are and those and
we have our own house rules that
um that we can decide that shift
and change and determine those
guidelines, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you for that sentiment. I
mean, I, I think we go back and
forth, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
on.
People who
members or uh ranking members or
whatever they express, you know,
that, that, uh, problem.
So I'm gonna kind of shift over
here, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what if there's a business
owner that comes to testify but
doesn't have a lobbyist.
And they're not on the SOS
system. How does that work, Mr.
Speaker General Lee?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they
don't have to file this report.
They're not a lobbyist.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
So
Are you, does this mean that we
uh
See here what I was gonna ask
because I don't go around in
circles, Mr. Speaker. Give me
one second.
Sorry, my papers got shuffled
here pile.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
what, what role would the ethics
commission have in this
legislation?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
the state ethics commission has
the authority to investigate,
uh, any violations to the
lobbyist regulations Acts.
I'm sorry, I didn't hear that,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
ethics commission has the
ability and is authorized to um
to investigate violations of the
lobbyist regulation Act.
So to expand on what you were
trying to say that you got a
$50.
Uh, fine, and then in addition
to that, the ethics commission
can investigate and do what Mr.
Speaker?
Uh, thank you to my witness, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, if
the commission has jurisdiction
for the complaint, the state's
ethics commission shall refer
the complaint to the secretary
of state, um, and upon referral,
the Secretary of State shall
attempt to achieve voluntary
compliance with the lobbyist
regulation Act, um, and there's
more and I can go on if, if
you'd like me to, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So again, I'm not, I, I like
transparency. I'm all for it.
I'm just trying to understand
and I and I appreciate some of
the amendments that you accept
or the amendment that you
accepted to expand that, um, so
does this, and I think and I
don't know, I think this was.
This is something that I had
jotted down so for 501c4s or
501C6, uh, do they have the
right to lobby and can they send
employees to come and advocate
for or against bills and.
Which is lobbying
And I think what if they're
getting paid by an organization.
And if they sent 5 employees, do
they all have to update the
reports.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So again, definition
of a lobbyist, so if there are
501c4, 50 501C6 um as long as
they uh follow the definition of
what a lobbyist is and the
lobbyist regulation Act, they
would have to file a, um, an
activity report, an expenditure
report filed as a lobbyist, um,
as currently, um, in, in, in law
in statute, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I kind
of looked into that a little bit
and I was trying to study and I
don't think.
It actually without changing the
definition of lobbyist to
include all this it was a little
messy and so I wanted to uh.
Proposed an amendment
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
OK, will you kindly get it up to
the clerk? Make sure it's, and
I'd like to roll call vote, Mr.
Speaker. All right, you got a
roll call.
Gentlemen, can you please read
the number on the bottom left.
So Mr. Speaker, it's 0 231666.1.
Point 231666.1.
I don't like the number, Mr.
Speaker, but that's the one I
was given. Got it. OK, it'll get
passed out and then we'll get it
online. Give us a minute.
Right, it looks like the
amendment has been passed out,
um, and it is posted online,
gentlemen, to explain the
amendment. Thank you Mr.
Speaker, and so, um, this
amendment would, uh, it's an
application to persons or other
than other than lobbyists, uh,
the lobbying activity reporting
requirements of Section 1 and 2
of this 2025 act shall apply to
the person that is not lobbying
but that provides a monetary or
other tangible benefit to any
other person for the purpose of
being present in the state
capitol building including
during.
the floor session or committee
hearings and support or
opposition to legislation during
the legislative session, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what I'm
trying to do is
You know, we're when we pick
lobbyists we're just picking
picking us up small portion or a
third of the portion, I don't
know what the exact percentage
it is, but we, I wanna include
everybody, Mr. Speaker,
generally, and so when we have
we have um some of these
nonprofits who are paying
individuals to come and support
or go against certain
legislation their technically
taking uh sometimes monetary.
Uh,
gifts or uh some sort of they're
they're they're making they're
they're coming up here being
possibly paid some of them are
paid, some of them are not, but
if they're paid, they need to
comply with your legislation.
Gentle lady from the Aterro is
this a friendly amendment.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
no, and can I ask a few
questions? Yes, Mr. Speaker,
lady, you can.
Mm
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
And so, um, help me understand
this, um, amendment. So,
Can you define tangible benefit
for me, Mr. Speaker.
gentlemen.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they could be offered a meal,
they could be offered, I don't
know, a voucher, they could be
offered something to come up to
come up here, uh, tangible is
anything that they can, they
can, uh, that is that they can
touch that they can get in in
exchange.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, um,
So
Again, I, I, this is an
unfriendly amendment. I think it
would be, um, overly broad and
overly burdensome for the
citizens of New Mexico who come
up here on one day, um, our, um,
families or parents that come
up, uh, from like Las Cruces or
Chaparral, uh, places I
represent and so um with that
and.
Yeah, I, I yield back. This is
an unfriendly amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, does the, uh,
gentleman from Catherine Grant
and Hidalgo yield.
But yes, I, uh, yield to the
gentle lady man.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, I
know that you
Discussed, uh, the definition of
tangible benefit, but could you
maybe share a couple of
examples. I think you said, uh,
Some form of payment. Could you,
could you give a few examples of
the tangible benefits that
you're describing in this
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
didn't look it up on, on, you
know, to get an exact definition
do you have some?
Uh, examples you'd like to share
with me because it it sounds
like you have some in mind.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you know, the one thing that
has been very important to me
is.
Allowing the community to
participate in all of our
hearings, um, day in day out
hearing from regular folks, um,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
often very difficult to
participate in this process,
often too difficult. Um, would
you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Speaker,
gentle lady, sometimes that is
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um.
This amendment, um, while I
understand um the great desire
to get sort of unseen money out
of politics, um, I, I feel
personally that we have to have
a standard in terms of what does
constitute lobbying so that we
can enforce it and in this case
what does constitute a tangible
benefit. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if we had legislation
that pertains to a small
business.
And a small business owner says
to another small business owner,
hey, I'm gonna drive up to Santa
Fe and maybe they stay 4 hours
away. Maybe that's where they
live, um, do you want to come
with me and I'll give you a
ride, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
under this amendment, I fear
that that is a tangible benefit
and that small business owner
who was trying to really
represent his community would
basically be unintentionally
walking into a reporting
requirement that they may have
no idea about.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, we've had.
Participation from folks that
have come in on buses we've had
participation from children who
ride school buses into this
building to support a memorial
that they have worked on, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and, and
this amendment would require the
school to then file a lobbying
activity report, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, which I think
Um, to me it just goes a little
too far, and I don't want to
have a chilling effect on all
these, all of the very many
parts of New Mexico that, uh,
participate in the process,
including our schools, including
You know, small businesses in
the community, um, including,
you know, citizens from a senior
citizen center, we often have,
you know, the day, uh, a day
celebrating the aging community
and many of those seniors, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, ride on a
bus that's provided by say the
city or the county um or the
area agency on aging that is
encouraging them to come uh
participate in the process and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, those
seniors when they get here
they're not necessarily.
Advocating specifically all on
one bill, they may have many
interests, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I'm afraid with
this amendment we would be
forcing that local senior center
to file a lobbying report, um,
and anticipate all the very many
issues that those seniors, for
example, uh, would be advocating
on so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, I, I can't support this
amendment, and I would
respectfully urge the
body to uh stand in opposition
as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'd like to answer
your question now because you
hold on a second, sir.
Was, was there a question or are
you finished, young lady? I'm
complete, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, let's go to the gentle lady
from
Eddie and Learen of Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Katherine Grant
in Hidalgo, please yield.
I yield to the lady from Eddie
and Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, um, I've listened pretty
closely to um this bill and the
attempted amendments and.
I've heard the phrase life span
of a bill, you know, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, as I
understand it, life span is a
measure of time.
But I think what probably is
trying to be grasped here is the
life of a bill and all the
influences that factor in to the
formation of a bill, the support
or the opposition to it, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
agree about that?
I agree with that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, um, kind gentlemen.
I think what I like about your
floor amendment is that it
captures
Kind of the 360 view of uh
influences that um that
legislators deal with.
And rather than just looking at
lobbyists, that's a very narrow
segment I think of of this whole
picture and um I wonder, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, if the onus
should be on the legislator.
Not the lobbyists or the
lobbyists employer, and what I
mean by that, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, is that we're the
ones who know.
Whom we've spoken with, what
articles we've read the books
we've read, the news coverage
we've seen.
So many factors that go into the
formation of our opinions on on
matters and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I wonder if
legislators.
In the interests of transparency
should be tasked with keeping a
log book and they would file it.
And dealing with every
communication, uh, that has
helped form their opinions, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, am I
kind of getting to the heart of
your amendment?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what I
was trying to do is, is, is.
If we want to be transparent, we
have to include everyone.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I meant tangible when
you're getting a ride up here
you didn't get anything out of
it other than coming up here and
getting it right. That's just,
that's not tangible means you
get to keep something for
yourself.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when we're talking about the the
the examples that were given I
think were poor examples of
tangible tangible is something
you can hold. That's why it's
that's what we're tangible
derives from.
So we have entities other than
lobbyists Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady that are doing exactly the
same thing through nonprofits
and a whole other segment that
is that unfortunately this body
seems to be not wanting to have
transparency on.
If we're gonna be transparent, I
wanna be fully transparent and
not just pick a little piece of
the puzzle.
And so that being said, there
are people, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that are being paid to
come up to committee now does
that person mean they're getting
paid because they believe in it
or they're being paid for in
compensation to do a job.
There's a difference and so when
you're you're taking
compensation that's a a whole
different thing in that they
need to in my view of trying to
expand the transparency that
we're talking about here it's an
effort, it's an effort to say,
hey, you know what?
If you want to take compensation
to make a point whether it's on
the floor, whether it's in this
building.
I think it should be reported.
Just the way anything else, so,
uh, you know, to be tangible
getting a ride up here that
using an employee, the employees
are already being paid.
So if your employer says come
with me, we're gonna go up there
that's, I mean, he's just being
paid to, to do what his boss
directed him to do that he
didn't get anything in addition
tangible now the uh what I'm
specifically targeting here are
the groups themselves.
The the nonprofits throughout
our state outside of our state
that literally pay people to
come.
Here, uh, above and beyond to
stand there and fill a room, uh,
sometimes it allows the people
to live.
Also in our districts that don't
get an opportunity to have a
seat.
And so they're being paid to do
that and they're also Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, sometimes
the, the, the committees
themselves are limiting the
amount of people that can
express themselves, so, uh, you
know, there's we got a few
things to fix up to clean up
here, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Well, thank you, Mr. um Speaker
and gentlemen, that, that was
very enlightening. I, um, I do
see what you see as well that uh
there are a lot of people
probably more more.
NGOs, non-governmental
organizations and certain groups
that actually do functionally
lobby even whether they're
registered or not, but I think
they outnumber the ones who are
registered lobbyists from what
I've seen, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I value lobbyists,
uh, because they give me
information that I may not have
gotten on my own. They give me,
uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, an
appreciation for how a bill
might adversely or beneficially
impact certain people or um.
The state as a whole, so, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, um, I
really think if we're concerned
about the life of a bill, what,
what happened for that bill to
go forward.
I think we really we
legislators.
Should be keeping a logbook
because we're the ones that
know.
And maybe we report this logbook
every week.
I mean, I don't see what's wrong
with that idea except that it'd
be a lot more work for us, but
maybe in the interest of
transparency that's what should
happen. So just sharing a
thought or two with you.
And so, um, Mr. Speaker, I
Um, I wanted to just look at
your language here. It's um
section 3.
And um you you talk about a
monetary or other tangible
benefit.
To any other person for the
purpose of being present in the
state Capitol building.
Um, are, are you thinking about,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, like
the
Cookies that we have on our desk
today, is that what you mean by?
Uh, this part of the amendment
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what I was really referring to
is not a little kid riding up
here on a on a bus or or some
kids dancing up here that's,
that's they're not lobby,
they're just showing us, you
know, what, what they feel about
a certain thing when you're
actually paid to go to
committee.
To sit up here for a purpose,
um, paid.
Pa
Not a little kid riding on the
bus and coming up here for a
school, uh, trip, you know,
that's that's really what we're
targeting and that's why I think
I thought the the examples that
were given were kind of, you
know, uh.
Not valid in in what I'm trying
to uh propose here and so I
appreciate what you're, what,
what we're doing here I mean I
appreciate the bill itself I
think it needs to just be
expanded to to include everyone
and do you do you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker. Uh, yes, Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentlemen and
members of the body, I do agree
with that if we really want to
be comprehensive in our
transparency, then I think we
need to know these factors and
um I, I know of an instance.
where there was an advertisement
on Craigslist, Mr. Speaker,
asking people to show up for a
protest and they would get paid
for it.
And so I, I consider that as
much lobbying as the lobbyist
who's also being paid uh to to
be here on a bill or several
bills, so, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
appreciate what you're trying to
do here. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. There's further
debate on the amendment to the
from Bernard Lee, Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will
the, uh, gentlemen please yield?
I do, uh, yield to the gentle
lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Um, I am
intrigued by, uh, your amendment
and, um, it's the goals of the
amendment, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do have a couple of
questions, um.
With regard to tangible benefit.
And I realized, uh, there have
been a number of questions asked
on this, um, but I wanna
clarify, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that, um, could you
repeat once again what the
definition of a tangible benefit
is.
You know, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it, it to me tangible is
something that you can keep, OK,
that you've got that you can
usually hold or get something in
return, right?
Uh, and, and I don't, I wouldn't
constitute.
I would call uh right up here an
intangible, uh, uh, would, I
would consider that intangible,
whereas something that you can
have in exchange that's tangible
that's that's what I consider
tangible.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Do we know if,
uh, the phrase tangible benefit
is defined anywhere else in
statute.
Not that I see, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The reason that
I, um, and particularly curious
about how it's defined is that,
um, according to my research.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
a tangible benefit is a concrete
measurable advantage or positive
outcome that can be clearly
observed, quantified and
directly attributed to a
specific action investment or
decision.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
you know, the other day I had a
wonderful visit with the Girl
Scout troop.
And uh Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, they, um, came up and they
were working on their democracy
badge, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and, um, I did not ask nor did I
think to ask who was paying for
their transportation or their
food, um, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, according to my
research.
I am concerned that
Either, uh, getting the badge or
perhaps having an advantage in
selling additional boxes of Girl
Scout cookies uh because I did
buy 3,
that might be an intangible
benefit.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thoughts
on that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I don't think the Girl
Scouts come up here just you
know came up here to sell you,
uh, for that reason, get a
tangible return by selling their
cookies we got the tangible
return because we ate them.
I'm speaking and I'll teasing
aside. I'm just kidding. Uh, uh,
look, I got the, the context of
uh from the statute that says
tangible benefit uh typically
refers to a clear measurable
advantage just pretty much what
you said I think let me see,
make sure I didn't miss anything
game that can be directly
attributed to a specific action
policy or decision. I, I
consider it a tangible asset,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
monetary exchange, so this, this
is pretty clearly get defined if
you got paid to to go to
committee that pretty much
settles that.
I don't think Mr. Speaker, John,
it would be that they came up
here and got some got to sell
some cookies because they just
have to go to our office we buy
a lot of cookies.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, another
example that that I actually do
think potentially could, could
fall under this, um, is, you
know, for opening day, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I brought my
daughter and 3 of her friends,
um, and they compete, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, in
speech and debate, um,
specifically in the, um,
congressional, um, component,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, where
they have to present a bill and
they have to learn how to um
advocate and.
Uh, be persuasive on a bill and
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, one
of the things that they were
learning and witnessing when
they were here, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is exactly how
legislators do that, um, now,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we did
stop for Chick fil A on the
drive up, and I understand that
they also got Starbucks on the
way home and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they.
Received a leg up.
Uh, by being here and being able
to see exactly how it works on
the floor so that when they went
to their next speech and debate
competition, they have a little
bit more insight um than some of
the other competitors.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that
While the intent is, is helpful,
uh, of this bill. I am very
concerned. I don't think that we
are um
Our language is targeted enough
to achieve what you your desire
is, um, so I do have some
concerns about that, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I had
another question about, um, the
phrase, uh, so after after
tangible benefits, it says to
any other person for the
purposes of being present and
then it goes on to say,
including, um, in support of our
opposition to, but could you
explained to me
I am unclear, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if
Being present is its own action
or if it's.
It because the comma and then
including
I am unclear if it's an and or
an or. So if being present is
and of itself, one of the
activities Mr. Speaker,
generally, the example that you
used of them coming up and and
learning about legislation and
getting a ride and going to
Starbucks and going to Chick fil
A. I call that an educational
field trip that's not they're
not technically being paid to
lobby for a bill.
Whereas we're talking more, I'm
specifically talking about
entities coming out here paying
somebody.
Come up here and lobby um in
support.
Or against certain legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, and I 100% agree
that that's your intent.
However, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I think that the language that
you're proposing is far too
broad because when I look at the
definition of tangible benefit
and I look at what is is being
proposed as activities, there
are so many things that could
fall into this, um.
That
We don't really want to be
included, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I would also like to suggest, I
really like the idea of, um,
legislators, uh, keeping lists
of who visits, um, you know,
I've asked a couple of times if
we could get iPads, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, because you know,
when you go to the doctor's
office and you plug in your
information, be a whole lot
better if we could have that
information electronically
rather than I don't know that
the paper copies ever get
entered into electronic record,
um, but that is something that I
would encourage uh.
Uh, us to consider in the
future. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Right, gentle lady from.
And of wall on the amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, do you
yield
gentleman from Cotton tor and.
Yes, I yield to the lady from.
Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr. I wanna thank you for
this amendment, um, you know.
I may be a freshman, uh, but
I've been coming up here for
years and been active, uh,
within the legislature and my
representatives for many, many
years.
And, uh, I would hope that I
wouldn't fall into the uh
lobbying or non lobbying, uh,
where I would have to disclose,
but, uh, there would be times
that Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Gentleman, that I, uh, I would
text while they're on the floor
when I see the debating on a
bill that I uh might oppose or
support.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
You know, coming up here and
well over the years I've seen.
Just
A great deal of nonprofits
coming with just a ton of people
here advocating one way or
another for a bill.
And Mr. Gentleman.
I mean, and speaker, sorry, um,
it does concern me.
That
They are getting some sort of
benefit here to come up here
and, and really technically
lobby but not lobby, but not
having to register as a lobby
organization that is truly my
concern and um Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Trump.
So let me ask you, um.
Have you, how long have you been
in the legislature? This is my
3rd term, Madam Speaker,
generally.
And um Mr. Speaker, Mr. gentle,
about how many um of these
nonprofit groups do you usually
see within your committees or on
the floor.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, you
know, I couldn't answer that. I
really don't know how a specific
answer, but I, I will say they
are a big part of the of the
legislative process, right?
They, um, and, and first of all,
I'm gonna start out by saying
I'm not against it. That is the
that is what um we have in our
ability to come express how we
feel they, they, the groups that
are doing that are doing that
because that's how they strongly
feel I think that's great and
there's there's.
groups, Mr. Speaker, general
lady, there are, are supporting
things that are for uh
conservatives and there's groups
that are um doing the same thing
that are progressive, so I don't
think there's this isn't an
attack. This is just an
inclusion of expanding the
transparency that we have. I
didn't think it was gonna be
that big of a deal seeing that
we were trying to expand the the
transparency, uh, and I've seen
groups sit in my committee when
I was in certain committees I
want.
I won't mention them here, uh,
but I've sat in committee and
watched full groups take the
entire room and then Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the people
that travel from all over do not
get an opportunity to come in
and express themselves and that
is lobbying because they're
being paid to wear a certain uh
uh attire.
To represent that they're
they're given scripts that they
read off their phones or on
paper to read a certain pro for
or against a certain uh bill and
I was just, I thought it would
just be great since we're
talking about transparency.
Let's expand it so I, I, you
know, again I can't answer your
question of how many lobbying
groups there are, uh, in, in,
in, um, I'll call them
nonprofits or groups, but what I
can say is there's a lot of them
I would even guess.
that it's probably
More than the lobbyists
themselves, so I wanted to
capture, you know, I want to get
that a net that captures
everyone, the speaker gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaking, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
gentlemen, um, you know, and
absolutely agree. I mean, that
is our First Amendment is to be
able to come out here and I've
been member I, I've been part of
a nonprofits and it's it's our
First Amendment right to, of
course, come out and, and, and
speak to our uh representatives,
uh, but yes, absolutely do think
that um they do need to be
registered as lobbying
organizations because of what I
have, well, what I believe you
should.
um, uh, that they come out.
Mhm
And uh Mr. Speaker, um, Mr.
Gentleman, uh, so I just wanted
to check here you're saying that
it, it includes during floor
sessions committee hearings and
support of opposition to
legislation during the
legislative session. So, uh,
would this not include like
after uh the session or before
the session be uh really primary
before the session.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the,
the intent of my bill is
actually simpler than that. I
think what we're doing with the
actual legislation is we're
pulling the curtain kind of back
and we're peaking.
If we're gonna open the curtain,
let's pull the whole curtain all
the way open and it's called
full transparency. Let's just
open it up and then we get to
see everything that's going on
and that way the people that way
the legislators, everyone gets
to see what's going on rather
than just a group or a small
group that's really my, my, the
purpose of the bill. I just
wanted to just just, let's just
take off the curtain rod and the
curtain roos. Let's just see
what's going on here. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Gentlemen, thank you, I will
close with this, you know.
I, I was a little offended
earlier. I ended up having to
come off the floor.
Um, because of a comment that
was made earlier, for one thing
I've been in.
public service for a while and
um I've been 100% transparent,
sometimes a little bit over
transparent. I, I overshare
because I never ever want to be
thought of having any, any sort
of impropriety.
And so I, I agree that the more
transparency that we have, the
better it is for our legislators
for our community members and
for the state, so thank you for
bringing this amendment forward.
There's further debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker,
will the gentleman yield?
I yield to the gentleman.
Edie Travis and Lee.
Eddie Chavez and Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Representative. Uh,
I originally wasn't planning on
standing up for this, but the
longer I sit here, the, uh,
To me, it's pretty.
Straightforward, I thought, uh,
we read part of this.
The person that is not a
lobbyist, but that provide it,
that provides a monetary or
other tangible benefit to
another person for the purpose
of being present in the Capitol.
So to me that
If I have a business.
I tell my manager.
I'll pay you you go to Santa Fe
lobby for this bill. I'll pay
your way, your room, your meals.
That to me is me giving somebody
a tangible benefit, would you
say so, Mr. Representative?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, if
you're going to get paid to do
that, you should report it.
Thank you.
The uh for being present and
I'll finish reading here again
now.
Be present in the Capitol
building.
On the floor session committee
hearings.
But the kicker to me is if
they're if is the last part if
they are here in support or
opposition to legislation.
I'm not painting somebody just
come up here and visit. I mean,
I'm, I am.
Paying somebody.
To give my and their position on
specific legislation either in
the office, in the committee, or
on the floor. Is that true, Mr.
Representative?
That's exactly what it says, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thank you, gentlemen. That was
all I had.
There's a debate on the
amendment, your lady from Berlio
and Sandoval Representative
Keats. Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, does my friend, um,
from Hildero Grants and Chavez
yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Bernardville and was it
Sandoval? Thank you so much. I,
I know that you brought forth
this amendment and I do realize
that it's a small amendment and
we've talked a lot about it, but
I wanted to go back to uh the
line here, other tangible
benefits, uh, Mr. Speaker and
general friend I, I, I wanted to
know, you explained that
tangible means something I can't
take with me, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
didn't say that. I said
something is tangible, something
you get in return, something you
can tangibly means you can touch
it, hold it, you get something
out of it, right? That's usually
what I, that's how I know it as
and so.
And I'm thinking of accounting
terms, tangible assets,
intangible assets. So for me
tangible is something like
monetary you and the reason I
changed is what if you get a
voucher to say hey you know what
I'm gonna give you, I don't
know, a voucher to for um so
that they couldn't skirt around
it, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
added that because what happens
if they say, hey, here's a
voucher for I don't know, Ace
Hardware, uh, for $100 or $50 or
to go, you know, uh, or a, a
maybe um some sort of a gift
card.
So I was trying to just cover.
Ways to skirt around.
that Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, and, and thank you, um.
Thank you very much for for that
explanation. It's just when you
talk um earlier to the other
representatives we brought a
scenario of um.
Uh, a ride to Santa Fe is a
non-top tangible, so as an
executive of a nonprofit that is
not in the legislature providing
transportation for individuals
with disabilities to talk to
their legislature about issues
that directly affect their lives
and being able to provide that
that transportation, maybe a
meal, maybe even something to
rem uh have the legislators
remember them by like the bisco
Cheetos on her desk, um, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle person, is
that a, is that a tangible, uh,
uh, thing that we're worried
about in this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
beautiful thing about what we
have right now is we don't have
to drive up here.
If our committee chairs would
allow full all of the, the
people to speak.
On online like we this was
intended to do. There's no need
for them to do that, but to your
point, if they get a ride up
here, I don't see that as an
intangible. How did just getting
a ride here, how did that
improve your bank account or
your where you
Tangible meaning something that
you got in return a ride to me
is not tangible that if that in
my opinion, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the way this is written,
it's basically monetary or
something that's uh another
tangible return for going
somewhere, getting a ride is not
a tangible. You didn't take the
the you took a ride but you
didn't get anything monetarily
out of it you just got right up
here, but that person also, Mr.
Speaker, general lady.
could have simply gotten gone
down to the library if they
don't have internet or they
can't gone to a friend's house
and they could lobby just on
their own without having to come
up here with a group. I don't
have anything against any of it.
I'm more looking for someone
that pays.
Individuals to come up here for
the purpose of lobbying for and
against legislation.
So thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle person, so
that's what I'm saying is an
executive and nonprofit, a
non-lobbyist is paying for
transportation of individuals
with disabilities to come here
that we'll talk about bills, and
maybe even capital outlay that
will help address their needs
and make sure that their
legislators known. I do very
much appreciate, Mr. Speaker.
And gentle person that we have
an accessible legislature and
that you were able to speak in
committees, um, on Zoom. I, I
love that, but I also know the
experience of what this capital
brings to our citizens and, and
that face to face experience. I
um am so grateful that people
have that opportunity and that
they have organizations who are
willing to fund such a trip, Mr.
Speaker, gentle person.
So taking that in mind, so
Uh, if that is not a concern for
you is my understanding, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General Per correct?
You know, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I mean, you've kind
of broadened that up. I mean,
you have, you have cities,
counties that send people up
here for cap generally for
capital outlay, right? Sometimes
it's a nonprofit depending if if
we get junior money which we or
or uh growth funds which we
didn't this year and so they
they're they're lobbying for
that but to.
They're being paid to come up
here that's fine, but when
you're getting when a nonprofit
or other groups outside are
saying.
We will pay you to come up here
and sit in committee and read
what we give you.
is more what we're targeting so
we get more of the process
capital outlay is a little
different, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady in that, in my opinion.
Um
And depending on how you're how
you define that because it's
generally for municipalities and
and for uh for counties, cities,
there are some nonprofits that
do that also, but this is what
I'm saying, um, I just want it
to be transparent on who we're
paying.
Remember you have to take
something in exchange so if
you're getting paid to come up
here, they just do the simple
report that's what we heard
earlier it's just a simple
report. All I have to do this
report we send so and so and
they have to claim me I got paid
to go lobby up here in in Santa
Fe for fine capital outlays to
sponsor uh operational money for
my nonprofit for whatever it is,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you to the person, I'm, I'm
sorry, I just wanna clarify one
so it's, it says here, shall.
Not many shall apply to a person
that is not a lobbyist.
But that provides a monetary or
other tangible benefit to any
other person for the purpose of
being present.
In the state Capitol building.
Including the floor session, so
I'm not sure how that doesn't
apply to the scenario I just
mentioned.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, again,
if you're getting paid.
By any entity
Whether it's profit nonprofit,
no liase.
If you get if one entity is
paying another person.
That is not a registered
lobbyist.
But is receiving exchange of
funds or something that is
tangible for them to get and
receive I give an example of a a
voucher going to, I don't know
to Ace Hardware.
And they get something in return
for that.
And they're not just coming up
here just to lobby, hey, I want
some money for my city, but they
got paid something to for them
to express themselves they are
being paid to lobby. It doesn't
matter if it's only $50 it does
or more, but it's, it's, it is
I'm just giving that as an
example that they got paid.
To come up here so it's not just
targeted to nonprofits, it's
targeted to anybody if I send
somebody from my company and
say, hey, I want you to go up
there and I'm paying them then
I'll have to report and there's
I don't think there's anything
wrong with I don't, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm not sure why,
why we are
Pushing back against pulling the
curtain off.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
and, and thank you gentle
person. um, I came from the
nonprofit background, so, and I
also have had federal contracts,
so I've had all kinds of
clearances and very much have
lived a very transparent life
for decades now. So I have no in
in the uh no issues with
transparency. My, my confusion
with this, Mr. Speaker, and I, I
promise this is the end of my
question is I don't understand.
Who is paying the monetary and
who's receiving it the way it's
written, it's as an executive
and nonprofit, my board of
directors paid me to come up
here. I spend money for my
budget to transport individuals
to come up here so that we can
pass bills or gain funding that
will help my programs and
I am not clear on what that, I
understand your intent that you
don't want somebody to pay.
Myself as a legislator to fly to
the islands to learn something.
I get that. I understand that,
but the way this bill is written
is it is um a very unclear, and
I'm so sorry I won't be able to
support this amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. There's
further debate on the amendment,
gentlemen, from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is
a gentleman from Katherine Grant
in Hilldago. I, I yield to the
gentleman from LEA Lee.
EEA
Thank you very much. Um,
You know, I wasn't gonna get up
and talk on this, but
As I listened to the debate
going back and forth, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I thought
it'd be interesting if we
defined tangible benefit.
is a quantifiable advantage or
gain that can be measured or
observed.
One of the examples, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
is measurable improvement in job
opportunities.
Tax reductions, community
contributions or other project
link enhancements.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is
there any chance that the intent
behind this amendment.
Addressed any of those?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the the
last uh um gentle lady explained
she would have had what she
explained the scenario she gave,
she would have had to have
reported and so would they have
so with the nonprofit that she
works for had to reported their
efforts so no uh exactly what
you said, that's, that's what it
was meant to say.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
curious if there's a piece of
legislation running through and
I want your vote as a
legislator. I want your vote
because it's gonna benefit Lee
County.
Would I have to report this?
When you and I sit down and have
a cup of iced tea.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
if you and I are legislators, I
think we have to report to our
to our voters right when we
finish, uh, and, and I think
that's what we have town halls
for, but I think this was more
pointed out for the uh.
The other people outside of
legislators that are doing that,
Mister Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
hear you, but as I read this,
Other than lobbyists, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
would be a legislator. I'm
trying to garner your vote.
With uh apply.
No, sir, Mr. Speaker, because
I'm not providing any monetary
exchange.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
I'm the one buying dinner, I'm
the one. So would I have to
report it?
You're buying dinner now is and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady or
gentlemen, I still don't think
that would be it. I, I don't
think between legislators
lobbying your, your job as a
legislator in my opinion you're
always gonna lobby you are
actually an advocate for your
district and your job and my job
and every person in here is to
advocate constantly for that so
it it now if you're taking we
have reporting for there's also
reporting that we already have,
Mr. Speaker.
If someone comes and they they
give us uh a monetary donation
we have a system for that and we
have to show that in and we have
a different reporting system for
that, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree with you. We do have a
process for that. We do have
reporting for that. I just find
this interesting. I in Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentlemen,
I'm, I'm
I'm a lot
On the same page with you with.
Open the Dagu window all the
way.
You know, take the blinds off.
Let's, let's go wide open, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I can
tell you for every day.
I have.
A multiplier of 4 or 5, and I do
keep a log.
On nonprofits.
Versus lobbyists that come into
my office.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think that this is something
that is critical.
That we need to have our
nonprofits because many, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, are the
beneficiaries of
Um
Of the legislation that we run.
And they should be um required.
To log that information, the
amount of time, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I know that we have
people up here in different
colored t-shirts from time to
time. I've talked to them. How
much were you paid today to come
up here. Some of them 25, some
of them 50.
They're paid to come up here and
to lobby for their effort.
And that's what I'm trying to
address, Mr. Speaker. It's not
so much that I wanna stifle
their ability to, I don't think
this stifles anything if you're
a nonprofit or you're a group
that wants to express
themselves, no problem. You
wanna come up here voluntarily
as a person.
No problem. You get paid to come
up here, you need to report just
like we report anything that we
receive in in in monetary funds
and, and, and that's important
all all it is, Mr. Speaker, we
talk about transparency, we talk
about moving up the scale. I
think this would move us up to
the top of that scale if we just
say hey.
Anything that happens here,
there's a monetary exchange to
express your view for or against
any legislation.
Doesn't this isn't legislation
only for one group or another
any legislation it's
automatically should just report
that you got paid to do that and
the other and the other has to
report that they paid you. It's
not I don't see a big deal in
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
gonna finish going back to the
definition.
Of a tangible benefit.
Now this is according to AI
which is we're trying to bring
into New Mexico right now.
A quantifiable advantage or gain
that can be measured.
Instead
you're, you're Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, your amendment says
monetary or other tangible
benefit.
Measurable improvements, job
opportunities, tax reductions,
community contributions or other
project linked enhancements by
your words on this amendment,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
tangible benefits.
Defines exactly what you've been
talking about with respect to
this. This is critical because
each and every nonprofit that
comes up here has a tangible
benefit when they're in your
office asking for something.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to table
House floor amendment number 3
to House Bill 143 as twice
amended.
We are a tabling motion to house
floor amendment number 3 to
House Bill 143 is twice amended
the vote of yes and the
amendment is tabled that would
have nowhere back in the
amendment.
32nd book clock, the vote is now
open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 32 House Bill
143 as amended has been tabled.
Gentlemen from Katherine Grant
Hidalgo, you still have the
floor. Thank you Mr. Speaker
we're back on the bill. Thank
you, you know, the body for at
least considering and listening
to the debate.
I understand that you know we
have uh.
Questions about uh transparency.
Uh, and so I had just a couple
more questions. Let me just.
Run through my papers here and
give me a second.
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go
ahead and relinquish the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have
further debate. The gentle lady
from Santa Fe, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. The
gentle lady from Donana yelled.
I, Mr. Speaker, yes, I yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, generally, um.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, thank
you for, thank you for bringing
this, this, this piece of
legislation forward. I just want
to say this is, this isn't all
this isn't wasn't gonna be easy,
uh, and it's not an easy a piece
of legislation, but what it does
is it really puts into account
our, our interactions with um
with our lobbyists and what that
means for us as as legislators
and really trying to put that,
that, um, that transparency in
place and and getting
Uh, getting this in front of us
and, and uh how government was
it was uh was important as well
and I just want to say it's
really um
A piece of legislation that I
I've really read through and
really getting to understand
this and the pieces of it. I
just have a couple of questions
for you, Mr. Speaker, generally,
in your bill to
As I'm getting to know this
bill, um, do lobbyists have to
report on their lobbying efforts
that try to secure a governor's
veto.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, yes, so this, um,
Part of the bill came into
conversation when we were
talking about all the what ifs
that could um that could come
through as a bill is getting
introduced and then at some
point we talked about well what
happens once uh a bill goes
through all the processes and
then reaches the governor's
desk, um, what then? And so
Speaker General lady, we um
talked about um multiple
different scenarios and options
and
Um, we decided that it is very,
very important for again for our
constituents for people who have
no lobbyists here, um, to be
able to see what happens, not
just at the very beginning of a
bill, but at the very end when
it reaches the governor's desk,
and so, um, so if a lobbyist um
has lobbied um throughout the
legislative session, there would
be a supplemental report that
they.
would add if um they began to
lobby on getting a bill either
signed or not signed, um, from
the governor, um, alternatively,
if a lobbyist, um, never lobbied
at all, um, during a session,
um, but did, uh, have an
employer that wanted them to
lobby on a specific piece of
legislation that um was in front
of the governor, there would be
again an additional supplemental
report that they.
would have to file to say I'm
lobbying within the period that
the legislative session has
ended, but up until the point
that the governor has to sign a
bill into into law or or
otherwise veto it. So, um, so
yeah, that requirement is in
place. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
remind me what, what that
timeline is from when session
ends to when the governor has to
finalize all her um
All the other bills she signs
into law.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so the timeline is 20
days, um, between session ending
and then she has twin and then
the governor has 20 days to then
take action on that piece of
legislation, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I, I
really find that uh that you,
you've covered your bases on
this, this piece of legislation
and I feel like um.
I myself didn't really even
consider like
Putting that piece into this and
I, and I just want to commend
you on that because you know
what the governor does get get
heavily lobbied the same way
that we do maybe.
Maybe even more, would you,
would you care to respond and,
and, and say or make if there
are any differences in the the
lobbying that goes on between
what the governor's office and
the the legislative branch, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, thank you for that question.
Um, I think it is different and
um, as we talked about, um, at
length in this debate we talked
about all the lobbyists that can
come before us, come to our
offices, sign in sheets, um,
give testimony and make their
positions known in front of
committees and um and all of
that though, once it reaches the
governor.
Um, all of that goes away.
There are no sign-in sheets.
There are no cameras, um, there
are no committees. All of that
work has been done. And so I
think that
Report more than ever helps
illuminate um who is shaping a
bill to to the very end and um
and that's why I think that that
part of the bill in particular
is really important, um, because
again, that's where more
darkness can reside. Um, there's
less sunshine there and, um,
ensuring that the public.
That, um, our constituents back
home.
That even us, you know, we work
hard these 30, 60 days, um, and
so, and whenever we're in
session and so to know what
happens to a bill once we've
released it from our possession
from uh either chamber is really
important to know like what
happened here? Why did my bill
either get signed or not, um, is
additional information that I
think would benefit every single
member, not only of this
chamber, but our um
Um, are, um, sibling chamber
next door, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and so, and, and I
think I would also add that
there might be differing
lobbyists or employers that are
involved in that phase, we just
don't know, we don't have that
information isn't available to
us right now and so, um, again,
I think it's really important to
keep and and maintain that part
of, of, of this bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, again, I, I, I
commend you on that because as I
just wanted to clarify that
because I don't think, I mean
just as you mentioned, my and
myself, I don't, once if I am
fortunate enough to have a bill
passed and get onto the
governor's desk for for signage
and
That I really never really.
Completely paid attention to
how, how that still could be
lobbied and I think this is
great information for, for all
of us, especially, you know, as
legislators to, to kind of dive
into that information and know
what what's going on there so
that we can then make sure that
we are, we are concentrating our
focus on and, uh, our bills to
the very, the very end and into
final passage and so we can know
that if there is any information
that we are
We need to have in order to to
help um.
Get those bills signed, Mr.
Speaker, um, general lady, so
thank you for putting that in
that in that piece into your
legislation. I think it's, it's
valuable, um, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, uh, just another
question, uh, you say that New
Mexico ranks very low on
national transparency scales
today, is that true?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, so according to um a number
of studies and like common
common cause and other
organizations that study
transparency, good governance,
um, across the country, which I
would also add is a key
indicator of how strong a
representative democracy is in
that state or community, um, we
consistently rank in the 40s,
and, um, there's a number of
factors.
That lend to that one, you know,
could be many other issues that
we've debated in this chamber
and in, in the other chamber
around uh volunteer legislature
and uh campaign reporting and um
and I also want to commend um
the Secretary of State for
strengthening our stance on
that. I think over the last um
few years we've seen our
reputation change on that, but
this is still one of the places.
where um we can do better and
having a lobbyist, a paid
registered lobbyist only have to
report their expenditures, um,
and name um the not even the
work that they do, but just
saying, hey, I'm a registered
lobbyist and um
Here's my employers and here are
the expenditures I make is not
enough to fully give us a
picture of the influence that
their knowledge, their ideas,
their relationships and their
money has in this roundhouse.
And so, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, because of that, we
are um still ranked 40th, uh, or
in the 40s, um, in terms of
transparency and good
government.
governance, um, and I would also
look at the state ethics
commission and the reports and
different um um opinions that
they've put out in terms of the
different things, the different
structures and the different
processes that could um
strengthen our standing in, in
terms of uh transparency. And
again, Mr. Speaker, and um, and,
um,
gentle lady, I appreciate this
question again because when we
are transparent about what we do
here, then it helps to lend
credibility to this body.
The people back home are tired
of feeling like lobbyists or
others have undue influence on
this body. We hear that at the
national level over and over
again, and we hear it. I hear it
on the doors and so when I
talked to regardless of party on
the doors, I hear people wanting
us to take a serious the
question of transparency and um
and making sure that those who
have influence
in this house are being held
accountable and um in, in clear
and open ways, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
general later again I commend
you on your on this piece of
legislation as a freshman and I
say, um, keep up, keep up the
great work and thank you.
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
lady from Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker,
this matter having been under
consideration for 3 hours, I
moved to close debate a motion
to close debate. All those in
favor by saying I.
close mate.
I have it. The debate is closed,
gentle lady from Otero and
Donana to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
We know that real and true
information is becoming harder
to find these days, and this
would be a real tangible and
true record of those involved in
how a bill is shaped.
Again, more than most anyone in
this roundhouse lobbyists have
incredible issue knowledge
relationships, ideas that they
bring into the space and many of
them also bring incredible
amounts of money with them.
Again, I will say organized
knowledge, ideas, relationships,
and money.
These things combined can
concentrate an enormous amount
of power for any person or group
registered lobbyists do have an
outsized influence here when
compared to the people in our
communities who have no
lobbyist.
And I'm here to stand up for
those who have no lobbyist.
A representative government is
dependent on an informed
electorate, and I believe in
informing people so that they
are more self-determined and
more autonomous. When a
government can empower its
people through information
rather than hiding or
misdirecting that information
from them is when we thrive.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
move that House Bill 143 is
twice amended do now passage of
House Bill 143 is twice amended.
The vote is now open.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House Bill 143 is
twice amended, has duly passed
this house.
And lady from Re Riba Sandoval
Santa Fe tows represented
Herrera. Are you ready on item
number 35.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point action is placing
House Bill 206 with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken and it is not subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
House Bill 206 is the annual
water project fund project
authorization bill. I'm carrying
this bill on behalf of the New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversight committee which
unanimously endorsed this bill.
This bill authorizes the New
Mexico Finance Authority to make
grants and loans for water
projects from the water project
fund on October 29, 2024, the
Water Trust Board met to approve
a list of projects to recommend
to the legislature for potential
funding for from the water
trust.
Water Project fund.
This recommendation follows a
thorough evaluation of
applications by a 7 agency
review team, the final list of
projects includes 84 projects
whose application requires uh
requests uh total approximately
256.4 million. The 84
applications are made up of the
projects from the four
categories including.
Uh, I, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I move that House bill,
uh, 206 as uh with an emergency
clause do not pass on final
pass.
Where a final passage of house
with 206 with an emergency
clause, the vote is not open.
Well, it's about to close.
Theo's not closed by a vote of
63 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative House Bill 206 with an
emergency clause that's duly
passed this house.
Your lady from Donana, are you
ready on item number 24. I am,
Mr. Speaker. Can you get me to
that point? replacing House Bill
178 is twice amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
generally to explain the bill HB
178 provides updates to the
nursing Practice Act to account
for current nursing practice and
emerging nursing practice with
artificial intelligence HB 178
brings consistency in language
and allow
the board of nursing to assist
in recruitment and retention and
with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for questions.
Representative Locke. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with a kind gentle
lady from Dona Anna, please
yield. I do yield to the kind
gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I'm asking questions
because I read the bill and I'm
a little confused when it comes
to the AI portion, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you go into
that a little bit for me and
what we're doing when it comes
to AI.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, I'm
sorry, I, I didn't hear the
question.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe we said this, this
regulates in some way the
artificial intelligence used in
healthcare, and I'm just
wondering what kind of
regulation we're putting upon AI
when it comes to that.
So Mr. Speaker and and kind
gentlemen, we don't know what it
is at this point we're just
using it as a recruitment tool.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
recruitment tool, are we, is it
in
Hiring people, is it in reading
scans cause I know we use it for
that. What kind of AI are we
using in health care? Mr.
Speaker and kind gentlemen, it
actually could be both. I mean,
it's gonna generate people that
are qualified to fill in in
these positions and it would
also uh be able to give more
information as to the license
licensing board, um, as to who
um would be in line for
employment.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and since I'm
looking at the bill here.
I just want to make sure I
understand what, what we're
talking about. So this is indeed
House Bill.
178. And so I'm looking at the
FIR and it says there's a
synopsis under the HJC
amendments regarding gender
gender identity.
Can you tell me what those
amendments did?
So Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, it is updating uh the
um.
Definitions for under the Human
Rights Act.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so.
Under the Human Rights Act,
could there be something filed
under that now regarding
healthcare or do we need to add
this in the bill to
Let them have a claim under the
Human Rights Act in healthcare.
I'm just kind of wondering why
we updated it.
So Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, it's making sure that
the nursing, uh, practice Act
con uh complies with.
The Human Rights Act.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what does this entail? Does it
mean nurses themselves and
gender identity or does it mean
patience?
OK. uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, neither. Basically
what it is saying is that if you
have a problem you've got to go
file a separate claim. What this
is doing is just making sure
that this bill is in alignment
with the Human Rights Act.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I kind of
understand that a little more. I
just wanted to make sure cause I
was reading the bill and I had a
few questions and I'm so glad
that your introduction wasn't
like blah blah blah blah blah
and then like, oh, let's vote.
So I think that's good, Mr.
Speaker, and, and good job, by
the way, Mr. Speaker, on, on the
way that you guys talk very
quickly, but I did want to make
sure that we understand this. Is
this relating only to nurses.
And does it also refer to people
who are
And it'shesiologists and other,
other things cause I see that
we've updated some language in
the bill. How, how does this
pertain to other people in
healthcare other than just
nurses. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and kind gentlemen, this only
applies to nurses.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so what about nurse
practitioners, doctors of nurse
practitioner, uh, all those
other ones.
So, so, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, if you're a nurse
practitioner if you're, if, if
somehow you qualify under being
a nurse, you fall into that
category.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
when it comes to these other
portions of the bill, I see that
we're updating language. I'm on
page 8 of the amendments in
context and we're looking at
sedation.
And other kinds of sedation,
there's like.
Minimum sedation, moderate
sedation, deep sedation,
palliative sedation. Can you
tell me why we're adding
language regarding sedation.
So Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
we're updating the the rules, so
it conforms with the same as the
hospitals.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I see
there was an amendment made, I
believe.
I don't know which committee.
It's in blue on the amendments
in context on page 10, where it
says as ordered by a licensed
physician or independent
provider per employing
organization protocol up to and
including moderate sedation. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
why did we, we change that in
committee and what did that do?
What did that amendment do? So
Mr. Speaker, um, basically,
you have to have a doctor's
order and so we just wanted to
make sure that that was clear
and so it, it really just
strengthens the bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle laddy, and I'm just
looking through the analysis as
well real quickly because I know
we updated a bunch of stuff. So
according to this, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, the Department
of Health had some comments
regarding improving changes that
they would like to be made to
the bill on page.
Three of the FIR and I believe
they said something regarding
rapidly respond to identified
emergencies. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, have we addressed
those concerns that are in the
FIR with the amendments, and can
you just tell me a little bit
about how we're addressing some
concerns from the Department of
Health. Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, the Department of
Health never had a conversation
with me, my witness, um, or
showed up in committee to
discuss having any issues.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
General Lee. That's good to
hear. I'm glad it's interesting
how some, some of these things
make it sound like the the sky
is falling and then they don't
even show up to testify against
the bill. So that's interesting.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's kind of, I kind of
get a little more information
about your bill. It's kind of a
long bill, so it took a little
bit to read and I did have some
questions, but I guess there may
be other people on the board and
so I will just let those folks
ask the questions that I must
have forgotten to answer or get
answered. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady
from Don.
You know. There's further
debates, gentlemen from San
Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, you
know, I had my wife read this
bill. She's the uh nurse in the
family and, uh, you know, she's
only 30, but she's contemplating
retirement at some point in time
and so she liked that being able
to have her license where she
wasn't gonna have to pay for
things she was gonna be able to
be useful either on boards or in
advisory uh area and so she
really liked that uh she likes
the bill and, and therefore I
like the bill, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
There is so the debate generated
from Grant Hidalgo and Sierra
Representative Dao.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the
gentle lady yield. I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. It it it's, we've
got to do everything we can to
build the workforce capacity,
and I believe this is a step in
the right direction, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, what is the
current vacancy rate for nurses
in the state of New Mexico?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, kind gentle
lady, it.
7700 vacancies. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentle
lady and um other bills that are
being, what is our graduation
rate? What, what is our current
rate of nurses that were
graduating, that are passing
their license, that are able to
begin practicing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentle lady we graduate about
14,000 nurses from 1400, I'm
sorry, nurses from all of our uh
schools and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, do you know how
many of those pass their test
and become licensed RNs and are
able to practice.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and kind gentle
lady, an average of 90%.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is, that's a really great
number. Um, I, I think that, you
know, particularly in rural New
Mexico, I hope that this is
helpful. When you pair it with
other bills that are about
expanding accessibility, and we
think about the compacts, and we
think about the different things
that are going on. I'm really
optimistic because it's, it's
cool, it's, it's an honor to
have the New Mexico Veterans
Home in the county of Sierra and
to have such a beautiful
facility and yet part of our
issue with being able to be
self-sufficient is the
number of traveling nurses that
we have to have. And so Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I think
this is could also save us funds
in our cost of providing
services to our vulnerable
populations if we're able to
have less traveling nurses, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, do you
think that we might have less
traveling nurses if this is to
pass.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and kind gentle
lady, I, I believe that that's a
possibility.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady, and I,
and before I sit down, I would
just be remiss if I didn't just
say like, uh, hello to your
expert witness and thank her for
all of her advocacy for so many
of our key healthcare services
that are providing in Mexico,
and thank you for the thoughtful
bill that you've brought.
from Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We'll uh
The kind lady, my friend from
Donana yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, I yield to
the, to my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um.
Just trying to look through the
bill real quick, um.
But 27 pages is a lot for me to
read through.
Can you answer if there are any
exemptions to this?
To the requirements in this
bill?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, I don't believe so.
Mr. Speaker, um.
The reason I ask is,
Um, I'm thinking about nurses,
um, that I know that have.
Uh, very strong religious
beliefs and I'm wondering.
Um
What if they object to some of
the medical procedures being
done in the state.
What happens to those nurses,
Mr. Speaker, a kind lady?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, um, so this is not in
this you're the, the question
that you're proposing is not
covered in this act.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
so conscious conscientious
objectors.
Um, stay in place, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
that is correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
Seeing no further debate, don't
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
asked that.
House Bill 178.
it.
Twice amended, I can't see that
well anymore the twice amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 and 56 in the affirmative,
3 in the negative. House Bill
178 as twice amended, has duly
passed his house.
Gentlemen from Bern Lee,
Representative Romero, are you
ready on item 40? Mr. Speaker,
could you get me to that point?
a replacing House Bill 63 is
twice amended and final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill. Thank you Mr.
Speaker. This is a to the
culmination of a two-year effort
and study into our state
equalization guarantee, the
changes would include uh
changing the at-risk formula,
um, to transitioning to the
family income.
index as a mechanism for
identifying uh students living
in poverty, um, and then adding
an English learner's factor to
our state equalization
guarantee. And with that, Mr.
Speaker, I'll stand for
questions. No debate, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 63 is twice
amended, do now pass. We are our
final passage of House Bill 63
is thrice amended. The vote is
now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The boat's not closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 63 is
twice amended as duly passed
this House.
Gentle lady from Donana Hidalgo
and Luna.
Mr. Speaker,
I've been asked to present the
bill. Got it, gentle lady from
Eddie and Learator Brown, are
you ready on item number 43. Mr.
Speaker, will you get me to that
point, please record reflect
that election necessary for
placing now Bill 171 as amended
on final passage has been taken
and it is not subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
House Bill 171 as amended, uh,
amends the pharmacy Act to
provide for custodial care
facilities to acquire and
possess controlled substances
for the purpose of withdrawal
management.
Uh, this bill gives greater
access to care and improves
patient safety. Most states
already do this. I stand for
questions.
close. Mr. Speaker, I move that
House Bill 171 is amended do now
pass.
We are on final passage of House
The boats are closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 171 as
amended as duly pass this house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, are you
ready on item number 10?
Yes, Mr. Speaker.
That the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 228 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill.
thing, Mr. Speaker, this bill,
uh, House Bill 228.
Um, puts in a new section of law
to limit county municipal
restrictions on certain battery
charged fences with alarm
systems.
With that, I stand for
questions.
Singing of the debate gentlemen
close Speaker, I move that House
Bill 228 do now pass. We have
our final passage of House Bill
228. The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The border is not closed by a
vote of 16 in the affirmative
for in the negative. House Bill
228 has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Berley or of
Houckman B. Hill.
Mr. Speaker, I'm gonna go to the
next order of business committee
reports.
See no objection to this order
click to read.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
475 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, we respectfully
submitted art de la Cruz chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption,
please report for House Bill
475. All those in favor of 75
but say I.
I suppose name
Yeah I saw the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
480 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
art de la Cruz chair.
We adoption, Mr. Speaker,
please report for House Bill
480. All those in favor of 75,
but say 9.
I suppose, the IA community
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural development
land grants and cultural Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 219 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Linda Serrato chair, speaker of
adoption adoption of favorable
report for House Bill 219. All
those in favor of 75 but say I.
I was supposed to make.
Right
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, the rural
development, land grants, and
cultural Affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 265
has had it under consideration
report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Linda Sorato chair. Speaker of
adoption adoption favorable
committee report for House Bill
265. All those in favor of 75 by
saying a.
' s name.
Yeah, that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
410 has had it under
consideration reports seen with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for House
Bill 410 do pass as amended and
this referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen White Gallego's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable committee report files
before 10, but a favorable
committee report for House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for hours before 10, all those
in favor.
I say no.
I was supposed, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 469 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and hence referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen
Waig Gallego's chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We're
adoption of a favorable
committee was 469. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
All the supposed me the I saw
that committee report adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 387 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Gohan and a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 249
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Mohan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate tax, business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59,
Senate Bill 63, Senate Bill 236
as amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements, gentlemen from
Ber Leev Romero. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House Education
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning in room 309 at 8:30.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members
take note.
Gentle lady from Berli thank you
Mr. Speaker, because of all the
hard work of the staff and
members of of um how health and
human services we will now meet
at 8:30 instead of 8, so you're
welcome.
Remembers take notes, gentlemen
from Berlin Garcia
speaker uh Esimal speaker, I'd
like to share a, a very
patriotic, uh,
A very New Mexican and a very
brotherly and sisterly measure
as the ma speaker.
Mr. speaker, the, uh, Kit Carson
Electric Cooperative from Taos
is, uh, stepping up.
To assist some of its members
who are federal employees
recently separated from their
employment.
Yes, the speaker, if unable to
pay,
The co op will not disconnect
electric.
Internet or propane services to
these struggling individuals, as
the speaker.
Uh, and some of us know, Carson
has a propane division.
And the telecom division.
Yes, the speaker, kudos and
blessings to Kit Carson for the
humanitarian outreach.
Thank you for that gentlemen.
Round of applause is in order.
Round of applause for Kit Carson
Electric.
Gentlemen from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the House
Democratic Caucus will be
meeting right after the 4th
session in room 309 please see
your email for details. Thank
you. gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and uh
my announcement uh for the body
and for the state of New Mexico
is, uh, wishing all our young
athletes' safe travels as they
go and compete in the state
basketball tournament, uh, Mr.
Speaker, Shiprock is gonna be
traveling to Portales, so thank
you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Is that a friendly bet with the
gentleman from that part of the
state?
It's a friendly bet.
All right, we've got a friendly
wager on the floor of the house.
Gentle lady from San Miguel and
Torres, Representative Gonzalez.
um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
just wanna call attention
hopefully they were enjoyed
during today's uh, the reading,
but there were some biscochitos
on your, on your table again as
part of the Las Vegas days kind
of continue and roll out. These
were from one of our local
cafes, Traveler's cafe there in
Las Vegas and they were brought
to you today by our city
officials, so thank you, City of
Las Vegas thank you Travelers
Cafe.
Thank you, City of Las Vegas.
Gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. House
preparations and Finance
Committee will meet in room 307,
15 minutes after the Democratic
caucus concludes lady from San
Juan and McKinley,
Representative Johnson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. House state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow morning, 8:30, room
305. Bring your own coffee.
gentle lady from Donana,
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, um, consumer
and Public Affairs will meet as
soon as we're done. Um, are we
still having caucus?
Yes, OK, right after caucus is
what I meant to say. Thanks.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Ber Senator Rebel
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee will meet.
Uh, right after the caucus ends
their meeting um right after
there'll be an announcement room
315 thank you. Members take no
gentle lady from Sandoval and
Berlio reserve kids.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to take a stab at our
ending uh process. No, I don't
want to end with Mr. Duncan, uh
Representative Duncan there, um,
the secret to making Congress
more efficient is to replace all
the people with horses sure
every vote would end in a nay,
but hey, at least the housing
market would be stable. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Competition, no? OK, hold on
before I go to you, I do have an
important announcement. Listen
up, folks, there is a
Uh, generic bill, uh, the, the
202 number 231 number is
231500.1. I will have that bill
removed from the House rules and
order Business Committee and
refer it to the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee. 0.231500.
1 removed from.
Um, the housing rules.
House rules and order Business
Committee referred to the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
And that is House Bill 588.
Any other announcements.
As the speaker uh point of
information, uh, the blessing of
ashes for tomorrow. What is the
schedule? 8 a.m. in the Senate
Finance Committee room.
Be there or.
be SpongeBob SquarePants.
And you don't get your ashes.
All right.
Seeing no further.
Oh, gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker.
Representative Duncan.
What do you call a well-balanced
horse.
What do you call a well balanced
horse.
Stable.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, I can always tell
when a person is lying.
But I can also tell when they're
standing up.
Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady? Was that a short
joke?
Generated from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand a recess until 10:30
a.m. tomorrow until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
