Rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty do pass an answer for the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
respectfully submitted Christina
or yes chair run option in favor
committed for house bill one
sixty but a federal committee
porterhouse rural development
and land grants and cultural for
substance I'll move adoption of
the committee
Thank you for adoption.
When looking for a house bill
one sixty but a federal
committee for the house for
rural development language
culture first of surprise one
sixteen of those of everything
but the same time.
Was made.
I seven Mr speaker your role
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to is
been referred house bill two oh
four has had it under
consideration point same as
recognition that it do pass and
that's referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Christine or yes chair
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption fable Committee Porter
house bill tool for all those in
favor signify by saying aye
opposed may the eyes of a
committee report up to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill one
fifty nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption Dr Phil
Committee por for House Bill one
fifteen and all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
They opposed hi seven point four
opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to
has been referred house bill one
sixty six has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass
and answer for the purpose of
the finance committee
respectfully submitted and sale
clincher the spectrum of the
room for rent option federal
committed for the house bill one
sixty six all those in favor say
about us and I was named the
ascetic would report up to.
Mr speaker later veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill one
eighty one has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
finance referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted at the center of
culture miss the report for that
option for will committed for
the house bill one eighty one of
those who favor state of us and
I.
Was made the as having committed
for adopted.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to
miss been referred house joint
resolution I have had it under
consideration point it with
recommendation that do pass an
answer for the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
of the state of New York on
chair thank you for granted
option available committed for
the house joint resolution I all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Is a yes have a good report
opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to
has been referred house joint
resolution six has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation letter to pass an
answer for the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
a similar conjure speaking with
a reporter for the option of
fable committed for the house or
solution six so those in favor
signify by saying I was named
yes I have a committee for
adopted Mr speaker later
veterans and military affairs
committee team has been referred
house memorial for has had it
under consideration point of
recommendation editing pass
respectfully submitted an asylum
clincher
therefore we're on adoption of a
fable can important house
memorial for all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Opposing the S. have a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
terms been referred house bill
one ninety eight has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that I do
pass immense referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G. Andr√©s Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report print option
available committee report on
house bill one ninety eight oh
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose make yes have a
committee for adopted.
Mr speaker consumer of public
affairs committee to miss been
referred house bill seventy five
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
it to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair move adoption
run on Dobson fable Committee
port and house bill seventy five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Does make the as have a
committee for adopted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to one is been
referred house bill eighty one
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that to pass as amended and it's
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair of adoption production
available committee report on
house bill eighty one all those
in favor say of us and I.
Was made yes have a good
productive.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too has been
referred house bill seven has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
it to pass and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair production
production fable Committee put
on house bill seven of those
have been missing about this and
I was made PS are committed for
adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill eighty three
has had it under consideration
for some of recommendation that
it did pass and that's referred
to the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption
production a fable Committee
Porter house bill eighty three
of those in favor say about this
and I suppose they the US are
committed for adopted.
Deliberately Representative
Chasey.
Is that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business you know it is so
ordered the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative set up
the thank you Mr speaker of your
house commerce technical
development committee will meet
fifteen minutes after the floor
adjourns thank you number signal
gentleman from going on a thank
you very much Mr speaker your
house appropriation of finance
committee is going to be very
close to two thirty PM today
room three oh seven thank you Mr
speaker number signal generated
from Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker the
consumer public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow at
nine o'clock I think in a
regular room and Health and
Human Services will be at eight
thirty in room three oh seven on
Monday members signal deliver
million or percent of the metal
thank you Mr chair has occasion
committee will meet at eight
thirty on Monday morning so no
Saturday thank you miss members
signaled the gentle lady from
Los Alamos Santa Fe and Santa
Representative Chandler Mr
speaker your house Judiciary
Committee will be meeting twenty
minutes of after the floor
session there's a note any other
elements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Reasons to Levin a Monday thank
you members for a great day
thank you for celebrating with
us this beautiful historic more
in the state house
representative the state
legislature we will see you
Monday at eleven AM the house or
Senate races.
