Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from San Miguel and Torre,
Representative Gonzalez.
If everyone can please bow their
heads with me. Dear Heavenly
Father, I come before you and I
ask for your many blessings.
I ask for a family's neighbors
and loved ones back home, that
they are safe, protected,
healthy, and cared for.
I ask for the wisdom for us and
other community leaders to make
choices in the best interest of
our people that we've been
blessed to represent.
I asked for resources so that
our communities can continue to
thrive and survive.
I asked for the strength to
stand up for those that do not
have this platform, and I ask
for the patience and grace to
work together in this body so
that we can truly serve in the
way that you meant for us to do
Lord, I humbly come before you
and I ask that you guide us,
lead us and protect us in your
holy blessed name. Amen.
With a gentle lady from Chavez
Roosevelt lead us in the Pledge
of Allegiance.
And the lady from Taos with the
pledge to the New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Play ball
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, good
morning, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning, Mr. Speaker. I move we
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Good morning members.
Good morning, members.
Happy Monday Legislative day 14,
but if
Your good will roll the clock.
And it'll be legislative day 15.
So let's make it happen.
lady from Berlin representative
Thompson. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'd like to introduce
my two shadows from El Dorado
High School. They are in Mr.
Thomas's AP government class and
he invites um the area
legislators to come in and, and,
um, talk and listen with them.
So first I have Holly Steen.
She's a senior at El Dorado
interested in environmental
policy and legislation at school
she is involved in national
honor society, art club, and
chemistry club.
Post graduation Holly plans to
major in environmental
engineering either at UNM or the
university of Illinois Urbana
Champagne. Can we give her a
warm welcome. Welcome to the
house.
And Mr. Speaker, my other um
shadow is Ryan Harnberg is, he's
a senior from El Dorado High
School with an interest in
political science and law. He is
a member of El Dorado's
Community Outreach Club and
intends to major in political
science at UNM next year, so
please give Ryan a.
Welcome to the house and Mr.
Speaker, they have already
gotten quite an education this
morning and they're, they're
soaking it all in. They're,
they're gonna be here one day.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nothing
like
Witnessing bills get tabled in
committee to get you ready,
especially if it's your own
bill.
Gent lady from Taos you Mr.
Speaker. Buddy, I'm so excited
today is Taos County Day.
It's a great day to live in
Taos, um, on your, on your desk,
on your chair, you had a have a
bag filled with goodies from
Taos County, look carefully.
There's some valuable stuff in
there. Uh, we've got a way to
keep us healthy with a lovely
little first aid kit, some
coffee for those who need it,
um, really beautiful, beautiful
things from, uh, Taos County,
uh, later today, actually very
soon we're going to have
delivered from Panera.
So that's very exciting. That's
brought by Chevron, uh, Quest
Economic Development, and uh the
village of Questa and the um
The, the newspaper in Questa as
well. So enjoy that and and Mr.
Speaker, uh, go upstairs to the
rotunda and check out all the
lovely things that Taos County
has to offer. Thank you so much.
Thank you gentle lady.
Congratulations, Taos County Day
in the legislature. You guys can
clap, yes.
lady from Burn Leo
Representative Matthews. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I am
honored today to introduce New
Mexico veterinarians day.
And I think we have some
veterinarians in the house, but
the New Mexico veterinary
Medical Association is the
trusted voice of veterinary
medicine in our state dedicated
to advancing the profession to
continuing education advocating
for animal welfare and
addressing key issues such as
public health workforce
development and the well-being
of veterinary professionals.
Their mission is to promote
veterinary medicine and high
quality animal care by fostering
communication professional
growth, and a strong sense of
fellowship among New Mexico
veterinarians, they were
tirelessly across every corner
of our state to enhance the
human animal bond, uphold the
ethical standards and support
lifelong learning for veterinary
veterinary professionals, the
association also advocates for.
responsible legislation and
public safety protects the
rights of veterinarians and
invest in veterinary education
for students from New Mexico. Do
these efforts we aim to elevate
the image and values of
veterinarians while serving the
people and animals of our state
with excellence and integrity.
Mr. Speaker, I understand that
there are some veterinarians in
the galley, the gallery, and uh
that you were are going to
introduce them.
If, uh, there they are, I see my
friends, the veterinarians,
they're up in the gallery,
please rise to be recognized.
This is a New Mexico
veterinarians Medical
Association. Welcome to the
house.
leader from Dona Anna Sierra
Socorro Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you
see on your desk, you have this
beautiful little charcuterie
that has been provided by the
New Mexico Ag group. I want to
let you guys know, we, we don't,
they're not doing AgFeed this
year. So this is the
alternative. They packaged over
1000 of these and have delivered
them to every staff member, um,
so I think that was awfully nice
of them. They had to rent a van
to do that and to deliver that.
But I want to make sure that I
just acknowledge who these are
from.
um, bueno the New Mexico Council
of Outfitters and Guides to New
Mexico Aseki Association New
Mexico wool growers, the Federal
lands Council, New Mexico
Federal Lands Council, New
Mexico, um, crop production
association, dairy Farmers of
America, um protect agriculture
now, the cotton growers, to can
carry mountain cheese, council
uh the uh New Mexico Association
of Conservation Districts, Chile
Association, Farm and livestock,
dairy producer.
of New Mexico and the cattle
growers association, um, also
some from the water conservation
Districts, Pecos Water
Conservation District. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, if we all
eat 3 meals a day and uh if
Representative Azel would hear,
she'd say, if you like to eat 3
meals a day, if you like
affordable, high quality food
for your family, then you're
involved in ag, and I will just
say that, and she's not here,
but last year, the pro the
product sales from New Mexico
agriculture.
totaled 3.99.
billion dollars, so almost $4
billion. 1.7 billion of that was
cap and cow,
cattle and calves, uh 16.6
million is sheep and lambs,
fresh vegetables was 179 million
are winter wheat was 6.6 million
beans, the dry edible beans, was
2.9 million chili peppers, 41.5
million and dairy products were
1.3 billion and you know, we
have a couple of crops that we
just have to celebrate.
And highlight um the Farmgate
top product is the beef cattle
and dairy, Pecan is #2. Our
dairy, uh, and then, and then
onions and then chili and we
produce the entire plate with
the diversity um of agriculture
that's right here in New Mexico.
So thank you, New Mexico ad
group for these beautiful
charcuterie plates.
Thank you for the charcuterie
plates.
I didn't get one, but I'm sure
it's really good I hear.
I'm just gonna keep saying that
to get a bunch of extra stuff.
I'm just.
Just kidding, I didn't get one
for real. A young lady from
Santa Fe Lujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, I have.
Some distinguished guests with
us today in honor of um one of
our, um, beloved uh
representatives in in this house
who has now moved on or passed
on, um, on the rostrum today,
Mr. Speaker.
Um
I have the wife of of uh
Representative.
Jim Trujillo, Victoria Trujillo,
if you would please stand.
Liking
Mhm
Representative Chung's son Jeff
Truil, his wife, uh, Dane Trio
and Reina Truil, wife of his
other son Jeff Trujillo here
today with us, Mr. Speaker,
please stand in recognition.
Mr. Speaker, um, body, we get to
today I get to honor one of our,
um, as I said, beloved, and, and
well respected representatives
of uh house, uh, just how.
District 45, uh, and, um, his
legacy has led us to a lot of uh
wonderful things that we are
proud of, um, and a lot of that
that represent representation
and policy that he, he fortified
we still um.
We still respect and have in
place because he was very
thoughtful and his work um led
us to do some really wonderful
things here in our state, uh,
Mr. Speaker, I have a few words
to, um, say for in respect for
representative.
But you hear
Um
Representative Jim Che Rudolph
Trujillo was born and raised in
Puake Valley and was one of 15
children in his family.
He excelled academically in
school, graduating from Puke
High School in 1957 in just 3
years.
Representative Truillo graduated
from Saint Michael's College in
1961 with a bachelor's degree in
elementary education.
During which time he also served
his country in the New Mexican
National Guard.
Representing the trio worked as
an English teacher at Puake High
School.
And also managed a local branch
of uh Di Financial Manager and
owned El's general store and
liquor.
small business inuake which was
started by his father and where
he worked in his youth.
Representative Trujillo began
his public service as an auditor
for the Human Services
Department's office of Inspector
General and as a member of that
office's legislative tracking
team.
Representative Trio was
appointed on January 7th, 2003,
his 17-year tenure as a
legislator was marked by his
tireless advocacy for his
constituents, championing.
Affordable housing programs,
introducing tax credits for the
purchase of electric vehicles
and supporting education funding
initiatives. Representative
Trujillo actively served on
numerous interim committees,
including the investments in in
pension oversight committee, the
land grant committee, the
legislative finance committee
and the military of Veterans
Affairs Committee.
Representative Trio served on
numerous standing committees and
led the House taxation and
Revenue Committee as vice chair
from 2009 to 2014.
And chaired from 2017 to 2019
and co-chaired in 2020.
Representative Trujillo was the
lead sponsor on several
important pieces of legislation
including 2019's House Bill 6,
which pushed to reduce corporate
tax cuts and created constant
streams of revenue for education
and infrastructure.
Outside of his professional and
public accomplishments,
Representative Truil loves
sports and was a dedicated
golfer in Little League baseball
coach for 30 years, not only for
his sons but other aspiring
community athletes.
Representative Giuda was a
lifelong member of the Santa Fe
Elks.
And Representative Grio passed
away on March 3, 2024 at the age
of 84.
Representative Trio is survived
by his loving wife of 60 years,
Victoria, his sons Jeff and Jay
Trujillo and their families, his
grandchildren, JJ, Jennifer,
Nate, Cody, Brian, and Marie,
his siblings Jose, Clemente,
Alex Arsenio Ramo, and Trujillo,
Geraldine, Maxine, and Clara de
Maria and numerous other
relatives and friends.
Um, with that Mr. Speaker, um.
Let us um
Give our respect and resolved
from the House of
Representatives, the state of
New Mexico, um, the condolences
be extended to the family and
friends of former New Mexico
Representative Jim Rudolfo
Trujillo, a loving husband,
father, and public servant who
was committed to being a voice
for his community, and Mr.
Speaker, with that.
Again, we thank the family for
being here. We thank the
representative for all that he
has done for our state.
Thank you gentle lady. There is
some, there are some folks who
wanna say a few words as well,
so I'm gonna go to them and then
we'll come back.
To the family, gentle lady from
McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to, uh, say a few words also in
uh recognition of Representative
Jim Trujillo and welcome his
family to the New Mexico house.
uh, I was elected in 2001 and,
and, uh, Representative Trujillo
joined us in 2003 we had a very
similar paths throughout the New
Mexico legislature served on
several committees together, but
we always had Mr. Speaker, and
uh.
Uh, family members, we always
had a res a very good working
relationship when it came to
figuring out what the framework
framework would be for the tax
package and he always, always
brought up the issue of we've
got to change this progressive
system. The system isn't
working. We need, we need to do
something and, and, uh, I can
remember lots of times when we
were working together.
On that framework and he would
literally take out the sharp
pencil and paper and we'd sit
there either in his office or in
my office and we'd go through
the whole thing and he showed me
what the bottom line was gonna
look like.
And um very, very, uh very good
representative and I really
appreciate and uh feel very
honored to have served with him.
Um, I don't want to get choked
up, but thank you for being
here.
Thank you gentle lady.
Your lady from Santa Fe of
Zipansky.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, it's
so wonderful to have Vicky, Jay,
Jeff, Danette, Reyna with us
today, um, uh, you know, the,
the family of Chairman Trujillo
spent so much time in this
building, um, supporting him and
his incredible public service
but also supporting all of us as
we did the work, um, Chairman
Trujillo from the moment that I
met him was so kind and
encouraging.
To me, um, he was truly a class
act.
Um, but Mr. Speaker, he was also
super tough, uh, and I think Mr.
Speaker, you and I saw some of
those tough moments and I was
sharing with the, with the
family today how we still tell
stories about his legendary
toughness, um, and he was tough
when he
Really had to stand up for the
things that he believed in. He
did it time and time again, um,
and sometimes in, in meetings or
behind the scenes in places that
nobody knew about.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, uh, one of
my fondest memories is getting
to escort him through that door
over there for him to cast the
decisive vote on
Early childhood education for
the kids of this state, um, and
he showed up and with a smile
and his Duke's hat on and he
voted like a boss that day, um,
and that is one of the, the
great parts of the history of
the house. It's a great story in
the history of the house, um, so
Mr. Speaker, I just wanna
welcome the family. It's been
wonderful to stay in touch with
Vicky over this last year. I
know it's been a, a difficult
year.
And just I would just let the
family know, um, we really miss
him, we really support, uh, all
of you and uh he has not
forgotten.
Um, and I hope Mr. Speaker, that
we can all serve the way that
Chairman Trujillo served, uh,
which is with a whole lot of
kindness, uh, encouraging word
for everyone around him, um, and
a whole lot of toughness when he
stood up for everyday folks, so
thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from Berlin Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I too
would like to rise in support of
uh representative Trujillo, Jim
Trujillo, who I met when I when
I was on the para board.
But and I wanna acknowledge his
wife and his family. I've known
Vicky for many years, um, I'm
not Representative Trujillo when
I was on the PERA board and he
had oversight of the board and
later came to find that he knew
my father, who was a
commissioner here in Santa Fe
County and you know,
representative Trujillo was one
of the patriarchs of northern
New Mexico actually took a lot
of us younger people under his
wings and helped guide.
Just through, through a lot of
different political questions
that we had and I, I really
acknowledge that, you know, I
wished I could have attended his
funeral, and I talked to Vicky
earlier, um, but he was one of
definitely one of the people
that helped lead some of the
younger people in northern New
Mexico to where we are now and
From my heart, Vicky, I, I
acknowledge that and uh I'm
deeply sorry and saddened that
we lost him, but he has
contributed so much to the
development of our state, um,
and thank you for being here
today.
gentle lady from Verier of
Hockman Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
rise, um, to acknowledge
Chairman Trujillo, um, and all
of his family, thank you very
much for being here today, Mr.
Speaker, I only got to um have
the pleasure of knowing him a
couple of years, but he was
assigned to me as my mentor as a
freshman and I remember, um,
going to lunch with him and he
asked me in that very kind of
soft, but decisive voice of his,
you know, what do you care about
and um I started
off and he looked at me and he
said, no, what do you really
care about?
Mr. Mr. Speaker, and I told him,
he said, that's your heart.
That's what leads you, that's
why the people have chosen you
to lead you and don't ever
forget that and those words, Mr.
Speaker, have
Stuck with me ever every day
since, so, um, he was an
incredible lawmaker, um, thank
you to his family for being
here. He's dearly missed but not
forgotten. Thank you.
You gentle lady, the gentle lady
from Katherine Socorros Sierra
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I rise to acknowledge
and thank the family for being
here, um, Chairman Trujillo was,
um, kind.
always kind to me and always
trying to um make sure that I
knew and that I learned from him
and I really did and, and just
wanted to let you know that it
wasn't just, you know, a man of
his own party. He was a man of
trying to teach everyone, um.
All the things, all of his
knowledge and just, it just
seeped out of him. And so we, we
truly appreciate his service. We
appreciate you being here and,
and we are sorry for your loss,
but we thank you for allowing
him to be part of our life.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, lady from Bern
Leo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and um I
rise.
To
Offer a few words. I'm honored
to do so.
I welcome the family and I'd
like to commemorate, um.
The memory of chair through
heel.
I, um
I was assigned to tax and
revenue Committee and when Cha
Trujillo was the vice chair.
And um
I remember him.
He did his homework. He knew
what my background was. He
pulled me aside.
And he said,
I know that you come here
knowledgeable in the area of.
And he asked me to repeat what I
my degree was in because he was
interested, Mr. Speaker, in
knowing about degrees and
specialties and how he could
assist.
And I'll never forget that um he
mentioned.
You know, I don't know
everything. I may be vice chair
and later he was chair.
So I rely on the committee
members.
And their input
So never hesitate as long as I'm
sitting in this chair, do not
hesitate.
To raise your hand and to offer
what you have to offer. Don't
hold back.
And so I remember that because I
had the last name Caballero.
But he was truly a caballero,
the gentleman with kindness,
soft spoken words and welcoming
and never feeling intimidated by
anyone.
Particularly anyone who had
achieved.
And degree or achieved a level
of professional, um.
Experience, he was open always
and so I just wanted to say
thank you to the family, thank
you for sharing him with us
those years thank you very much.
Thank you gentle lady, um, I'm
gonna take a little bit of
chair's prerogative because um
Everything that you all have
stated about Chairman Trujillo,
um, I can attest to, um.
You know I have a bunch of other
stories, but I probably
shouldn't tell those on the
floor.
Um, but he was truly a
gentleman. He
was somebody who
took his role as a legislator,
very seriously.
He's somebody who was a
committed.
Democrat
And also very much understanding
of his role as the chair of tax.
And the impact of his decisions
on people across the state. Um,
and so in that light, he really
worked hard to work across the
aisle.
To not let his ide ideologies
necessarily stand in the way.
Of his work as chair.
While also holding strong to his
values, um, I had the
opportunity to serve under him,
um, as a, as, as a member of tax
when he was chair, uh, then I
had the honor of serving his, as
his vice chair, uh, starting in
2019, and I got to tell you,
those negotiations upstairs on
the tax package at 3 in the
morning the last night before
the end of session, uh, are
really truly the stuff of
legends. Um, I was tired. I was
cranky.
I was dead men walking.
And Jim Trujillo showed up,
refreshed like nothing had ever
happened. Um, there's an epic
picture in the Albuquerque
Journal of Chairman Trujillo and
I sitting next to each other and
the old Senate corporations
Committee where they were about
to tear up our tax bill.
And uh you could just see, um,
like freaking out like.
They looked like death and he
looks like a million bucks, uh,
in his, uh, in his freshly
pressed suit and starched shirt.
The thing that um that I'm gonna
take away from from Chairman
Trujillo from from Jim is how he
took it upon himself to.
Mentor the next generation.
And that's hard to come by in
this building, uh, because as we
get set in our positions, we get
set in our maybe committee chair
positions or, or, or leadership
positions, um, you know,
sometimes a little bubble kind
of builds around us, and we stop
looking, uh, backwards and
reaching backwards to pull the
next generation, and Jim didn't
do that. Jim was very conscious
of the fact that there was a new
generation waiting, um, and he
happily offered mentorship,
support.
Uh, lent a hand to pull those,
those of us who were new.
Um, and paid it forward, paid it
forward every single day that he
served here. Um, so I will
always remember Jim fondly. He
was a dear friend. He was a
mentor, um, he was somebody who
I confided in, um, and he was
somebody who uh as leader stated
and as all of you have stated,
um, really put the people first.
Now, um, I, I, I do want to add
one little bit to what the
leader from uh uh um Sapansky
stated earlier.
Um, the bill she's talking about
when Trujillo literally rolled
in in a wheelchair through that
door. I used to sit with a
gentle lady from Los Alamo Santa
Fe and Sandoval sits now, um,
and it was a bill I was carrying
with then former Representative
Maestas, who used to sit where
de la Cruz sits.
Um, and I'm not sure we had an
idea that was coming.
Um, we called the vote and we
knew we were a vote short.
And we were looking this way at
the boat.
And then I hear this.
Roar.
Every single member of this
house, Republican and Democrats,
stood up clapping, and I'm like,
what's going on? And I looked
behind me and there's Chairman
Trujillo right in that corner
seat.
Casting his vote.
I'm in shock. I look back up the
vote is closed.
I go back to thank him.
He's gone.
He was like a ghost. He was
gone. The media was texting,
they wanted to interview
Trujillo and like I, I think he
left.
I think Vicky sped away that
night, uh, out of the parking
garage. Um,
But look, uh, regardless of how
we feel about specific votes or
bills, the fact that he showed
up.
Um, and you wanted to show up,
uh, tells you everything you
need to know about Jim Trujillo,
uh, so Vicky, uh, and to all of
your family, thank you for
having shared with, uh, shared
Jim with the people of New
Mexico for so long as you could
tell by these, uh, different
stories you've heard here today.
He is dearly missed. He is very
much loved, um, and we know that
we will all see him on the other
side, uh, once that time comes.
So thank you, um, and if all you
all please rise and give the
Trujillo family.
And Chairman Jim Trujillo are
big roaring round of applause.
Jim Trujillo.
gentle lady from Catherine
Socorro Sierra Valencia, Leader
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
rise today to share a story.
A story of a doctor who fought
for his patient, one of many.
Who ultimately suffered the
consequences of New Mexico's
devastating physician shortage
and the barriers to timely care.
In May last year, a patient
walked into the clinic.
An excruciating pain, sharp
stabbing, radiating down his
leg. He rated it a 10 out of 10.
As his doctor.
This is his story as his doctor,
I performed a thorough exam and
saw what I feared significant ne
neurological weakness and
profound foot drop.
These symptoms were urgent,
requiring a mediant immediate.
neurosurgical evaluation, but as
a doctor practicing in New
Mexico, I knew what was coming.
Due to the state's critical
shortage of neurosurgeons, even
with a clear clinical evidence.
I could not get him referred
without imaging neurosurgery
would reject the referrals
unless I had an MRI or a CT scan
within the last 12 months.
But because they questioned his
diagnosis.
Not because they questioned his
diagnosis, but because they were
overwhelmed and forced to limit
access to only those cases where
imaging confirms a surgical
issue.
Without this policy, they would
be overburdened with patience
better suited for for pain
management.
So we thought, we fought hard
for him. We ordered the MRI. We
didn't wait, we started
treatment immediately.
Administering 3 epidurals,
hoping to reduce the
inflammation pressing on his
nerve root while navigating the
referral barriers. In June,
after his imaging was complete,
we submitted the referral to UNM
neurosurgery.
One month later,
One month later.
It was rejected.
I called the clinical manager. I
contacted the neurosurgeon
daily. I did everything I could
to get this patient scheduled,
but even after pushing the
earliest available appointment.
For an individual evaluation was
not until the end of the year,
far too late. Desperate for the
patient.
Desperate, the patient asked me
to refer him to a surgeon in
Durango, Colorado. Fortunately,
they were able to schedule him
for surgery in September. His
surgery relieved the pain, but
because of the months long delay
in care he suffered permanent
foot drop, a lifelong condition
where muscles that lift the
front part of the foot are
paralyzed, causing the foot to
drag while walking.
And here's what haunts me.
Had the patient been treated
urgently, the permanent
disability.
Could have been prevented.
And without that, Mister
Speaker.
Let's fix our system. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Further announcements.
I've got an announcement we are
going to be doing some 3rd
reading a little bit later, but
first, we're gonna do some
committee reports, a little bit
of housekeeping, and then we'll
get into the nitty gritty of 3rd
reading.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Clerk to read.
Yeah.
Oh my goodness.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
456 has had it under
consideration reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen White Gallego's
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Move
adoption.
We are in adoption of favor
committee report for hospital
456.
All those in favor same by
signify by saying I.
All those opposed signify by
saying nay.
OK.
Committee.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 457 as amended, has had it
under consideration report, same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Dorian Waigao's chair.
We adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
committee report, a House Bill
457 as amended. All those in
favor say aye.
All those opposed, same name.
Committee committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to who has been referred House
Bill 506 has had it under
consideration report and with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Dorian
why Gallego's chair. We
adoption.
We're on the option of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 506, all those in
favor of probably saying aye.
All those in uh posts by saying
nay.
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 295 has
had it under consideration,
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Derek J lent the
chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption.
We're in a favor of committee
report.
For house built 295, all those
in.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
All those opposed to saying nay.
Can we reported up.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee tomb has been referred
Senate Bill 8 as amended has had
it under consideration report
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted G
Andres from chair.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move
adoption.
Where adoption of people
committee report, uh, on Senate
Bill E as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All those opposed, sign my name.
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 133 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Gremo
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of favorable committee
report for Senate Bill 133 as
amended. All those in favor
signified by saying no.
I suppose nay, the IAI committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 343 has had it under
consideration reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Andre chair.
Mr. Speaker,
move a favorable for Senate Bill
343. All those in favor and if I
was a 9.
How was Bosna,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 551
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and it referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair Mr.
Speaker, adoption. We're
adoption of favorable committee
report for House Bill 551. All
those in favor of Saint say no.
I was supposed.
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 555
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair.
We are adoption of favor for
House Bill 555. All those in
favor of say 9.
All the supposed nay,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 570 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair, adoption. We
are adoption in favorable
committee report for 570. All
those in favor of 589.
I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred to Senate Bill
199.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations of finance
committee, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Move adoption.
We are an adoption of favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
199. All those in favor of 9.
All the supposed a.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair
adoption of favorable committee
report for Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Al the supposed nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 65 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted.
Do you want Johnson, chair.
Speaker, move adoption.
We are on adoption of a favor
coding report for House Bill 65.
All those in favor of signified
by saying na.
All the supposed nay.
The eyes have it be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 304 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Deanna Johnson, chair.
Move adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 304. All those in
favor of papa cena.
All the supposed need. The eyes
have it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 412 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Dowana Johnson,
chair, move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 412. All those in
favor signified by say 9.
All the supposed
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 414.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair? Move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
414. All those in favor
signified by C 9.
Oh there's a snake.
A committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 443 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do Wanda Johnson,
chair.
More reduction.
We're an adoption of a
favorville community report for
I 443. All those in favor in
Papaina.
I suppose nay, the Isabit
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 487 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Dowana
Johnson chair.
We adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 487. All those in
favor of signified by CI.
All Bona,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, to whom he's been
referred House Memorial 35 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that a
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Memorial 35
do pass, respectfully submitted
to Wanda Johnson, chair. Move
it.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House Memorial 35, but a
favorable committee report for
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Memorial
35.
All those in favor of signified
by saying I.
Alth suppose nay.
You guys have it report adopted.
General lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I we go to that order
of business messages.
See no objection. It is ordered.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 169
as amended.
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate bill.
353 and request the concurrence
of the house respectfully
submitted Sherry de Luhansson, a
chief clerk.
Have you ever wondered if we
don't enter the message what
would happen?
Should we try it out?
Message will be entered.
one.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 39 as
amended, Senate Bill 81 as
amended with the emergency
clause, Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 480 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan sent a chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 252 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted Sherry
Hansen ay clerk.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session.
It's an objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to provision and
approval of the rules and order
of Business Committee.
It is so ordered.
Happy legislative day 15
members.
If we do this 35 more times
right now, we're done.
If you guys want to go for it,
we could totally do it.
That is also uncharted
territory, I'm told, so.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements.
Did all committee uh dinners
already happened, everybody got
the committee dinners out of the
way? Yes, how about, how about
enrolling and engrossing? Did
you guys get your committee
dinners yet?
Mr. Speaker, I haven't been
invited to that dinner. Neither
have I.
Is it happening? What's going
on?
OK, we're totally kidding. We
just.
We wanted to see your expression
when you found out that you may
have to have had a committee
dinner. Who's the chair of
printing and supplies.
Is there a
Mr. Speaker, um, I'll arrange
something very unique.
Members take note.
And because we're all members of
that committee we're all
invited.
I just appointed all of us to
printing and supplies.
Any other announcements?
Right, we're gonna do a little
bit of intro and then we'll get
into 3rd reading. General lady
from Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, I
move we go to that order of
business introduction of
legislation. It is so ordered.
clerk to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 18,
an act relating to crimes
against the public peace,
creating the crime of swatting,
describing penalties, making
conforming amendments. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 18. Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 18 haven't been read twice
by title is ordered.
I referred to the house Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 180
as amended, an act relating to
self-service storage, providing
that the limit for the maximum
value of stored personal
property allowed for in rental
agreements is deemed to be the
maximum value of the stored
personal property, providing
that an action to sell property
may be taken upon 45 days of
continuous default, allowing the
imposition of late fees for
rental payments in default,
providing for an alternative
contact in an agreement.
a rental agreement to receive a
notice of intent to enforce a
lien omitting requirements for
the posting of notice. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 180 as amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 180
as amended have been read twice
by title is referred to the
House of Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax, business, and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 20,
an act relating to taxation,
increasing the rate of the
tobacco products tax, amending
definitions in the tobacco
Products Tax Act, distributing
the revenue from the increase in
the tobacco products tax to a
new nicotine use prevention and
control fund. Senate tax,
business, and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 20. Senate, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate bill 2
have been read.
wise by title is referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
taxation and Revenue Committee.
Senate Bill 274 as amended,
introduced by Senator Wirth and
others, an act relating to
public property, changing the
threshold for state board of
Finance approval on sales,
trades, or leases of property by
state agencies and local public
bodies. Senate Bill 274 as
amended.
Sen a bill 274 as amended have
been read twice by title.
I referred to the House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 507,
and act relating to firearms,
amending and enacting sections
of the concealed handgun carry
Act, providing terms and
conditions for a concealed
handgun carry license, providing
a process for license renewal
and transfer of a license from
another state, enhancing a
penalty. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507.
not house Senate. Thank you for
paying attention. Good job,
Madam Whip. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507 have been written by
title, is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee then the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 169
as amended. An act relating to
economic development, enacting
the strategic economic
development site readiness Act,
making an appropriation. Senate
tax, business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 as amended. Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 as amended have been
read twice by title. He referred
to the House commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 353,
an act relating to search and
rescue emergency response,
amending the search and rescue
Act, providing response
protocols for federal, state,
local, or tribal agencies when
New Mexico search and rescue is
required in search and rescue
emergencies. Senate tax,
business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 353.
Senate Taus and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 353 haven't been read twice
by title is referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 39 as amended,
introduced by Senator Stefaniks
and others, an act relating to
insurance, amending the prior
authorization Act to add more
classes of drugs that are not
subject to prior authorizations
or step therapy protocols.
Senate Bill 39 as amended.
Senate Bill 39 as amended have
been me twice by title is
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 81 as amended,
introduced by Senator Wirth and
others, an act relating to
insurance, creating the new
Mexico Property Insurance
Program Association board to
administer the Fair Plan Act
establishing board duties and
responsibilities, creating new
requirements for insurance
policies offered under the Fair
Plan Act, prescribing fees,
making an appropriation,
declaring an emergency. Senate
Bill 81 as amended. Senate Bill
81 as amended have been res wise
white title is referred.
To the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480,
an act relating to public
schools requiring the public
education department to create
an annual report of all students
who are school age and have not
graduated from high school
within 4 years from entering 9th
grade and to provide the report
upon request to certain
recipients who provide adult
education or programming to
attain a high school equivalency
credential. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 480.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill for
80 haven't been.
Read twice by title is referred
to the House Education
Committee, the the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 252 as amended, uh,
introduced by Senator Figueroa,
an act relating to telehealth,
amending the New Mexico
telehealth Act to allow all
licensed social workers to
provide telehealth services.
Senate Bill 252 as amended.
Senate Bill 252 as amended
haven't been read tw haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Memorial 53.
Introduced by Representative
Herndon and memorial requesting
the Department of Health and the
aging and long-term Services
Department to collaborate with
the New Mexico chapter of the
Alzheimer's Association and any
other entity deemed appropriate
or beneficial to using the best
available evidence-based
research regarding brain health,
update and integrate that
research into those departments
respective public health,
education and outreach programs
and campaigns and into those
departments respective
healthcare provider education.
An outreach programs and
campaigns and further requesting
those departments to seek
federal funding.
And resources for the updating
and integration efforts through
the federal administration on
agings Alzheimer's disease
programs initiative and any
other federal programs, funds or
resources that may be available.
House Memorial 53.
How's Memorial 53 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house, health, and Human
Services Committee.
House Memorial 54, introduced by
Representatives Baca and G.
Andreas Romero, a memorial
requesting the legislative
Education Study Committee in
collaboration with the
Department of Public Safety, the
Homeland Security and Emergency
Management Department and the
Public education department to
research and study during the
2025 legislative interim public
school safety and the potential
benefits of the establishment of
a school safety entity in public
schools and to report the
results to the study of the
Governor to the governor and the
New Mexico Legislative Council,
House Memorial, 54.
As Memorial 54 haven't been read
twice. My title is ordered,
printed, and referred to the
House Education Committee.
House Memorial 55 introduced by
Representative Vincent, a
memorial urging the office of
Superintendent of Insurance to
promptly approve the proposed
changes to the New Mexico
property insurance program to
provide relief to homeowners in
Lincoln County and other
communities throughout the
state. House Memorial 55.
House Memorial 55 having been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 56, introduced by
representatives Lujan, Borego,
Torres Velasquez, Abeta and
Serato, a memorial recognizing
the importance of maternal
mental health and observing May
as national maternal mental
Health Awareness Month in New
Mexico. House Memorial, 56.
Memorial 56 haven't been read
twice by title, is ordered,
printed and referred.
To the House Health and Human
Services Committee.
House Memorial 57 introduced by
representatives Hall the 2nd and
Lundstrom, a memorial requesting
a designee from the Department
of Public Safety, the director
of the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy, the deputy
director of training for the New
Mexico law enforcement Academy
and the designee of the public
employees retirement association
to collaborate and study the
issues regarding recruitment and
retention of New Mexico law
enforcement Academy instructors
and provide a consensus
recommendation.
To the legislative interim
committee charged with reviewing
matters related to investments
and pensions. House Memorial,
57. Memorial 57 haven't been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
you know, objection is ordered.
learn to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 155 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the houses
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Luhan, Senate chief clerk
will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation.
It is so ordered.
Gentle lady from I believe Santa
Fe, Romero, are you in charge of
item number 52? And if so, are
you ready, Mr. Speaker, will you
get me?
Let the record effect that
action necessary for placing the
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 253 on
final passage has been taken and
it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This
bill modernizes the way in which
we data process through certain
court records with that being
pertaining to evictions
specifically and with that I
stand for questions. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, does a gentle lady from La
Sallamo Shield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, if I were from
Los Alamos, I would yield, but
I'm from Santa Fe, so maybe not.
I don't know. Do you want to try
that again? Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. You can yield from
Santa Fe if you'd like to do
that. I will do that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. I did
not see this through any of my
committees, and that was a
pretty quick uh explanation.
Could you explain how this
modernizes uh.
Records
Uh, sure, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so essentially we're
looking at um about 15,000
eviction filings, um, this year,
uh, or averaging that per year
and about 55,500 records since
March 2020. So there are quite a
few folks, um, that have been
essentially um two courts, you
have to deal with an eviction
filing, whether or not you
actually win that court case,
that eviction.
Stays on your record. So if I'm
a tenant who um essentially wins
that court case, I still look
like I have an eviction on my
record. Um, so what this does,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady or
gentlemen, excuse me, um, allows
for folks that win their cases
for that case to be sealed for
um in perpetuity, um, for those
that lose their case, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, those get
unsealed and are um essentially
open for public view for
At least 3 years and then
automatically go away from that
record and and our sealed after
the fact. So for those that are
facing eviction, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and essentially
when their cases, um, so they
don't get stuck entrapped in
that, um, sort of stigma of
eviction, those records are
sealed indefinitely.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So currently, um,
those, those records remain in
place.
Whether or not, uh, they lose
the, the case currently.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so if
they lose their case currently,
all of that's public record and
the same thing goes if they lose
their case, um, as per the new
protocol we've um designated in
this bill um would allow that
record to be open for viewing.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, so for those who, who lose
in court currently does that uh
record remain, uh, does it
remain on the record in
perpetuity? It does, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
So thank you Mr. Speaker. So,
uh just once again, I, I have no
idea what this does, so.
Just per year.
Uh, let's just say, uh.
Cliff note's explanation for me.
If
If a person wins.
And is not evicted, then that is
completely removed from their
record, but for those who were
to be evicted, it would remain
for 3 years. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, what?
Happens in the instance during
those 3 years following
And there is another record of
eviction during those three
years. Does that original still
fall off after 3 years, Ms.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, so
after 3 years that that original
record would automatically be
sealed, um, but then any
subsequent again the the amount
of time starts whenever that,
um, eviction is um.
Basically adjudicated through
the courts. So as soon as they
get that eviction filing they
lose um that stays on their
record for 3 years.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, would it, uh, if, if,
uh, person is a.
Uh, habitually being evicted,
that wouldn't be uh worth our
while for that to remain, uh,
instead of falling after off
after 3 years, it wouldn't be in
the benefit of a potential
renter to know that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Yeah. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again for perpetual offenders,
that tolling begins at every
eviction. So you, you would be
able to see it on any subsequent
eviction for at least 3 years.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. OK, so.
Um, but regardless, even if
they're habitual at 3 years,
it'll fall off the record. OK,
I, I think I understand. I, I
appreciate the debate. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalillo,
Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, does
a gentle lady from Santa Fe
Yilt? I yield to my friend from
Bernalillo.
Uh, thank you so much, uh,
gentle lady for bringing in Mr.
Speaker, for bringing this piece
of legislation. I think it will
have a tremendous impact in our
um communities, but to the point
of the gentleman from San Juan,
uh, I do have some points of,
uh, clarification that will help
the body understand what this
bill does better, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady,
do you know why eviction records
currently remain on attendance
record for life. I mean, not
everybody has access to the case
law system to be able to even
look up someone's.
um, eviction record.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think it's just been common
practice. We've been learning
from a lot of other states about
how to improve housing, um,
opportunities and we understand
that the records that are kept
in this way, the way that we do
currently in New Mexico, um, has
just been a way of doing
business for, you know, since
its inception, um, and so what
we're looking to do is really
figure out what can work for New
Mexican families for those that
have been in this situation that
helps us modernize our data.
processing and and how it is
that we keep these court
records.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you know how many cases that are
filed for eviction actually end
with an eviction warrant.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so we
don't actually, unfortunately
take that kind of data in New
Mexico again, part of the idea
of modernizing this whole
structure is learning from what
we are providing within our
systems of, of information. We
do know that in Colorado it's
about 50% of them, um, so
learning from our neighbors to
the north, that's how we've been
able to understand and grapple
with what we would be thinking
would be very similar here in
New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so, um, just so everyone
understands, when you, when a
landlord files for eviction, uh,
that does not necessarily mean
that you have then been evicted.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? That's exactly
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, again, 50% of those cases
are often won, whether it be
through being able to negotiate
something with the landlord,
being able to pay, perhaps
something in arrears, a number
of different situations again,
that, that families are in.
that requires maybe just a
conversation through that
filing, um, but again, 50% of
those would be considered
non-evictions.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so,
um, when I was working at Legal
Aid as a paralegal, um, working
on eviction cases. I think I
only saw one case out of the
many, many that we saw that
actually ended in a warrant, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
I understand, most, um, eviction
cases, at least in Berlio County
are settled through um a
negotiation with the landlord
which then would allow um that
in and the individual usually
moves out peacefully, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you?
say that that's your experience
as well? Yes, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also, um, worked
in the clinic with, uh, with the
University of New Mexico's um
law school looking at a lot of
these cases and most of them are
online. They're very fast, um,
and again, having the
opportunity to have that
conversation in many of these
cases helps resolve a situation,
but whether or not those cases
are filed and end up in an
eviction or in just a
resolution.
that eviction case still sticks
on someone's record, and that's
unfortunately what goes to a
number of different background
checks, websites, um, and then
unfortunately stigmatize a lot
of those that are looking for a
new apartment or a new rental,
um, and their names end up on
those same lists just because of
that filing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do,
so what you're explaining is
that, uh, then the, the online
system has that record then in
perpetuity they don't update it.
Do the, do they distinguish on
this rent screening on this
tenant screening tool, um, does
it distinguish cases that have
been completed towards to
eviction or those that were just
filed.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
exactly the problem. They do not
distinguish whether you won your
case or lost your case, um,
unfortunately, oftentimes
because the records are so
incomplete, sometimes just
having a name that's very
similar to somebody else. Your
name might end up on that same
database as well. I know the
same things happened with my
name being very commonly used,
um, and unfortunately, I've
ended up on lists for liens or
for evictions, things that I've
had to get removed just because
my name is very common.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
that is, that is a really tough
situation to be in. Uh, what,
you know, when these, when these
are updated, there are some new
tools now for that screening
companies use, do they use AI in
any kind of way to distinguish
that that sort of problem.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
certainly, um, we have another
bill about rent, um, use for AI,
but those types of tools are
certainly being used to screen
out, uh, various, uh, tenants
systematically.
And, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, do you know why landlords
rely on these automated tenant
screening reports instead of
just reviewing the court
decisions themselves, I mean, if
you were gonna have someone live
in your apartment, wouldn't you,
um, ask for their records and
then go through those records
and see how the judge ruled or
what happened in that case.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
only we had all of the clerical
time to do that. I know a lot of
landlords probably don't and are
relying on this maybe, um, not
even knowing that they may have
be screening out great tenants
or potential tenants, um, just
through that sort of data
processing, so hopefully this
really helps, um, landlords
really understand who's in front
of them, you know, maybe someone
had a bad year that, and they
did have an eviction on their
record. Well, 3 years at least
they know that that's not going
to stigmatize.
them further from finding
housing, um, the other issue is
just that again with common
names and other data for folks
that win their cases, we've
heard a lot of testimony through
this process, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, of those that won
their case with their landlord
and still cannot find an
apartment because their names
are on these lists, and
unfortunately, a lot of
landlords do rely on the data
that we do have available, um,
and I think to unfort to be a
detriment of both parties, both
the landlord and the tenant,
they're not getting the data
that they need to proper.
screen a tenant.
So Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, is there some kind of
financial incentive for these
tenant screening companies to
misclassify the eviction
records, it would seem they
would want actually accurate
information.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
when this data is is purchased
and or just it bred for, as we
understand it in a lot of ways,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they're able to take that data
and sell it to um landlords, um,
who are undergoing these
background checks for their
tenants. So there's always a
financial incentive for the data
brokers, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but not a great incentive
for those who don't have clean
data and are accurate data, and
especially for the tenants who
can't actually find housing
because
names may be on these lists, um,
it makes it extremely hard for
them to be able to get past
these filtration systems and so
that's why we want to start with
the source of this information
at the court level to make sure
that the information that's
being obtained and held at the
court level is accurate.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, uh, that is also my
understanding and as I
understand, you know, attendant
screening company, they're their
model, their profit model would
be driven by providing as much
information um as possible,
including as much eviction data
as possible and, and that may be
regardless of the accuracy of
that data, um, many landlords in
in our community operate, um,
you know.
are are renting our good
landlords are renting in good
faith, um, but certainly the in,
in my experience, the landlords
who are doing most of the
evictions are often some of
those larger landlords, um, who
maybe aren't even from our state
are are from out of state, have
many, many, many units, um, and
I have also seen that uh
landlords in, in some cases, uh,
can use evictions as a possible
way to incentivize.
is the person to pay quickly or
to pay more, um, uh, to pay even
more than they already owe by
you leveraging fines and fees
and, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
At least with um with the
eviction piece having so many
evictions on your record, even
if they aren't actually leading
to an actual eviction, um, but
are, are rather using this
eviction system, this legal
system that we have as a tool to
get individuals to pay, um, oh
it doesn't really seem that fair
that um that there are then
companies who are profiting off
of this and are not actually
taking the time and the due
diligence.
to go through uh the those that
court data, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, do you know if
that court data, if you can just
email to get that court data out
and review it or if um so do you
have to go in person to the
court to access that court data?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so if
I wanted to go review my own
court records, I can file
through the, the court website
depending on what jurisdiction
you're in, um, most of these
records are available for you to
view them. However, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there's no way to
really do anything other than
view them.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I do
remember when I had to go access
um some court documents, uh, to
read them to understand what
happened in the case I remember
I had to go to Burnlio County
Court, and I had to provide my
ID, uh, I had to sit down and
review. I had to copy by hand
some of the information, um, I
remember there was a an
extensive process for requesting
a CD for instance, I guess it
would make sense, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that if your
business model was to provide as
much.
information as possible, maybe
you actually wouldn't take the
time to read every case to go
through the trouble, especially
if you're a company that isn't
even in our state if you're an
out of state company, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it doesn't
seem like that it would be very
difficult to actually review the
accuracy of that of that data,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you think that um the landlords
who use this legal this large
property management, um, you
know, that we use these, these
screening reports, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, do you
think that?
they understand that that this
might be happening.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
may, they may understand what's,
you know, is going on with the
data and how it may affect
people's lives, just putting
everyone in one sort of lumped
category of, of eviction status.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
could be the case. Um, however,
you know, again, having that
nuanced information, we're
starting at the source of how
that information is collected
and for those who do win their
cases, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we find that the best, safest
and, and certainly the most
proactive option for
folks that are in that situation
would be able to just have that
record sealed and, you know, you
want your case, you don't have
that stigma against you.
However, for those that have
that situation, we know we want
that data to be available to
landlords, so you get that 3
year period, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but then that again
gets sealed after the fact, um,
so we think this is really fair
and it's a better way to manage
data, especially as we know it's
being brokered and, and, and
oftentimes just lumped in.
with everything when we know
about 50% of these cases, um,
are likely those that just end
up in a in a settlement or a
situation where there is no
eviction at all.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, who, who does this, uh,
disproportionately impact, um,
did this, I mean the, the
evictions and who would this
policy benefit?
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
we know there are about 250,000
people who rent a place here in
New Mexico today. So when you
think about all those that have
to sign a lease make ends meet,
make, make sure that they're
following everything, um, to the
T, and we have a a a very
unfortunate 3-day, the shortest
timeline in the United States
for eviction, um, for that court
filing to come down and for
eviction to be applied to folks,
um, so 3 days of time before
you, you have to be out.
of your place, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so folks in those
situations that do get called to
court that do get in this
situation, oftentimes just need
to have that sort of
conversation with their
landlord, um, and so when we're
thinking about the 15,000
eviction filings on average that
we see per year in New Mexico.
This is a lot of folks that fall
into this category of need, uh,
when they're actually trying to
find a new place to stay for
those that, again, the 50% that
may just be able to win these
cases.
um, and move on from that, uh,
renter rental situation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we, we
know that they struggle to
relocate, um, more if you are
have an eviction on your record,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
those are the folks that likely
fall into homelessness, um, and
we just, we certainly don't want
that to happen, and that's also
part of why we're here today.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just a few more questions. Um,
is there a reason why, uh, you
mentioned the word fair in this
proposal and, and I think this
bill is um quite fair in the way
that we've put it together
compared to other laws across
the United States that have
this, um, is, is there a reason,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, why
we um did not include, like, for
instance, expungement of these
records, uh, in this bill, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, that, that's another bill
that is for consideration moving
forward why we're talking about
ceiling today is that it's a,
it's really a proactive
response. It's really looking at
the front end of opportunity to
how we and how we data manage
folks that come into the courts
through this um type of
situation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so they're two very
separate sort of situations and
expungement is is a category of
law that we don't know a ton
about in New Mexico and how well
it's been used, um,
As far as just being able to
understand what's happening on
the back end when folks are
looking for expungement of those
records, so we really feel like
this is a a proactive way of
looking at how we data manage on
the front end, um, to help folks
out with those situations they
may end up in.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I definitely can see how from
me, at least for me, um, in, in
housing, I think we need an all
of the above approach, but I
think um definitely the emphasis
on this bill here is um, you
know, we are trying to be fair
in the sense of that, uh, you
know, a, uh, an eviction that
has been led that has gone
through the whole legal process
and have been has been
determined that it is a valid,
um, eviction that those kind of
records wouldn't, um,
those kind of records would be
made available for 3 years and
that in the beginning, uh we are
trying to protect the, the data
of folks and the accuracy of the
data that folks are receiving on
individuals, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, are there any
other folks around us, um,
around in, in other states who
have enacted these type of laws.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
16 other states have enacted
this including the District of
Columbia, um, to essentially
have this sort of data model we
have done the back um and
research to really understand
best practice in each of those
states that applies best to New
Mexico. Um, we've worked with
the administrative office of the
courts as well to update
language, um, for this, for this
bill and so we really feel
confident that on best practice
and the way in which we data
manage this is the best model.
available to us.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
um, and gentle lady, I, I
certainly am in agreement with
that and um I will know in in my
research of other states, uh,
Texas even has a provision like
this in their um in their law,
they um if the the court does
require that there's some
negotiation and that the um
landlord and the person who is
being evicted meet and if they
are able to reach an agreement
that eviction actually does get
removed from the
record upfront. So, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I do think that
this is a a fair policy for New
Mexico, especially as we're
experiencing such um such a rise
in in homelessness and and um
housing instability as costs
are, are rising in, in our rent.
This is one of the number, the
2nd most cited issue yesterday
on our town hall in
affordability and, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I
think, uh, what's brought
forward will make a difference
in in in our courts here in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
There is further debate.
The gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield? I will yield
to the representative from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. I, I just, uh, looked up
and Texas does not allow for any
expungement of the eviction
records at all, period. They do
allow for some expungement for
other things but not for
eviction.
So just a quick question for
you.
Couple of questions perhaps, um,
I think everybody in here wants
to be fair.
Uh, for both landlords and for
tenants. Would you accept that,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you.
Um, so after 3 years, the law
right now states that that uh is
is uh you, you can be expunged
from that eviction.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady or
gentlemen, excuse me, um, so
after 3 years, if you had a
valid, uh, eviction on your
record, that then becomes
sealed. That record is sealed.
Mr. Speaker, generally, so
that's the current law right
now. No, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's the proposal before
us. OK. Gentlemen, excuse me.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um,
Going back to a statement that
was made a little bit earlier,
um,
Yeah
How many, how many of these
cases are settled between the
landlord and the.
Lieutenant.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so based on just data
estimates from Colorado, about
50% are settled. We don't have,
we don't actually have the
ability to collect that data
right now in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Let's take that one
step further than if I could,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you agree then that uh
perhaps landlords are not made
whole.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I, I
don't, can you explain, expound
upon your question, please.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I've had 60 doors before,
almost 60 doors I should say,
and every time that I evicted
somebody, I was not made whole,
so that's my question just
because uh on a an agreement is
reached does not make the
landlord whole.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
we don't collect data on this
issue, perhaps you have um.
had an experience with that, um,
what we understand is that for
the folks that end up in a court
case on eviction, we estimate
that 50% of those folks are able
to settle, able to have a
situation with which they're
able to come to a conclusion
without that eviction, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and so for
those folks that are able to get
into a settlement situation,
that's where this record is
sealed, um, that's what we're
asking for within, within this
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I had like
Probably
20
25, um, and never once was I
made whole as a landlord, so I'm
telling you real life
experience.
Out of 50% of those are settled,
I guarantee you that the
landlord is not made whole in
the majority of those cases, so.
With that being said,
I have a friendly amendment for
you.
And I'd like to have a roll call
vote, please.
How friendly is it, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, it is very
friendly.
It comes with a teddy bear.
Gentlemen, to sign the
amendment.
And then bring the amendment to
the clerk.
Gentlemen, can you please read
the number on the bottom left.
Yes, Mister Speaker, the number
on the bottom is 231-805.2.
All right, we're gonna get that
passed out and posted online.
Give it a couple of minutes and
Gentlemen, I believe the
amendment has been passed out
and it is posted online,
gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, this
amendment for 253 basically does
two things. It leaves unsealed
any court proceedings or a
judgment is issued and a render
is ordered to pay damages other
than owed rent.
And this would include inners
who ordered to pay damages to a
landlord for failing to meet
their statutory obligations
pursuant to 47-8-22 and cause
physical damage to a property
owner's property and it limits
application of the act of the
first eviction proceeding
against a renter, eliminating
protections for individuals who
the subject of multiple eviction
proceedings.
Gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment?
Mr. Speaker, this is an
unfriendly amendment.
Is there a debate on the
amendment.
Gentlemen from.
Chavez, Eddie, and Otero
Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. To the
gentleman from San Juano.
I will happily yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on this amendment,
can you tell me why you think
that's important?
Well, I think there are a couple
of reasons. Number one, we want
to offer
Mercy
And if if I'm evicted and I
haven't done anything wrong
other than falling on hard
times. This gives me exactly
that if I'm a tenant and I
wrecked that apartment and cause
damage, then it does not do
that.
And our my concern as a former
owner of properties is that this
happens time and time and time
again.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentleman
from San Juan, I tend to agree
with that. I, I've seen a lot of
rentals where a renter will
absolutely destroy destroy the
property, move on to the next
one, and I think it's really
important that we help folks
that are gonna.
Do rentals because as as
everybody in here knows, uh,
housing is crucial at this time.
And so if, if I owned rentals, I
would want to make sure that my
rental is protected and if that
continued to happen, I would
probably get out of the renter's
business.
Do you think that's accurate?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, that is
accurate. Like I said, we wanna,
we wanna offer offer mercy. We
want to give a person that's
just fallen on hard times you
want to give them an opportunity
to to have that expunged and
say, OK, one, you're good, but
if it continues over and over
and over again, then yes, those
evictions need to stay online.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and the
last thing I'll say is I, I
really do appreciate the fact
that after one time that we've
given the mercy, uh, if this is
going to continue to happen I
think it's important so that
rental rental offices are able
to pull that history up and
understand what they're getting
and maybe that even allows to
have better discussion with that
renter before they're, they're
able to rent that property. So,
uh, I fully support this
amendment and I thank you for
it.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Hall the 2nd.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. It is the
gentleman from San Juan Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
gentleman yields.
Thank you, uh, when damage is
done to apartments, I, I have
owned.
A building that I rented and
made the mistake of owning one
in a college town. My father
owned rental properties.
How long does it take to go in
and repair these properties.
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, sometimes it, uh, it
can take days and days to rent,
um, as I, uh, as I manage my
properties as I did most work
myself, it took me days and days
because I'm working alone if I
hired it done and paid somebody
to go in there and fix it up,
you know, they might get it done
in 3 or 4 days, uh, depending on
how much damage was done.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
can tell you through my own
experience, I would have to take
time off to drive from
My home in San Juan County down
to Donana County and spend the
entire weekend and days off to
fix the rental property.
So I could get it, rent it
again, and as time went on, I
found out there were some
Systemic renters.
Down there, um, who'd done this
to multiple properties, and I
always tried to be a nice guy
and give everyone a break and it
ended up costing me thousands of
dollars, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, thank you,
gentlemen. Yeah, that, that's
the problem here. We're trying
to be fair to both parties
trying to be fair to the person
that owns the property that puts
his skin in the game and his
money and and also be fair to
the individual that may fall on
hard times.
The other thing, Mr. Speaker,
that I would point out, having
owned property like this, I
eventually sold it.
And I got rid of the property
and taking away an opportunity
to rent to people who are good
renters, and the issue is when
you sell your property because
you're so frustrated losing
money.
The people who are not going to
rent it now or they bring the
rent way out of rate. I
basically charged enough rent.
To college students to make my
mortgage on that property, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's part of the problem after
you've been, um, your property's
been damaged a few times and you
just raised the rent up and you
get it to where people that
aren't going to come in and, and
tear your property up, uh,
you're not gonna rent to them
and that in itself is a problem
because some of those folks are,
are the best people in the
world. I had, I had renters that
were with me for 24 years.
And they're great. I've had
people with me for 4 months that
cost $30,000 for the damage.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
is the question of the day.
If we talk about a housing
crisis, we talk about being able
to provide for housing, and yet
those of us who are fortunate
enough to try to have rental
property, end up paying the
price and so the property goes
away or we sell out to as our
compadres across the aisle have
said to these conglomerates to
buy the property.
And the only ones who really
lose are the, the people who
reside in New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
accurate.
Well, I appreciate you bringing
this amendment, um.
Representative and I, I wish it
was friendly because I think
it's the right thing by both
sides. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Further debate on the amendment,
the gentle.
lady from Berlio and Sandoval%
of kids. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Will the gentleman from San
Juan, who I'm staring oh sorry
I'm sorry, sorry. No, it's OK. I
called in the young lady from
Berlin and Sandoval, and then
I'll, I'll go to you next. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My voice
sounded really funny there for a
moment.
I was sure what I was supposed
to do, um, does the gentleman
from San Juan.
I will gladly yield. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you for bringing this forward,
um, I to.
Um, like to hear the, the voice
of property owners who have
every right to be able to
protect their property, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, but I, I
wanna go over, um, uh, your, uh,
amendment here on number one, it
does say that, uh,
That you
I need to recoup if there's
damage above, if, if the
eviction occurs and there's
damages above the past rent that
is what you are asking for and
not have their records sealed,
is that correct?
No, ma'am. Uh, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you,
gentlemen. It's a shall not seal
any court records pursuant to
the provision of this section if
the court has awarded damages to
the owner for anything other
than unpaid rent. So you're
asking for it not to be sealed
as the bill before us if there
are damages beyond the unpaid
rent.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you, gentlemen. I, um, I
do agree that you have every
right to um ask for damages for
property that's been damaged,
but that is not a part of the
eviction notice, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if um that would be a
separate procedure and would not
fall under uh the proposed bill
we have today, so it wouldn't be
part of the sealed record.
words if somebody came and
damaged your property, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, I have another question, uh,
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen
from San Juan, our number 3, you
say, uh, if the resident who is
a party to the eviction action
at issue has not previously been
a party to an eviction action.
Throughout their entire
lifetime, there's no time period
on here, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so was your intent,
is any eviction throughout their
lifetime would make them
ineligible for any kind of
ceiling. Is that correct?
That's correct, young lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, I cannot support
this bill. I think that um what
we've shown is that um there are
individuals, as you said in your
top and you presented this bill
that you believe in second
chances. I know that individuals
maybe who might have
schizophrenia or have uh uh
different uh medications and
they may have periodic to be
able to do something that I feel
they should still be held
accountable and you can still
hold them accountable for
damages, but.
you would like to remove what
will
Um, make it impossible for them
to rent in the future, if not
sealing these eviction records,
especially throughout their
entire lifetime. So I won't be
supporting this amendment. Thank
you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Further debate on the amendment,
the gentle lady from Berlin and
Torrens, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. It's good to see your, um,
face this time around, um, well
the gentlemen, well, the, uh,
gentleman from San Juan, please
yield will yield to my friend.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
when I'm looking at this, this
first part you have on page 4,
line 5,
after public insert and provide
further, the court shall not
seal any records pursuant to the
provisions of the section this
court have awarded damages to
the owner anything. Can you
explain to me in layman's term,
what, what was your intent with
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. My intent was if,
if this individual has destroyed
your property, um, then and, and
as awarded monies.
Um, and by the way, um, when
you're awarded money from the
court, you hardly ever get it
back.
You hardly ever get those funds
back, so you're left as the
owner of that property to fix it
up, to repair it and get it
ready to rent again or as has
been stated, you fix it up and
then you sell it and get it off
the market and get it out of
your headache, so that was my
intent if they have, if the
court has ruled that this
individual has destroyed your
property, he owes you money and
you won that in court. That's,
that's what this was intent was
for.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
when I think I'm understanding
is your intention of this bill
is somebody destroys your
property that, that they, you
know, they should, shouldn't be
an exemption for that, but more
importantly, we keep talking
about housing shortages, right?
So I would imagine the other
part of your bill that will play
out of this amendment would be
more people would be inclined to
possibly keep their houses in
rental. Would you say that's
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Versus selling it generally that
would, that would be the case if
they had great renters.
It may not be the case if
they've gone through one or two
renters that that perhaps
destroyed their home or or
caused damage to their property.
The idea of this is to allow the
property owner.
One or and let's see, I'll take
that back to allow the tenant to
make a mistake to, you know,
perhaps a woman went through a
divorce perhaps they lost their
job, whatever they've got,
they've got a chance to have
that expunged. That's not going
to be held against him, but for
the individual that causes
property damage that time,
that's it. It's, it's, we're
going to give him one, and then
that's it.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
how badly, because meth does
quite a bit of damage if
somebody's cooking meth in the
houses, I think my understanding
is you have to have a team of
people come in. Do you know
anything about that? And how
expensive that cost the landlord
to have to clean up a meth mess,
Mr. Speer and gentlemen.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I never had that problem, thank
heaven. Um, I've heard about it
secondhand and it is not cheap.
So just for you and gentlemen,
what I'm looking at is right now
we have the issues that were
expoed and here's the bigger
picture I see with the whole
bill and I'm trying to take your
amendment into that. You have a
landlord that is renting a place
has no idea.
What's about to happen because
everything's been expunged,
right? So you're trying to make
it so at least there's a little
bit more fairness. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's, I'm just trying to put
it on, on equal footing for the
landlord that if this individual
has done that in 3 other
apartments or homes. All I want
is for that landlord to be able
to access that and find out,
yes, it's happened and no, I
don't want him as a as a a
tenant.
Right, because Mr. Spring,
there, there's a huge
difference, and here is the
whole problem with the entire
bill, not just your amendment.
The whole entire problem is the
landlord is the one that is
eating it for lack of a better
word. The landlord is the one
who has to suffer. The landlord
is the one who has no idea. The
landlord has no way of knowing
what happened. It would be
different if this bill said OK,
you get one time sealing of
records because you were going
through a divorce or had a DV.
You didn't have.
to pay with, etc. but the
problem is I don't see any
exceptions if somebody did
something horrific, like had a
meth house, a meth cookhouse. If
somebody busted the heck, sorry,
I almost said a bad word, Mr.
Smid out of your house. I mean,
I had that issue with the renter
myself and I'll tell you what I
did. I sold the house right
afterwards because I could not
afford to do that. So Mr speaker
Delay, what I see is more mom
and pop people getting out of
this business because as it is
it's so hard to pay for all
those fixes to the house, you.
have to have money put away.
This is not, I, I think the
other thing that is doing it,
it's, it's making the small mom
and pop but the people that own
it or you inherited a house and
you're getting by with that.
This is the people who are gonna
be affected and this goes back
to the first question I said to
you. They got a house that was a
grandma's house or renting it
out they can't get these costs
you're trying to figure out a
way to make it that they could
see these before somebody rants.
Because I couldn't see this, I
would be furiously mad at this
bill because I'd be like, why am
I being punished because I can't
look at their records versus one
if it said, OK, this was uh
sealed and we know that how to
do something we fell on hard
times versus don't seal it
because I need to know, were
they cooking meth in the house.
Mr. Speaker, I mean, it just
seems like it's a simple thing
of saying we may not want to
rent two meth heads while
they're in current addiction
because they're ruining your
house, Mr. Speaker John, would
you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I would. This is a fair
amendment and that's all I
wanted to be was just fair. It's
fair for both the tenant, it's
fair for the landlord.
Mr. and gentlemen, I, I agree
with you. I have more questions
on the bill too, but uh I just
wanted to say that I don't think
it's fair and I think what
you're trying to do is element
of fairness that as a landlord
they can't go in to see while
this person destroyed a house
they've done it multiple times,
uh, they've destroyed this
property and I know what I'm
getting into because if I'm
barely making the mortgage
payment every year in that
house, that's not fair to any
small family it's not fairly New
Mexicans. They cannot
Make that and now they're gonna
sell the house, uh, which takes
houses out of the rental market
or sell it to a big conglomerate
or double or triple the cost,
so, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I absolutely agree
with the amendment. Thank you.
Further debate on the amendment,
the gentleman from
Catering Grant Hidalgo rasas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
gentleman from San Juan.
Yes, Speaker, I'll go the yield.
No, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I think what people have to
understand is one thing.
Is it is getting harder for
people to find rentals.
And for those who are landlords,
they're finding difficulty and
and because some of these rules
and regulations are being
leveraged.
to favor the renter.
And Mr. Speaker, it's hard to
tell you a couple of situations
that I had, um, one was I had a,
I had a rental, a beautiful
rental in Las Cruces, um,
beautiful home and I, I, um, I
had it for, I don't know,
probably about almost, probably
about 8 or 9 years.
I rented to the same family, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, for those 8
years and my wife and I really,
really liked them.
And it was in a nice part of
town is in Snowman Ranch area,
um.
We never raise the rent on them.
And one Christmas I tell Mandy
and I talked and we said, you
know what, let's, let's, let's
surprise our ranchers. They
never bothered. They only call
us if there's a leaky faucet or
something like that. I said,
let's surprise him and let's go
ahead and have the whole house,
uh, done in granite all the all
the kitchen and the and the and
the bathrooms and all that so we
did that for you Mr. Speaker I
new fixtures and all that, um,
make it a beautiful, beautiful
home, and you know he got
transferred.
Shortly after that to another
job he was working at White
Sands. The reason I'm saying
this, Mr. Speaker, I put it up
back up on the market.
And uh got another renter after
we went through all this, uh,
you know, all the.
Kind of cleaning up and, and I
guess betting through the
vetting process.
In 6 months I had a renter that
damaged my place.
Well, a couple $2000 worth of
damage at least.
And it's at a time that I want
to uh let the body understand
we're in a situation here, Mr.
Speaker, where, why are you
gonna take rent?
$40,001,200 1500 dollars when
you can sell your house.
And make a profit of 100,000,
200,000 depending on what you
have $50,000 and avoid the whole
entire headache.
And so what's happening, Mr.
Speaker, is you haven't, you're
having, uh.
These landlords decide, you know
what?
I can't do this anymore.
I can't do this anymore and all
this is doing is getting the
supply and demand of rentals.
Of out of kilter worse than they
already are.
People are already struggling to
find one.
So if, if, uh, uh, uh, if a
landlord goes through what I
went through, I, and I, that's
why I don't have any. I dumped
it and, and.
And they decide, you know what,
why don't I just cash out and be
done and not lose any money and
put it in something else that's
what's gonna happen now there
are Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there are habitual.
People that habitually destroy
properties.
I know a person that in Luna
County that literally went from
house to house.
You they go from one to another
and someone wouldn't do their
homework and this person was
always running around, uh,
trying to find a rental and it
would finally get somebody to
agree to it and then she go on
she and her family go in there
and they destroy the the the
property.
The last property that I know
that that this person destroyed
in Luna County was a house that
had had a small some smoke
damage and he just happened to
be my cousin. It was near the,
the, uh, country club, uh,
states the golf course he turned
around, got all the insurance
money, remodeled the house, new
paint, new fixtures, new carpet,
new whatever, and then ended up
renting to this person.
He didn't do his homework. That
person left something like
10,020 bags of trash in the
garage.
There was feces thrown on the
ceiling.
They had, they had put stuff in
the in the microwave and and
turned it on and to destroy it,
destroyed the whole house.
So when there are those people
that are doing things like that.
Purposely, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and if
If we're not careful, we're
going to continue.
We're going to continue
leveraging the renter over the
landlord to the point that.
They're going to walk away and
they're already walking away.
All you have to do is just think
back if you bought a house 4
years ago what you purchased it
for and what you can sell it
today and ask yourself, is it
worth staying renting for, for
what people can afford or is it
easier to cash out. We're every
time that we do this we're just
giving them a little bit more of
a reason to say I'm done with
this now, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
This was brought to my
attention. The other thing is I
think what's important too is we
should be careful because there
are those individuals who are
doing bad things in those homes
it's not just, you know, uh,
dam, you know, putting a hole in
the wall or a door, it could be,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
they're selling, uh, drugs or
something out of there and I
think.
I think we're not that that home
that you're renting could be
right next to your home where
you have your children and your
family, or your, it's something
that you feel responsible to
that neighborhood to have a good
renter and so I think this
hinders your ability to do that
now so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
do you know anything about what
happens when the judgments, uh,
filed against you and you lose
or the the the renter loses,
does it go on their credit
report and if it goes on the
credit report.
Does it, is it removed after
it's satisfied? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, yes, it, it can
be removed after it's satisfied.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
It has to be satisfied.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes
sir.
And so I think that's that's one
of the issues that that that I
have with the bill is, is, is
how does that and of course
we're we're we're gonna talk
about the amendment, but how's
that, how does that figured out?
Do you have any answer how
you're possibly your amendment
would.
fix that.
Well, my, my amendment wouldn't
fix that, but, but that's,
that's, uh, that's allowable
right now.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I understand that the maximum,
uh.
That is recorded on a credit
report is $10,000. I just, my
biggest problem with the
situation here is you have
We have to be able to.
As if you're a landlord, we have
to give them the ability also.
To find safety and security in
what they and what this person
who.
Just because they have a rental
doesn't mean they have a lot of
money. They could have cashed
out their retirement. It could,
it could be everything they
have, it could be something that
they still owe to the bank and
so they have to make good
decisions. It could be their
neighbor because it could be a
neighboring house it could
destroy their neighborhood if
they don't have good
information. There's too many
open-ended situations that can
happen here that I think could
get us in trouble. I appreciate
your amendment. I would love for
the body to reconsider and
under.
understand what you're trying to
do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And a lady from Donana Sierra
Socorro Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
Does a gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll gladly
yield.
I might be a little tired and I
might be a little frustrated,
but I think this is a friendly
amendment, and I, you know, we
all recognize the need for
housing, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, what are the housing
needs in your area?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we've got great housing needs in
our area.
Our, our area has been, I think,
no different than any other city
within the city of New Mexico
when conglomerates come in and
start buying up homes right and
left.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe I've heard testimony in
prior years of, of getting
affordable housing for teachers,
for law enforcement, what other
types of folks are you looking
for housing for?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
we have transient workers are
coming in and and uh they need,
they need housing, um, and
they're, they're not gonna be
there if they're there for 6
months, 9 months. They're not
going to buy a home. They just
need a place to rent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. And I, I
mean, I, I feel the same. I
mean, I think about the
representative from Lincoln
County. They had a huge fire
followed by floods. I know he
needs affordable, adequate
housing. I think about my
district where it's over in my
home county of Sierra, over 80%
of the homes are trailers, and
the majority of them are older
than the 80s and um the housing
that is there, I would say
probably needs a lot of repair
or replacement. And so, um,
a lot of the bills coming
through around housing have been
very bipartisan in prior years,
I, I've seen some that I'm
excited to support. They haven't
made it to the floor. And when I
think about some of the other
bills that we passed, they're,
they're omnibuds, they're
omnibus, and I, I, I mean,
You, you'd feel a lot better if
you saw something that had a
landowner protection in it, or
had some sort of safeguards for
the landlord in it, but that's
always a different bill, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that's
why it's hard to support these
stand-alone bills. We say, oh,
we're gonna, we're gonna set up
a fund in another account that's
gonna make the, the landlord
whole, um, it's gonna cover the
cost of they'll, you know,
ignore the, the evictions,
ignore the, the bad actors and
go ahead and rent to them the
state taxpayers.
will make you whole. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, how come you
didn't put that in this
amendment?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think, um, as we were looking at
this, I just wanted to be fair.
One time, mistakes happen. I get
it. But not a second, not a 3rd,
not a 4th or a 5th.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and I
think what's important to me in
this amendment is that we could
differentiate from those that it
was a, a purpose of rent versus
some sort of criminal event.
Especially when I think about um
the average citizen in my county
being 58 years of age, a lot of
them have an additional dwelling
unit or they, it's a single
elderly woman who has someone
living in the garage, and to not
be able to know why they were
evicted. I mean, this is a
common sense compromise that we
should be able to come to in a
body of 70 people. And, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm going to
support your amendment.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Judiciary Committee's
substitute for House Bill 253.
We are on a motion to table
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 253, a
vote of yes, and the amendment
is tabled the vote of no we're
back in the amendment. We have a
32nd book clock, the vote is now
open.
Vote is not closed by a vote of
40 in the affirmative, 25 in the
negative. House floor amendment
number 1 to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 2503.
The vote, I mean
how do you wish to vote?
It's not closed by vote of 40 in
the affirmative, 26 in the
negative. House for Amendment
number 1 for House Judiciary
Committee Substitute for House
Bill 253 has been tabled.
Gentlemen from San Juan, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
truly feel that this is a
compromise. I feel that we hold
people responsible. We give
people a fair shake when they
need it.
Um, but we are not holding
people accountable and that's my
fear with this. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
It was the lady from Torrens,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentle
lady, oh, I'm lost now. Well,
the gentle lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. I will yield to my
friend from CPAC.
No giggling here on the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. We actually do get
along in CPAC, so, um, Mr.
Speaker gently, uh, I do have
some questions.
On this, so walk me through
this. So someone is when they're
served the eviction is that when
it does it immediately go into a
database or does it happen? I'm
sorry, I got lost in this bill.
Does it happen later or after
they go to court? When does it
go into the database, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, thank
you for the clarifying question.
So again, we're in civil court.
Your landlord would be filing
for an eviction, um, this has
nothing to do with criminal law
or
trashing houses, um, this is
about eviction. So those would
be potentially criminal
penalties if you're cooking meth
in a house and those are
criminal penalties, um, and the
police would be involved in that
situation. So when we're talking
about this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we're talking about
a situation where a landlord
would be filing in civil court
to evict a tenant and as soon as
that filing happens, yes, that
goes, that information goes
straight into a database,
whether or not the proceeding
then moves forward, however, it
moves forward.
whether this is adjudicated for
the tenant or for the landlord,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
record is sustained and remains.
So I just figured that the
reason I'm asking questions so
they get served, it goes into
that process, goes into the
database and if I'm
understanding correctly, if they
win their case, that's what's
taken out. Is it only if they
won their case or it's even if
they don't win the game. It's
all, yeah, sorry, mister. I'll
give you a chance to answer I
see you nodding your head. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, only if
the tenant wins their case is.
that record sealed. That's who
we're trying to understand that
if a proceeding takes place and
the tenant is able to resolve
that record with their landlord
or win their case specifically,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, then
that record is sealed.
So, Mr. Speaker Delady, there
are absolutely no exemptions,
even if, let's say for some
reason, some hypothetical that
they
We, let's say cooking meth,
which is a criminal case or they
Were rapist or murder or
anything else. There's no
exception in your bill that
says, you know what, this person
did do a lot of damages, this
person is the exception, this
person did cook math. There was
a, a criminal case and went with
it, so even if they for some
reason won their case and didn't
get a they won their case.
There would be zero exceptions,
even if there's some
hypothetical that there were
criminal charges, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker Delaney?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what you're describing, we don't
have it as a single example of
in the sense that you would lose
your case if you were cooking
meth in your household that you
were renting, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you, you, that
eviction notice, that record
would be public. That would be
public information and we don't
have a single situation with
which that eviction record
wouldn't be, um, in any of these
hypotheticals that have been.
discussed on the floor. That
record would be open and
available to any future
landlord, um, should that
eviction, um, be adjudicated by
a court, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so in a criminal
situation where there was a
record, um, that would be
attached separately again, we're
talking about a just an eviction
record on this, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, right now, it's
actually what HUD has described
is that this data is really
inaccurate for the folks that
get lumped into a lot of this.
So because we
would be limiting that those
records to just the cases with
which um are available on
adjudicated actual um eviction
records, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, landlords now have better
data to actually screen out
tenants who have been evicted
for, for cause, for an actual
specific purpose, whether it be
unpaid rent.
Whether it be a criminal
situation, etc. Currently, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, all of the
tenants who win their cases are
lumped with those who lose their
cases. And so when folks
continue to look for rentals,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, all of
that data is all mixed up. And
so what we're trying to do is
weed out the folks that are
actually poor tenants that have
an eviction on their record for
at least those 3 years, Mr.
Speaker John Lady, ensure that
the data is correct about when
those adjudications happen and
ensure that.
for those landlords who are
looking for tenants that have
actually gone through that
process, that's the data that
would be available, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, there
could be because nothing is
perfect, there could be a case
where somebody repeatedly did
not pay their rent. They
repeatedly laid on the rent, the
person files for some reason,
they win the case. Couldn't that
happen? I mean, that, that, that
wouldn't be 1,000% batting
average that that person would
maybe win their case when they
had actually not paid their rent
numerous times. I mean, the
landlord could have quit. There
could be whatever reason that
that person could say, I, I hate
to use the word one because it
isn't correct.
but they're absolved from this,
they're expunged, but they
really had done some things, but
somehow they had won that now it
has been sealed. Is that
correct, Mr. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady again, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the hypothetical
that you're bringing up, just,
there's no absolutely no data
that that's ever happened. If
you were evicted for cause, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
record would would stay on your
record, um, you would have that
on your record for 3 years, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. There's no
situation with
which we could come up with or
conjure where that information
would not be available, um, if
you were evicted for cause.
Well, Mr. Speaker Dela, I
actually heard a couple of
things where you guys said
earlier and you know I'm really,
really grateful that I have
experts.
And so I called somebody who
does evictions. They do
evictions 5 days a week in
Burling County.
They do 5 to 15 a day.
And these are for people that
are being removed out and these
are people who there's actually
two teams they're both doing
about 20 to 30 people a day just
in Burlake County with the writ
of restitution if I wrote that
down.
And the problem with that is
that people still have the
ability to go to the courts in
Burling County to get things
expunged. They can go to the
courts, have the record removed.
And I just want to say one more
thing, I know we heard a lot
about people's race since that
was brought up, uh, I was told
by two officers that 60% of the
people that they removed from
housing are white.
And they are often repeat
offenders, so the problem is,
and it goes back to this
amendment, I would have rather
seen that if somebody had done
something that there was some
some people could be not put on
that list, uh, because what I'm
being told is they get removed,
the officers removed them from
the house or the apartment. Most
of them are white. They go to
the court, they get it expunged
in Burer County and they're back
in it's the same people that
they're moving over and over.
Over and over and over and over
again.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is not uh protect our
landlords from those kind of
people that are returning back
in homes consistently and I
think it's putting too much
burden on the landlord while I
try to see what you're
understanding what I'm getting
from my officers who are
actually out there doing this,
they're doing 30 a day, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I don't
have any more questions. I just
wanna make sure that I, I, you
guys know that 60% of the people
that are removed are white.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Hill.
Yes, I yield to the
representative. Thank you,
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
So listening to all this, I
understand the intent of your
bill. I get it. Um,
Doesn't the ceiling of viction
records prevent landlords from
making informed decisions. So if
they don't have the, if they
can't see everybody.
Um, gentle lady, you know, how
are they, how are they supposed
to make a decision on who
And you know we're talking about
somebody's investment and you've
got this, this rental that
you've just gotten cleaned up.
In its pristine, it's ready to
go, and it's within, you know,
their, their, um, means.
And you put them in there and
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you, you signed contracts, you
do everything, and then in 90
days,
After you go over this and over
this and over this, you just
kind of get a little bit of a
stigma to you to where it's hard
to trust somebody and you want
to know, I want to see what your
background is, and I want,
before I put you in my
investment.
Before you do me a favor,
And I do you a favor.
And we have a contract. How do I
know that I can trust you, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, what we're really doing
is clarifying and keeping better
data in that regard. So if you
want your eviction case, that
record is sealed. If you lost
your eviction case and you're a
landlord looking for the right
kind of tenants, that would be
publicly available information
until 3 years, right? So this is
the whole idea of looking at
second chances and for folks
that, you know, may have had a,
a, a, a bad year or a bad
situation where they got
evicted. It was adjudicated.
And then after 3 years that that
record then gets sealed. If
you're a repeat offender, those
records are gonna keep coming
up. They're just going to keep
coming up. And so what we're
saying too for understanding
what HUD has advised to states
as well, is that landlords are
responsible for screening their
tenants. First and foremost, Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies. So we're
actually looking at that
screening tool first and
foremost as being, let's look at
the tenants who are actually
performing well and those that
aren't.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies. So
we're actually creating a better
system of data to help landlords
understand those situations that
have been rightly adjudicated
and those tenants have been
evicted that information will be
publicly available.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. So I, I really
didn't even want to bring this
up, but I used to be a landlord,
Mr. Speaker. I didn't know if
you knew that, but I was a
landlord for 13 years, and that
was my business and out of the
13 years, I, I did have some, I
did have some bad experiences I
did. And, you know, I, I really
got used to, I've, I'm not a
lawyer, I'm a fireman at trade
and, um, you know, back then,
and I don't know if it's
steal that away, but we had a 3
day, a 3 day eviction notice. We
had a 7-day eviction notice. We
had a 30 day eviction notice and
by that time that I had given
them a 3 or a 7 or a 30 day
eviction notice, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
And we went to court.
They couldn't afford an
attorney.
I really didn't want to spend
money on an attorney, so I, I
was my own, and I actually got
fairly good at it, and it saved
me a lot of money. And Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I
never, I can't remember the last
time I was ever paid
restitution.
And it was ruled in my favor.
And I never was paid for it. I,
you just, just write it off at
the end and, you know, on some
taxes or something. And those
folks weren't, I don't even
think they had a record. And so,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
for, for a
A landlord, how do you check
somebody's record?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I've
also been a landlord. That's why
I think having good data is
important, um, when we're, when
we are doing these screenings,
you can actually go again to
website and again, this data is
often brokered, so you have a
lot of landlord support software
that essentially lumps
everything that comes from the
court system into these
software, um, you know,
databases that allow you to look
up names when someone applies
for your, your rental, um.
And so again, for criminal, all
those other background checks,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
all gonna come up. That has
nothing to do with eviction, but
then again, if you have an
eviction on your record, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that'll show
up as well. And so when we're
talking about how that works out
when you're looking at someone's
record and you're doing your own
screening, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on eviction, it
doesn't say whether they won
their case or they lost their
case. It just says that they
have an eviction on their
record, and that's what I'm
saying with this bill, Mr.
Speaker gentlemen, it really
clarifies the process for those
that actually unfortunately,
right in the situation that you
just proposed, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, for those that get
evicted for cause that that's,
that'll be there and the data
will be good about what what it
is that we're exposing to the
public.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for that, that answer,
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
because I do want people, I want
folks to be able to rent. I want
landlords to be able to, you
know, have a little business and
thankfully, I'm retired out of
that business and I, I would
never go back to that. There's
easier ways to make money than
that. Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, but, you know, how will
landlords protect themselves
from tenants with a history of
non-payment or lease.
Especially the ones that I
served.
That never paid restitution, and
I don't know if it ever if it
says, is there something that
says they never did pay the
restitution back, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, so this is separate from
the eviction record, you would
have a different adjudication
and whatever the restitution
will be, that, that will remain
on record until it's actually
paid. Um, so again, separate
from what we're discussing right
now as far as having going
through the process of perhaps
small claims or large claims
that you would be recovering
for, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again, that would be available
on record separate from the
eviction record.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. And since you
have your experts there, maybe
you'll, you'll know this. So
today, if somebody, it's their
30 day eviction, and we've
already gone to court and just
say they go ahead and they
vacate the premises and I get in
there and I get it all cleaned
up.
And the court has already ruled
in my favor that they need to
pay restitution, and they're
going to set up payments, and
that's usually what they do. The
payments never come.
How, how do I get that? Do I
just keep going to court? Do I
have to, do I have to have them,
you know, have them served
again. How does that work? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, again,
totally separate from this bill
and that's already a process
that currently exists and will
stay in perpetuity, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, it's, it's
really up to you how you want to
do that. You're talking about
being prose and wanting to go
through that process on your
own, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So
yes, I mean, that's all very
separate from this bill and
still very much the
the
The reality of, of what still
exists. This is just about
eviction records specific to
something different and Mr.
Speaker, and forgive me,
gentlemen, I want to, I do have
experts on this matter, um, and
I've unfortunately not
introduced them. Serge Martinez
and Alison Friedman from the
Center for Housing Law, um, are
with me here helping answer
these questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Let me restate
that question. So the people
that owe me restitution,
they're, they're out today. This
is their 30 day, and they go to
the next landlord, how does that
landlord know that they, they
still owe me money.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
this has nothing to do with this
bill, all of the restitution,
recovery mechanisms that
currently exist through the
courts would all be the same and
you would still be in the same
situation, whether or not this
bill would be passed.
OK, fair enough. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Should the courts be
transparent.
And, and it almost seems like
when we seal records, we're not
being transparent. And
That's the thing I guess I'm
hung up on is why we would seal
a record.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, for those who win their
court case when they are taken
to eviction court. That's the,
the record that's sealed. That's
the record that we want sealed.
Why? Because they won their
court case. They shouldn't be
stigmatized with an eviction
record if they were able to be
uh victorious in that situation,
right? We don't want to put that
scarlet letter on folks who
don't actually deserve it. And
that's what we're trying to do
here is clarify that data for
folks who get evicted for cause.
We know all the different
reasons why someone might be
evicted, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
if they are, that record remains
for 3 years. Why it's 3 years,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, is that
we want to be able to give folks
an opportunity to, um,
essentially look at other
housing options if they were
able to recover from that
situation. If it was a one-time
mistake and that 3 year record
still sticks with them, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, but after
that, we don't want that scarlet
letter to remain on those folks.
We wanted them to be able to
say, OK, I put that behind me
now my record is sealed and I
can move forward without that
stigmatization because we know
how difficult it is when you
have an eviction on your record,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, to find
other housing. It's really,
really difficult if you have
that record out there whether
you want your case again, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, or if you
lost it. And so this is what
we're trying to do. It's
twofold, clarify the data for
landlords so that they're
getting the right folks weeded
out and to make sure that folks
have a path
to a second chance if they were
really truly trying to recover
from that eviction situation and
move on with their lives.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. I appreciate that.
And I'm not looking for an
exact, but
Definitely there was something
that happened that made you want
to bring this bill forward. Is
there a percentage of people
that are not the bad actors, the
ones that you're trying to
protect. What percentage is that
out of all the renters that we
have?
So again, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we don't have data in
New Mexico. Again, we're trying
to work around how we're
managing data. Our closest
understanding of this is
happening in Colorado now, and
they have this bill in effect,
currently, and about 50% of the
folks that, um, come into an
eviction court are, are not, um,
evicted.
So that that record, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is about 50%
of the population when we look
at an average of 15,000 eviction
filings in the state of New
Mexico, we can imagine that
about 7500 of them would be in
this database currently as quote
unquote evicted, but they would
have won those cases, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. So we
wouldn't know right now in New
Mexico, um, what, who are these
folks that just maybe just
needed to have a conversation.
They were, they were quote
unquote filed for eviction, but
they won those cases, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that record,
unfortunately still remains with
them even when they want. And so
we're talking about potentially
7500 people in the state of New
Mexico that are in this
situation where they were never
actually evicted.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady and in
closing, I just want the body to
know that, um,
The landlords usually draw the
short end of the stick. Most of
the time, and I know that
there's a percentage of people
that were, that we are trying to
protect and I appreciate, I
appreciate that angle, but there
is, there is the other side and
until you've been through that
and you've gone into the mess
and you've tried to put houses
back together, uh, uh, yes,
there still is, there's a
business there, but the bottom
line is you probably end up
losing like you heard.
most of the, the
The landlords that have been in
that business, they're not in
that business anymore. And thank
you for the debate. I appreciate
it.
the debate, the gentleman from
Montero, Representative Block.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. I will yield to
the gentleman, my friend from
CPAC.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and kind
lady. It's good to see you
again. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, a couple of questions.
First of all, I was reading the,
I think it was the AOC analysis
of your bill, and I was
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, why we didn't go with more
of an approach like Florida,
where they have specific
guidelines, so if, if your case
has been closed because you've
paid the fees or if you've,
you've like cured whatever the
problem was in the eviction,
then they would allow that.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
why didn't we go with an
approach similar to Florida.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
Florida doesn't actually seal
eviction records on the front
ends, um, so it would just be a,
a different law, um, body of
laws that
Um, Florida uses as it pertains
to eviction. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies. So this
immediately from what I'm
hearing, immediately upon the
filing, it just seals it.
After 3 years if
And I think it's only if they
lost the case. Is that what I
understand, Mr. Speaker, lady,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so yes,
so what happens currently is in
the through this bill, the
proposal is that um filing is
made until that court is
decision is made, um, the folks
who win their cases, the tenants
I should say, the tenants who
win their cases, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, those are immediately
sealed or continued to be sealed
and for those who lose their
cases, that information becomes
public.
information, uh, for 3 years.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then what would
this do regarding these groups
that get this data immediately,
so let's just say it's been out
there for 3 years. They get this
data, they put it in some kind
of background check.
Online portal, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is there anything
in the bill that would preclude
them from keeping that
information past the 3-year
mark.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's a
great question, and
unfortunately, no, we don't work
with the third parties to clean
their data. What we want to do
is, again, provide the data at
the front end, um, as correctly
and accurately as possible, but
no, we would not have a third
party situation where, where we
would go and try to clean the
third party information, no.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then when it
comes to this bill when it gets
to the 3 year mark, is there any
kind of information that the
court has to send out to that
person saying, oh, your record
is now sealed, or how does that
work on the court level, Mr.
Speaker, General lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, it
would be an automatic ceiling,
so as soon as the record is
entered, then it would be
automatically sealed after 3
years.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just kind of wondering how
does the court do that? Because
I mean, it's, it's on a specific
timeline, I'm sure, and all the
courts are different across the
state. Is there a centralized
system that they all use to keep
track of these different cases,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
ceiling is a very common court
practice. Um, we've been working
with the administrative Office
of the courts to create that,
um, data processing, so they are
successful in being able to look
at the system of information and
ensure that it's accurate.
We portrayed to the public and
so this is again, a common
practice when it comes to
sealing of records, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and that's precisely
what this is for eviction.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that does help me
on that. And then when it comes
to the actual data, I know we
were saying we, we wanna get
more data from New Mexico when
it comes to these, these
records, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I see in the bill, there's
some kind of stipulation on here
talking about
And I forget which page it was,
but it said pretty much you have
to have a good reason to request
the data, but it would be taking
out any personal information, I
believe. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how are we actually going
to use the data that we're
gathering on this for not
knowing if this works or not,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you,
uh, just point me to where
you're talking about that in the
bill.
Of course. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes, I,
I'm on the committee substitute.
Or
Amendments in context.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
OK, I see it on page 5.
And it's talking about
compelling need for this data.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
guessing.
That compelling need would
potentially be research, things
like that, or how would that
work, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So we want, you know,
researchers, the legislature,
other folks to understand how
this um is working in practice
and we want to be able to
collect that data redacted, of
course, protecting the identity
of any individual, but really
understand how um this bill, you
know, performs in, in when it's
enacted as well.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that, that helped me
on that and then when it comes
to like these large studies that
we're trying to, we're trying to
do on a, on like a large scale.
Do we know who would be, who
would have access to that data?
Could it be anybody in
nationally or would it have to
be someone in state to, to get
that data regarding evictions,
etc.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if you
read the sentence before that,
which may include scholarly
educational, journalistic, or
governmental purposes, that's,
that's who would be looking at
this data.
OK, perfect. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady that
help me on that. And so I guess
I just continue to look at the
Florida model, which I find to
be a little more palatable
because it's all based upon
curing whatever that problem
would be instead of just
automatic expungement or not
expungement, uh, ceiling and so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
just, I kind of would, would
have a little heartburn with
this bill because currently, if
you had an eviction that was
like you punched a wall and you
cause all kinds of damage, it
would still be
Taken off even after 3 years if
that was in the actual.
Uh, eviction notice. So I do
have some concerns and I'll
continue to listen to the
debate, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but, but thank you so much
for the answers and it did help
me a little bit on some of my
questions. So thank you so much.
Thank you gentlemen. Thank you.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
With the generator yield. I will
yield.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker.
Just a few questions.
Uh.
Anytime he's kind of build, who?
What
Why, who brought this bill
forward? Did, uh, are there any
organizations or whatever that
are that stood in support and
ask you to bring this
legislation forward. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, for the last
year, uh, a group of legislators
have been looking at a lot of
different housing data across
the country and various policy
proposals, um, that could help
New Mexicans move forward. So
for the last year we've been
studying a lot of those bills,
um, and in, of course, my
experts here, Mr.
Speaker today or at the Center
for um housing law out of uh the
University of New Mexico, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this has
been a longitudinal sort of look
for um us as legislators that
have come up with this proposal
today. So I'm carrying this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, after a lot of that research
and deliberation over the course
of the interim.
Thank you gentle. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
A lot of times legislation gets
brought forward because of
requests from different
organizations or something was
the reason I was asking.
Mr. Speaker, General Lay, gentle
lady were the realtors of the
landlords or in the rental.
Associations engaged in
conversation before we wrote
this bill.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we heard, um, a lot of uh folks
for, um, I believe we, I don't
know who exactly was against it,
but yes, we've had um a lot of
different conversations
throughout the year again on, on
this specifically, mostly we've
been in um conversations with
the administrative office of the
courts since they're the ones
that actually just handle the
records.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, so we don't really have
Any of the realtors or in that
that came out in support of this
legislation. Is that true,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, we did
have a number of landlords,
folks that are talking about
having good data and access to
information that was proper for
folks in support, but as far as,
you know, just looking at
overall associations or groups.
I'm not to my knowledge, do I
know that. Thank you gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh,
How many states gentle lady, did
you, Mr. Speaker, did you say
have legislation of, of this
sort already, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there are 16 states
in the District of Columbia that
have enacted essentially this
bill.
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, does
this bill mirror
The regulations in most of those
states. Correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, with probably the
closest parallel being Colorado.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
to me there's 16 that do, but
how many?
It leaves what, 34 that have,
have not seen to bring this
forward.
One more question I have.
I believe he's on page 4.
Yeah
Of your bill
If I as a, a realtor, landlord
or whatever, have you fill out
an application, which is
generally what they do in the
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker.
Sorry, can you repeat the
question, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? I'm,
I'm usually asked to, to look
over a contract and, and sign it
and ask questions.
for the realtor, landlord to
evaluate, to rent the property.
Is that true, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Which brings me to that section
of your bill, and I will read a
resident who is a party to an
eviction in which a court record
has been sealed pursuant to this
section shall not be liable.
For failing to disclose the
eviction in response to an
inquiry from a third party.
The lady, Mr. Speaker, that mean
his eyes a
Landlord ask you if you've been
evicted and you say no.
Then there's no recourse for
you.
Saying that
You know, own your contract. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so this
would be in a situation where
that record was sealed, so we're
assuming that at that point, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that person
won that case, so they wouldn't
have to disclose to you, um,
that they had an eviction
record, um, or were taken to
court if that record was sealed.
That's correct.
OK, so they don't, they don't
have to reveal it once it's been
sealed. Thank you, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, that's all for me
today.
There is further debate, gentle
lady from Sandoval,
Representative Cohen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield.
I will yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, could
you tell me what other records
in civil court are sealed such
as this?
Mister Speaker, gentle ladies,
so there are a number of
different records, juvenile
records, uh, domestic violence
records, um, a lot of different
records are sealed in court, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
talking about civil court, not
criminal court.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
gentle lady, excuse me. Yes, so
sensitive information that may
proceed in a core, um, civil
court also takes care of
domestic violence records, um,
as well as, um, juvenile records
as well, so just depending on
the case that's in front in
front of them in a civil court,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
sensitive information is often
sealed.
OK, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, could you tell me then if
I go to New Mexico courts look
up and I go and put in the
person's name, will that be
removed from New Mexico courts
look up.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so the
record itself will be sealed,
um, if, if it is sealed.
If you look up a person's name,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
and there, that record is
sealed, there would be
essentially no record available
from public view. If it is open,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
unsealed, that is available
through the New Mexico courts
records. Look up.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gently.
There is further debate, young
lady from Chavez, Representative
Mejia.
Thank you.
That's a
gentle lady from Santa Fey. I
yield to the gentle lady from
Chavez. Thank you.
Give me just one second, I
wasn't prepared.
I have some questions as a
possible future landlord and the
landlords of my district.
Um, I have some questions. What
are the potential pros and cons
for allowing only authorized
attorneys to access sealed
eviction court records.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
trying to understand your
question. Is, are you asking
what authorized attorneys can
and can't do with records
because there's a lot of
availability for how the records
can be used, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Yes.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
authorized attorneys are one of
the stakeholders that can review
the records. Um, there are a
number of other folks listed,
um, in the bill that will also
be available to do that judges,
court staff, authorized staff,
etc.
Thank you for that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how can the course
ensure fair and consistent
application of the procedures
for sealing and unsealing
eviction court records.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you for the question. That's
part of what we're trying to do
here is have more accurate data
about those who win their court
cases versus those who do not.
So yes, it is the purview of the
administrative office of the
courts to keep those records
already. Again, they do seal,
um, records and so we know how
sensitive information, um, needs
to be protected. This would be
one of those cases as well and
so they would be charged with
ensuring that that was protected
information as well.
Thank you. um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady should landlords
have the right to request the
unsealing of eviction records
under certain circumstances.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this is just an eviction record
that would be sealed if they won
that case, um, and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
know why, uh, you know, if they
won the case.
There'd be no reason for, to our
knowledge why they wouldn't, why
in a a future landlord would
need that information.
Thank you for those answers. I
have no further questions. Thank
you.
See no further debate, that
generally a close. Speaker. I
now move that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253 do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253. The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. How's Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 253 has duly passed this
house.
Let's go next to the gentleman
from Bernaillo
representante Miguel Garcia, are
you ready? On item number 40.
As the speaker, uh, can you get
me to that PowerPoint?
Let the record reflect that
election necessary for placing
House Bill 330 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Esma speaker, uh,
Estema speaker House Bill 3:30
as amended establishes the land
grant me infrastructure fund and
the Asea infrastructure fund
within the framework of our als
tax binding capacity, creating a
stable revenue source and
meeting the capital needs of our
centuries old Spanish land grant
in a secular communities and
with that Esimma speaker, I
stand for questions. There is a
debate. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
will the gentleman kneel.
As the most be grandmas greatly
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, we heard
this in committee and so I'll
make it very brief.
Um, I, I asked several times if,
if, uh, the land grants have
ever raised their taxes in some
cases they don't even pay taxes,
um, and I also shared with you
at the time that a rural part of
the county that you live in, we
decided to raise our taxes, we
incorporated and we taxed
ourselves. The land grants have
never done this.
And first off I think it's um as
I said in committee, it's easy
to help my kids when my kids are
helping themselves.
And then the second part of
this, um, a wrong was done to
the tribal entities and this was
put into this bill and I don't
think that's, it was the proper
place to do that. I would vote
yes to make the wrong right, but
this was the wrong place to do
this. It was put to that into
the entity, I think, uh, and the
last thing I'll say, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
We in the tax
speaking, can I, can I say this
about tax committee?
Is that allowable to say what
committee I heard it in only if
it's nice things.
It, it will, it will be nice,
Mr. Speaker. um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we heard this in tax
committee and tax committee
we've temporary table everything
that has a tax consequence of
the state of New Mexico.
We did not do this on that, on
this particular bill, um, shame
on us. This is not good tax
policy and um Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, for that reason,
I cannot support this.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from Sandoval and
Santa Fe, Representative
McQueen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, does a
gentleman yield?
Yes, I'm, uh, I most graciously
return from Santa Fe
land grants, which are political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico. Do they have taxing
authority?
As the speaker, a gentleman from
Santa Fe, no.
No, they do not. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
See no further debate,
gentlemen, close
that 330 twice amended do not.
past. We are on final passage of
House Bill 330 is rice amended.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 47 in the affirmative, 16 in
the negative. House Bill 3:30 is
twice amended, has duly passed
this House.
It's a gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative
Dixon, ready on item number 60,
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point? that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
448 with an emergency class has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Speaker. House
Bill 448 creates the Office of
Housing, Planning and
Production. I'll stand for
questions.
The gentleman from Otero,
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentle lady from Bernalio
please that to like go back here
and look at you.
Uh, yes, I will yield. Thank you
so much, Mr. Speaker, and kind
lady. So I don't remember if I
heard this in my committee. Let
me check. I probably did. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
wanted to do the RTS button
before he goes rapidly pass this
bill, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I did want to make sure,
does this codify something that
is currently
An executive order. Speaker,
uh, gentlemen, um.
I don't know that it's an
executive order, um, the
governor, um, has within her
office.
Um, established an office of
housing, but this would be, uh,
it's creating an office of
housing, planning and production
that would be administratively
attached to DFA.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then I guess
what I heard.
Testimony wise from experts in
the committee when it came to.
This bill, they said that we
were losing out on federal
funding because we didn't have
an office such as this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, do you
know if that's correct or was
that a misstatement that I
heard.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
without knowing the specific
grants, um, even without knowing
that, I can say almost
definitively, yes, we are
missing out on federal
opportunities.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then currently
does the state.
not have a fiscal agency that
can
obtain these federal grants like
There are, there are house in
New Mexico, uh.
Finance Authority or the New
Mexico.
The other and NMMFA or whatever
it's called. I believe it's a
housing authority, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, uh, MFA and
mortgage Finance Authority are
now referred to as Housing New
Mexico is a quasi-governmental
um entity. They have um a
specific purview that limits the
types of federal funds that they
work with by establishing an
office of um housing planning
and production, uh, this would
afford more opportunities, uh,
for the state to better
coordinate and leverage federal
funding.
OK, got it. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
yeah, we have so many different
acronyms around here, it's hard
to keep up, so thank you.
So Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
when it comes to the bill, I do
want to understand a little bit
more how much are we putting
from the general fund into this.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, so
there is, um, there is a one
time non-recurring
appropriation, um.
That is.
To support the funding for this,
um, $2 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, and then do we know how
many new people we're gonna hire
with that $2 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, in fact,
um, the funding is, uh, broken
out so that the office can hire
2 FTE and then use the remainder
of the money for contracts to
work with entities or
individuals that have
specialized, um.
Experience in areas such as uh
transitional housing,
homelessness initiatives, um,
strategic items that will
support the future work of this
office.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then how is
this going to affect local
municipalities authority over
housing or zoning in any way.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So it won't have
any direct authority over the
local entities, but what it will
do, um, number one is provide
technical assistance to local
governments, Indian nations,
tribes and pueblos as well as
regional entities, uh, to
improve, to work with them to
improve their housing
regulations, um, so that, uh, we
are able to build more housing
units, uh, in a more efficient.
Banner.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So how much
deregulation do we expect to
come from this office within the
first year of its enactment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, and
thank you gentlemen. So I don't
know that.
We expect to see direct
deregulation, um.
What we hope to see is
communities that potentially
have.
Adverse permitting and
regulation structures, uh, what
we hope is to be able to work
with them to figure out where
they can streamline processes,
um, I think we all heard the
story of um the paper copies
that were required here in Santa
Fe and that when the application
was missing a staple or a paper
clip, uh, was denied so things
like that that the Office of
Housing could work with our
local.
on.
OK
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. OK, so I guess I thought
it was my understanding that
this, this was meant to be a
little more on the state level
to take away over regulations,
burden, some regulations on
people who wanted to build
housing in the state. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
tell me a little more about on
the state level, what it aims to
accomplish when it comes to
regulation and clawing some of
that back to ensure that we can
get some more affordable housing
in the state.
So at the state level, it would
be working, for instance, with
the construction and the
construction industries
division, um, on some of their
permitting processes, um, things
like that.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then I'm, I guess I'm just kind
of trying to figure out how will
this office tangibly
Decrease
Housing costs. I mean, I guess
that's the point of the bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm,
I'm just wondering how exactly
do we aim to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, uh, let me
provide you with, uh, sort of 6
broad objectives of the office,
all of which, when working
together will help to reduce the
overall cost of housing and
increase the number of
affordable housing units that
are available throughout the
state, so increased housing
availability and affordability
across the income spectrum, so
working with our uh local
entities as well as uh MFA for
instance.
instance,
Supporting private housing
development.
Reducing regulatory barriers to
housing as we've sort of
discussed.
Uh, decreasing systemic and
chronic homelessness.
Um
Support legal, uh, sorry,
support local governments and
tribal communities to solve
local and regional housing
challenges and improving housing
and homelessness data so that we
will be in a better position to
make informed decisions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So, OK, I'm gonna go on a
couple of these that you just
said. So, let's start with
systemic homelessness, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, how are
we aiming to target that with
this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
apologize. I missed your
question.
Of course. So I believe one of
the points you said was ending
systemic homelessness, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how, how
are we gonna do that with the
funds and the, the new entity
we're creating in the Office of
Planning and Production,
housing, planning, and
production. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
That is a great question and
that is, in my opinion, one of
the biggest needs that we have.
We don't have a centralized
entity here in the state that
actually coordinates the myriad
of partners working on this.
issue. So if you have no one
that is central to all of the
efforts. Everybody goes off in
their own direction. Maybe
there's uh overlap and
duplication of efforts or gaps
that are not filled. So this
office will be able to do that,
um.
It also, you know, by having an
office that is gathering and
collecting data, we will be able
to look at.
Where we need to put resources
where we're moving the needle,
we'll be able to work with the
local governments on exactly
what supports they need. Those
are a couple of things. OK,
thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I
I understand that, but I mean,
working with these entities,
working with these, with these
local.
Municipalities, etc. I'm just
wondering how is it that we're
going to help these people.
Who are homeless currently and
how are we going to end systemic
homelessness and, and I guess,
could you help me define what
systemic homelessness even
means, Mister Speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Well, one of
the.
One of the biggest, um,
contributors to homelessness
right now is the lack of housing
supply.
So if we are able to increase
housing supply at all income
levels, uh, that will reduce
homelessness. So I think far and
away, that is number one.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because when I hear
the the words systemic
homelessness, I think of
somebody who's just perpetually
not able to get housing, but
what if, Mr. Speaker, General,
there was housing available in a
specific area that they could
afford, they just couldn't get
access to it for some kind of
reason.
How, how does that work when it
comes to this office and its
mission, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
could you potentially rephrase
that or um
flesh it out just a little bit
more for me. You betcha.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I'm just thinking systemic
homelessness, someone who is
homeless for a very long time.
Someone who
Perpetually as homeless, I
guess, and it's, I don't know
how else to say that other than
systemically homeless. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering how this individual
who is systemically homeless,
how do we get that person from
being.
Repeatedly not able to have a
house.
To being able to get back on
their feet.
And get a house with the goal of
this office.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
So one of the issues that I
think we've encountered is, as I
mentioned, there are a lot of
groups doing wonderful,
wonderful work so the Office of
housing.
Will be able to help coordinate
in a region, so if there's a
If we're looking at, let's say,
uh, veterans, um, that, uh, have
struggled with.
Homelessness and potentially,
um, substance misuse.
Having an office of housing
that.
is in the position to put all of
the different services together
to connect them to ensure that
wraparound services are made
available, um, to those
individuals, that is something
that this office can do.
OK. OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So currently
there's no office in the state
of New Mexico have the ability
to.
Help these veterans with all
these wraparound services
currently to also help them with
housing?
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, could you, uh,
Say the first part of that
again? Of course, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so is there
currently no state office that's
currently
Helping veterans get these
wraparound services to find
housing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. We do have a
Department of Veteran Services
and we do have other, um,
offices and agencies scattered
throughout the um the
government, but there's no one,
coordinating all of them.
OK, all right, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then I'm just gonna continue on
with a few more questions that
I, I, I jotted down. So I'm
wondering, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, will municipalities
be free to pursue different
solutions to homelessness.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
thank you, gentlemen, yes, uh,
based on their needs and
capacity, absolutely. OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and what
if counties and municipalities,
they follow some of the
recommendations set forth in the
bill, but not all of them, will
they still be eligible for
assistance and guidance by the
office. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So most of
the support would come in the
form of technical assistance to
those local governments, um,
potentially funding.
opportunities could have, um,
additional requirements.
Gentlemen, pardon the
interruption. There's been a
request for the gentlemen to
remove their jackets if there's
no objection.
So
Please continue, Jolin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would,
I would hate to object to that.
That would not make me very
popular in this, this building.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that answer and then
I guess another question I did
have when it came to the bill
was, so I know it's under DFA.
I'm wondering why we put it
under the governor's purview
with DFA and why didn't we put
it in something like MFA or
NMFA, which is overseen by us,
the legislature, because a lot
of the time we talk about
empowering the legislative
branch. This, in my opinion.
the executive branch, which
might be the opposite effect of
what we're looking for. So, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, could you
go into that for me?
Absolutely. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
think that's a lovely question
and I'm, uh, very pleased to
answer that. So as a, as a
reminder, MFA is a
quasi-governmental organization,
so we have, in my opinion,
limited oversight, um, and
limited ability to hold them
accountable, however, if we
attach the Office of Housing,
Planning and Production to DFA.
We do have, uh, we have control
of the purse strings. So we are
able
to hold them accountable to
track performance metrics, uh,
have them in front of our
committees, um, explaining their
expenditures and performance,
um, and we do have the ability.
To hold them accountable, uh,
through funding also, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the reason
that DFA makes the most sense is
that DFA also houses a couple
other offices that, um, are
integral to all of this. So
number one, DFA has the local
government division.
So that's an entity that's
already working with our local
governments. So by placing the
Office of Housing and Production
there, we are facilitating
collaboration and communication,
um, another office that is at
DFA currently is the Federal
grants Bureau.
That's another one where we want
to make sure that we're
leveraging all of the federal
opportunities that are available
to us and by having those
offices together, uh, we can
really make sure that fewer
things are falling through the
cracks.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So we just
established that there's things
falling through the cracks.
What's following through falling
through the cracks currently,
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
one thing I would say is, um,
exactly what type of housing are
we lacking in each community.
What is it that um our homeless
population, what do they need in
each community? What services
are available? Um, those are
great things. Uh, we have, um,
we're missing 40,000 housing
units, uh, what type of housing
units do we need, uh, for whom?
When are they going to be built?
What are the log jams, things
like that.
OK. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally, that, that
did help me a little bit on
that, but I, I, I will push back
a little bit when it comes to we
have the power of the purse
strings.
And I know we talk about that a
lot and I know that you're
actually on the, on HFC. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I guess we
do technically have the power of
the purse strings, but Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I guess
if it wasn't doing what we
wanted to do.
It would look really bad for a
legislature to keep money away
from people trying to find
people housing, so Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, it's kind of a
catch 22 in my opinion, when we
say, oh, we have the power of
the purse strings, but at the
end of the day the governor has
to sign off on it and she could
use any any means to to
potentially, or he, if, if a
future governor is a he to
potentially sway us in a certain
direction based upon this. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, other
than the power of the
Purse strings, how does this
help us as a legislative body be
strengthened when it comes to
taking charge of the housing
crisis in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um,
thank you, gentlemen. One of the
things that I would say though
about um the appropriations is
as a reminder this is a
non-recurring appropriation. And
so we have the ability in the
next.
2 years to make sure that this
office is doing what it's
supposed to do and put in guard
rails to monitor that progress
and in my opinion, force, uh,
and altering, of course, if we
do not feel that the office is
doing what it's intended to do.
Um, furthermore, by putting this
in statute, we are ensuring that
should it be funded.
Uh, this office will continue
across multiple administrations.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So I get the
second portion and that kind of
answers my question on the first
portion, which I had following
your, your first portion which
said,
The ability
In the next 2 years to evaluate.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm, I'm wondering why we didn't
put a sunset clause on the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, well, we
put a sunset on the funding.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I guess we did by just giving a
one-time appropriation, but
there is no actual sunset clause
in 5 years of this doesn't help
alleviate homelessness, it's
dissolved. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering why
we didn't do that, maybe a 10
year period. I know 5 years as
usual, 10 year maybe just to
ensure that those housing grants
that are very helpful to us.
Don't get killed in in the.
In a room between the
continuance of this office and
then maybe the potential
dissolving of the office.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. You know, that's
an interesting, uh, concept, but
one of the things while we've
been talking a lot about
homelessness, um, creating a
housing strategy and strategies
to alleviate homelessness. Those
are multi-decade, um.
Efforts. So it like if we were
to consider the city of Houston,
for instance, um, my expert, I
think, would be able to tell me
exactly how many years it took
for Houston to really turn
around, uh, it's housing and
homelessness issue. uh, it took
more than 20 years, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so I think
rather than putting a sunset in
the bill for.
An issue and.
Uh, policy that is.
Potentially multi-decade.
We have a better opportunity to
hold the office accountable
through what we've decided to do
for funding.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and so I guess, I
guess I come to this bill. I'm
not anti-fixing the housing
crisis. I'm usually anti
creating new offices though and
so Mr. Speaker general lady,
when I see that this is a one
time appropriation.
And we're, we're trying to make
this permanent. I'm wondering
why we didn't maybe look for a
multi-year appropriation such
as, I know we have grow projects
that are 3 years and so Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, why
didn't we put some funding
staggered through certain years
to see if it would indeed
Produce benefits, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I can repeat
the question if you'd like.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. It is actually, it,
they have multiple years to
spend it, uh, so it's not just
one year, uh, in which to spend.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because I, cause I
know that there are certain
offices that have been opened, I
think when it was in Los
Angeles. There was another one
in New York and another one in
Illinois regarding housing and
some of them had some hiccups
when it came to funding things,
things that we really should be
caring about as a legislature,
and I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, how is this
different than some of those
other states' offices of housing
when it comes to how it's
administered and how we're going
to ensure stability of the.
so it can indeed help people get
housing.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
thank you, gentlemen, um,
neither my expert nor I are, are
intimately familiar with the
details of how those other
states have set up their
offices.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General lady. I, I just assume
so since we talked about Houston
and I thought maybe we had a, a
countrywide approach, but Mr.
Speaker, General Waiting, I'll
continue onto my questions
because I, I just want to make
sure that we're not recreating
the wheel and then or even just
copy pasting a wheel and the
wheel is really bad and it's
gonna end up messed up, so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
appreciate that. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to the plans that the
office has and these liaisons to
communicate.
these individual municipalities,
governments, etc. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, is there any other
kind of office in the state that
has similar
is similarly created that has
these same kinds of individuals
doing these kinds of things when
it comes to
To any kind of program. I mean,
is this, is this its own little
animal that's very specific, or
is this something that we can
look at an agency that's already
working well.
And see, this is kind of what
it's copying.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, um,
Recently we established the
infrastructure, uh, and planning
office, um, and starting small
with an appropriation to measure
their success, uh, putting them
within DFA, um, some of these
are, you know, we're really
looking at different practices
across the country, um, and
coming up with solutions that
work best for New Mexico.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I guess
going back to my other question,
I apologize for going back and
forth. Uh, it's my understanding
that in HB2 currently the
appropriation is only one year
and not multi-year. Can you help
me with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, uh.
Fortunately right now the uh the
House Bill 2 is over in the
Senate, um, and the funding, uh,
from last year, uh, for.
Preliminary work and to support
this endeavor was a 3-year grow
project, so there is um there is
existing multi-year funding and,
uh, certainly the ability to
fine tune.
Current language.
OK. And uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So can you
tell me a little bit about
How, how much was appropriated
in the grow project and then how
much is being appropriated this
year for this year's
appropriation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, uh, both
appropriations are $2 million.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, General lady. Do we
know how much has been expended
of that 2 million from last
year, I guess 0 since it this
office wasn't in existence.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. So the appropriation
last year, the 3-year grow
appropriation is $2 million that
can be spent over 3 years, um,
and, and remember our grow
programs, uh, through, uh, the,
the fine work of the legislative
Finance Committee are coming
with, uh, strict accountability
measurements so that we can
ensure that
Anything we continue to fund,
um, actually, uh, is doing what
it's supposed to do.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I guess I'm kind of
a little confused now because
previously we, we said that this
was not.
Something that was like a grow
program and it was something
that we're just putting in law
forever and so Mr. Speaker,
general lady.
Once 3 years is up and we've
used the $2 million.
What can we do as a legislative
body to say since we we say that
there are parameters that need
to be followed with grow
projects. What specific
parameters must be followed, and
then if they're not followed,
would that mean that this bill
kind of would be nullified in
any way since I guess there's no
sunset, that would be no, but I
guess I'll ask the question
anyway.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, uh, gentlemen, uh, so a
little bit of clarification, um,
so last year, as we talked about
earlier this, you know, the
governor set up within her
office.
Um, housing.
Experts and so she had her own,
let's say.
Mini office of housing that was
not defined in statute that was
simply within the governor's
office and so the funding, the
two-year grow money, that is to
be spent, or sorry, the 2
million in grow funding that is
to be spent over 3 years with
performance metrics to be
determined by LFC and DFA. And
so my understanding is those are
still in process, um, that was.
the beginning
And then this year,
What we are seeking to do, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, is put
into statute so that we have
more oversight.
Uh, and are able to hold this
office more accountable and the
funding, as mentioned, is $2
million and it was a one-time
special appropriation.
All right, OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I
All right, so, OK, the governor
through whatever authority she
had created an office that was
not funded by us. She funded it
somehow until now, and then Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, now we're
creating a new office because
the governor started an office,
a mini office as we as we
established, we're now going to
create a new office through DFA
that's also overseen by the
governor. Is that what I
understand?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
mini office would be moving, uh,
so no longer under her office,
uh, but similar to other offices
such as the infrastructure
office, the broadband office,
um.
The Federal grants Bureau, those
would be
Um, well,
As, as I said, this would be
administratively attached to
DFA.
Which is overseen by the
governor's.
Cabinet secretary. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mhm
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The, um, yes, it is an
executive. It is part of the
executive branch and the
director would be appointed by
the governor, but as I refer
back to this is where the
legislature has accountability
and oversight through
appropriations.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I guess I
see that, but I'll go back to my
point. The only thing that we
can do is threaten to not put
money in the budget. And so I
don't know how much
accountability we do have over
that, but I, I will just
continue on here and I've uh
I've some final questions, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, so.
It's my understanding in in
House Bill 2 currently, maybe
it's been changed, I don't know,
but I think there's about 130
million for housing projects,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, how
much of that 130 million will
the Office of Housing
Be overseeing if it is enacted
with this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So of the $130
million that you mentioned, uh,
110 is already identified, uh,
for specific areas, uh, the
remaining $20 million the Office
of Housing would be able to work
with, um, they would be able to.
Help set up the grant policies
and procedures, um, identify the
data that they need to have
collected and work with the
eligible entities on ensuring
that that money is spent.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, and then
I guess of that of whatever
money that we're putting in for
housing, how are we going to
ensure that the housing needs of
rural and frontier New Mexico
are also prioritized alongside
urban New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, in addition
to sort of allocating some of
the funds to go to, uh, rural
and frontier communities, um, I
think we've done a really good
job in the past several years
when we set up.
Um, the infrastructure office or
the federal matching fund things
like that, ensuring that there
are guard rails in place to make
sure, uh, that our agencies are
serving the needs, not just of
urban communities but also rural
communities and you know,
This last year, um, the, um,
office the mini office, uh, was
able to work with over 40
communities, uh, last year and
focused on underserved
communities overall.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I hope to
see that and I think, uh, we
definitely should be
prioritizing the needs of
everyone across the whole state
because, you know, in, in
Albuquerque is way different
than Alamogordo and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that. I do have some
concern when it comes to putting
the department in or the office
in the Department of Finance and
Administration, it would
actually be cool if we maybe we
just take the Department of
Finance and Administration away
from the governor altogether so
we could totally have complete
like.
legislative autonomy over that,
but I guess that's a bill for
another day. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'll
continue to listen to the
debate, but I do have some
concern regarding that, but, but
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you so much, gentle lady for all
the good answers and uh thank
you body for entertaining this
awesome, really fun line of
questioning. Thank you.
There is for the debate the Joan
from San Juan represented
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady fromer Leo Yild.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
I will yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um,
gentle lady, so I, I, I would
like to
Uh, revisit last year, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, when um
The governor came to us um and
was wanting us to put money
towards the Office of housing.
So Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady.
Um, how much money do we put in
that last year in the budget
for, for the Office of Housing,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, the funding from last year
was one of the 3-year grow
appropriations, and it was $2
million.
So Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, how was that money spent
over the last year, Mr. Speaker
generally. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, uh,
gentlemen. So thus far, uh, the
office has spent approximately
$200,000 and that would be
primarily for staff salaries and
some small contracts to get
programs up and running.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, and what oversight in the
last year has the legislature
had over that office, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, so we
actually, uh, because it was
grow funding, we are looking
forward to having some reports
this interim, uh, on how all of
the grow projects and member
grow projects are performing.
So Mr. Speaker and general lady,
so I'm confused as to why we're
bringing this bill forward.
When we've not even had a single
report to the legislature, um,
Mister Speaker and gentle lady,
in the, in the last debate, uh,
with Representative Block. I, I
heard several times how this
would increase the amount of
oversight that the legislature
has, and the Speaker and
generally between last year and
now, there has not been any
oversight whatsoever over the uh
expenditures out of that office,
Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
well, there's only been 6
months, um, since, uh, the
fiscal year went into effect.
And I think that all of us in
the legislature understand that
housing and homelessness is an
enormous concern for every
community in this state, and
it's a multi-year process, um,
and
We need an entity to work with
all of our federal agent or
sorry with all of our state
agencies to work with our local
communities to help leverage
funding.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
and uh uh MFA or now the
Housing in Mexico, do they not
do that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there is
actually a lot of stuff that MFA
does not do. And so this office
is seeking to fill the gaps of
the things that MFA does not do,
and that's why, you know, to
your point about the debate last
year, um, you know, the mortgage
finance Authority had concerns
and during this recent interim,
uh, the Office of Housing and
MFA have worked together to
ensure that we are not
duplicating efforts rather we.
are coordinating and
collaborating.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I, I've read through the
bill and I don't see.
Anything
that is substantially different
than MFA. Could you please point
to uh a couple of areas where um
uh this is addressing
homelessness, uh, shelters
working with local communities,
uh, the speaker and gentle lady,
uh, and where there is more
oversight here than currently
exists with housing New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So a couple of
differences, um, and gaps that,
um, we'll be able to, to cover
that MFA does not currently do.
Um, and I know that you're very
well versed in MFA, um, because
we've sat together on, um, MFA
oversight committees, so one of
the things Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that I think we know
is MFA has income limits.
Um, and so they have 15 targeted
programs, but those are all
bound by uh income limits, so
that's one big thing. 2, they
don't have the ability to direct
state agencies, um, as we've
talked about MFA is a
quasi-governmental agency so
they do not have the ability to
direct, um, state agencies. 2,
They also cannot do regulatory
change.
Um, in the same way that an
Office of housing, uh, would be
able to, for instance, work with
construction and industries
division.
Senator Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, to be able to change
regulation.
Uh, we really don't need to
create a new department for
that.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I guess the real concern I
have here is
I believe we, we put $2 million
last year into the governor's
uh.
Uh, Office of housing.
We've not, we've spent maybe 10%
and that's just been on
staffing.
The rest of the dollars have not
been spent, but we're spending
more money and creating an
office when there has been no
proven record, Mr. Speaker, and
generally, there's been no,
there's been no proof in the
pudding. We're just doubling
down and creating.
Uh, an office.
Uh, statutorily.
Um, when there has been.
Nothing to hang a hat on and the
Speaker and general lady in
particular.
Um
Oversight
Miss Speaker and gentle lady,
from my standpoint,
We have
Uh, housing in New Mexico.
Which has a board on that board
sits the lieutenant governor,
the, uh, the, I believe the
auditor, the state auditor, the,
uh, the state treasurer, um, Mr.
Speaker, I, I, I, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I believe
there's 5 people on that board
and then Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
There are, I believe, 13 members
that sit on the interim
committee of oversight.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we have the ability to uh hold
them accountable.
Um, with the budget, so Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the
only thing that we'll be able to
do with the governor's office.
In this uh new uh department.
I
Hold them accountable in the
budget, Mr. Speaker in general,
I see that as going backwards
when it comes to accountability.
Could you please explain to me
how somehow just having the
purse strings.
And not having an oversight
committee and not having a
statutory board, how is there
more oversight over the
governor's office in this area
than we have currently which
reports directly to the
legislature.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. One of the
things that I would point to is
that we've had MFA in existence
for 50 years.
And we have a massive housing
crisis we need an entity that is
directed statutorily, uh,
created to work with all of our
local communities on all types
of housing projects, MFA only
works on project-based funding
they have income limits, they do
not have full authority to do
all of the different things that
we need to do to address this
crisis. I simply put, um, MF
has not been able to do it.
They're not going to be able to
do it moving forward, um, and
With an office administratively
attached to DFA. We do have far
more control over their purse
strings than we do at MFA.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I've been, uh, on the oversight,
uh, board or committee.
Um, for
9 this will this year will be 9
years, I believe, and the
speaker and gentle lady, they
spend all of the money that is
allocated to them every year.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
those dollars go not just
towards housing, and by the way,
the income limits are lower and
income limits, not above the
line, so Miss Speaker and gentle
lady, the income limits that are
placed on them is to make sure
that the dollars go to the lower
income folks, not the higher
income, Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady
Uh, this new housing, uh,
office, it doesn't have those
same income limits, so there's
no means testing here, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Um,
The reality is
MFA they leverage dollars
federal dollars, and grant
dollars better than we do.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
they leverage 16 to 1 on
average.
That is a massive amount of
money that comes from out of
state. So, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, when we're taking
these dollars and we're going to
try and leverage them within the
administration, the one thing
that I'm gonna want to see is
that they, they're gonna have
any sort of a match is there
going to be a, a 10 to 1 match,
a 15 to 1 match. If they don't,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
see us as diverting dollars away
from what has proven to be
successful, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, I
Uh,
There has not been bipartisan
support for this office.
But Mr. Speaker, generally there
has been bipartisan opposition.
And it has been great.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
because this is the one area.
Where the governor
Any governor doesn't have their
hands on it.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is exactly why I believe we
have this legislation before us
is not because it's going to be
better, but because the governor
cannot influence uh housing, uh,
New Mexico.
And I think that is something
that we as a as a legislature
need to understand what we're
talking about here is
Something that the legislature
has a lot of oversight in and we
have annual reports, not only
annual reports we have in an
interim committee that we get
reports continually, so Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I'm,
I'm just trying to figure out
when we're giving up this
authority to the governor and
it's complete authority minus
whether or not we fund it.
I do not see how they're this
goes towards the legislature
having more accountability,
please, if you would explain the
accountability portion to me in
a way where I can understand
that somehow there's more
accountability than we have with
housing in Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so let
me back up a little bit. Number
one, this is an MFA endorsed
bill. So clearly MFA sees a
need, need for this. Number 2,
when we're talking about the
housing and homelessness crisis,
it is more
than just building low income
housing. This is a whole
systemic issue that needs a
whole variety of solutions and
one of the things, um, that MFA
hasn't been able to do is
workforce housing, right? We had
to come in last year and we
developed a program to support
the development, the creation,
the building of housing that is
affordable for working New
Mexicans, right? It doesn't meet
the definition of affordable
housing.
And we need that housing built.
That's something MFA cannot do.
So
There are, there are huge gaps,
um, and in terms of
accountability, um.
The standard that we have in the
legislature, and you know from
being on appropriations and LFC
is we do performance-based
budgeting, um, and.
As a standalone office.
Um
As a standalone office by doing
it this way, LFC and DFA can
come up with uh performance
measures that go into the
budget.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um
Housing in New Mexico does do
worker housing. It's called
multi-family housing, it's
apartments, and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, there are a number
of those, uh, whenever they
build those that they are means
tested and the folks who come in
um to rent those, it's set aside
for worker or or low income and
the speaker and general lady,
uh, as well MFA has programs
that are made specifically
for working with the homeless
population. dollars go from MFA
or I'm sorry, housing New Mexico
now.
Uh, to, uh, those projects as
well, so, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I, I think the
only thing that's missing is if
we feel like more housing uh
needs to be addressed is to more
fully.
Uh, uh, develop or expand what
they're doing. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, what MFA is not
able to do, which this housing,
um, department will be able to
do is be able to come into a
place like Santa Fe, where, uh,
there is not enough housing for
the folks who can afford a
$600,000 home and there are no
limits, so uh folks could come
in and want to provide.
What would be considered middle
income housing in Santa Fe, and
it could be on the upper end.
This, this goes away from what
we say, uh, generally that we
want to do is we want to means
test it towards the lower end.
There is no upper end limit in
this, in this uh new or at least
currently under the governor's
office of housing, so are, are
we going to, are we gonna, I, I
don't see in this legislation
where there's any
means testing or there's any
limits, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. That's
because this office deals with
the systemic issues this office
does not provide financing for
housing projects, um, the other
thing that I wanted to note, uh,
and I forgot to mention earlier
is, uh, this bill actually has
passed 3 committees with
bipartisan support. In fact, the
last committee it passed was
House Appropriations, and the
vote was 12 to 1.
So that is, uh, most
definitively bipartisan.
Miss Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm just wondering how many of
those folks, uh, we have a whole
lot of new people in this
building that do not have any
long term knowledge or have
maybe have not served on MFA and
so this idea sounds good in a
vacuum, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, when people
understand that we're already
doing that and we're doing it
very well and we're getting a 16
to 1 match.
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I, I have a hard
time with this.
Because I believe this is
duplication of effort. There is
no means testing.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the group that is doing it now,
uh, housing New Mexico has a lot
of legislative oversight and
frankly the governor of any
administration doesn't have any
authority over it and Mr.
Speaker, so and gentle ladies,
so we have.
The most amount of influence
this body and in the Senate and
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
much, much, much more direct
oversight. So Mr. Speaker,
generally, I appreciate.
That maybe we're not doing
enough and we haven't been able
to deal completely with the
homeless issue, but Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, I do not
believe that this is the way to
go. I do not believe that it
brings any more accountability.
As a matter of fact, I believe
it would be much less, and I
urge the body not to support it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
the vice chair of Appropriations
Y.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. I think I've
tried to make my voice be heard
in appropriations, and I really
don't love the fact that
State, local agencies are in the
landlord business and
Are, um, so I guess what my
question would be is, is there
public private partnerships can,
can they get involved?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, just
stepping back.
This office is not going to be
building housing units, um, this
office will be serving as a
liaison with uh Ruidoso with Amo
Gordo, uh, with the city of
Albuquerque to help them if they
have regulatory barriers. This
office can help reduce those
regulatory barriers. Um, this
office can help them set housing
goals, so this office itself is
not going to be constructing or
financing.
Housing projects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. So does,
does
Does privatize people, do they
have, do they have a seat at
this table?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
apologize. Could you repeat your
question for me? So if I'm a
private developer and you, and
we're calling this the housing
and planning production, do I
have a seat at this table? Can
I, can I work with tribal units.
Can I work with uh local
governments could I, could do I
have a seat at this table to,
for the planning process.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. The office
thus far has been uh reaching
out to a wide variety of
stakeholders, including private
developers, um, tribal partners,
municipalities, uh, federal
funding opportunities and one of
the things that they're able to
do is sort of serve as a
matchmaker. Um, if your
community has a specific need,
they can help identify where
that need, you know, how they
can help, where you can get
those resources. They could
connect you.
with the appropriate people.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. That's really
what I was kind of wanting to
hear. I want to know that, that
there's gonna be some developers
that have, you know, a seat at
the table and, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, what about
repurposing of commercial
properties? Will we be looking
at things like that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so,
um, in terms of the, the
stakeholders that we were
talking about. I did want to
highlight that in addition to
MFA, the mortgage Finance
Authority, endorsing this bill,
uh, NIOPP.
Um, has endorsed this bill, um,
as have the homeowners, uh,
association, sorry,
homebuilders, um, you know, I
think that shows that a wide
range of people are really
invested in making sure we get
this right, um, in terms of your
other question.
Um,
Which honestly I have forgotten.
Could you repeat it?
That's OK. I forgot it too, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
let's, let's move on. Oh, so
what I was wanting to know is
the repurposing of commercial
properties. I know we have a lot
of commercial properties that
could possibly be utilized for
housing, will we be able to, to
do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That is a
fantastic question and so
pleased you brought it up. One
of the issues a lot of
communities have, uh, with not
being able to currently uh
repurpose some of those
commercial buildings is
regulatory barriers, and so this
is really where the Office of
Housing can come in and be
helpful. They can provide
technical assistance. They can
look up what other states and
cities are doing, and they can
help communities, uh, make the
changes that the community
needs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. And because
we're calling this the planning
and production, and we're trying
to bring these private
developers in, we're trying to
bring tribes, nations, and
pueblos, uh, counties,
municipalities, will there be,
there's been a big push this
year to clean our forest up, and
we're trying to stand up
sawmills and we're trying to,
you know, grow our own timber
grading.
people
Will there be a procurement
office anywhere in this, in this
planning session or planning,
uh department that would
possibly be able to buy
New Mexico product.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I don't know
that the office itself would be
in the business of purchasing
the timber, however, um, part of
the systemic problems that we've
had is supply chain, uh,
concerns. And so the Office of
Housing would be able to take
into account that now in
Southeastern New Mexico, uh, we
have access to more timber, uh,
that we can use here in state to
speed it up and uh
the costs.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so what I just heard you say is
we, we are going to stand up
sawmills, we might be able to
build houses with the product
and clean our forests up.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
feel like it's a win, win, win.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Kaine Grant and
Dialgo counties representatives
the Razas. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker the gentle lady please
yield.
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I will
yield to my colleague from all
of those counties. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies. So
quick question for
clarification.
Trying to figure out here the
the the money that you're
talking about $2 million and in
last year's budget in in on page
249 lines 7 and 8 it says the
following amounts are
appropriated from the government
results.
An opportunity program fund in
fiscal year 25 and fiscal year
26.
On page 251 line 4 it says $2
million for housing assistance
personnel and programs so the
question, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is.
The money that we're talking
about is this the 2 million that
was appropriated in the last
year's budget.
Is it covering 20 years, 5 and
26, 2 million each or is it 2
million split between 25 and 26.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It's $2 million
total in addition to what was
added this year.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, that
was my next question. So what
was added this year, uh, to the
budget. Is this a duplicate?
That's what I think that's where
I'm, I'm a little confused, Mr.
Speaker, generally.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It is not a
duplicate, uh, but it was $2
million added this year.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
they have 25 and 26 here and the
2 million that you put in then
is for 26.
I'm confused. Is it this 2
million because it says 25 and
26, the one that's appropriated
this year is for what?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The $2 million
appropriated this year is for
fiscal year 26. Um, and one of
the things that we've talked
about is what the money can be
used for, and so, you know,
Staffing up the office is
important, but that, you know,
it's a few, uh, I believe 2 FTE,
uh, presently, but there are
other things like a data
dashboard, uh, making sure that
the state different agencies,
communities know, uh, what
housing is available, um, you
know, the things from supply
chain to, um, how many housing
units are needed in Silver City,
um, that information, having a
data dashboard is really
important.
important to making sure that we
are spending our money
efficiently and effectively, um,
and something like that would be
covered uh in that funding that
we've appropriated this year.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
much of the 2 million that was
appropriated last?
Uh, session has been spent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. Um, uh, one of,
uh, our colleagues did ask that
earlier and as I mentioned, the
funding was available July 1st
and thus far they've spent about
$200,000 and part of that is
because they've had one staffer
and they were able to hire
another staffer who began in
October, so I think that they
are right on track, uh, with
spending those funds the way
that they're intended, uh,
they're, um, up to 4 FTE
currents.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this program in this passes and
we already have it in the budget
so that then we're talking about
having about $3.8 million
between for fiscal year 25 and
26. Do I understand that
correctly, Mr. Speaker
generally?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
they will certainly spend more
money, uh, before the end of
this fiscal year, um, but part
of the reason that uh we're
undertaking the budgeting this
way is so that we can actually
track how much money is being
spent and on what things as we
move forward, uh, we want to be
able to separate those items in
the budget. How much needs to go
for contracting? How much needs
to go for personnel and
benefits, things like that. And
so this is a really good
opportunity for us to watch
those numbers very closely and
make sure that we are not
overfunding or underfunding in
the future.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the next question I
have is, and I and and I'm
pretty sure I know the answer to
this, but I wanna see if it gets
addressed and at at minimum,
Mister Speaker, gentle lady, at
least talk about it so um.
Uh, New Mexico housing, excuse
me, New Mexico housing, yeah,
manufacturing housing division
has.
has had some issues when it
comes to inspections and I, I
think Mr. Speaker, generally
you've heard me in, in, in, in
interim committee talked about
this before where um.
Affordable housing is also
manufactured housing.
And uh being that we're in a
dire in dire need in the state
of New Mexico for that are we
addressing through this new
office in any way, shape or
form.
The issues that we're having in
in the.
Um, delays, I'm gonna use the
word delay of of inspections for
basically their foundation
inspections where the let's just
say the double wide is gonna set
on the on the ground.
I'm only mentioning that because
with this.
Uh, housing shortage, uh, and we
still need to address those
things and I know it's some it's
a different division.
Are we going to have any
conversations in any way, shape
or form to address those needs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. Um, and I
just realized that I have been
severely remiss in introducing
my experts, so I apologize. I
have Daniel Weworth from the
governor's office, um, and
Amanda Dick Petty, uh, actually,
sorry, Amanda Briding, who is
her budget, uh, director, um, so
in terms of manufactured
housing, huge component to
solving, uh, this housing
crisis, right? We know that, uh,
manufactured housing, that's a
great option. And
Um, in fact, I was just reminded
that uh we did appropriate $2
million to MFA.
Uh, just recently to work on
that specific issue, but the
Office of housing will actually
be able uh to identify, you
know, what are the bottlenecks,
what is slowing, slowing down
our ability, uh, to get
manufactured housing to the
communities, to the, uh, folks
who want to buy it, um, and if
there are other issues that they
can either address re through
regulation, um, supply chain,
things like that.
Speaker, generally, from my
understanding, um, the biggest
issues and, and people are
waiting 4 to 6 months just for
inspection of the of those um.
The foundation inspections and
so um.
Some of these people, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are
purchasing these, these mobile
home units, getting them set
they buy the property they set
them on the property or they
lease the property and they put
them on the on on the property
and are making payments on that.
And unable to move in before
because there's they're still
waiting for this uh for the I'm
gonna use the word certificate
of occupancy. I don't think I'm
not sure that that's exactly the
the word for the final uh
inspection that allows them to
get into the to the mobile home
unit, but they're still having
to rent houses 4 and 5 months
sometimes and still on top of
that making their their payments
on the manufacturer housing and
in which is causing a lot of
stress on some of the families
that are.
Probably you know they're
bringing every bit of money that
they have to make this down
payment and get things in order
and they're finding themselves
in these situations that's why
I'm trying to to to address
this, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
any comments?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. One of the
issues we talked about earlier
is that unlike a
quasi-governmental agency, this
entity, this office of housing
administratively attached to DFA
will have the ability to direct
state agencies, um, and so as
we're talking about CID, uh, the
construction industries
division, um, having that direct
connection, I think will be
really important to solving some
of those, uh, slowdowns.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I hope I, maybe I misunderstood
this, this office is gonna have
more power, Mr. Speaker, general
lady.
To direct other agencies or
they're gonna work with them
because I maybe I misheard it
maybe.
Maybe it was just miss.
Spoken.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. More, uh,
than a quasi-governmental um
entity, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so I
know you're moving this this
office to DFA.
From the governor's office to
DFA in my understanding that?
And so it'll have more power in
DFA than it does currently in
the governor's office. That's
why I'm, it doesn't sound right.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, it's still
in the executive agency, so this
office will have the same. I
mean, it will still have the
ability to work with other
agencies and and use that, uh,
when I'm comparing it with, I'm
sorry, is MFA, the mortgage
Finance Authority, which is a
quasi-governmental.
Agency and does not have the
same authority. Thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. I knew I
misunderstood what you said, so
I, I think at the end of the
day, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think what's important is we uh
as a body need to understand how
important manufactured housing
is to this whole equation and
I'm hoping uh Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that this the Office
of Housing and Planning
Production will take into
consideration those
conversations to, uh, you know,
give guidance to CID.
Well that department that I was
talking about which is uh in uh
in New Mexico, uh, manufactured
housing housing division, a
direction or funding to hire
more inspectors or whatever it
takes to move along. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Chaves Eddie and
Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to my colleague from
Chavez, Eddie and Lee Counties.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Uh
Be listening to this debate.
And while I really, we all want
to fix the homeless problem in
the state of New Mexico, in the
state of the, the, and the USA
for that matter.
But to me there's another avenue
that that worries me, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker.
Uh
Gentle lady, how many job
openings with this.
Office require.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. Um, so as I
mentioned, currently they have
uh 4 full-time employees, uh,
they will be allowed to hire up
to 6. So that would be 2
additional.
To 2 additional, OK. Uh.
What gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
what is our
Mm
How to put this, how many state,
what's the percentage of state
positions that are unfilled.
Today.
Young lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, thank you,
gentlemen. Uh, so, uh, an
estimate would be about 20%,
down from last year where, uh,
we were looking at about 28%.
Thank you gentle lady. That's
exactly what my said, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
How many jobs have we already
How many jobs already have we
Additional positions that we
Put in for this year.
According to LFC.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So the budget this
year focuses more on, um,
reclassification and
compensation as opposed to
creating new positions.
Thank you, uh.
lady, Mr. Speaker.
The, uh
Listening to the bells we've set
up. I don't have the exact
figure on how many, but we
added funds and different
offices already this year, so
there's several.
But, uh, along with my
Question, uh.
How much
Vacancies unfilled from last
year.
How many millions of dollars are
set there that were allocated
last year that had not been
spent for open positions.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, that's a great question, and
I'll tell you as a member of the
House Appropriations and
Finance, that is one of the
first things that we look at
when we are determining whether
or not to increase an agency's
budget to meet their requests.
We are always looking at their,
uh, funded vacancy rate.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, according to the
article that I brought up is
quoted that there's $213 million
that we allocated for positions
last year that have yet to be
filled.
In
I guess, you know, my main
problem with this is, is growing
government.
Opening new offices.
When
We can't
Support and fill the positions
that we already have in our
state government.
So for that purpose alone, I
guess, I don't guess. I, I
cannot see opening another
office.
That we cannot, we cannot fill
the positions.
It looks like to me we should
put on whole new offices and
fill the ones we have and then
move forward from there. Thank
you, gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
You know further debate, John
lady close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 448 with the
emergency clause do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 448 with an emergency
clause. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 49 in the affirmative, 17 in
the negative.
gentle lady from Bernalillo
represent our our you, are you
ready on item number 61.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent of the House
that the rules be suspended and
the records show that all action
for placing House Bill 453 on
final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Generally to explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, um, House Bill 453
creates a program to be
administered by MFA slash H&M
through which property managers
can feel secure about running to
applicants who in all parameters
qualify for rental for um rental
of an apartment except for a
less than desirable credit
rating. The program also
includes a training program for
qualifying tenants on the
importance of budgeting and the
operation of credit histories
and credit scores.
I think it's important to
highlight a couple of things
that this bill does not do. It
is not rental assistance or
eviction prevention. If a tenant
is unable to make their
payments, the property manager
will still follow their usual
procedures. This bill also does
not mandate participate
participation, excuse me, by
property managers it's entirely
optional and lastly this bill
does not require any changes to
how property managers select
their tenants. There is no
mandate or requirement that a
property manager must rent to a
particular tenant and
That, Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
There is debate. The dolmen from
San Juan represented Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, does a gentle lady
from Bero yield?
I yield to the gentleman. So
that was a quick explanation.
Um, could you give just a
slightly more detailed.
Explanation, uh, for me.
Certainly, um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, so House Bill
453 creates the creditworthiness
assistance program to be
administered by MFA or H&M.
That's cute, H&M, um, and it's a
voluntary program by property
managers where if a property
manager accepts applicants for
tenants the way they usually do.
They flag an applicant as
saying, oh, this person checks
all our boxes for rental. It's
just they don't have a really
good credit score, but I still
want to
to this person.
that property manager can then
submit that applicant to MFA for
the creditworthiness assistance
program.
The tenant will then go through
MFA training on budgeting and
creditworthiness assistance and
the property manager will go
ahead and rent to that tenant as
per usual, should that tenant
then default in their first year
of lease, we will cover the
remaining lease up to I believe
$5000 for that first year of
rental.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So this would only
be for properties that are that
are uh associated with MFA, is
that correct Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Speaker
Representative, no, this is for
any property manager who wants
to participate in the program.
So the Speaker and gentle lady,
but uh there is nothing
requiring a
Uh, property manager to
participate in this program?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is correct. There is no
mandate of
participation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So currently for property
rentals, what is a what would be
considered a good credit score,
uh, for a property manager to
determine that that would be a
good person to rent to.
You know what, Mr. Speaker
Representative, I'm not actually
sure. I believe that varies from
property manager to property
manager, how much risk they're
willing to incur.
So the speaker and gentle lady,
so I guess that's why I'm asking
the question. I'm trying to
figure out who would benefit
from this. It doesn't, I don't
know that the average property
manager would even know.
To apply for this or if they
would be locked into certain
Uh, uh, parameters or whether or
not this allows them to still
continue to keep the reg the
parameters that they so choose,
um, and the Speaker and gentle
lady, and since there's no
Lower end parameters on this.
I'm trying to figure out why
would the state then want to
guarantee.
Uh, that rental assistance, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker Representative, we are
seeing a growing population of
New Mexicans who struggle with
bad credit scores, so while I
can't specify a number and we
did not include that in the bill
for the very specific reason
that we don't want to set a
floor or ceiling for what we are
calling a negative credit score,
we're leaving that up to the
property managers to decide for
themselves is that is their
business. We just want to make
sure that that growing
population of New Mexicans.
struggling with bad credit can
still be able to rent an
apartment should they be
gainfully employed and qualify
in all other ways.
Mr. Speaker Representative.
So my speaker and gentle lady,
so I'm, I'm just wondering why
the state would necessarily want
to be the insurance policy for
these uh property managers, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
you're, I, I believe you said
the total amount that could go,
um out to cover rent for someone
in a lease. Did, did I hear you
say a maximum of $5000 for the
year? Is that correct? Did I,
did I misunderstand, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Mr. Speaker
representative.
That is a max of $5000 of unpaid
rent to the qualifying grantee
per one participant with a cap
of $10,000 per year per.
Property manager.
Mr. Speaker, Representative. So
thank you Mr. Speaker, and, and,
and gentle lady. So I, I think
we might be creating a
A program that a an unscrupulous
property manager might take
advantage of and what I'm, I'm
gonna give you a scenario, Ms.
Speaker and gentle lady.
So let's say I had a one room
studio apartment that
Might not might rent for in, in
a certain part of the state,
maybe $500 a month.
And so the Speaker and gentle
lady, if I were to go through
this program,
And I were to set.
A
Uh, a low credit score, let's
say the person has a job, but
let's say they have a low credit
score of 200, 250.
Uh, on their score.
And I rent them uh knowing that
they may not with all of their
other
Uh, bills that they have.
That they might not be a great
risk, but Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if I go through this
program.
It sounds to me like the state
would be the insurance policy
for that.
For that.
Um
Property manager
And so I, I'm just not sure.
And I'm gonna listen to the
debate a little bit more, but
I'm just not sure why we would
want to be the insurer.
Of that, so I, I'll listen, but
uh.
You're going to have to do a
little bit of convincing here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
There is debate. The gentle lady
from Katherine Sierra Socora and
Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Berlio Yield.
I yield to my friend from uh
commerce.
Uh, thank you, uh, gentle lady.
You know, one of the things that
I really like that's in here is
that it says requires individual
participants to take a class on
financial literacy.
And the importance of credit
scores.
I just wanted, uh, Mr. Speaker,
a kind lady to, to bring that to
the body's attention because we
fight really hard for financial
literacy classes and things like
that. So I really like that, uh,
portion of it.
Um, one of the questions I had
is, does, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, does this
assistance go directly to the
renter?
Or the person um who's renting
them the property.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
thank you so much for asking
that question. The assistance
would go directly to the
property manager, and that is
what the definition of
participant I believe is laid
out in the bill as the property
manager.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
that's not the way I read it, so
I have an amendment, but.
I don't want to introduce the
amendment if it goes directly to
the property manager. And can
you tell me where that is in the
bill.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
you give me one moment, I can
pull that up for you.
Maybe a few moments.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
still pulling up that
information, but I did see that
I misspoke earlier, the
definition of participant in the
bill is the prospective tenant,
the definition of grantee is in
the person who's receiving the
funds as the property manager,
so I think actually that Mr.
Speaker Representative, that
might answer both questions, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, yes, I
just found the definition on
page 5,
section L where participant
means the person participating
in the training program.
and if you can find me the where
you think it says that it would
go, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, to
The
Person renting the property or
the rent manager, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, if we go down
just a little bit on page 5 to
qualifying.
Excuse me, it's a qualifying
grantee.
We have a governmental housing
agency under subsection 2.
And then the.
Excuse me
And then on page starting on
page 6 and at the top of page 7,
a non-individual qualifying
grantee, and an individual
qualified grantees, so that
would be a property management
company or an individual
property manager.
OK, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I,
um, I won't introduce my
amendment because you nailed it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Donana and
Otero Representative Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield? I yield to my immediate
next door neighbor.
Thank you, uh, Speaker gentle
lady. I just wanted to um
highlight a couple of things
that I really like about this
bill. We heard it in
appropriations, um, and, uh,
just appreciate the bill that
was introduced first, um, in
earlier debates today we talked
about making a landlord whole or
a property management company
whole. Does this bill do that?
Does that help maintain or give
some assurances to landlords
that uh they might be made.
Who if their tenant isn't able
to pay.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is really what I love about
this bill is that yes, it does,
it doesn't require a property
manager to participate, but if
there is a particular applicant
that they really want to rent to
but they just have that one
hiccup of the creditworthiness
being an issue, they can make an
exception, as it were. They can
incur, they can feel comfortable
taking on just a little bit of
risk on that one special tenant
without having to have the
negative repercussions of never
being.
able to be made whole if that
tenant then still defaults on
that lease.
Excellent, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, I
also wanna highlight that this
bill does focus on landlords and
property managers and some of
the challenges that they might
face in wanting to rent to
quote, you know, more risky
tenants, um, or folks that don't
have, um, great credit scores,
and so I just want to highlight
that this bill in particular
highlights some of the needs
that we're hearing in earlier
debates around focusing on the
landlord or focusing on the
property manager and in helping
make that landlord.
property manager whole so thank
you for introducing and I'll be
supporting this bill.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield? I will yield
to my other friend from
commerce.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Speaker, just one
question.
Uh, well, maybe just one,
In the decision making of the
landlord.
In most
Rent situations, we have a
Do you know what the rent to
income ratio.
Basically is in the state of New
Mexico, how much money
they need to make to rent for a
certain amount of money.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
not sure the exact ratio. I know
that the last a department that
I applied for, I had to prove
that I made 3 times the monthly
rent to in order to qualify for
that apartment.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, in, uh, most
of the,
uh, you know, the the base.
is usually around 30%, which is
about what you were talking
about, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, so.
I have, I'm a landlord. I have a
Bart to rent and just to make
the figure an easy percentage
wise, the rents $600 a month.
So my applicant needs to make
$2000 a month.
On, on these.
guarantees does the landlord.
required
To make
Well, I guess what I'm saying,
if I've got good credit or bad
credit, do I have to abide by
the same percentage.
Rent uh rent uh.
Income ratio.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, this would not change
anything about how a landlord
selects their tenants, the, um,
participation in the program is
entirely voluntary.
Uh, gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
does this program in other any
way monitor whether they abide
by the same rules or not? Is
there any oversight?
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, could you maybe
rephrase that? I'm not sure I
get exactly what you're asking
real well and
it, is there any way we as
As the agency know whether the
landlord
His following those regulations.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
I, if I'm understanding you
correctly, that would be up to
MFA to track the behavior for
lack of a better term, of the
participants, i.e. the landlords
participating in the program.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, I guess my what I'm
getting at is I don't want to
make uh incentivize landlords to
make bad rental contracts
knowing that they are guaranteed
their rent whether the
applicant.
can make the rent payments or
not. Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Representative Mr.
Speaker. There is for the
debate, the gentle lady from
Donana Sierra, and Socorro
Representative Dao. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Religion lady from
Vernao Yil. I will. Thank you
very much. Um, there are so many
awesome things about this bill.
First of all, it's voluntary.
It's voluntary for the
participants. It's voluntary for
the landlord, is that correct?
That is correct, Mr. Speaker
Representative, and you know
I've talked about this bill and
I, I got to stand up and say
this is one that I think has a
good compromise. It protects the
landlord, and it helps build
credit. I, I'm seeing like a new
family, and they just, you know,
they haven't had a credit card
or they haven't bought furniture
on a revolving loan where they
paid an astronomical amount of
interest, and so they just don't
have credit. They don't have bad
credit, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, um,
they, they that family that you
mentioned your hypothetical, but
also qualify should the landlord
property manager choose to rent
to that family. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. And then what we're
saying is, hey, landlord, it's a
little bit of a risk, but we
understand that this is your
investment, this is your
property, you set the rent and
we've determined that on all
other cases, uh, they're,
they're going to be able to pay
this rent and the in
And so now, if, if there, it's
kind of an assurance for the
landlord. Is that
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that what I'm hearing? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes, that
is the intent of the program.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what percentage of, this is,
this has happened in other
states. What percentage, you
know, it's $250,000 that doesn't
sound like a lot. But what
percentage of the time do we
have to, uh, in other states
that have done this, have the
state have to pony up for the
lost rent or damages.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
cannot give you the exact
percentage that that's happened
in other states. I do know that
Oregon has a has a program that
is very similar to this. It's
been in effect since 2017, um,
and they have not had any issues
with solvency because Mr.
Speaker Gentleti, the whole
point of this program is that we
are renting to people we're
guaranteeing housing for
participants and participants as
families, single mothers.
Etc. who are gainfully employed,
who do make the income
requirements who want to pay
their rent, it's just that
credit score that's hindering
them from being able to rent an
apartment, Mr. Speaker,
Representative. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and when
you're saying that it's solvent,
are you saying they haven't had
to replenish it and they started
in 2017. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, I believe that is the
case, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, how much do they start out
with, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they actually started out with
less, but they um that program
was
assembled somewhat differently,
so they also brought in, it's
not through the.
Organ equivalent of MFA, so they
also brought in, um, private.
Partnership to um assist so
their fund is also much higher
than ours than what we're
proposing, but Oregon has a much
higher population. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I, I had looked at
the data because we are looking
for solutions. And when
something uh protects the
investor, the, the landlord and
creates opportunity for New
Mexicans, um, that show goodwill
and good intent and are
gainfully employed. I think that
seems like a win-win to me, and
I looked at the data and the,
the need for the fund was
be low. And so, um, I'm, I'm
happy to be able to support
this, uh, and I, I hope you get
lots of support. Thank you.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady please yield? I will
yield to the gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
so I understand from reading
page 2 of the bill that
The uh quote credit worthiness
assistant grant, unquote means a
grant of money.
To be used by a participant for
and then it gives the couple of
categories there, Mr. Speaker,
General, I just wonder how that
is squared with the
anti-donation clause in the
state constitution. I'm looking
at Article 9 section 14.
And I can paraphrase it, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, the
state shall not.
Make any donation to or in aid
of any person and then it goes
on to mention uh association
private enterprise and so forth.
So gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
could you explain, um how you
believe the bill avoids that
problem, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's my
understanding that it doesn't
conflict because it's a payment
toward the financing of
affordable housing under the
AHA, so forming funds under the
Affordable Housing Act.
My understanding is that it is
not subject to the anti-Donation
clause, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so I,
I think the bill, the bill
clearly says that this is a
grant.
Um, of money to be used by a
participant for all or a portion
of unpaid rent and damages
caused to a rental residential
property by a participant.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
really do think we have an
anti-donation clause issue here
and for that reason I'm uh I'm
not gonna be able to support the
bill. Thank you.
Seeing no further debate,
General Le close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move that House Bill 453 as
amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 453 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 47 in the affirmative, 16 of
the negative, House Bill 453 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
The gentle lady from
Donana Sierra, and Socorro, are
you ready on item number 29.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point?
Let the reflect that all action
is necessary for placing.
House Bill 209 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
Sunshine Portal fun creates a
link online, uh, for the and
adds the purpose of the fund to
the listing of funds and the
fund balance. And with that, I
stand for questions.
Seeing no further debate, to to
to close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I do, I now move that
House Bill 209 as amended now to
pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 209 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
We could
OK.
We can allow Representative
Johnson to cast a vote, please.
How do you wish to vote?
OK, by a vote of 63 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 209 as amended has
twoly passed this House.
The gentle lady from Ma Los
Alamos and San Sandoval and
Santa Fe, are you ready on item
number 55. Um, yes, Mr. Speaker,
will you get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
House Bill 298 on final passes
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, on
behalf of me and my co-sponsor
from San Juan, uh, county, the
municipal code has had seen
minimum updates since 1978. This
is simply an update in a tune up
to the municipal code, Mr.
Speaker.
We are available for questions.
Seeing no further debate during
later close.
I do, I do now move that House
Bill 298 to pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 298. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close. The
vote is now closed by a vote of
62 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 298 has
duly passed this house.
Joan Ley from Bernalillo
represented Kate, are you
writing the item number 42?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Could you get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 357 on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you members of the house. This
bill mandates that the
healthcare authority to
establish rules excluding gross
receipts tax from me via waiver
recipients individual budget
allotments providers would build
GRT separately ensuring
participants' budgets are fully
allocated with services, uh,
this bill will just, we have a
fixed uh budget for media
services. This rolls the GRT on
top of that so that it, whether
or not
I stand for questions.
So no debate, gentle lady,
you're close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move for a due pass on House
Bill 357.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 357. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 60 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative, House Bill 357 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Gorola, are you
ready on?
Item number 56.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 340 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and this is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 340
addresses two gaps in current
law that hinder solving open
criminal cases by allowing
judges to order the entry of DNA
into the combined DNA index
system.
And also mandates aromatic DNA
entry for individuals who have
who die in prison or were
released before July 1990, 1997
provided that the DNA was
collected in accordance with
law.
And with this I stand by
question.
John Lay to close. I move the
House Bill 340 to now pass.
We're on final,
final passage of House Bill 340
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 340 as
amended, has duly passed this
House. Gentle lady from Donana,
are you ready on item number 31?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action is to serve replacing
House Bill 427 as amended on
final passage has been taken.
And is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady, to explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. HB
427 amends the Water Project
Finance Act to add real-time
water monitoring to as a
qualifying project for the Water
Trust board.
And I stand for debate.
So you know for the debate
generally close.
Mr. Speaker, I move the HP 427
as amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 427 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close. The
vote is now closed by a vote of
63 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative.
House Bill 427 is amended has
duly passed this House.
The gentleman from Sandovalley,
are you ready on item number 38?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point? Let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
192 as amended on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution. Mm. And gentlemen,
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
House Bill 192 is amended adds
additional reporting from the
Department of uh IT to LFC to
make sure that the, uh, amount
in the budget every year is
enough to take care of the
public safety digital trunked
radio system subscriber fees and
with that I stand for questions.
So you know further debate,
gentlemen are close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I do now move
that House Bill 192 was amended,
do not pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 192 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 192 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
representative Hernandez, are
you ready? An item number 79.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
you get me to that point?
reflect that a necessary for
placing House Memorial 27 on
final passage has been taken and
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
I rise for House Memorial 27,
which directs the New Mexico
legislative council to take an
interim committee with
developing legislative proposal
for implementing a 2022 voter
approved.
Uh
Exemption 2 Article 9, Section
14 of the Mexico Constitution,
commonly known as the
anti-donation clause. Mr.
Speaker, I'd like to hand it
over to my uh co-sponsor from
the general lady from Santa Fe,
gentle lady from Santa Fe. OK,
thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen
from San Juan. In 2022, voters
overwhelmingly passed a
constitutional amendment that
created an exemption to the
anti-donation clause, uh, that
allowed the state and local
funds to be used to help cover
the last mile in uh
In rural areas, uh, and then
making sure that happened. Now
it's time for the body to pass
the rules so that we're able to
implement this, uh, this change.
So that we can make sure the
will of the voters is heard. Um,
I now hand it back to my
colleague, uh, from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, and I stand for
questions.
There is a beat. The gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, my friend you?
I do yield for my uh neighbor
and from San Juan County, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, so can you tell
me a little bit more about this
bill, um, uh, you know, as we're
starting to, uh, this, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, just
explain a little bit about it to
me if you would.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
Gentlemen, uh, what, what we're
gonna be achieving here is to
set up an interim, um, a
conversation with uh throughout
the state of Mexico, as you
know, it, it, um, Mr. Speaker,
and, and our rural communities,
uh, this is definitely something
that, uh, as, as uh we get new
elected leadership at the local
level who are now coming on
board trying to uh see what what
uh the state of New Mexico
has to give to the local
governments. We want to make
sure that we're hearing the
issues, uh, more importantly,
Mr. Speaker, the barriers and
challenges that they're facing
when uh uh applying for state
government uh uh state money,
but we also wanna uh take, take
in consideration of, of what we
can do better through this
interim session, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, the, this is
memorial, um, and so as we're
thinking about that, is that
only gonna go to uh entities or
like actually go to individuals.
A moment.
And Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
this, this will be to help so
that we're bringing essential
services, uh, from private
residents into uh the the
services that that's needed.
speaker and uh gentleman, uh, we
offer services in lots and lots
of ways. So tell me how this is
gonna be different than the
other services that we might
offer somebody.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I wanna, uh,
uh, hand it back over to my
expert which will really give us
a, a, a deep dive into that work
which I wasn't a part of, but,
however, Mr. Speaker, uh, my, my
expert was involved in that
process.
lady from Santa Fe. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen, for the question. Um,
so essentially what this does,
it allows the state to use state
funds to connect private
residences to the main essential
lines think broadband,
wastewater, water, um, those
essential services. What this is
directing the LCS to do is to
have one of our interim
committees provide recommended
rules around that exemption that
was passed overwhelmingly by the
voters in 2022, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Can you, um, tell me perhaps
some of the rules you're
thinking about, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you for the
question. Honestly, when we
brought this up, uh, to LCS they
provided us a 2 to 3, it was
like 4 pages actually of an
outline of what should be
discussed. And if you look at
the memorial itself, it outlines
those questions that need to be
answered. The crux of this is
that you have rural areas where
we're, we, we've spent billions
in getting more broad broadband
lines out there. We have sent a
much money on infrastructure.
In my district, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it was sewer lines.
What this does, it says that
that $10,000 a person needs to
get a private line for a sewer
line to their house to get that
set up the state and local funds
can be used for that private
line connection to that
essential service, so that
essential service is then
utilized.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So if let's just
assume that I'm the one that
needs this, um, I've got, um,
Natural gas.
5 blocks away from me or half a
mile away from me and, and so I
need that.
Would that be something that I
could, uh, ask for Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and right now that,
that is the exemption that was
passed by the voters, uh, Mr.
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and, and what
we're doing is building the
rules around that to make that
process work. So is it, is a
grant process? It doesn't go
through the cities, etc. all
those rules, we're looking to
the interim committees to
develop recommendations for
that.
OK, thank you, gentle, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, and
one of the reasons I'm asking
that question, as we've passed a
bill yesterday, I think, I think
has uh implications perhaps.
would you anticipating any of
the rules that uh it would only
be for clean energy or could,
that's why I ask about gas, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, outlines
directly and you can see it on
page 121 of the Constitution,
the essential services are
included. The essential services
that are included.
are, uh, and they do not say for
renewable or anything. They
specifically say wastewater,
water, um, infrastructure, I
believe is one of them. It also
says, um, uh, broadband in
particular, we call that as
well. So you, and you can also
see to the memorial, but it's
again for those essential
services that we're already
investing in the main lines.
This is to make sure that the
residents can make those
connections directly.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but after the bill
we passed yesterday, that may
change and so I'm that's why I'm
asking the question, so, uh,
from what you've just said, it's
essential and so that's one of
those things that uh that I
could look forward to.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, the intent
of the memorial, again as it
stands right now is not to carve
out certain energy or certain
otherwise, specifically because
we're investing so much money in
developing infrastructure into
New Mexico. We don't want to cut
off anything that we've already
invested in. So again, and again
what I'll say, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is this will be
developed in the interim, you
know, by a bipartisan interim
committee and those
recommendations will come out.
Should they come out with, with
parameters that were
uncomfortable for. We still have
the opportunity to make those
amendments, uh, you know, here
in this body, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I, I look forward
to hearing more about it and,
and seeing those rules. Thank
you.
Seeing no further debate, the
gentleman from San Juan too
close.
Yeah
Mr. Speaker, I move the house
memorial 27 do now pass.
We are on final passage of how
Memorial 27, the vote is now
open.
Well, it's about to close.
Vos are closed by a vote of 40
in the affirmative, 21 in the
negative. How Memorial 27 has
really passed this house.
Congratulations, gentlemen from
San Juan.
The gentleman to sing.
Make it good, please.
Living in a new world with an
old soul, these rich men north
of Richmond, Lord knows they all
just want to have total control
wanna know what you think, wanna
know what you do and they don't
think, you know, but I know that
you do cause your dollar ain't.
But uh it's tax to no end
because of Richmond north of
Richmond, God, if you're 5' 8
and you're 300 pounds taxes are
not to pay for your bags of
fudge rounds young men are
putting themselves 6 ft in the
ground because of all these damn
uh country does is what's the
language congratulations,
gentlemen. Lord, OK, we're done.
Thank you.
All right, well.
Maybe I should have listened to
the gentleman from Santaro and
Santa Fe about the uh.
Amazing ritual.
Congratulations, gentlemen.
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from uh
Catherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia, are you ready on item
number 53. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
would you get me to that point
that action necessary for
placing House Bill 269 as
amended on final passage has
been taken. It is now subject to
amendment.
Substitution.
Or debate later to explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, House Bill 269 allows
providers to choose and use any
electronic verification system,
and I stand for questions.
Mr. Speaker, I now move that
House Bill 269 as amended do now
pass. We are our final passage
of House Bill 269 as amended.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 6-3 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 269 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
It's a gentle lady from Bern Leo
Representative Herndon ready on
item 64. Could you get me to
that point, Mr.
Speaker placing House Bill 519
on final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
House Bill 519 transfers the
operations maintenance and
staffing for the African
American Performing Arts Center
from the New Mexico State Fair
to the cultural affairs
department, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for questions. So no need to
close.
Uh, Speaker, I move that House
Bill 519 do now pass. We are on
I don't forget to vote on your
own bill.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 519
Azuli passed this House.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I am when we go to
the next order of business
messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 45 as
amended. Senate Bill 53.
Senate Taxus and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168, Senate Bill 290 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhans Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 170 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson a chief clerk.
lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Announcements.
Miscellaneous business.
Represent me here, do you have
any miscellaneous business to
report.
Do you have any miscellaneous
business to report?
Committees or committees meeting
gentle lady from Los Alamo Santa
Fe Sandoval, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House Judiciary
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after the close of the floor
sessions note lady from Dona
Anna. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Your House Commerce will meet 15
minutes after the floor session.
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after the conclusion, unless
otherwise notified by text.
Remember saying no gentle lady
from Taos, Mr. Speaker, your
house agriculture and Water
Resources committee will not be
meeting tomorrow. There will not
be any burritos.
Look for that on Thursday.
Members take note Thursday
morning burritos lady from Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house Rural Development, land
grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning at 9:30. We
have two with a bill in a a
resolution that will be up and
there will be paneria in room
305 at 9:30.
Thank you other announcements.
Members I've got a couple of
announcements and we've got two
generic bills, uh, that we will
be removing from the house rules
and order of Business Committee
and referring them to committee.
The first one is.
Um, House Bill 593. It is a
generic house bill. We will be
removing it from the house rules
and Order of Business Committee
and instead referring it to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee and the House
Judiciary Committee that 202
number is 0.231739.2 sponsored
by Representative Armstrong.
Again, House Bill 593 removed
from the House Rules and Order
of Business Committee and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judici.
Committee.
The second bill is generic house
Bill 592 sponsored by
Representative Brown.
The 231 number is 0.231713.1.
That bill will be removed from
the house rules and order of
Business Committee and referred
instead to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, thence the House
taxation and Revenue Committee.
This is Hasville 592 sponsored
by Representative Brown, 231
number is 231-713.1 referred to
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
I have a 3rd announcement.
In conversation with the chair
and the sponsor of the bill,
House Bill 212, which is on the
third reading calendar will be
remanded back to the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 212 sponsored by
Rosetta Ferrari, will be
remanded back to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Any other announcements before
we break for the day.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Did you
hear the rumor about the butter?
I did not. Well, I'm certainly
not going to spread it.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Bernal Leo.
Mr. Speaker, why did the pirate
learn the alphabet? Why, gentle
lady?
Because he couldn't find the
sea.
Oh, that's a good one, OK.
Competition competition we
should have a vote at the end, a
voice vote. No, this is a roll
call vote.
See who got the better jokes.
To a roll call
We have a roll call.
Any other announcements?
Generated from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, CPAC will not
be meeting tomorrow, but we are
going to have a get together at
Thomas Sitas with our analysts.
Thank you. Members take noe
Tomasitas CPAC still waiting for
the house, enrolling in grossing
committees for the committee
dinner, so keep us posted.
Members, thank you for a very
productive day. I hope you have
a good rest of your Monday.
We will see you tomorrow, gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
The house was set in recess
