1175 is another phase.
And
See, and I think we go into the
next sections.
That have um.
05, 1011, 76 on, on the very top
of page number 7. So those are
some of the uh US 64 projects.
We also have a few other
significant projects. We have
the uros Road project, which was
mentioned and that is um.
Each number, sorry, I apologize.
New Mexico.
14
Um, it's S10680 when it's kind
of towards the middle there, um,
and as it shows in FY 255 we
have the $10.6 million in the
step, but again we are short by
$35 million for that project.
Excuse me, moving um onto page
number 7.
We also have, um, I think one of
the other projects are the major
investment projects that I'd
like to point out is um New
Mexico 30 that is currently at a
$52 million project, and then I
think one of the other major
investment projects that we have
is the very last one listed
under the planning years. That's
the S100440. It's the Saint
Michael Saint Francis
interchange for Santa Fe, um,
that's, uh, uh, right now the
current engineer.
It's about um.
Almost $50 million.
So looking at a total of both of
these under the current step, we
have a total of about 300,
almost $380 million of project
needs that are in the fiscally
constrained step.
And then in the planning years
or um 29, 30, 31 were about a
little over $600 million for
District 5.
Moving on to page number 8, we,
I have listed the um TPF, the
transportation project funding
that was received and the
projects that received that
funding, um, I know that this,
um money is extremely helpful to
the local governments, they
really find it beneficial. We
were able to give out, um, it
has the 95% uh split with the 5%
match by the entity.
And so we were able to award out
a total of 9.
$2 million with the $460,000
entity match for a total of 9.
7 million and down below.
we show the locations within the
district that were able to
benefit from the TPF funding,
and as you can see, we had um
several in most of the counties
that are within District 5.
Excuse me, moving on to pages 9
and 10.
Um, this is a list of all of the
projects that were awarded local
government road fund or LGRF
funding for FY 25.
Um, there's several, and of
course this one has a 75, 25%
split.
And if you go to page number 11,
um.
can see the map
That shows where all of the
different uh projects were
located, as well as the various
breakdowns for the LGRF funding,
and we were able to award a
total of $5.4 million almost
$5.5 million with that 75, 25%.
You don't want to go over
equipment and OK, and there is
one last page that has equipment
needs, but I think that's being
done separately, so I won't
actually go over that.
I stand for questions.
Thank you.
A member down
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. It's,
it's more maybe.
A freshman question. How
How do you determine the
priority projects? Like how do
you determine which prior
priority priority projects take.
I.
And feel free to chime in, but I
think from a a big part of it,
quite honestly is where where we
are in design. I mean, that's
one of I think the biggest
factors is where we're at in the
design process because it can
take quite a while to design a
project and so, um, you know, we
have these projects that we plan
out, you can see we have several
stuff that's even out in the
planning years and we know it
takes a while to develop it and
is um we go through different
um.
Things that we have to address
in order to do the design, and
it kind of sometimes will, will
adjust slightly like where it is
in the prioritization and as we
get funding as we move closer to
completing the project, it might
adjust that slightly.
Yeah, and also Mr. Chairman and
Representative Doo, um, as we,
as we select projects within the
Department of Transportation,
we, we obviously collect tons of
data on every route within our
jurisdiction and that includes
payment and distress data,
crashes, um, all kinds of other
criteria that come to to to.
Basically float the project to
the top. And once we kind of hit
those triggers within the
districts, they'll know those
routes that um that are either
in the top 2 or 1 or 2% of
crashes, um, the payment is so
terrible that there's something
that we have to absolutely
address right now. So those
projects will float to the top,
we'll get them designed, we'll
get them developed, um, we use
our tap or asset management
program to track all the
projects and and categorize them
and rank them when we do what is
called a car form which
basically takes all the roads
and based on some of the
criteria I mentioned to you,
it'll automatically.
rank those for us and then with
that data, then we'll come and
use engineering judgment to kind
of fine tune that list and make
sure that we hit the targets
within the district. So it's a
very comprehensive process that
we select projects from.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And that's
for agency projects. Because
our, our process is a lot less
complicated than that.
Full of fully fund a project in
your, from your ICIP so it might
be a block. And then, um, Mr.
Chair, I, what about, are people
using the millings for rural
routes?
Yes, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, that's a great
question. So yes, what we've
done um over the last 10 years
as we
is we worked with a cooperative
agreement through the Federal
Highway Administration because
Most of our roads were built
with federal funds. They have
80% of the whatever comes off
those projects with this case
happens to be Milings. So they
own the milling, so we, we come
in, we created an agreement
between us and them which
basically allows anybody, any
entity, city, county, uh, tribe,
uh, Pueblo.
Uh, school district to come and
request millions. We'll go
through the federal process very
simple process. Um, we'll get
those approved and then we'll
cut them loose to the counties.
We've done over, um, you know,
615 uh,000 lane miles with the
locals, we've, it's equated to
about $7 million of donated
mailings. So with the, the
donation has really become
beneficial to a lot of uh
locals, um, you know, for.
For erosion and and roads around
the school and you know, things
like that, so they come in very
handy. And yes, we have a good
um robust program when it comes
to donation of buildings.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
didn't for the secretary too. I
didn't really think about it
until just recently that you're,
um, soil and water conservation
districts can do work on private
land and also the water
districts, um, I, I
In my area, I inherited a water
district that I mean the streets
look like Arroyos, but they're,
they have to be maintained by
the private.
property owners. So I don't know
how to get the word out about
the millings, but I think it'd
be beneficial in this region.
Um, and then this is my last
question is in regards to the
federal matching dollars.
Were any of the federal matching
funds leverage to do road work?
or how does that work when
you're, I think these are just
literally, I'm just trying to
learn.
Chairman and representative for
the locals.
Well, we had the fun, I think it
had 75 million in it, yeah, the
match fund program where we able
to leverage any of that for road
projects? Yes.
Representative
Um, the match fund of $75
million is a great for that.
We did leverage $2 million so we
received $2 million for a grant.
And and so the challenge for us
is that we have very large
projects, and we could tap that
fund out in.
3 weeks, um, meaning that we
could have projects and in the
last few months, we've been
really successful with federal
grants, probably above 200
million.
And so, um, we're we're
cautious, we understand that
there's a sweet spot for that
fun, so that locals can leverage
it more than anything and 6 or
$8 million dollar grant. We felt
that was an appropriate size of
match pretty.
Um, right now, what we do is we
pay for the match fund out.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ranking member Ralph.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Is Los Lopez, that was a very
good presentation, um, very
informative. I, I really like
the format of
Going by the year of the funding
and uh giving us the window
during which it has to be spent,
so it's very well done. I do
have one question, and that's
about Mr. Chairman Berrios Road
Project at Saint Michael's
through Indian School through
Saint Francis Drive.
The question I have is, how will
this affect the railroad track
used by the rail runner there at
that very large intersection.
Mr. Chair representative Brown,
um, from my understanding, I
think this section, um.
does not include the railroad
track, but um I can verify that
with the.
That's true. OK, that is
correct, then, yes, it does not
include the railroad track.
For this segment.
I'm kind of Mr. Chair
disappointed to hear that. That
is a tough intersection at
certain times of the day, and
it's a little choppy and
A lot going on at that
intersection, so, um, it
probably would be very expensive
too.
Work on that and um like disrupt
service of the rail runners.
Anyway, OK, so it'll stop just
before that.
Yes. OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Remember Lindstrom?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had a
few questions.
Looking at page one, Mr.
Chairman, at the 18.5% vacancy
rate.
But primarily is vacant in your
district.
Chair representative Lindstrom,
um, really I think, um.
Looking at the the percent
vacancies, a lot of it is in our
engineering.
And um
Support staff, um, we actually
have quite a few engineering
positions within the district
that are vacant, um.
From, uh, the assistant district
engineer of construction, which
I'm currently trying to fill uh
down to like our traffic
engineer position. We, um, and
our assistant traffic engineer.
Um, we have, uh, each district
usually has like a design group,
um, right now we do not have any
of those positions filled in our
design, I'd like to ask Mr.
Padilla, what are we doing about
that because that's gonna be
consistent among all the
districts.
Mr. Chair Representative
Lindstrom, so over the last at
least, you know, as long as
Secretary Serner has been
around, we've been really
actively trying to seek out um
young engineers, um, we have a
ELP program where we go out to
all the surrounding
universities, including Texas,
Colorado, a few in Arizona and
reach out to the young engineers
and try to get them to New
Mexico and to get to our
program. Pay has come up quite a
bit for our engineers, so we are
now just really right there on
the knocking on the door being
really competitive with.
The private sector as well, so
that's come a long way.
Getting word out to anybody
that'll listen to us about the
vacancies we have in New Mexico.
What in New Mexico, you know,
can, can offer them and bring to
them.
Um, you know, it's, it's really
been big. So really, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
we've, we've really just done
anything we can to get word out,
but this is the place to work
and this is the place to be, so
hopefully we're, we're
accomplishing some of that with
some of these, you know,
vacancies that are coming down
in some of these districts, Mr.
Chairman, that might be
something that this committee.
ice to help the department with.
It's been a consistent problem
for many, many years.
They cannot get the technical
staff to support with their
operations are.
I have a couple other questions,
Mr. Chairman. I'm looking on
page 7.
I'm looking at your, your
district 5 step planning years
FY 29 and 30.
What's the inflation factor
used?
Chair Representative we used in
inflation factor of 1.5%. So
you're telling me that 1.5% of
total project budget is what we
can expect when we can't move a
project.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
You know, that, that right now
that's the best we can do
likely. I think we've seen the
information, the data work that
David is seeing in his shop.
Probably right there, right now
today. I mean, if we were before
you next year, it's probably
gonna be a little different, but
with the data right now, we're
probably around the 1.5.
amount of
So, um, we have seen price have
you now they've stabilized in
that 1.5.
An inflation rate, um, is
estimates.
Oh.
ahead of those prices, um, we're
fairly confident not rise as
much as they have been.
So I think that 1.5%.
Barely, um
And Mr. Chairman, on page 7.
Um, I'm looking into, well, I
guess it'd be page 8.
Looking at the transportation
project funding, when you, when
you let those projects and award
those is the state, the leader
is a local.
Sorry, I did not catch that last
part you award
state.
Project funding.
Is the state the lead or is the
local government the lead chair
representative, the local
government.
So, Mr. Chairman and uh.
I'm, I'm sorry, you're the
first.
A female engineer I've seen in
District 5. Maybe there hasn't
been any other, but
congratulations. Um, I did have
a question about, and I think
this helps some of the new
people.
On the committee, if you could
explain the difference between
the local government road fund
versus the transportation
project fund.
And they're probably both local
leads.
True.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
yeah, it is a great question
because we've been the one and
the same. Right. So the
transportation project fund
created in statue, uh, thanks in
large part to your leadership.
Allows for us to um fund that
fund through a tax distribution.
And so, um, every year we're
receiving approximately $52
million that we award out to
community projects.
We fundamentally enter into an
award with them. They manage the
projects and then the local
government road fund also
created in statute receives
distributions from what I
believe is a.
Delivery fee, the PPL.
Yeah, that's what it is. The
PPL, uh, petroleum, uh, that one
is, is a little trickier, uh,
for a couple of reasons. The
transportation project fund
requires the local 5%.
The local government road fund
has a higher match and 25% of
the cost of the project.
Which means that we see a lot
more larger municipalities and
courses.
In statue, there's also a
division of that fund and it
needs to be used in accordance
with that division.
So a percentage of it.
to go to school routes for
example.
Uh, percentage of it needs to go
to cooperative programs,
arterial programs and and county
cooperative programs and so the
tricky part is we get the
funding, we break it up into
those buckets.
Then every the community, the
locals have to come and apply to
that bucket and then we have to
ensure that the 25% match can be
so that's the main difference
and our discussions are whether
or not we should collapse the
revenue from those TPF fund.
And ensure that the TPF fund can
be allowed for the same types of
projects just without the
limitation of breaking up the
funding by percent
distributions, they're really
low.
So
Hope that kind of answer. It
does, Mr. Chairman, and I'd like
to work with the department and
let's take a crack at that kind
of a bill this session.
Both of these bills, both of
those funds were.
My legislation.
So I'd like to take them now and
let's see if we can't pull those
together, working with the
committee on that.
It is confusing, uh, you have
both of them are local leads,
both of them have different
criteria, but both of them are
for local projects at the end of
the day. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Lindstrom. Would you be open,
Representative, to having a
working committee to make to
create some recommendations
around assisting the uh
department in
Better filling those technical
positions that you were
referencing.
Now, Mr. Chairman, thanks for
bringing that up. We, we do need
that. We don't have a good
pipeline right now for engineers
and.
So um
surveyors, people like that, the
technical positions, it's tough
because they're competing with
the private sector.
So what ends up happening
generally is um.
You know, people will peel off
and start working for the
private sector.
I, I would strongly suggest that
we try to help them.
Figure out a way that we can set
up a pipeline and you can do
that in the. So if you're open
to that, why don't we visit uh
at some point.
Relatively quickly and has come
up with a working committee of
the members.
Uh, to interface with uh NMDOT.
Thank you.
Next we have representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, Mr.
Chair, I, I would also ask when
people speak out of the audience
that they identify themselves or
people that are new.
Um, because I'm not sure who
they are, um, so I wanted to uh
thank you all this morning for
your presentation, um, couple of
questions, Mr. Chair, is, um, in
your RFPs, do you provide for a
local option?
determine, um, representative
Borigo, um, we do.
for it if it's a state funded
project, um, a lot of our
s are federally funded and we
cannot pursue a far include that
type of a provision in the RFPs.
Thank you. Um, so I served as
the um vice chair of the Mr. Cog
Transportation Committee in
Albuquerque, so I'm
Very familiar with the tip
process and and uh.
Your involvement and District
3's involvement and some of the
other regional districts, um, in
the merge cog.
Um, and one of the issues that
I've had Mr. Mr. Chair is, um,
it seems like that information
sometimes doesn't get translated
back to this board and I've
watched this sport over the
years, so I'm, I'm uh.
Familiar, can you um elaborate
on that a little bit.
I think Jill sat sat on that uh
Mister Cog.
Representative
fill you in on on the cog itself
or no, I'd like to know the
relationship of those projects
to this to the step to what you
guys are presenting here today.
uh, I do sit on the MTV, um,
along with engineers, so.
Right,
um, outside of NPOs, um, really
focus.
But bottom line is it's
federally funded and as you are
aware,
That's a 4 year cycle of
Um, and the reason I asked that,
Mr. Chair, is because I'm I'm.
Very familiar with District 3
and how that works, but I'm just
wondering about the other
districts. Do they have a
similar process.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, so.
In essence, yes, you know, I
think, um.
By and large, the other MPOs
have diets, um, and that's of
other committees.
Right.
But does do the other districts
in the state have a similar
committee as what I'm asking.
Um, so, so, so there are which
are.
Outside of the NPO areas, right?
So you
I5.
We have North Central Planning
5, merge, um, reach RPO is all
the ups now of the north uh
Southwest and south and the
northeast are eels, so there's
like 5.
And the Southwest also how many
that is 6 RPs.
That in our field and 5 MPs. OK.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, the
reason that I asked that
question is because there's a
significant amount of money
that's being programmed through
Mr. Cogs and places like that
that is federal money and you
know, I kind of worry sometimes
that it's not, there's not a,
you know, a really strong
coordination among those
projects, so I just, I just
raised that issue because I saw
that.
when I was on Mister Cog,
um, so and to all the members,
if we could please keep the
course today.
To the district specifically I
and those are good questions and
important questions, but we have
all of an hour and we still have
to get through one more dish you
Mr. Chair, one more issue that I
wanted to raise um really
quickly is um I, I passed this
morning through the area on 76,
right next to Holy Cross School,
and there is a um school zone.
There's a beginning of the
school's own sign, but there's
not an end, so I just wanted to
raise that issue.
true.
Thank you before we, we move on,
I know we still have another
district to cover, but there was
a couple of members that were
not here, if I could have a
representative Borego and Vice
Chair Lara introduced
themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
So I am representative Barrego.
I represent the area along uh
west side of Albuquerque on the
northwest Mesa long uh.
Hotwood Mall area, Rio Rancho,
um, on the edges, and I'm a
former city councilor and former
city council president.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Ray Lata. I represent House
District 34 in southern Donana
County, um, my district goes to
the Texas state line and to the
border with. Thank you, Vice
Chair. If we could, uh, Mr.
Secretary, very quickly just
have all of your staff
reintroduce themselves. There
were some members that weren't
here.
Please, please get in line and
step up to the mic, otherwise
nobody will hear you out in the
world.
Good morning, Mr. Chu.
Representatives. My name is Mo
Mobi. I'm the deputy secretary
for New Mexico.
Department of Transportation.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Jerry Valdez,
executive director, special
projects office of the
secretary. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members, um, David
Quintana, Chief Engineer and
MDOT.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
uh, Manuel Maestas, uh, program
management.
Good morning, Jolene Herrerait
manager for NMDOT.
Mallory. Uh, good morning, David
Harris, uh, model programs.
John Romero, Highway Operation
Division Director.
Thank you everyone. Let's
proceed.
Right
Mr. Chair, good morning. I'll
introduce myself just briefly
for these new members. My name
is Rick Padilla and I'm the
executive director for um
highway operations uh for the
office of the secretary and
introduce to you Miss Lisa Vega
District 6 engineer.
Take it away.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'd
first like to thank you for your
continued support.
Um, definitely helps keep our
roads in good order.
Uh, District 6, like Rick
mentioned is in western New
Mexico and encompasses Cibola
McKinley Counties, the majority
of Catan and Sandoval counties,
portions of San Juan, Rio Riba,
Valencia, and Socorro counties.
There's a map here that kind of
shows you what the district
boundaries are, our District 6
commissioner is uh Charles
Lundstrom.
And just to give you a brief
overview of our budget, our
operating budget is 23.5 million
are ongoing construction
contracts are about 93 million
contract maintenance at 7
million. Field supplies at 6.5
million.
Striping and signing at 1.3
million rest area maintenance,
uh, and improvements at 476,000
IT budget at 251,000 are
employee breakdown, we have
support staff of 39 positions.
My
Maintenance staff at 144
positions, construction at 51
positions, uh, engineering
support at 13 positions, which
gives us about 247 permanent
positions, and we do have 5
temporary intern positions that
we do utilize to try to onboard
additional people.
Um, our vacancy rate right now
is at 8.1%.
Um, moving on to page 2, I'd
like to start with our house
build project status. So for the
laws of 2019, we have uh 3
projects that have been
completed. There are 2 projects
that are still in the design
phase for the loss of 2021, we
have two projects that have been
completed, uh, 2 that are in
process.
Uh, and just to kind of give you
an idea here, the gray shading
projects that have been
completed and then that blue
gray are projects that are in
process, uh, for the loss of
2022, all of those projects have
been completed.
Moving on to page 3.
Uh, for the laws of 2023, all
the projects have been completed
except for that last one, which
is a local lead project with the
city of Grants. That project
currently is in design.
For the loss of 2024, we have 4
projects that are in process, 3
projects that have been
completed and 4 projects that
are planning to start this
spring and be complete by the
end of the summer.
Um, at the bottom of the page,
we have also the laws of 2024.
We have two projects that have
been completed, one that's in
process, and then one again
that'll start in the spring and
be done by the end of summer.
For page number 4, I'd like to
take a moment to highlight some
of the district's ongoing
construction projects, of
course, these projects are
projects that improve our
critical infrastructure.
So we do have some projects here
on New Mexico 566126, New Mexico
264. New Mexico 32, New Mexico
118, and US 550 and then on the
2nd.
half of the page, we have our
completed construction projects
on going on to page number 5,
while new construction often
captures attention, the ongoing
care and upkeep of what we've
already built is also equally as
important. So these are some of
the district's contract
maintenance projects that we
were able to complete last
fiscal year. So here is our
fiscal year 24 contract
maintenance projects, and then
this next table are projects
that we are currently working on
for this fiscal year.
So as you can see here, we've
completed 3 of these projects
and then 2 again we'll start in
the spring and then be done by,
by the end of the fiscal year.
Um, page number 6, we have our
district sip, which is our
fiscally constrained years on
the top table, the second
portion or the bottom table are
are planning years and a lot of
these that are in the planning
years are projects that either
being designed now and are
partially funded or sometimes
they're actually unfunded, but
want to keep them moving forward
and in an attempt to get some
additional funding.
Moving on to page number 7. I'd
like to take a moment to talk
about our proposed major
investment projects. So, as you
know, the DOT faces significant
challenges with regard to our
transportation infrastructure.
So that first project is located
in Gallup and will improve
safety, traffic operations, and
reliability, as well as the
payment condition.
I-40 has significant high heavy
truck traffic, a lot of pavement
and some of their structures are
beginning to end or come to the
end of their design life. um,
projects 2 through 4 are located
east of Winterrock and actually
are the gateway from New Mexico
into Arizona. Uh, these projects
will improve safety, pavement
condition, and also drainage.
The 5th project will address
flooding that has been occurring
east of Gallup and that affects
both the frontage road, I-40,
and the Yambao chapter community
there.
The last project would improve
safety, traffic operations,
bridge condition and drainage,
and this will also bring an
outdated interchange up to
current standard. So in this
location, we actually have a box
culvert that isn't high enough
to accommodate semi trucks, so
if there's an issue that happens
on I-40, we can't use the
frontage Road as a detour. So
this is very important to bring
it up to current standard.
Uh, the next table there is the
district's maintenance need. So
it's important to prioritize
maintenance due to our aging
roads, bridges, and roadside
assets, so by preserving what we
built, we're making an
investment in the long term
health of our, our state's
infrastructure.
So these projects are mainly
pavement preservation, also
included at the bottom of that
table is striping contract
trucking, field supplies and
some burial message boards to
kind of replace some of the
message boards that we have that
are currently either unoperable
or aged, uh, at the bottom of
the page there is our District 6
capital needs and improvements
and just some kind of reminder
that in order to properly
maintain our roads, we also need
to have good.
places of employment for our
employees and to just take care
of some of the things that need
to be taken care of, as you can
see some of these items include
garage door replacements.
There's um a septic system
replacement here, roofs, floors,
uh, building security, so as you
can see, we just need to
remember that our facilities are
aging as well as our roads, so
we do need to kind of remember
that and take care of those
items of need.
On page 8 is our transportation
project funding that we've
received some 23 and 24. Again,
the shaded projects are those
projects that have been
completed.
Uh, page 9 just gives a visual
of where those projects are
located within District 6.
On page 10 is our fiscal year 23
and 24 local government road
fund, and again, that one
project there that shaded is a
project that has been completed.
And then lastly, I just wanted
to share some pictures of, of
items that been going on going
on in District 6 over this last
year, uh, some pictures include
our paving crew, our chip seal
crew. We had a Christmas
luncheon where we had a lot of
participation from our
employees, um, which that
Christmas luncheon was actually
organized by 3 of our employee,
um, organizations and each
district 6 employee got a ham,
so that was really something
special that we were able to do
for our employees.
Um, again, there's some pictures
here of our bridge crew, um,
fixing a rundown off of an
interchange.
Along I 40, we have zippy, uh,
we were able to construct Zippy
out of some uh drums and other
traffic control devices and in a
competition, District 6 did
become first place on that, uh,
one thing that I also wanted to
highlight was a screening plant
that the district was able to
purchase and that's gonna allow
the district to process our
milling stockpiles into surface
treatment aggregate which we can
then utilize for our chip seals,
so it's something really
exciting that we're looking.
to and in the middle of the of
the.
board here we have some of that
material that we were able to
process. So just some things
that I wanted to share with the
committee. I want to thank you
for the opportunity to present
this morning and I'll stand for
any questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
I have to apologize to
Representative Hernandez, I
overlooked him a little earlier,
so representative.
Like
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, colleagues
on the committee and presenters,
I too want to apologize for uh
coming in late, but uh it it's
for a good reason for my
district.
It's uh, I've been working on
the energy transition Act for 5
years and, and, uh, really happy
about the good news that's gonna
be announced soon, but um,
On, on, on this uh um.
Let me, uh, focus on on on
something I think both districts
can can relate to.
Um
His, uh, I understand that
there's a
A fund for um like, like to help
with
With uh claims on.
On repairs to vehicles.
How much is that fun? And what
is the
Uh, what's the criteria because
of the uh numerous potholes that
are
Throughout these districts and,
and it's something that
I constantly hear from my
constituents is, is the uh
potholes and, and I myself have
have had to ah.
repair maintenance early on, on,
on my uh vehicle. Thank you.
true.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Nandez, thanks for the question.
There are um a couple of
different avenues that can be
taken when um stances.
If it happens on a steep road
outside of a construction
project, then we have a claim
process that goes through our
risk team and then through GSD
risks to compensate.
road conditions. If the damage
is done, um, on a project,
active construction project,
then the claims are actually
made through the contractor risk
um or insurance company.
And, and they can be paid that
way.
And so, um, more importantly is
how do we and so there isn't a
fund necessarily or a a total
number um of uh claims that we
can pay, um, it, it essentially
is uh an impact to the state's
risk liability insurance, and so
that's how it's covered.
We actually now and we're trying
and we're getting ready to
launch more broadly, and this is
kind of like the on our NM
roads, we just relaunched our
Nim roads application for those
of you that use it, it's a great
tool for getting up to date, um,
information we now during the
winter.
We have added a place on NM
roads that allows drivers to
report, it will allow you to use
your.
Um, your location to pin drop.
The location of a pothole.
And litter
OK? And so if you get on to NM
roads, you'll see a place where
it says report potholes, report
litter.
You click on that and it'll
guide you on how you.
Download the app to make those
real-time pin drop reports to
us.
Those reports go directly to the
districts.
The district, um, assistant
district engineers for
maintenance, then get the
patrols out so we're not just
trying to streamline the claims
process, which we try and do,
we're trying to actually get
feedback in real time from road
users about potholes and litter
and so um that's especially so
if the litter is in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um,
Um, again, I'll probably have
Uh, more, uh, discussions on US
Highway 64.
Um, but I just want to also
point out, uh, within that
district 5 and, and, and I'm
sorry for not raising this
earlier, it's just, you know,
the, uh, the safety.
Um, um.
Um
Oh
Issues around the hogback, uh,
uh, rich, the curve, uh, it's,
it's just it and.
Uh, something that I, I, I
really wanna see, um, uh,
something to that my community
feels safe driving through.
Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary, if you
could provide uh all of the
members uh contact regarding any
potential request from
constituents about a claim.
Is on the road, uh,
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Lisa, for the presentation.
I'm glad to see your vacancy
rates only at 8, 8.1%, is that
primarily with engineering or is
that another?
Area.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, uh, right now our
vacancies, we have 3 and program
support.
to an engineering support, 8 and
maintenance and 7 in
construction, so I actually only
have one engineering position
that's currently vacant and
we're in the process of hiring
for that position. OK.
I did want to ask Mr. Chairman
and
And um
serve the staff can highlight it
for me. We don't have to get
into the that's eyebrow, but a
project that I've consistently
advocated for was an additional
lane east and west on I-40. I
see lots of maintenance stuff
for I-40 on here.
Um, you guys know that there's
been a big deal for me in the
last 10 number of years.
I want to know, and you can just
highlight it for me where in
these sections, yeah, are we
actually tying to that
consultant plan on I-40 to do
those turnouts.
You know, when you all presented
your consultant plan to the tis
Committee and Gallup a year or
two ago.
told me that at that time you
told the committee that we would
not be adding extra lanes
because they weren't needed.
Um
But we were gonna be building
out.
Certain areas of 40 going east
and west, and I want to know on
this clown, where is it?
Mr. Chair Representative on our
district 6 step, which is on
page 6. We have a project that
is 6101581 which is 1234, the
fourth project down between uh
it's I-40 mile post 39.8 to
44.8, and in that section we are
actually going to be
implementing the enhanced two
lane, which will be 2 12-foot
lanes and 2 12 ft shoulders.
And we'll be tying into uh
Coolidge, which we also
constructed in that widened
section and then also on um page
number 7 for our proposed major
investment projects, the
priority number one, which is
I-4017.9 to 21.9. That's
actually a project that's also
going to include the enhanced
tooling.
portion and we're in the process
of um.
moving forward with trying to
program more projects on I-40
with the white in sections as
recommended by the corridor
study.
So Mr. Chairman, I think that's
a super important and um.
Those of us who've been stuck on
40.
For hours going either east or
west from Gallup to Albuquerque.
We have been um peppering this,
peppering the department and
others on trying to get the
funding to get that with the
additional lane, I think it's
critical. I have not been one
that buys into just doing
reconstruction or expansion only
because I think what's happened
here is um.
Uh, we're always in catch up
mode then, as opposed to let's
get this done, let's, let's work
on this by section and then, uh,
create the maintenance plan for
it, um, I like the fact, Mr.
Chairman, that this uh district
also puts together it's letting
schedule, I think that's
important.
We need to know when these
projects are going to be let.
And I do want to have some.
Communication on a regular basis
regarding the new grant.
Allison
I know they got another $43
million from the feds for the
Allison corridor.
There's been uh comments from
the city of Gallup.
It has to be realigned
apparently they're concerned
about the alignment going right
through.
A business and somebody's house
and and that kind of thing, the
portion that actually goes into
the city.
So I, I want to be part of that
discussion when you guys fire up
with that new with that new
grant.
And I don't believe that there
was a match required for that.
Is that correct, Mr. Secretary?
There wasn't a match.
Well
Um, there is a match associated
with that uh award and um the
project is going to hone in on,
uh, the great separation of
Allison with the railroad. And
so I'm not sure how um.
How long the project, um.
and I will be to address some of
the alignment issues, but to be
sure, we'll have the discussion
ahead of time.
Now, Mr. Chairman, it's a
Project that's got 9 phases to
it.
It's got 9 phases. It's
basically building another.
Off ramp
On the west side.
Uh, but now with this new grant
and the problems that we've had
with fatalities at at grade
crossings in Gallop.
I'm glad to see that this has
come through. I know you guys
did a lot of work on that. I
appreciate it, get that
information in to the fits.
That's all I had for now, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Hochman Mahe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
thank you, dear to Lisa,
everybody, good to see you
again, um, just wanted to
commend you these reports, um,
look great, you've really done a
lot of work on kind of cleaning
up the information for us and um
we had some asks of you last
year as to how we wanted the
information presented and I
really see that you took that to
heart and these reports are a
lot clearer to me, so thank you
very much for that, um, and also
just, you know, all joking
aside, I'm still waiting for my
zippy swag.
So I could receive that sometime
soon. That'd be great.
Thank you, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you all for your
presentation. Um, I, I really
like the, the maps with the dots
on it, so we can actually see,
you know, some of the, sometimes
I don't know and it it's not in
my district where that road is
or whatever. So I, I appreciate
that. Um, one of the things that
I wanted to see if
You all could do and maybe
everyone else knows this
information, and I always just
call the same person, but.
Can you get us information for
in the districts.
Yeah, in the DOT districts, who
we should contact if there's an
issue.
I, I would love that. I've, I've
contacted Jenny many times and
she's always helped me, but I
don't even know if that's the
right person I should be
calling, so I would rather.
Do, uh, you know, contact the
correct person. Um, so I, I
really, um, uh, as well as as.
Um, with Aman v. Hill. I really
like the way that it's stated
the money. I like to see all of
this information, the matching
funds, everything else. And of
course, you know, I have uh.
Catherine uh in in this
district. And so, um, one of the
things that I always have
trouble with is knowing if it's
a, it's the local DOT that's
supposed to be doing something
or the state or the county, you
know, I've got road 603 that's
been a pain in all of our butts,
and so it's always because it's
a shared road with county and
state.
And I you guys have been out
there, uh, when I call and I
appreciate that. Uh, one ask
that I've been meaning to ask
for is a rumble strip.
From high from Highway 36 to 60
right before the school
apparently.
A car ran through the school.
So, um, I missed that stop sign,
so, uh, just to bring that, uh,
I hate when people ask for
special things, but I thought,
gosh, I have an audience. I'm
gonna ask.
So give us a contact for that.
We could certainly reach out to
whoever you're dealing with at
the school. So,
um, my strips may not be the,
the fix for that, but we have a
lot of things in our toolbox.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that. Um, I will get that to
you, um, ASAP, and again, thank
you for all you do. Your hands
are full and.
Your money is little.
Transportation fund.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you committee, great
questions this morning. I have
to please ask, I'm not pleased,
but I have to ask you all,
please, to do your absolute very
best to be here on time.
We are not even into bills yet
and we're already running past
time. If you could please try to
be here at 9 o'clock. It'll help
us all get our business done. In
addition, please also try to
keep your promise germane to the
topic, if you can go offline
with the secretary of the
secretary staff, that would be
very helpful if you have just
generic questions.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, just one thing for
as you all leave today, we are
expecting snow tonight into
tomorrow, so for sure in your
commute in tomorrow, you will
see some snow 2 to 5 inches ish,
so we'll be very busy, so heads
up.
Thank you.
Representative Lindstrom, thank
you so much. Members that asked
for maps and DOT was gracious
and we have maps back here, so
members if you need a map, want
a map, they're right back here.
Thank you.
