To be and then we'll go to that.
Hope springs eternal.
The gentleman from.
Bernalillo.
The next order of business
committee reports we have a
committee for that was my
mistake General formerly
optimistic and overlooks our
business introduction
legislation that was also a
mistake Gen from Bernalillo.
Indigo get rusty so quickly.
The speaker I move that we go to
next order of business meeting a
legislation interjections
ordered members I'll direct your
some of your attention summon
calendar everyone we're in a
gray area of the twenty four
hour rules are objection to stay
in that role to lack
consideration this bill hearing
no objections we will proceed.
To house bill one let the record
reflect all action is necessary
for placing House Bill one with
an emergency clause on final
passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the mistake
on house bill one is you feed
mill it appropriates a total of
four million one hundred forty
three thousand dollars for
for this session fifty five
thousand of which are for
expenditure by the house of
representatives seventeen
thousand for the Senate sixteen
thousand seven hundred for
Legislative Council Service in
four million dollars for State
Capitol Building systems
upgrades and renovations Mr
speaker
you should know that
these renovations for actually
approved by the legislature in
house bill two they were vetoed
by the governor the so
renovations and upgrades include
renovations to the annex
potentially reconfiguring the
New Delhi is the office which
took over when a OCD of
administrative off office of the
courts vacated their space
as well as other miscellaneous
items and upgrades and with that
Mr speaker I'll stand for
questions there is debate the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman yield please
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
have a question for you how many
members are in the house the
speaker and gentle lady seventy
members in the house and Mr
speaker gentleman how many
members are in the Senate
speaker and gentle lady for you
to.
And Mister speaker the house
gets how much equity to this
bill how much money does the
house get speaker gentle lady
the house would get fifty five
thousand dollars with seventy
members to Mister speaker how
many how many thousands of
dollars to CENIC it was
speculated seventy two thousand.
Mr speaker so the Senate could
seventy two thousand dollars
with forty two members Mr
speaker gentleman can you
explain that disparity I need an
answer speaker and gentle lady
we did dig a little deeper into
that earlier and you know it
just really comes down to what
the respective chief clerk of
each chamber request in the feet
bill I can tell you with in
conversations with our own
spectacular chief clerk here I
know that she and her team do a
lot with very little.
Michael closer to my mouth Mr
speaker I know that a chip does
a lot with very little and you
know I can't speak to why the
Senate chief clerk
you know.
Runs from members with the but
you know part of my
understanding is that they
probably bring staff of a little
earlier perhaps than we do when
they bring more staff than we do
and so that's that's the does
the disparaging difference in
those two numbers Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
also done a little bit of
research on my own I have found
out that the Senate does pay
their staff more than they do on
the house side Mr speaker maybe
that's one reason why the house
has such problems often more
often than not and getting help
up here maybe we need to raise
up the salaries on our help I
did not have a provided the
system until.
Is going to it was like.
Thirteen days into the session
in January.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
it's very disingenuous of us all
seventy of those to be paid the
fifty five thousand first is the
Senate even though they may
think they're the upper chamber
but they're not.
Whenever the Senate is getting
paid seventy two thousand
dollars for forty two members we
work harder than the Senate does
and we do a better job of that
in my opinion gentleman from
Chavis who do care to ask me to
request that Senator Ingle come
to the wall of the house to pay
closer attention to this debate
Senator you're invited to the
well of the house.
More.
As we enter.
Mr speaker you know that
sometimes and it would never
mind I won't go down that rabbit
hole okay Mister speaker
gentleman I I want I'm not
saying.
This is taxpayers money but
we're up here doing the work of
the taxpayers and we need to be
fully aware of everything that
is going on and whenever we do
not have the help that it takes
to keep us informed on all not
just our constituent problems
well we're here in session but
everything else that goes on
because as you will know why
didn't go at a fast pace appear
Mr speaker and gentleman as far
as section team goes I had some
questions whenever this came up
before LESC or earlier of.
There was questions about what
all the renovations were going
to entail Mr speaker gentleman
went to Canada and from the body
of what renovations are
anticipated with this to.
Ten million dollars for the
building fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and delay
yeah the so these are four
million dollars that would be
coming out two million coming
out of the State Capitol million
is funded and the other two
million coming out of the
Legislative cash balances and
some of what's been discussed
with me by Mr Burciaga who as
you all know our oversight as a
director of the Legislative
Council Service
some of those needs and and some
of those potential projects
include renovations to the annex
and what we heard this morning
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
and it is part of the house
appropriations and finance
committee hearing was potential
renovations to the annex to
remodel some of those
legislative offices as we know
house members generally speaking
up share an office with a
colleague and it is my
understanding that those spaces
in the annex would be renovated
so that it would be one member
of the office and As You raced
the concern that you race Mr
speaker and a lady would be that
those offices maybe a little
smaller now but that's one of
the things that's been shared
with me by a council service the
other potential project is a
reconfiguration of the L. U. C.
space as I said at the opening
of my presentation Mr speaker
and gentle lady the legislative
education study committee L. UC
has taken over vacated space by
the administrative office of the
courts
another potential project to be
remodeling of of of the
leadership offices
in both chambers and for both
parties
and I know that that
conversations being had I know
between staff for sure there's a
number of other upgrades in
miscellaneous maintenance
including the elevators in
capital Norris installing
electronic electronic locks the
capitol north as well we heard
Mr speaker generated about some
issues with the parking facility
help.
On the top floor of it were
there some leaking happening
and then also new vehicles for
building services including I
believe the trash truck Mr
speaker and LED in the body
should also know that there is a
facilities review subcommittee
which is made up of the speaker
pro temp and the floor leaders
of each chamber so it is a
bipartisan.
Process of of folks who I
believe advice Council Service
as to how some of these projects
will roll out and and you know
the design process that will
take place and whatnot should we
vote for this and should this
money be
appropriated for these purposes.
Mr speaker gentleman I do
appreciate your explanation this
also contains an emergency
clause of that means if the
governor does sign this if it is
passed.
That it will be effective
immediately and I'm not one of
those purses the state okay
we're gonna give four million
dollars to have all this work
done but yet we don't know what
it's going to be about Mr
speaker also brought up the fact
that those members from both
sides of the aisle and we like
our group that's out there we
are out there mainly because we
can meet with our constituents
if needs be with the rest of the
people's house is open to the
public we can get business done
out there but it also does take
us quite a problem Mr speaker to
get from those offices all the
way up here one of the speakers
is.
Roll call in three minutes and
we have to hustle to get our
stuff ready and then to make the
trek down here and I'm not a
surprise I used to be Mr speaker
does comment on that Mr speaker.
Yes you are.
Now he's trying to get on my
good side and unfortunately it's
not working so I think.
So Mister speaker gentleman as
far as re doing the offices out
there if you split those offices
in happen every member from both
sides of the aisle will tell you
that if you split those offices
in tune that it is going to be a
six by ten box that they will be
sitting in.
That is the size of those
offices out there I guess like I
said as far as the four million
dollars go with emergency clause
attached I want to definite
answer on what is going to be
revised Mr speaker gentleman
thank you very much for your
responses there are just some
questions I still have is
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from.
Bernalillo yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Lincoln and Chavis.
Thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
and and gentleman my questions
Are also along the lines of
section two of the bill.
And that specifically
what is going to be done because
I think Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The past two years has shown us
that we do have a critical need
to my opinions with respect
office space there was virtually
impossible and virtually no pun
intended impossible to conduct
business with a sweet may who is
on another virtual meeting
yeah and so it was very
difficult at best and I know
that's not the normal course of
action but I think it did
highlight some of the needs of
this body this particular
chamber experiences based on the
current fiscal.
Lamp that's available to us and
so my question is is a two
million dollars Mr speaker and
gentleman sufficient to
accommodate some of those needs
a to see.
Speaker and gentleman you know
that question came up this
morning a committee and and if I
recall the the response from Mr
wood said that the answer was
probably not enough in light of
rising construction costs and
whatnot
so you know I I think however I
think that based on what was
approved by the legislature in
the third day session and house
bill two you know we sought to
keep the mouth and sort of the
general purpose of that money
the same hopefully to get it
passed again and hopefully is
sometime by the governor I would
assume Mr speaker and gentleman
simply because I know this is
set in stone my understanding is
that these are conversations
that are being had that if any
of these projects does get off
the ground that we would be here
you know and the next
legislative session the sixty
day session probably asking for
whatever amount would be need to
be asked for in order to
undertake and complete any one
of these projects that's that's
the understanding I got from
council service but I I agree
with the general premise of your
question I mean I I don't think
it's enough but that's what we
have here.
Mr speaker and gentleman the.
That.
You know if this were capital
outlay project that came before
me from one of our
governmental entities I'd be
asking the question what are one
of the plans and we usually we
would see some money associated
with planning and and I just see
renovations and
Upgrades I don't see planning
design other things that we
would normally see with the
capital outlay request and it
sounds to me like the responses
to the questions of the gentle
lady from Chavis was asking for
that this is of.
Maybe not.
As well
Plan is maybe what we'd like to
see and and so I'm not objecting
to the process I just find it a
little bit unusual in light of
where we're at on this and maybe
if you have any comments
regarding that would some of
this money before the planning
design and and maybe some
architectural work and and what
have you.
Thank you miss Jennifer the
question the the short answer is
yes and I'm informed by by my
experts here that actually lasts
interim we did some preliminary
design work already as part of
this facilities review
subcommittee so there's already
some work under way but yeah
you're correct this money would
be used for some more finalized
design and and plan keep in mind
this money's coming out of two
separate funds when was provided
cash balances which is where
expended money that we do
through the feed bill ends up at
the end of the day and then also
the
the capital C. capital equipment
fund in these two specific funds
have the legislative cash
balances as about two point six
million dollar currently in it
and the man is fund has about
two point four so we're simply
transferring funds from those
two funds into this pot of money
that we would use to pursue some
of these projects and again if
if you know during the interim
if this facilities review
subcommittee decides that they
want to undertake the alias you
reckon figuration for example
and they need an extra two
million dollars to finish the
project that that would in fact
take place at that point in time
so I I you know I I I have all
the faith in the world the good
folks I Council Service that
they'll go through the
appropriate process these
council service is required to
have a plans and designs before
the execute any type of of
building project which might
explain why sometimes it takes a
long time to do so for and here
but that's you know besides the
point the fact of the matter is
that those folks up there on the
fourth floor working hard making
sure that we cross every T. and
dot every I have.
Mr speaker and gentleman of one
comment but I certainly would
like to see this committee
that's looking at this look at.
It seems to me that the last two
years is also shown us that we
may need some some conference
rooms that both of the majority
and the minority
would have access to because
often times we saw that we were
not able to access committee
rooms and and it seems to me
that access to a dedicated
conference rooms for both
majority and minority should be
in the offing my last question
Mr speaker and gentleman is the
two chambers pay their staff
those same and.
If not is the.
Payment that's made to staff
operable.
Respected German I think Janice
picking they have the same rate
as they have to abide by but I
would assume that they don't
always pay the staff the same
and I would assume that that
depends on a case by case basis.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
a question because it seems like
we've lost some some of our
staff to the Senate because
we've heard that they pay better
over on the other side and I I
don't know how that occurs.
That's just what gets reported
back to the to to some of us and
and it seems to me that if
people are doing the same work
in the house side is the Senate
side that'll be making the
basically the same type of money
based on their experience but in
any event thank you for your
answers and and I look forward
to the day when maybe we can see
this two million dollars and
maybe more go to work to
accomplish some some very needed
things of this building thank
you Mr speaker in a building
Representative Greg Nibert
conference room on the fourth
floor.
The general from Chavis Eddy and
Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield yield to the
gentleman
Mr speaker and gentleman
I know for if I and I know and I
think you do too that.
The rate bands are relatively
wide and there has been a long
standing difference between what
we have in the house paid
staff versus what the Senate's
rate I don't think it's a debate
that needs to happen the night
on this bill but I think out of
Out of honor to the the staff
that so well supports every one
of us on both sides of the aisle
we should make sure that we of
raised the bar in requires that
those staff members on both
sides are treated equally.
And
and we stopped the disparity so
with that Mr speaker I would
just ask that the
at the appropriate time that is
remembered and we do that in the
budgeting process thank you the
gentleman I will remind the body
that in house bill one in the
thirty day session we had.
Roughly thirty percent increase
in compensation for House staff
and that is gotten as much more
aligned and a number of the
salaries that are paid are up to
either myself or you or the
leader Martinez in the
individual offices I think
there's been a lot of progress
made there to equalize Energy
clerks and a great job working
in the pay bands so I think
we're much much closer than may
have been in previous years
thanks that is the staffing
increased we did in the thirty
day session
sorry to interrupt but I started
remind folks we did take a big
step a few weeks ago the
Simard Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker is a
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and to the
point that the to speak off was
making I was going to make that
same point we we did come
together both sides of this
chamber and work together to
make it more equitable for staff
on this side and I I do believe
there is more work to be done I
think the point that that the
representative from Travis
county maybe I think it's valid
and I and I think I think
there's desirable size we just
need to keep on making progress
so well with that Mr speaker and
and and gentlemen I would like
to maybe defer defer a little
bit from my callers my colleague
from Chavis and Lincoln and I
would like to talk about the
process
that of what we're doing here
with house bill one
Mr speaker and and gentleman
and in your discussion with the
representative from Chavis and
Lincoln
you mentioned that these were
dollars that were vetoed by the
governor following our last the
last thirty day session
as is that correct Mr speaker
John speaking German that is
correct.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I I don't have a problem with
this.
Number that it was invented
because we it was that it in the
last session so I I don't have a
problem with that Mr speaker and
gentleman but I do have a
problem with us if you remember
we had a very similar discussion
at the beginning of the thirty
day session
discussion as to how we were
using house bill one and
attaching the other items to
house bill one that the fee bill
that that really.
Shouldn't be there and the
speaker and gentleman I I think
this is the case here as well
I'm not disputing I think I I
don't think the governor
especially with this being the
appropriating body I don't think
the governor has any business
we're trying to just take care
facilities to make that decision
so I'm glad we're addressing
this Mr speaker and gentleman
I just we were dressing just in
the wrong way I I think I I
heard you say Mr speaker and
gentleman that hopefully this
time the governor will veto this
amount
so Mister speaker German there
is the possibility of the
speaker of the governor once
again.
mandatory this amount out of
house bill one is that is that
incorrect the speaker and
gentleman.
the speaker and and gentleman
the legislature.
Passes the bills if we choose to
and the governor has the power
to veto whatever we pass.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
that's my point because I the
the governor could make the
exact same argument that I'm
making right now.
Which is.
This doesn't belong in the feet
bill.
And I think of the governor of
could go back after this and and
once again we be in the position
where this governor is telling
us.
The appropriating body.
We're talking about state
facilities that we should be
doing this so Mister speaker and
gentleman I I guess I would just
be asking is there any.
Commitments on behalf of the
governor to not the total this
this time around of this amount
because she can line item veto
it's a dollar a the speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman of what
one thing that I I would want to
clarify is that we are talking
about the same branch here which
is the the legislature and so
I'll all.
You know have a family disagree
with you on whether or not this
belongs in the feet bill as a
sponsor of this bill I but I
think it does belong here this
is to upgrade and maintain our
facilities and this bill is
specifically designed to help
Fund the of the work in the
activities of the legislature
so.
That compared to the previous.
Of bills that you mentioned the
previous few bills I think there
that's a pretty big difference
there as far as any commitments
and I can speak to any
commitments made by by the
fourth floor on whether or not
to approve the this particular
appropriation I think that a
veto
as was executed post through the
session is well within the
governor's power as is well
within our power to re
appropriate that money again so
hopefully she won't be to it.
So the speaker and gentleman
once again I I don't disagree
with us.
Free appropriating this money I
I do believe this is the wrong
vehicle I think we've done this
several times dating back to the
one Republicans were on that
side of the island and Democrats
were sitting over here I don't
believe that makes it right I
think that
This is specifically I think
this becomes political in a
should be all we're trying to do
with the feed bills pay our
bills for every session so we
can do our work I don't believe
that portion of this bill does
that and I I believe that we
want to address that
that money that was vetoed by
the governor I think we should
have just a we should have just
uh introduced to the to override
and send it back to the governor
and tell her to stay out of our
business
we are the look we are the
appropriating body and I don't
think it's the governor's
business to be telling us how to
appropriate especially when we
have take care of the facilities
so Mister speaker and gentleman
support the bill but I am
objecting unlike Representative
Nibert I am objecting to the
process I I don't think we
should be using house bill one
in this manner thank you Mr
speaker.
Thanks to the gentleman from
the.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
I yield to the gentleman from
the.
Thank you Sir.
Mr speaker gentleman can.
Can you maybe elaborate and
explain to me what Legislative
Council Service has learned in
the last six months with respect
to the needs on four million
dollars that they didn't know
before we walked into the thirty
day session to them this creates
the impetus for this chair
Mister speaker gentleman I I
think that actually Council
services did you know about a
lot of these issues including
the maintenance issues primarily
but also some of the renovations
as I stated earlier Mr speaker
and gentleman I know there was
at least one meeting probably
there are more ID in coming to
this particular role until of
late August or so so I was in
there for the entire interim but
it is my understanding that
there is at least one probably
more facilities review
subcommittee meetings and I'm
being told actually that he was
at least two or three meetings
three last interim so when they
came into the thirty day session
these four million dollars were
up we're we're pretty well
vetted in terms of what some of
the needs that have been
identified Mr speaker and
gentleman from the.
Thank you very much so as I
understand it there's been up to
four different meetings that
that dealt with.
The projects and the status and
and how we're going to move
forward with these.
These deals at age one of these
projects from the north elevator
upgrades to the electrical off
upgrades all those different
things.
where those supplied anybody the
size of people there review this
on Legislative Council at what
point in time was this Mr
speaker and gentleman at what
point in time was a supplied to
the seventy members are.
Mr speaker and gentleman we work
through this of committee
process and it's the speaker pro
temp and the respective floor
leaders of each party in each
chamber so up you know to our
leadership your leadership would
have had access to whatever
conversations and and documents
may have been shared
particularly during that
process.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I'm just I get I guess
I'm confused with the with the
analysis that I'm looking at
here this a two page that gives
it a basic synopsis of what the
projects are.
You know is as a as a
businessman there's no way that
I would approve four million
dollars based on the description
I'm received.
It without the detail Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr chairman I think there there
is quite a detail and I'm sure
by the good folks at council
service would be I'm assuming
happy to share that with anyone
I know we as part of this
facilities review subcommittee
have seen some of those
preliminary plans I mean I I the
the one meeting I was at again
because I came in all the you
know probably about half way at
least for maybe more than
halfway through the interim I
did see some of the
reconfiguration of plans for I
believe it was the L. U. C.
space if I remember correctly so
that those documents are there
we're not just shooting blind
here.
I appreciate the fact that those
documents exists
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
appreciate the fact that those
documents don't exist in a way
that they could be reviewed
beforehand.
And so with that Mr speaker as
much as I I would like to.
be able to support the
legislation without the back up
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
no way that I can do that so I
cannot support the bill thank
you si no further debate
gentleman to close thank you Mr
I move that house bill one with
an emergency clause do now pass.
We are final passage of house
bill one with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Representative Lord if you're in
your see their income thank you.
And you're you're keeping us on
suspense the voters are closed.
I go to sixty four in the
affirmative one in the negative
house bill one has passed the
house with an emergency clause.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move we
go to the next order of business
committee reports no objections
ordered clerk to read.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill two has had it under
consideration point a with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Move adoption reduction of a
favorable committee report on
house bill two as amended with
an emergency clause all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
All this was may.
The point about gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr can we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation and
there's no junction to suspend
the rule to a consideration this
for the twenty for us having a
lapse during objection we will
proceed.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill two as amended with
an emergency clause on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady from Los Alamos to
explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker the house
bill two is a very
straightforward bill.
It does two things one is it
provides for rebates to New
Mexico residents who are tax
filers in the amount of five
hundred dollars per individual
one thousand dollars for married
joint filers it
the the rebates will be issued
in in two phases one in the
spring maybe June time frame and
the second in August.
The second part of the bill
creates a program for non filers
it is based on programs that we
have implemented in the past
that health and Human Services
has adopted and implemented in
conjunction with our tax
department.
It sets aside twenty million
dollars and that is a cap
to which non filers may apply if
they are not obviously not
filers and those rebates would
occur in the same amounts except
in one in one phase in this in
the summer
I would also point out Mr
speaker for the members there
are obviously appropriations to
the various departments to
ensure they have sufficient
funding to be able to implement
these programs and with that Mr
speaker I am available for
questions okay there is debate
is German for Santa
Representative Harper.
In your shot.
He is a form and then I thought
we would take my take care of
that first.
Okay.
Representative Harper nearby Mr
leader now okay all right so we
will all call on him when he
gets back.
The general from Bernalillo
Representative every.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
shield Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo happily yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
of Los Alamos I understood the
move you know early on in the
discussion that this is a tax
rebate for to offset the high
cost of gasoline in motor
vehicles is that the intent of
the law of the legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman I think
that is one of the intense I
think Mr speaker John that is
what prompted us to start
evaluating how we could assist
are on residents in the state
with the bright rising prices so
certainly tax the
let's see I guess you might say
unprecedented tax increases of
significant driver but there's a
ripple effect with all of that
so there are other rising
raising costs that are our
citizens are facing as well so
it's intended to address
multiple things certainly gas
prices Mr speaker gentleman is a
significant one.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos I agree that there's
others what I'm worried about is
some individuals may not have
vehicles that would be receiving
this rebate and it's really in
my mind intended for the
individuals who are driving gas
and diesel vehicles and and I'm
talking about private vehicles I
mean business clearly go ahead
and increases prices or have
some offset to recover its loss
Did you look at the possibility
of sending this to of people who
own vehicles as opposed to just
any tax filers.
Mr speaker and gentleman
certainly we evaluated a number
of options and that was
certainly out there and
discuss them in a nanosecond I
would say we should not be
viewing this economic household
relief as simply focused on
vehicles but it is the wide
array of economic challenges
that our citizens are facing
right now and I feel privileged
to be working with all of you Mr
speaker and gentleman to come up
with a solution that will
support our for the folks in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Los Alamos
I contacted.
New Mexico department of motor
vehicles and the information
will be to you shortly the
number of vehicles that are in
New Mexico that are licensed as
of April first of this year.
And I believe that we should
Look at this rebate from the
high cost of gas which it
originally or fuel I should say
I'm sorry
as it was originally set up
proposed.
And with that the the amounts
are nearly the same but when we
look at individuals in
households
I think that they could be.
Further offset of based on the
number of vehicles I have.
Mr speaker John I I'm sorry I
was getting a little input from
my expert but I believe the
answer to your question Mr
speaker and gentleman as you
know I appreciate where you're
coming from in terms of vehicles
however that is not exclusively
what this rebate is designed to
support and Mr speaker gentlemen
I'd point out that part of the
increasing costs that are
residents are facing has to do
with trucking costs so even if
you do not own a vehicle Mr
speaker you are feeling the
effects of the rise in gasoline
prices whether you're simple
comps consumer vehicle driver or
any other type of person state.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
agree with you that
over in particular the last two
years that inflation has been
quite high.
on a.
I do agree that we need to take
steps to lower our inflation but
I think that that is also a
problematic out of what is
happening in Washington.
The.
Constituents in my area not only
are complaining about.
Inflation but they're
complaining about the high cost
of gas.
Many have asked that we suspend
the the road tax.
I'm not a fan of that in the
reason is that we need to keep
our roads in good repair in I
think that we need to have that
tax I think that there's other
issues that are not going to
address and this that we could
try to help
The oil and gas industry of.
You know of do more drilling and
produce more product.
I thank you bye now and I I can
give you a moment to go ahead
and read the legislation so that
we can discuss.
Thank you and gentleman
Mr speaker and gentle.
I do have the I guess this is
amendment you're proposing for
substitute.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Los Alamos you also have the
handout from DMV that has the
vehicles.
Mr speaker German it has not yet
been delivered.
Mr speaker and gentle lady oh
wait a moment tell you have a.
Mr speaker gentleman I do now
have the hand out as well as
your
substitute.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
a Los Alamos so let's look at
the DMV numbers and when you see
the the electric cars that were
registered in New Mexico.
on April one is four thousand
four hundred and fifteen now
obviously they're not
purchasing.
gasoline or diesel to go ahead
and operate their vehicles the
next one is a hybrid and we see
that there are twenty four
thousand three hundred and
seventy one hybrid vehicles.
We look at the other fuel types
category down here now this
excludes all businesses
government entities these are
individually owned vehicles and
there's one point seven eight
eight six one one million of
those vehicles.
The what came to be in the
discussion with the of the is.
And why I why I'm prompted with
this let's take a single mother.
Who has three kids one is in
college one is in high school
someone's in grade school.
That mother she has her college
age child who's driving to
college she has one in high
school who's striving and she's
driving to work every day if
under the current proposal she
would receive five hundred
dollars.
Well she has if you will three
offsets of the three different
vehicles.
And that's the rationale for why
we need to go to the vehicles as
opposed to just flat giving
money to each individual.
I don't know if you have any
questions on that
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I would rate of the
year the number that you used is
incorrect it would be a thousand
dollar rebate because I believe
she would be considered a head
of household in those
individuals will get a thousand
dollars
Hey.
Just to correct your premise so
I I'm happy to answer any other
questions okay.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Los Alamos I didn't
realize the head of household
would receive the thousand
dollar rebate.
The one of my legislation what
were.
Going to do is we're going to go
ahead and give them three eighty
eight.
Per vehicle.
So she would get three hundred
eighty eight times to read.
so she received slightly more
than the thousand dollars.
I I I understand your point
if I could make one as well Mr
speaker German I own three
vehicles well actually Mr
speaker John on my own for
vehicles so should someone such
as myself Mr speaker German get
more money because I own more
vehicles.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Los Alamos exactly because
you're impacted by the offset of
the fuel cost on the each
vehicle.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
cannot drive all four at once.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
assume the that is correct but I
also think that there's probably
other drivers in your household
as well.
Mr speaker gentleman just one.
And I would point out he has a
motorcycle as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Los Alamos the motorcycle won't
get a rebate.
So with the drives the other car
one of the other cars he'll have
a rebate.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
from Los Alamos and then for the
hybrid sensei use less fuel we
reduce the rebate to them by
fifty percent or half.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
or Mr speaker I now move of
house floor substitute for House
Bills to and ask for a roll call
vote.
It's been passed down spin move
to be the splendid gentle lady
is this a friendly floor
substitute Mr speaker then on
gentleman regrettably it is not
I I think it misses the point of
what we're trying to accomplish
here and that is really to
soften the blow to New Mexicans
across the board and frankly
this would disproportionately
help frankly somebody like me
and.
I don't think that's the right
way to go thank you Mr speaker
gentleman is there debate on the
substitutes.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move we
table house floor substitute
number one eight the motion is
to table the for substitute will
be a roll call vote voted yes it
will be tabled a vote of no and
we will be back on debate of the
substitute the vote is now open.
Is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty one in the affirmative
twenty when the negative.
The.
Amendment has been tabled.
Substitute has been tabled.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
really enjoyed that there's
quite of a sea of green up on
the board and I I see some odd
dollars coming out of the
Legislature helping everybody
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Some of those very nice
sentiment thank you.
Representative Harper can you
hear me.
Okay.
With state please please locate
Representative Harper he's gone
missing.
There is the gentleman from.
The gentleman from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe
you
Mr speaker
the wonderful gentleman and
friend from Santa I yield.
It was bigger and thank you
gentle lady we had quite a great
discussion in the tax committee
where we went through all of the
in and outs of how this actually
works the limitations how you
are eligible eccentric sector to
address I'm not gonna rehash
that all here speaker gentle
lady although I find tax policy
and and the mechanics very
interesting I know a lot of us
are excited to go home today Mr
Julie I won't do that
I I will have just a couple
comments but I would like to
I guess begin by sing the
speaker and gentle lady.
See the bill as it's structured
there are two sections Mr
generally the first section
refers to a rebate.
And folks have to file a tax
return to be eligible for that
rebate.
The second section is a payment
and the eligibility is.
To provide a more to the you
don't have to be eighteen or
older and and twenty twenty one
you have to not be eligible for
the rebate and you have to file
Florida form was the HSD
spindle FY characterize that
properly Mr speaker and
gentleman I think you gave a
very fair overview of what the
bill does thank you yes it was
bigger and and generally so I do
have an amendment Mr jelly and
what this
I think addresses that problem
of making sure that we don't
cross between one into
unintentionally.
And and so I guess before
explain it speaker and gentle
lady all go ahead and and move
the amendment and then I can
discuss what it does so Mister
speaker I would move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill two as amended it has been
passed out I believe the two oh
two number is triple two nine
zero two point one thousand
native has to pass out the
gentleman to explain the floor
amendment thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady in the bill
right now.
To be eligible for part two.
You can't have done.
Part one.
But there's nothing above this
is.
You can do part one if you
haven't done part two.
Mr all this is doing this
language to says that both
directions you only get one the
only get to you can't double dip
you can get both Mr Gillian I'm
happy to explain the details of
that the folks are interested
but that's my explanation
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
the gentle lady from is almost
is this a friendly amendment Mr
speaker and gentleman it is a
very friendly amendment it's
just frankly just a technical
fix that we're doing very good
is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it hearing
none house floor amendment
number one to house bill two as
amended with an emergency clause
is adopted.
Gentleman you still have the
four thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady I will I think I'll
just finish by saying I really
appreciate the amount of time
and effort that went into
driving this legislation bibles
the secretary and her staff by
LFC and their staff DFA and
let's council this was a I just
got a very well drafted bill
spiritually and I also
appreciated that we were able to
work together
on on this legislation in a way
that we were you know mutual
respect for each other in the
loop on things and that's one of
the thank you for that from a
spiritually I think the last
thing I'll say is
As we look at.
The future right this is a great
relief that I'm happy to support
right now but as we look towards
the future.
Just in case use.
That this is really a symptom of
you know we want to address the
actual cost of is regionally I'm
really excited to work with you
and anyone who'd like to join us
on doing some meaningful tax
reform next year.
And Mr gently I'm I'm excited to
support legislation thank you.
Thank you John next the general
lady from granted although and
this year Representative Dow
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields Mr speaker and
gentle lady I would happily
yield thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady I'm on the side
I'm not on either of the
committees that heard the bill
so I just wanna make sure that
I'm understanding so we in
section one we are providing an
income tax rebate for all filers
in the state of New Mexico is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady in section
two and that's in two separate
payments correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady correct
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that in section two we are
providing a single payment for
people who do not file taxes.
Mr speaker gentle lady correct
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and and we have all
kinds of discussions on this
house floor about the anti
donation clause and sometimes it
seems that it's used for
convenience state to kill bills
we don't want and sometimes it
doesn't exist when we get apply
the same argument when they're
bills that we don't want and so
you know when I'm looking at the
anti donation clause I am or it
states the anti donation clause
states neither the state nor any
county school district
municipality except as otherwise
provided in the constitution
shall directly or indirectly
land or pledges credit or make a
donation or in aid of any person
association public or private
corporation or in aid of a
private enterprise for the
construction of any road except
as provided in section a through
G. of this section so I've read
that and I think we're perfectly
fine on section one it does
appear to me Mr speaker and
gentle lady that section two is
an anti donation clause
violation due to use the
otherwise Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker generally I see
otherwise Mr speaker and gentle
lady could you please explain to
me why you do not believe that
that is a donation in aid of any
person.
Mr speaker gentle lady because
there are exceptions to the anti
donation clause one of it which
allows us to consider income and
and providing relief and in this
case non filers are typically
individuals who have
insufficient income to require
them to file a tax return to
return thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I think
you are you know it says there's
an exception in the subsections
a through G. and eighty would be
the only one that I read that
could even quite be interpreted
that way that could probably be
settled in court nothing in the
second section prohibits the
state or any county municipality
for making provision for the
care and maintenance of sick and
injured his people could you X.
tell me in the bill were
referring to maintenance the
care and maintenance of second
and just persons or we're just
assuming that non tax filers a
low income second engine.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
clause has been relied on in
numerous occasions to provide to
allow us to consider income and
as I mentioned earlier Mr
speaker gentle lady income is
the driver for individuals who
are non filers.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
percentage of New Mexicans pay a
tax liability when they file.
Mr speaker gentle lady will be
happy to look that up for you so
if you could give us some of.
Mr speaker gentle lady we do not
have that information available
at this time Mr speaker and
gentle lady with the assumption
is that anybody that would use
section one has a tax liability
but Mr speaker gentle lady isn't
it true in the state that people
file taxes in order to receive a
of a refundable tax credit and
to receive other credits whether
they had a liability or not.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes there
are some filers who have no tax
liability or very little tax
liability and as a consequence
they sometimes recent recieve
rebates for example elector
which we just increased and and
other sorts of financial relief
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to the ladies so section one
is not limited to only people
who have a tax liability it is
also for low income folks the
second the indigent as well if
they choose to file is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes there
are low income people who file
tax returns thank you Mr speaker
in thank you gentle lady and is
it also true Mr speaker and
gentle lady that the state of
New Mexico and the federal
government provide assistance
for folks would like to have
would like to file taxes.
I looked on the internet and in
just a minute just just looking
very quickly H. and R. block the
tax and revenue listed tons of
New Mexico tax revenue
department communities
organizations that fund that
will help people assist with
their taxes because low income
folks can violent or section one
and receive this tax rebate we
would have no anti donation
clause violation CNN has
multiple sites United Way has
multiple sites including the
Navajo nation's tax help New
Mexico A. A. R. P. western
Mexico university the IRS tax
Revenue Service has some sites
Lutheran family services senior
meal sites Los Lunas high school
Jalen Patala just proceed as
Sapporo Zuni Clovis Community
College Laguna housing New
Mexico legal aid that paired
multiple libraries Catholic
charities Anthony Patel is to
carry on it's my understanding
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
the federal easy form is one
page is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady that may
be the case I right we don't
know for sure Mr speaker gentle
lady the federal tax easier form
is one page as is the New Mexico
simple simple form so.
How many pages is a form that
the HHS will be allowing people
to complete under section two
which is not a tax rebate which
is a payment.
Mr speaker gentle lady we are
anticipating a one pager.
Mr speaker internally so one
paid versus two pages.
Free state and federally funded
assistance verses no assistance
however if we simply delete
section to insurers that house
bill two does not violate the
New Mexico constitution's anti
donation clause.
Would you agree Mr speaker
Angelina section two is absent
we have absolutely no risk of a
challenging court for that we
are violating anti donation
clause Mr speaker gentle lady
the bill as drafted we have no
risk of violating the anti
donation clause Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we've taken an
oath to uphold the New Mexico
constitution it's our
responsibility to ensure that
the legislation we passed is
not.
What is the harm in violating
section and and
amending the bill to remove
section to.
The harm Mr speaker gentle lady
is there will be some low income
people who will not be able to
receive or will not receive
financials much much needed
financial assistance and I think
we all need to remember that
there are populations in the
state who have certain
reluctance in their interactions
with the federal government as
well as state government and
that is an impediment to their
filing tax returns and other
participating in other programs.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
know wouldn't it be an awesome
opportunity if we find in New
Mexico citizens with the
opportunity to go and get free
tax assistance that haven't done
it before their low income as
you say and they have a barriers
of helping them as citizens file
for tax rebates wouldn't it be
great if they went and got free
tax assistance and learned of
other benefits that they may be
eligible for that they're not
benefiting from now and do you
believe Mr speaker and gentle
lady that is a low income at
risk person who didn't know that
they are eligible for benefits
went to receive this because
we're gonna promote it that they
would likely be benefit be
eligible for other benefits they
haven't yet received.
Mr speaker gentle lady I agree
that it would be wonderful if we
could get more people to
participate in the system and it
really would be wonderful if
they had confidence in our
system to such a degree that
they would be able to fully
participate but unfortunately we
live in the society that we do
and unfortunately that means
there are barriers to to certain
segments of the population who
still do not trust either the
state or the federal government.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to the lady so it's my
understanding in the committee
hearing that if we run out of
the twenty million dollars for
because because twenty million
dollars is not enough we as I
understood and and and people
can be first come first serve
until you run out of money Mr
speaker gentle lady is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am not
convinced that it is not enough
we have experience with a
similar program run through HSD
and we are just about expended
that amount of money so at this
point in time I think it is Mr
speaker gentle lady a fair
estimate of who will actually
apply for the funds thank you Mr
speaker thank you to the lady
and if we happen to run out of
the twenty million dollars in
the from section two can those
folks go and file and get a tax
rebate anyway if they they
wanted to get the twenty million
dollars in the money was right
now would they be able to
eligible to to go and get the
funds under section one if they
chose to complete a one page
federal forming a one page state
form Mr speaker gentle lady if
those individuals are able to
overcome their distrust and fear
of the federal government and
the state government and then
pursue five hundred dollars or a
thousand dollars yes it
certainly is possible but I will
reiterate we live in a society
where that is not always the
case and we as a body as this
legislation is intended to
support those as of individuals
as well as those who feel
comfortable enough it within the
society that they are willing
and able to file a tax return so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
the same people who distrust
filing a one page form with free
assistance have no barrier that
that that have fear with the
government in one.
Agency have no fear in another
agency being HHS.
Mr speaker gentle lady on focus
mostly on the federal government
and our tax system plays off of
the federal system.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
have an amendment and I move
House for substitute for house
bill two of that is number two
two two two eight nine two point
two it has been moved and passed
out gentlelady to explain the
substitute thank you Mr speaker
and I would like a roll call
vote.
That's fine.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to the lady what this bill
does is simply remove this that
section two so in the act it
removes the wording providing
relief payments because that
isn't it challenge going court
it could be a violation of the
anti donation because I believe
that it is providing relief
payments to state residents not
eligible for the rebates so
state resident not eligible for
the tax rebate and then it just
basically section to section
three become section to section
four become section three and
section I become section for and
Mr speaker and gentle lady I am
make this motion because there
are many more reasons to fill
out the tax form the not we will
avoid the anti donation clause
violation will save money a
taxpayer dollars to bring the
reverting on HHS because we're
already funding tax assistance
all across the state it's free
and by providing urging people
to go and our citizens to
participate this opportunity to
get free tax assistance to learn
about more benefits of their
eligible to seed and this
dollars will go further this
effort that we're putting
forward will go further because
our citizens are eligible if
they never filed taxes before
they're eligible for and they're
lowincome intended as were
saying this is for section two
is for the bill receive more
benefits than they've ever
receiving for in refundable tax
credits and we leave no citizens
behind there's no risk that will
run out of the money and its
approach the other language
appropriates for every citizen
to be included and no one left
behind and Mr speaker with that
I make the motion gentlelady
from Los Alamos is this a.
Finally for substitute.
Mr speaker it is not I believe
the substitute proposal targets
some of our most vulnerable
people in the state including
senior citizens who are not
filers we're just making it more
difficult for them it targets
volume are most vulnerable
populations state and I cannot
concur with an amendment that
target so many people in the
state Mr speaker.
is there debate on the
substitutes gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
The gentle lady from grants you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
The
Russians.
About section to in the tax
committee and of course.
In fact appropriation was voted
against this
the committee.
For section one.
Thanks for
is would you pull for tax day
this legislation is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
is.
Would be eligible for.
Would also be.
File a tax return to be eligible
for the payment what they also
have to be eligible to file a
tax return that is have the
appropriate documentation tax
members insurer to be able to
file a tax return is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
it's my understanding and again
I'm not this did not go through
my committee but in section two
you need to have a social
security number or in E. I and
number.
Would make them eligible to file
tax returns is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman I believe
so.
It was represented.
I discussions with the
difference between following an
application following a tax
return what is the difference
between pages one page
application in two pages which
would be a one inch Federal and
turn a lot of page stripper
turned.
Transaction measurable.
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
that the easy form in the state
and federal level are each one
page I'm taking the gentle
lady's word that the form at HHS
is one page.
Mr speaker.
We just eliminated section two
all together.
Much only in compositions.
A twenty dollar commitment to
those folks more.
To file an application as
opposed to a tax return.
If we eliminated that all
together.
Would be I guess during the
applications for twenty.
Dollars worth of.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
think we're jeopardizing any
were actually taking away a cap
in provision to cause and
provision one we transfers from
the tax stabilization revenue
the amount needed.
So the twenty million dollars is
the only place where there is a
cap on any of the unspent twenty
million rivers I am I reading
this correctly yes there's work
we have a for the section two
puts a cap that's not anywhere
else in the bill so we move
section to we've reviewed
removed the cap we've put on
people everyone who's a citizen
can apply.
Madam speaker apartment gentle
lady the twenty million dollar
cap.
Lied to people wishing to submit
an application rather than
following tax returns Madam
speaker and gentleman that's
correct so section two is
removed there's no limit every
resident who was a tax filer and
who has a so security number an
Indian number can benefit from
this with section two there's a
cap of twenty million and then
it's my understanding and
committee discussion they could
go back and file anyway so I do
not understand the purpose of
section two.
Some gentle lady I completely
agree with you I've heard were
destroyed lost of federal and
state government values because
the reason for.
During the filing of the return
in order to get this money.
Do you think that's a reasonable
excuse Madam speaker and
gentleman considering the
debates that I've heard on this
floor for the last six years I
do not how many parents in the
state distress the public
education department yet this
body isn't advocating for school
choice I do you do.
We can have that discussion on a
variety of agencies.
So it's a it's an it's an
argument used when it's
convenient and I do not think it
is necessary in this bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
To what circumstances might
exist for someone one.
Thanks much but not willing to
file a return.
Describe for us the
circumstances that could exist
for that situation to occur Mr
speaker and gentleman I do
believe that people have
distrust in the government and
they may not be filing taxes for
reason and someone with that
level of mistrust probably won't
go to HHS either so the only
thing that I can think of is
that they are illegal and they
are and eligible for a tax
rebate.
Madam speaker gentle lady they
have to health holder
proprioception meditation to be
eligible for payment.
Just establishment.
Mr Madam speaker and gentleman
you know my sister in law is
nationalized I'm in a meeting
she is a citizen in New Mexico
she married my brother but she's
not nationalized so she's not
eligible though but she works
and she pays taxes and so she
would be eligible for this and
so there are few people who have
a so security number or people
who have an E. I and number who
are here legally participating
in the American dream American
process they're working and
supporting a teacher in other
all throughout our community and
they're eligible for this and so
it I I don't know who it would
exclude except people who are
illegal.
For example I just came to mind
as you were discussions with
folks that participate.
The economy.
That is operate all of their
business on a cash basis.
Therefore don't pay any taxes
don't report any income and
would be of course to following
return projections that as a
potential sticking point.
Madam speaker and gentleman you
bring up a good point that I
hadn't thought of.
Yes Representative.
Demonstrated their owners
significant advantages to
requiring a tax return.
For two for a taxpayer with no
tax liabilities.
Such that there is.
Reporter.
For section to this bill all
of our concern for terminal will
be proud to do so section Madam
speaker thank you gentle lady.
A further debate the gentle lady
from.
Shows County.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from granite state
grants to please thank you madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Travis county.
Madam speaker gentle lady we
heard this bill this morning and
House Appropriations Committee
nighters to had great concerns
over section two because under
section two Hey it's states this
is to me it's very important.
Mainly because I do live in the
rural areas of our state the
Human Services Department shall
provide a relief payment to
state residents on a first come
first serve basis.
And the question I had as the
prisoner of the bill in the
secretary that was sitting there
is House notification going to
be going again.
And the answer was either
through newspaper or via email.
In my area where I do live in.
Ready for the bank in down there
I believe that our daily press
newspaper comes out once a week
daily purpose once a week.
Daily record.
We get it four times a week
okay.
We still have areas down there
that do not receive any sort of.
Broadband service.
Lots of our seniors down there I
don't want to have a computer at
all.
How would they be notified these
are the people that I feel are
going to be left out especially
if this language remains in
there under section two first
come first served basis and to
me that is very disingenuous
have whenever we say we want all
people that qualified to be able
to participate in this because
that is not actually the case
isn't that right madam speaker
gentle lady Madam speaker gentle
lady it is the case.
And whenever we can undo your
amendment or you're a substitute
bill taking section two out does
make it fair to everybody that
is qualified isn't that correct
madam speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker and gentle lady it is
completely fair to all who are
qualified to the taxpayers
devoid of risk of a liability
and avoids any confusion over
the inside a nation clause.
And madam speaker that's very
important for the members here
in the house to recognize the
anti dig the nation clause will
come into effect if the original
bill as it stands right now is
six and to his left in there so
madam speaker I think it's very.
Incumbent upon the members of
this body to really take a look
at what we're trying to do to
help those that do need help the
most and years substitute bill
does take care of that problem
Madam speaker thank you very
much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley counties.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentle lady from Sierra yield
thank you madam speaker I yield
to the chairman thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady I am
just curious have you ever filed
a tax return yourself
personally.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
I have.
So then miss madam speaker the
lady to understand how many
pages you have to fill out in
order to file the New Mexico
state tax return.
Is it just one.
Mr speaker I mean Madam speaker
and gentleman for those with no
tax liability yes Sir it is one
page.
Mr speaker gentle lady you will
for for someone who is filing
the just go this way for a
senior citizen that is filing a
tax return.
Filing for the rebates.
There is just one page.
Madam speaker and gentleman if
it depends on what type of tax
for they are the ones are tax
filer there are the ones that
the sponsor is suggesting would
be the ones would be excluded
and have never don't file taxes
don't have a liability don't
have access are six an indigent
they if it would end up being
more than one page it was
because we are going to give
them more benefit than this one
alone because they are eligible
for information I don't know
they are eligible for but it is
you can file a one page form in
the state and you can file a one
page form at the federal level
yes you can.
The
end of this discussion is
because I have heard over and
over again that they are painful
that are not filing tax returns
because there are you able or
their underground or something
we could just have been in the
world.
Honestly if you look at the New
Mexico state secretary
citizen on social security only.
You filed with the tax return
it takes approximately forty
five pages of paperwork in that
tax return to get it I don't.
How many people do you know
control of the computer.
And I
think this is going to file a
tax return for the state of New
Mexico tell us to claim the
rebates alone.
Madam speaker and gentleman
every single citizen and the
state can do this and we provide
free assistance to make sure
that they have the help they
need.
The gentle lady another speaker
and I understand we have for you
assistance but how many people
feel that they have that.
Problem that they don't think
it's worth their time to do
this.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
don't know if someone doesn't
feel it's worth their time to
get the free assistance to help
them fill out the tax refund and
likely get more benefits than
what we're offering to HHS alone
why they would feel differently
about going to HHS and since the
tax revenue can't tell us how
many people have a liability and
how many don't I certainly
couldn't guess that that answer
of the answer to your question.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I just wanna make
sure that you understand we
don't live in a fantasy world
this is the real world and we're
taking care of our people but
the the lady the legislation is
drafted right now thank you
madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady from Sierra County
yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln thank you madam speaker
gentle lady
Don't worry.
Which agency is involved in your
amendment.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
only taxed revenue in second
because that's who's listed in
section one as far as providing
the rebate.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady.
How many agencies are involved
in the original bill.
Madam speaker and gentleman
could you tell me I know it went
to your.
To say yes and tax and
Representative.
And madam speaker gentle lady
We just amended the original
bills to prohibit.
I guess ostensibly people from
taking advantage of both section
one and section two.
But the only way we do that
prohibition is either by the
people.
Owner honesty for by
communication between the two
departments would that be actor
Madam speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker and gentleman it sounds
accurate to me.
And so the problem I have with
the original bill is.
My concern madam speaker gentle
lady isn't we have to agencies
involved and it's likely that
there won't be that
communication that would be have
in determining
whether somebody has.
Receive benefits under section
one and benefits under section
two where in your amendment that
would not be necessary because
there's only one agency involved
and I would assume Madam speaker
and gentle lady correct me if
I'm wrong that the agency would
keep track of who is receiving
the benefits would not.
Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you I'm adding that to my
list of reasons why this
ammendment is strong it prevents
fraud in the opportunity of
fraud and and eases the burden
on our governmental agencies and
having to try to try to do
interagency communications over
something that they typically
wouldn't be talking about.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
for for that reason in addition
to what the some of the other
of.
People have asked why to support
your amendment because I think
it's much easier it certainly
provides a security measure
that's not present in the
original bill for that reason I
support your amendment.
The scene further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval in Santa Fe thank you
madam speaker food for dance
straddled the money senior here
I will the gentle lady from
grants and Sierra please yield
thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval in Santa Fe
thank you I'm.
So first thing I want to say
madam speaker Representative I'm
just speak for my husband and I
love you honey but he is a
senior citizen and a disabled
veteran and he files or
paperwork every year with
absolutely no problem so I just
like to clear the air that it's
not a challenge to file this
paperwork.
Sekali so I the first thing I
notice in this is going to go
back to your supplement here.
So what I noticed on the wrist
of Bill the first income I had
said rebate on page one.
But then when you go further
down I noticed right away it's
as payment because to me a
rebate just something that you
receive when you pay your
personal income tax and your
rebate and now we're looking at
a payment because they're in
into an eligible for rebate sent
a couple questions on that a
lot.
When we go back to what another
representative Ashley about cash
business my mind started going
different directions about would
that also include somebody that
would be involved in criminal
behavior.
Because what's to stop of
somebody has is receiving cash
and they're saying I don't file
because I make X. amount of
dollars.
There's no way of stopping
somebody who's an actual
criminal some issues trafficking
human somebody who is.
Using women and of various ways
to collect income off them so
that's the first thing asserted
knows how do we stop that and I
don't know what the answer is to
that one the second part I was
trying to figure out was.
If we're going to go to all this
trouble to promote people to go
and fill out this paperwork in
section two what you're trying
to address.
I don't understand what the
differences.
Of reaching out to people saying
Hey by the way if you file for
benefits in general which would
take out section two with this
weird cap I don't get this cap
on here.
I don't understand why we have
this cap and why we're not just
saying.
Go fire tax go follow every year
because you're gonna get all
these benefits so is that
something that you were leaning
towards with this that we just
want people to file in general
correct so they get the benefits
and we make this more
streamlined.
Madam speaker and gentle lady at
my my biggest concern is the
anti donation clause and the
fact that we have and there are
people who file taxes who have
no liability and that is a
refundable credit versus a
credit based on a liability and
so this is a refundable credit
so the people who are filing I
don't know why tax and revenue
can answer that but I believe
it's around forty percent have
no liability and when they file
their getting rebates getting a
refundable tax credit they had
no liability that they get it
back anyway and so to me
obviously it's not a barrier for
the low income in the sick in
the indigent they're able to do
that and I called a couple of
constituents in my district who
are disabled who are low income
who are seniors and they are
perfectly willing to go through
this process to get I'm all for
tax dollars going back to the
government can only give you
what they first take away give
it back right and so I'm simply
trying to make sure that we
don't have an issue with the
anti donation clause but I mean
you're bringing up a really good
point and it's another concern
that this resolves thank you and
thank you
A speaker so that goes back to
this that that which is very
concerning which also the same
concern was wise right down note
so feverishly is this anti
donation because when I read it
it specifically says that we
cannot do this and we have all
held and The New Mexico to not
violate the constitution so I
have been concerned about I
don't know why it would it seems
to be so much more streamlined
and so much more simpler and
everybody would just be an
agreement yes we want to give
the money back to give the
rebates.
But now we have this part in
here that is going to force us
to vote on this with a violation
to the to our oath to uphold the
constitution so I definitely
support that because I see too
many loopholes the second part
is very strange to me the whole
thing if we're going to go out
and promote that you need to go
and do this then why don't we
just promote to go ahead and
file your taxes which is very
simple thank you for for fallen
tax and make it so simple it's
very simple very easy manner
somewhere we just don't do that
to promote that idea and then we
won't have to worry about being
in violation of the constitution
thank you I yield my time.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker does
gentlelady from grant hill Dogo
answer County field thank you
madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
So I I I I did said this did
come through a committee that I
sat on and there was a lot of
discussion about
Folks who
this could be a burden to having
to go and I don't understand the
difference between the burden of
having to go to HHS.
And fill out a single page for
to fill out a similar single
pages for the federal tax return
and a state tax return and madam
speaker gentle ideas in
questioning of the secretary of
taxation
There're a was some discussion
that the that there was already
information on.
These folks that they're already
many of them even received
federal stimulus checks so
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm really not sure.
that there's two arguments one
that.
It would be hard on
Older folks and that it would be
hard on people who are maybe
afraid of the federal government
and many of the folks who were
there which by the way Madam
speaker and gentle lady I did
not see anyone from A. R. P.
there.
There was no one from any of the
senior citizen advocacy groups
there that we're saying that
that this be a problem for them
there were a number of folks
there.
but
Madam speaker and gentle lady
are not the ones that we are
being told that it would be hard
on them because they're elderly
and and my four Mr speaker
gentle it is the same thing that
happens and I have been fighting
since I got here is to be able
to pass legislation that is a
misdirect and it's meant to it's
intended to help someone else
that we will use and I'm using
that term properly use another
group for sympathy.
I I don't know how long it's
been said that I I remember when
I first got here we were
fighting a driver's license
issues that somehow it was very
difficult for a minority like me
or my children her double
minorities Hispanic and native
American that it was a
difficulty for them a hardship.
For them to go and get this hi.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
just continually have a hard
time with the idea of simply
asking people.
To fill out the property tax
limitation to for this for us.
For for this kind of yes for the
for the assistance is available
already this would be a benefit
to most folks and.
What we're building what we us
our our our fellow colleagues
here to do is to violate.
Our oath.
And the reality is is likely to
pass today.
As that is a that is a great
likelihood is going to do so
without my vote.
Because unlike many people in
this chamber I do take very very
very seriously something that I
did I raise my hand up.
And I did swear an oath to
uphold not only the United
States constitution but The New
Mexico constitution.
And.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
It is very clear the entitled
donation Clause states that it
is illegal to make a donation.
Or give direct aid to an
individual person.
That's what we're that's really
what was the second section of
house bill two does is it is a
direct payment.
part of the discussion initially
in committee was that.
We can set tax policy and so
this is not against this doesn't
violate the anti donation clause
because this is tax policy this
is not tax policy section one is
tax policy specifically rebate.
Section two specifically is not
tax policy it says payment.
It is very very clear.
The madam speaker and and and
gentle lady the likelihood is.
No one is going to take this to
court.
That's the reason we can pass
something like this out is
because no one will take this to
court.
The idea of this going and us
making a direct payment
individuals directly isn't this
violation.
And the idea that this was meant
to help the the the the the very
poor that's that language is not
included in here it just
basically states if you don't
file your taxes.
You can come and do this.
And I I don't believe that that
is.
Meant to be for the elderly or
for any of these other groups
that that are being used in this
manner.
Because those groups were not
present in the committee that I
served on advocating for this
like I said A. R. P. was not
there veterans groups were not
there.
Disabled groups were not there
so I I do not believe that low
income families are the target.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
because that's not who showed up
to advocate so I I just have a
hard time we come out here we
play this game the charade of
who is the intended.
We just need to have that debate
openly.
And I and that was not was it
immigrants rights groups were
able present.
That's two one after another
stood up and and discussed why
section two was important.
In reality is even those groups.
There's not a single one of them
that cannot go and file taxes in
New Mexico.
So.
As far as I'm concerned I'm just
tired of playing this game or
use one group to benefit another
group and act like that.
That what we're saying to the
public is.
What's been said so far that is
just not the case I do support
and I have since I got here
giving taxpayers especially in
surplus times like we are today
giving taxpayers filers and
really at this point we're not
even if people have a burden but
tax filers giving them a rebate
check because of once again it's
been stated because of the war
and fuel prices going up because
of the war the fuel prices were
going up and they've been going
up for the last several years as
we've been trying to make it
harder to to to make fuel
available.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think your.
Amendment is very reasonable
because it was stated.
That to qualify and this maybe
once again misdirection again
but I have to take their word
that.
To qualify for this you would
need to.
Have a so security number E. I
and number or some sort of tax
payer ID number that being the
case.
That's why there didn't seem to
be a the twenty million dollars
has decreased.
Over and over and over this is
version ten I'm not sure if
you're aware of that the version
that was presented was version
ten
during that time.
with the number has dropped
initially was much higher number
now stands twenty million but as
was stated that's right if they
run out they can go get in line
and up to the may first of
twenty twenty three.
A taxpayer persons qualified to
file taxes can go and get these
dollars so Madam speaker and
gentle lady I just to.
There's no reason for us to have
to violate.
R. O..
I will not violate my
conscience.
And I just think it's
unfortunate because the very
first section section one I
think most of us agree on not
everyone believed agree on that
but I think a lot a lot of
people vast majority agree on
the fact that.
There's no reason when we're
sitting on a surplus that we
don't give money back to people
when they're hurting.
but then speaker gentle lady.
I think your amendment is a
reason or here substitute is
reasonable and I think it would
keep all of us from.
Knowingly violating the
constitution so I plan to
support your substitute.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you madam speaker.
I move that we table house floor
substitute number two number
one.
There's.
There's a motion for the body to
table House substitute house for
substitute number one for house
bill two.
A vote of yes and the of four
years or two will be tabled.
A vote of no and the amendment
will not be tabled the vote is
now open.
And the vote is now closed by a
vote of forty three and the
information of and twenty three
in the negative house floor
substitute number one to house
bill two is amended.
is tabled will now return to
debate on house bill two as
amended.
Thank you madam speaker and and
forge I'm system fortunate that
that didn't pass you know I I
enjoyed the debate and
especially the COVID but it was
a perfect bill but the ten
version may not have been the
perfect bill the eleventh
version might even a perfect
bill but we will never know
however we never tire of special
sessions because you know we try
to have these amendments on the
floor Dona Santo just so that we
come back for specials and had
had to address bills whenever
we've made these type of
suggestions before and they're
ignored medical malpractice
comes to mind
so hopefully no one files
against this in court.
so back to the the
The bill.
You know I.
Every New Mexican in the state
is suffering from the rising
cost of inflation from the
rising cost of fuel in the at
the gas pump from the rising
cost of energy to heat and cool
their homes I I talked to a
couple of constituents from my
district and I believe I have
the hardest and have to pass the
vote the cost on to the consumer
and those are the folks who are
farming and ranching and her
extracting oil and gas from the
field the miners the truck
drivers that those are the folks
that are seeing increased costs
and they have to pass on to
consumers because they're not
getting up before the sun rises
and they're not going to bed
after the sun sets to go into
the whole so they have a right
to make a living so just a
rancher in my district said that
the trucking for their feet and
their cattle has gone up from
four dollars per loaded mile to
six dollars per loaded mile and
that increases that that's at
the fuel increase more if you
remains the same so fifty
percent increase in what it
costs them to transport them a
loaded my all that's getting
through to our grocery stores
processed into our grocery
stores and to our table to our
schools to our senior mill sites
their supplemental feed is fifty
percent increase two hundred
pounds of of of the tub was it's
around a hundred twenty right
now is eighty six dollars last
year and the shipping's
increased of course
wait the corn in the soybean is
like a sixty percent increase
because it is costing so much to
produce food in the field
because this is a rancher.
So they're saying that some of
the supplemental vitamins the
some of the other things they
are not available in America and
they are shipped by boat and
what was taking you know this is
all increase costs I talked to
were a farmer and they just said
everything from labor the
cardboard boxes the tape that
closes the cardboard boxes even
their plastic containers.
These have gone up to twenty
percent and more but it's more
than that it's getting the
supplies have gone from four to
six weeks to three and four
months.
So they are they are frustrated
they are feeling
That they are not being heard.
And there are solutions
solutions that were offered in
the sixty day span the thirty
day session that would avoid us
from being here in the first
place solutions like reopening
Escalante not closing San Juan
adding natural gas to our fuel
are clean fuel standards.
Stop slow walking the leases in
the permits having the courage
to call the president and say
Hey New Mexico has the solutions
we can be energy independent we
can help with the United States
and we can help address what's
happening in Ukraine.
We can bring this to an end.
Instead we are putting a bandaid
on of the lead this is a self
imposed crisis and here we are
in a special session and I
believe these rebates are should
go back the government can only
do with the first take away and
this is the needs of the
people's dollars anyway but the
way that we're doing this is a
violation of our constitution it
goes against the anti donation
clause.
It is it's time to have a
courageous changing to step to
do the hard things in this
floor.
Stop passing bad bills by one
vote in the Senate one vote in
the house.
Let's work together let's make
the state a place where citizens
can driver businesses can thrive
for our farmers and ranchers are
celebrated with oil and gas is
heroes are celebrated let's stop
putting bandaids on believes
because a failed policy thank
you madam speaker.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe I will yield to you
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I just want to
real and what we're here to do
why we're here and special
session and it it's in the state
of emergency that were called
here understanding that
Russia is at war with Ukraine
and the way that we see wars
playing out now and
understanding what our American
people are contributing and
being able to fight that war is
that we are taking on the cost
burden of rising oil prices
internationally and in
stewardship to our fellow
democracies that is not a self
imposed crisis in my opinion but
this is in solidarity with
democratic we run governments
around the world and in
solidarity with Ukraine we have
taken on that burden
economically as New Mexicans and
as Americans to stand in
solidarity with the people of
Ukraine who are fighting that
war against Russia and as an
economic burden the prices of
oil have risen since we have
cease to continue to purchase
oil from Russia Madam speaker
gentle lady is that my how do
you feel about that
understanding of of why we're
here today Madam speaker gentle
lady I think your assessment is
very fair and
This is a hardship on the world
and I would point out madam
speaker gentle lady the hardship
on us is to minimalist compared
to how are
democratic advocates in the
Ukraine are suffering right now.
Thank you for that Madam speaker
gentle lady and as we see the
nightly news and the atrocities
happening there the solidarity I
think in what we have is New
Mexicans to share with the
Ukrainian people and and what we
are experiencing here and and
coping with that as well that we
stand in strong support of their
democracy and and their people
Madam speaker gentle lady.
What we're experiencing here
however in the United States
Madam speaker gentle lady is
inflation with the demands of
goods that we have here in the
United States since there are
supply shortages in the recovery
from COVID and recovery of
markets everywhere the prices
have definitely risen madam
speaker gentle lady and what you
have proposed today and I
strongly support your
legislation I should leave that
madam speaker gentle lady is to
be able to share in the benefit
two of the boom that we've seen
in recovery from COVID Madam
speaker gentle lady we haven't
been able to meet the demand
side of the curve of being able
to supply consumers with the
goods that were in demand of but
madam speaker gentle lady we're
needing to those to soften the
blow on the pond on the amount
of money that our our families
our our folks in New Mexico are
currently having to pay out of
their pocket in order to meet
that demand Madam speaker gentle
lady is that fair about what
we're doing today what we're
experiencing as a state minister
generally madam speaker gentle
lady I think you've hit the nail
on the head.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady in in my understanding of
why we would offer what are you
know a lot of folks called
destiny in the in the in the
what we saw the federal
government hand out and what we
saw this economic benefit going
direct to families direct to
individuals and helping them
meet the demand of of
uncertainty and and in the
rising costs that we see today
Madam speaker gentle lady a
hundred fifty nine million
Americans receive stimulus tax
in the times of COVID Madam
speaker gentle lady and in my
research and understanding what
they were spending that money on
and what we expect New Mexicans
to expend this money on in their
first payment they spent seventy
percent of that check went
direct to household expenses
groceries rent and other monthly
bills madam speaker gentle lady
and when I.
Who were around my district
madam speaker gentle lady.
Some of the biggest worries that
folks have right now are about
their grocery bills increasing
about their gas prices
increasing and of course there
rents increasing so those those
basic household costs for to get
from point a to point B. to be
able to put food on the table
madam speaker gentle lady when
these stimulus payments have
gone our way what we're calling
a rebate or family a family
recovery check this helps them
pay for that Madam speaker
gentle lady is that what you
understand about why we're doing
this Madam speaker gentle lady
definitely and as the bill
refers it's a household relief
payment and it's intended to
lift the burden on so many
households in the state of New
Mexico who are sustaining the
weight of these increase prices
driven largely by gas prices but
there of course other factors as
well gentle lady and madam
speaker.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I what was also interesting
to me when the second stimulus
payment money out of people
qualified for that is the the
vast majority of that payment I
believe over fifty one percent
after it was the largest
payments spent was on paying off
debt so the first bow it was
about uncertainty taking care of
the basics and when the second
stimulus went out it was about
paying unpaid debt and then
spending again on household
expenses Madam speaker gentle
lady and when I understand I
understand when we're seeing
these paint what we expect at
least when those payments go out
madam speaker gentle lady is
that those that the great people
of New Mexico who may be who are
going to receive this are going
to be good stewards of that fund
Madam speaker gentle lady and
put it to exactly what the data
describes is right back into New
Mexico Madam speaker gentle lady
is that what you expect.
Madam speaker gentle lady on
that completely and a large the
large majority of the folks who
are going to be receiving this
check our middle income to low
income folks and what we know
Madam speaker gentle lady is
they spend that money and they
will help businesses grow and
support the economy in ways that
I can't even describe in full
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you madam speaker gentle lady
that is what I expect to and I'm
also was interested and and some
of the worry about why don't we
have.
We'll to filing taxes in New
Mexico what is this category for
folks that may not
the filing what's that what what
is going on with that madam
speaker gentle lady and some of
what I found and and I would
love to hear your thoughts on
this is that of course because
the income threshold is so low
they don't have to file a
federal tax return Madam speaker
gentle lady and so they don't
file a state return Madam
speaker gentle lady is that
right
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think that's a fair assessment
of the large the for the large
of bulk of the individuals who
do not file and madam speaker
gentle lady some of the worry I
understand too is wide folks
might not file if they're in the
income threshold or low income
threshold in particular is worry
that they may have a tax
liability that they can't pay so
they are fearful and and
basically do not file at all
because they're worried that
they can't afford it madam
speaker gentle lady so many
times those who might be
receiving a budget
such is the stimulus or what
we'll call the the family relief
funds that we're talking about
madam speaker gentle gentle lady
is that they may not be filing
because they're worried that
they may get further in debt in
in those situations madam
speaker gentle lady is that a
fair assessment Madam speaker
gentle lady that's certainly
that may be one of the reasons
as well.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so there's this what we're
seeing in in this legislation is
to separate payments going to
New Mexicans we of whether
you're jointly filing or filing
by yourself funds are generally
do you expect to have five
hundred dollars per person is
that right madam speaker
generally madam speaker gentle
lady just five hundred dollars
per person.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
that's per file or for it is
that correct madam speaker
gentle lady that under the
rebate program as per filer
that's correct Madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and while I'm trying to
wrap my hands around inflation
and how to predict the future
Madam speaker gentle lady can
you just describe why we're
doing two separate payments and
how that's fiscally responsible
for New Mexico Madam speaker
gentle lady one is one reason is
it splits the
Of the impact on our budgets to
between two budget so what we're
doing on in this fiscal year and
one in the second fiscal year
and that will help mitigate
against the need to have to tap
into the revenue stabilization
fund so that's one another
reason Madam speaker gentle lady
as it tracks the fact that
people are incurring higher
expenses over a period of time
in order for helping that and
madam speaker delayed a point
I'd point out one thing the
August payment which is now in
August which retains and Tax
committee then speaker gentle
lady that's going to be a great
help for people who are going
back to school.
So we've got families with
children and still be school
supplies and they are college
students and thinking of you
madam speaker I mean to tell
lady so it just makes a lot of
sense just in terms of spreading
the payments out and madam
speaker gentle lady one less
reason it softens any potential
inflationary impact so you know
we're gonna restraining it out
over time Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I'm just just so grateful
that we're here on even in a
special session to be able to
have this conversation about the
importance of what's going on in
our state as we deal with the
fact that we don't get to come
into session typically after you
know one session a year I think
it's important to recognize that
what's happening in our world
today madam speaker gentle lady
in the way that our economy
works we are affected by it and
we have to make good decisions
that basically allow us to
participate in that global
economy but allows us to react
when necessary and I'm grateful
that we are here to be with our
with the you know the governor's
proclamation to be able to have
this time to reflect on what we
can do to help New Mexicans move
forward Fennessy gentlelady and
it ends with the responsibility
and understanding that when
folks get that money into their
bank accounts and when they're
able to cash those checks that
that fund we know will be
regenerative right back into the
New Mexico economy Madam speaker
gentle lady and take a bit of
that burden off of what families
have been experiencing I think
for several months now with with
inflation with where it where
it's at but madam speaker gentle
lady recognizing that it's
because we're all sharing in the
burden together in in strong
solidarity with Ukraine and
being able to continue to
recover Madam speaker gentle
lady so I'm in strong support of
this legislation I I really
appreciate all of your hard work
and negotiation with how we got
here and keeping this
responsible to our our bottom
line and and future revenues so
that we can continue to to reap
that benefit Madam speaker
gentle lady but that we give
this fund back to New Mexicans
thank you madam speaker gentle
lady.
I mean the direction you've
referred several times.
About the payment being issued
in August.
Can you show me where in the
bill it says that.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think I would need to refer to
an amendment madam speaker
gentle lady that was made in
house taxation and revenue and
what it did was it amended a
provision on the two I want to
say yes
Thank you for your answer gentle
lady and Mr speaker.
generally I'm having an issue I
cannot find that amendment is
not online.
I just pulled up the bill I do
not see this amendment that
we're talking about that would
change the language from the
bill from September to August
there is nothing online for the
public to see.
And I have a fear that we're not
we're operate in a transparent.
Manner if that information is
not available to the public.
Gentlelady.
madam speaker
I suspect our clerk is checking
into that.
If you could give us a moment.
And just to be clear madam
speaker gentle lady it was done
in a public meeting it is a
transparent amendment.
Thank you gentle lady for that
Mr speaker gentle lady I've
learned that
A lot of times the devil's in
the details and unfortunately we
have over the last few years
I've been here I've seen it the
devil's in the details what
might be the kick in the pants
on page fourteen.
So I would appreciate you
getting that answer.
Generally there is one other
question I guess that would be.
I'm concerned what's not really
a question is a more of a
concern I guess gentle lady and
you've heard from all the.
Other debate we've heard this
afternoon how this may go
against our constitution is an
anti donation issue.
And I'm really torn and here's
why I do feel that it does go
against the constitution section
two of this bill.
Is in my opinion an issue with
anti donation clause.
I understand.
The premise of that we want to
help as many New Mexicans as we
possibly can and give them the
relief that they need.
I'm sure all of you who had a
huge tax.
Actually a huge gas bill well
some of you did getting up here
I'd thought my tank and it cost
me way more than it did the last
special session so it is an
issue for all of us and we're
all feeling at so I I understand
that gentle lady and I'm just
really I'm I'm vacillating I
don't know how I'm gonna vote on
this because I think it is
important that we get.
The people some relief but is
this the right way to do it
that's really where I'm at
gentlelady.
Mr speaker gentle lady
we didn't look into the public
record online and
Mr speaker generally I'll refer
you to the committee read the
tax committee report that is
where it is posted and where the
amendment that you asked about
Mr speaker gentle lady is.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
give me one second let me read
that.
Just for clarification gentle
lady Mister speaker so they the
amendment is actually listed in
the actual committee report not
as a separate.
I'm in is that correct the
latest Mr speaker gentle lady
yes that's my understanding.
Thank you for that gentle lady
and Mr speaker I guess I will
continue to listen to the debate
it's this is a tough one so
thank you for answer my
questions.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The the lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe County
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
County please yield Mr speaker
gentle lady are you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
So I just wanted to bring up
something really quick cares and
something else was brought up at
a little bit ago.
On April fifth twenty twenty one
gas prices were two ninety five
a gallon November eighth twenty
twenty one they were up to three
fifty a gallon December
twentieth before this war
started gas was three ninety
five gallon.
It's the Biden ministration IT
jacked up the prices before we
even got to the war so I don't
want to solely ball blame it on
just a single issue I want to
say it's a failure on the by
administration for multiple
levels I know we can also say
the pipeline and not doing
enough drilling for oil I just
want to make it aware of
painfully aware.
That under governor Lujan and
under the by administration.
Our fate our state has failed
our country is failing.
And I understand the importance
of wanting to help people but
you know it's happening this
mountains we can't get anybody
to work I saw an ad of
somebody's going to pay somebody
gas and they still can't get
them to work we have much bigger
issues.
We have tax reform we have
people getting back to work but
the main thing I wanted to
stress was that.
This is from failures.
This whole issues from a bunch
of series of failures so I just
want to make sure that we're
aware that it's not just one
single event there was numerous
ways we got here thank you I
yield my time.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
county Representative Martinez
thank you Mr speaker delay
please yield Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo county
I will yield thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady I first
of all I want to commend you for
the hard work I know you have
been working with our Senate
counterparts with our
counterparts on the other side
of the aisle and and staff to
get this crafted now Mr speaker
and gentle lady just remind the
body this is a tax rebate.
That will go out through the tax
system sold through tax filings
is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker General
and it will go the tax rebate
will go through tax filings and
Mr speaker gentle lady a lot of
people can file taxes in New
Mexico and and we take taxes to
tax filing small through the use
of social security numbers or
individual taxpayer
identification numbers otherwise
known as iTunes is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman that is my
understanding and the speaker
gentle lady those Titans can be
used by people for variety of
reasons including the fact that
they may not have a social
security number because they
might be in the country without
documents.
Mr speaker gentle and I think
that's right.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady soul this notion that the
second part of the bill where
you're creating this fund is
somehow set up to support in
this specific group of people is
simply not true or at the very
least it might be inaccurate Mr
speaker gentle lady because most
people
cool I would argue fall within
that category in terms of
immigration status already file
taxes with the nineteen because
they pay taxes the way you and I
pay taxes and speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentleman
hundred percent.
Respectability I was involved in
some of the discussions with you
has your crafting this very
complicated piece of legislation
of the last few weeks and we
kept talking about the fact that
we had members from both sides
of the aisle in rural
communities asking us what are
you gonna do about people who
don't file taxes.
And I said gosh darn it you're
right I hadn't thought of that.
And so we brought that up to you
madam speaker Mr speaker and and
gentle lady and you very much
you know selflessly took that on
and created what we believe is a
you have to ensure that those
folks are not left out of these
relief program is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle and that is
correct and I would point out
when we had those conversations
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
focus largely on rural seniors
that those were the
conversations I was having Mr
speaker gentleman down with
members and they were very
concerned that we have rural
seniors who it's only income is
social security and they don't
typically file because their
income is too low and we worked
very hard to come up with a
program that would support those
individuals that was my intent I
know that is your intent
gentleman and that is
a large goal of the program that
we're talking about Mr speaker
gentleman that's correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Seniors low income seniors
living in rural communities was
our primary concern that anyone
else.
Why is I'm concerned speaker and
gentle lady the folks that the
community that I belong to
many of undocumented most of on
the next status families we
already assumed that they're
going to file their taxes
because they pay their taxes
they don't cheat on their taxes
and therefore they could
probably make axis I should say
this relief program and and Mr
speaker lady you know I I used
to be a lot of the school and I
haven't much the last several
years for variety of reasons but
I think I.
We can disagree on policy Mr
speaker and generating all day
long.
But we should never ever revert
to dehumanizing.
Other people.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I don't care.
That it's election season I
don't care that we're in the
middle of primaries and then
eventually general election we
should never to humanize other
people.
Think quite frankly I'm taken
aback by the fact that we have
to go down this very very
dangerous and and disturbing
road the minutes ago Mr speaker
and gentle lady now a lot was
made of the anti donation clause
of the constitution Mr speaker
gently.
Section fourteen article nine of
the state constitution.
Is the so called anti donation
clause.
Inspected gentlelady I'm gonna
put you on the spot here
But.
What is the very first
exception to the anti donation
clause Mr speaker and gentleman
it relates to the indigence.
Mr speaker gentle lady here
absolutely right the answer to
the nation costs in short says
you can give.
Money credits etcetera to
individuals corporations private
entities.
Less in.
Thousand and one of these very
many exceptions and the very
first exception reads nothing in
this section prohibits the state
or any county or municipality
for making provision for the
care and maintenance of sick and
indigent persons and I would
argue Mr speaker gentle lady the
fact that you're not filing
taxes because you don't earn
enough money to have to file
taxes probably means that you're
indigent.
The argument that this falls
afoul of the anti do nation
costs is just that best an
accurate.
Perhaps it's a falsehood speaker
gentle lady with that I will
yield back my time I appreciate
all of you work thank you for
fighting hard for New Mexicans
and fit and and especially
grateful for your bipartisan
work I know you've worked extra
hard to ensure bipartisan
support of this bill and we
appreciate that thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln okay our.
Chavis and Lincoln County
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
County you'll.
Mr speaker I would gladly yield
to the gentleman from the lovely
Chavez and linking counties.
Thank you madam delivery
Mr speaker and gentle lady of.
I guess to follow up on the last
statement that was made of.
Could you point me Mr speaker
and gentle lady to language in
section two that limits.
Section two to indigent or.
indigent persons that would be
exempt from the anti donation
clause.
Mr speaker gentleman as I'm sure
you're aware it's not it within
that provision it is within the
provisions that allow for people
not to file their taxes.
But the only limitation Mr
speaker and gentle lady you
would agree with me is that
someone could take advantage of
section two if they simply do
not file an income tax return.
Mr speaker gentleman yes and I
imagine if they don't fall
within those low income they
would be doing something that's
probably not proper Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would agree with you and I'd
also.
Tell you that there are probably
a number of people New Mexico
the fall in that category
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Hi the the mentioned in the
debate regarding the amendment
the.
Concerns I have with respect to
the communication between the
two agencies Mr speaker and
gentle lady what assurances do
we have that people would not be
able.
To apply for
the money's under both sections
one and two other than their
honesty.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for that question
with this program is very
similar to one that's already
been in place through HSD taxed
revenue was an active
participants in that program and
they have access to all sorts of
data and they cross reference
data it is not based solely on
persons of asset to station on a
form but rather Mr speaker it
relies on data that has been
news and other programs Mr
speaker gentleman so Mister
speaker and gentle lady could
you point me to the language in
the bill that requires
a pre determination of
eligibility before that money is
paid out Mr speaker gentleman
and secretary are you referring
to section two another section
Mr speaker gentle lady there are
provisions in the law that
outline who is eligible and the
agencies charged with
administrative administrating
those provisions are required to
follow the law and if they do
not they will be not performing
their duties properly.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't see any provision that
requires a pre check for
penalties for
Person who would apply for
benefits under both sections one
and two hi I don't think it
exist in the in the legislation
doesn't.
Mr speaker down I guess I
disagree with you when the
legislature passes a bill that
says these are the criteria that
is imposing obligations on those
entities to follow the law and
apply it and verify they are
following the law and in fact as
I pointed out earlier Mr speaker
and gentleman this was done in
the past.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Prior to
The call.
I attended several.
Meetings regarding the high cost
of fuel and its impact on
society.
What we've been told is that.
At a four dollar per gallon
price of gasoline.
The average person's disposable
income.
Becomes compromised and they do
not have the disposable income
that they are used to having so
they're going to have to make
some decisions to cut back on it
so certainly Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Hi
I'm always happy to provide tax
relief to our our taxpayers in
New Mexico and this certainly
trying to find some some relief
again my concern is not on the
the.
Relief to be provided
particularly sense this money
that's being
paid out is really money that
largely comes from the oil and
gas industry in New Mexico in
the first place but Madam
speaker or Mr speaker gentle
lady
It's the mechanism by which
we're doing this because it's
it's much broader than just
simply fuel prices that were
concerned with and I believe Mr
speaker and gentle lady have
testified that the real point is
to just provide relief for
rising prices not just fuel
prices but rising prices
generally did I understand that
correctly.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that's generally a fair
statement but I would point out
that I am pointing to the fact
that gas prices affect other
prices because their
transportation costs Mr speaker
gentleman it's cetera so it's a
continuum certainly gas prices
are an important part of the
equation Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
you'll you'll certainly agree
with me that you know we
complain about gas prices diesel
prices are basically a dollar
ten more than gasoline prices
right now I remember the the
signs that I passed on the way
up here of and so.
Those transportation costs that
you just referred to are going
to be exasperated as those costs
get absorbed through the
economic system
Mr speaker and gentle lady
There was a statement made that
people may not want to go to the
tax and Revenue Department.
For fear that baby back taxes
that they owed
And they were in debt for back
taxes would somehow get paid but
Mr speaker gentle lady if that's
the case wouldn't this be an
appropriate way to get those
people out of that that.
Mr speaker John I don't remember
ever saying that it was back
taxes what I said Mr speaker and
gentleman it was that there is a
subset of our community and it
is unfortunate but they are
fearful of of state government
and more specifically federal
government and the two systems
are connected ma'am Mr speaker
and gentleman.
And and Mr speaker gentle lady.
You've already testified that
the.
Which is the item taxed Revver
connected did you not.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry I didn't hear that
question Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm if people have the fears of
government why would it matter
of services for full of taxed
Representative verses HSD Mr
speaker and gentleman
there are many people who are
more comfortable dealing with
the social services agency and
as I pointed out that taxed road
system is tied to the federal
tax system so it draws on
filings that one submits through
federal taxes and I think we can
agree that there's a sense among
some sectors of our community
who are very valuable to us and
contribute greatly who are
fearful of of the oppression
that or I'd that's a strong word
I don't that's not a fair word
but they're fearful of the
implications of dealing with the
federal government.
Mr speaker gentle lady is there
any requirement that one does
not have to file a federal
return.
Would have to file a federal
return if we the.
Took out.
The HSD requirement.
For the edges the option.
Mr speaker gentle I think
technically it's a you are able
to do that but you would then be
flagged Mr speaker and gentleman
in the federal system.
If you Mr speaker and gentle
lady if you fall under the
income parameters there's no
requirement to file a federal
income tax return is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I think that's correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
that would be correct and even
if you get flagged it's of no
avail because you don't have a
requirement to file the federal
return
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
of.
You know we we we've called this
an emergency and and.
It seems like a few months.
A lot strange because we were on
this floor in the wee hours of
of the Wednesday morning a
couple months ago.
Deciding whether or not to
impose a.
Twenty five to fifty cent tax on
people on fuel
and.
Yes it's very fortuitous of the.
The vote on that bill was thirty
three to thirty three in the
motion did not go forward but
here we are two months later and
the we're we're really concerned
about the high price of gas I
guess it's for to it is that the
we did not as a legislative body
send that bill on to the
governor for signature at that
time and probably have to do
something about the
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Hi I.
I see a lot of good points in
this legislation I am concerned
about the communication between
the two agencies I'm concerned
about the why we need to
complicated when we could have a
pretty straight forward of one
department type shop
that would be easily monitored
would be easily access by all
who want to take benefit of this
this program and it does provide
relief to to virtually all New
Mexico citizens of the for the
criteria that are in the bill
and so I'm a I'm a bit perplexed
why we didn't pass the amendment
Madam speaker and or Mr speaker
and gentle lady of thank you for
your your answers on and again
this is this is the one that
Really.
Is is tough for me because I and
I know the people my district
sorely need some of the related
but on the other hand of it's
it's maybe a bandaid when in the
big scheme of things thank you
Mr speaker thank you generally.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
County Representative Serrato
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
field Mr speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe I yield thank you
gentle lady I just had a couple
of quick questions Mr speaker
and gentle lady I'm just curious
you know you spoke about the
twenty million dollar cap on do
you feel that that would
complicate but only that that
would cover the majority of
folks that may not file taxes or
that may need that additional
relief Mr speaker gentle lady
yes I think it will cover the
large majority of people who
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I'm just curious
you know I I've heard of concern
and that's been brought up and
in this body in in the past that
the way that it's currently
frame this might affect income
caps for housing programs and
other types would this be an
issue in that way Mr speaker we
did look at that we feel it will
not and and and and frankly the
TRD does not count this and
this money as part of modify
gross income and their full have
no effect on budget state budget
of course is federal government
this is another entity thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
one thing I just want to point
quickly point out about section
to the earth that we've have
kind of spoken about that in the
end to donation Clause is the
idea of where the education
because came from in that
originally it came up because we
had so much towards real road
financing and was a really great
interest for communities to
encourage and just give free
giveaways to railroad barons
Todd to do whatever they wanted
and this created the anti
donation clause this is why we
have the exemptions that the
gentleman from Bernalillo
brought up to make sure that we
were allowing anyone that may be
in need to benefit from our
state coffers and so I just
think it is worth noting that we
have done legislation like this
in the past that has benefited
these communities that we're
great need at times of financial
distress I want to thank the
generally.
You for bringing up this
legislation and I look for to
voting in favor of it thank you
Mr speaker.
The gentleman from Chavis and in
Ontario county Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady of.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
yield.
Thank you
A couple of questions.
And you may have answered this
earlier but I've been studying
yes and I just want to make sure
I hi.
Grant your position.
The twenty million dollars
addresses the a group of people
that has been estimated to be a
hundred and thirty four thousand
people.
Do we agree on that Mr speaker
actually I I don't agree that is
the number of non filers however
I don't believe that that number
is the likely number of
applicants and I base that
statement Mr speaker and
gentleman on past programs that
are similar that have been
implemented through health and
Human Services and at that time
the allocation was ten million
dollars.
Thank you for that gentle lady
and Mr speaker the testimony in
appropriations this morning.
Was there was a hundred and
thirty four thousand people that
were.
A known group of non filers is
that is that did I misunderstand
that or is it is that correct Mr
speaker No you there was that
number that number was presented
as an estimated number.
Okay I would just like to
understand.
Statistically why you believe
twenty million dollars will
address a group of people that
if they all came and filed would
need seventy million dollars.
Mr speaker because they all will
not and Mr speaker gentleman
this was a consensus the number
that was put through through HSD
and TRD and other and LFC as a
best estimate as to who would
likely apply for the program Mr
speaker and gentleman I point
out there was an effort to
balance the needs as you I'm
sure I can appreciate we needed
to put it we felt it very
important fiscally important to
put a cap on the program and the
consensus dealing with all the
knowledgeable agencies including
LFC was that twenty million
dollars would be a good
estimate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
I'm not again of the bills purse
I mean what I'm trying to figure
out is are we addressing or we
of limiting a significant
portion of the population from
having any assistance and if we
are doing that.
What.
Why do we feel that only a
smaller portion will apply I
mean do you have any I mean did
did the agencies give you any of
us Soto said this is why.
You know a small people only
twenty six thousand of this
hundred thirty four thousand are
going to have to come in I mean
that's what I'm trying to grasp.
Mr speaker gentleman
I believe this is is the answer
there is a significant.
Portion of those individuals who
are disconnected from the
systems within H. we operate
that's of course this is a
problem that we need to be
working on there's no question
about that Mr speaker and
gentleman so based on other
programs these are the numbers
that were proposed as a
reasonable amount of money to
put in the bill recognizing we
did need a cap Mr speaker into.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
guess what I'm getting from that
is that they just S. believes
based on their knowledge that
there's a group of people out
there.
That either are disconnected or
don't want to be involved in
government programs is that
correct.
Mr speaker John I think you know
I think that's a fair way to put
it.
Okay
Now.
Does.
I have been talking to a couple
of.
Analysts in the Senate.
And I just want is it legal or
illegal.
For a person who has is in our
country illegally I mean don't
have a resident can they go get
a social security card or not.
Mr speaker gentleman I've been
informed that they would apply
for an IT I and.
I understand they can do that
but.
Candidate or can they not
legally obtain a social security
number.
Mr speaker and gentleman I've
been informed that one would
have to be a citizen to get a
social security card.
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady so only a they set a cell
or a person with with
With qualify residency I guess I
mean because of a foreign
exchange student I mean they I
think they can make application
if their work and I mean there's
provisions for.
For people that are in the
country legally I mean is on IT
in the only way they can do it
or can they get a social
security number.
Mr speaker and gentleman in it
we're doing our best assessment
on the fly but it it appears
that if you're authorized to
work like I guess that might be
a green card holder and and so
on
they may be able to get a social
security number.
Okay Mister speaker July thank
you I.
This.
Is new ground for me and just
try and understand
I have I have said publicly
that.
What we're doing all of its
seven hundred million dollars
It is a.
As I think I used the word
Pittman said the state pins of
the impact of these families of
how they're of all families I
mean.
I you know I I had a I had a
text from a farmer
A few days ago and he said that
last spring.
Is eighteen thousand gallon
diesel tank delivery costing
twenty seven thousand dollars.
Just a few days ago he filled up
the same tank in it costing
sixty seven thousand five
hundred dollars so it's a big
deal and and that.
Person.
Who has a.
Gigantic impact committee's
gonna get a thousand Bucks just
like everybody else.
And the and the person that is
May or may not even own the
vehicle.
But is has an.
And I tend number is going to
get the same thousand dollars
that's that's the part that I
hate that I it's problematic to
me I am and I'm not disk I am
not discounting the fact that
that thousand dollars is very
important to to both people at
all.
But I think the concern is.
Is that.
Rural New Mexico is impacted a
higher rate than.
Berman The New Mexico and people
whether they got four cars are
for two tractors I have a larger
fuel consumption so I I
appreciate your.
Your questions and and those of
your expert thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentleman from Dona ana
county Representative small
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady
from Santa Fe and Los Alamos you
Mr speaker and gentleman from
dynamic County I happily yield
to you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I I want
to be very brief Mr speaker
gentle lady these rebates are
coming at a time where I want to
share I think we all do
the thanks for our energy
workers Mr speaker gentle lady
is it fair to say that New
Mexico has actually seen our
energy production specifically
oil
come back more quickly than any
other state in the country.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
pretty sure that's true the
mystery of the general ideas and
Mr speaker gentle lady going to
the price issue when Russia
began threatening Ukraine Mr
speaker gentle lady and as you
rightly pointed out Mr speaker
and gentle lady the people of
Ukraine are undergoing
incredible for right now that
threatening began in October Mr
speaker gentle lady that's also
when prices began to spike Mr
speaker gentle lady
is that accurate Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman from Dona that is
accurate and things really got
Grumman right after the end of
our session very very grim
that's right Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady of course the number one
oil producer is the United
States of America Mr speaker
gentle lady the number two world
oil producer is is Russia so
Mister speaker gentle lady when
that threatening began it sent
these world markets into a Tom
all the figuring what was to
come Mr speaker gentle lady
we've now seen and we're in the
midst of that for Mr speaker
gentle lady so knowing that
that's where this incredible
surpluses coming from knowing
that
you know it's the unique and
challenging part of our state
also Mr speaker gentle lady
noting that this return an
increase in production has come
in a lower emissions way Mr
speaker gentle lady as we've
we've worked to reduce emissions
companies in the field of
reduced emissions even as they
produce more
the speaker gentle lady the pain
at the pump also means of course
this increase revenue for the
state increased profits for
companies that faced an
incredibly challenging cycle
just a couple years ago the
beginning of COVID so Mister
speaker gentle lady I think of
this is a very good way that
you've brought forward here
today to with our state and our
unique position
made possible by the men and
women here in the energy
industry to be able to provide
much needed relief to all New
Mexicans and I really appreciate
you bringing this forward thank
you Mr speaker.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill two as amended with an
emergency clause do now pass.
We're on final passage of house
bill two is twice amended with
an emergency clause.
The vote is now.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of fifty one in the
affirmative and thirteen in the
negative.
House Bill to as twice amended
with an emergency clause has
passed the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
district and we go to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation hearing.
I'm sorry.
That was the clerk's fault not
mine on this one.
Just kidding it was my fault
the general really thank you
we'll go to the next order of
business meeting of messages.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill one as
amended and requested the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
This is really under the terms
and Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house that the Senate
has passed house bill one with
emergency clause and returned
same here with respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message will
be entered.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Is becoming the go to make
services introduction of
legislation Texas ordered Clark
to read.
Senate bill one introduced by a.
S. insurance senator Munoz.
And others and act making
general appropriations and
authorizing expenditures
providing an exception to
legislative confidentiality
Senate bill one.
Senate bill one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and we're
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
Speaker not be limiting enam I
move that we adjourn until till
one PM second order.
Generated million Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended in the
General show that all those
present in the morning session
are present in this afternoon
session reductions order.
Mr speaker eight million I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
the revision and approval the
rules in order in order of
business committee rejections
ordered.
Welcome to the third day of this
special session.
We are going to stated recess
for a little bit well the
appropriations committee
considers Senate bill one.
If they pass out of committee we
will come back to the floor
consider that and our work will
be done.
we have agreed with the Senate
that we will visit with them
before we Psy.D die and vice
versa so we wanted operate in
that era comity so we will be
done but when we a major and was
cited I will make the decision
of the leader it will definitely
be tonight I just wanna make
sure that we're all.
Getting.
So the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair.
The gentleman the house in
recess subject to the call the
chair I would imagine that with
the committee meeting hearing
testimony on that preparation of
the committee report folks have
about an hour
at least so maybe just for the
sake of anyone who might want to
go and grab a bite to eat why do
we say will come back at seven
forty five.
