Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum, please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentleman
from Bernalillo representative
de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. It's my
honor.
Let us bow our heads and clear
our minds.
Our Father who is in heaven,
holy be your name.
Your will be done on earth as it
is in heaven, Father, may we
love you with all of our hearts,
our minds, and our souls. Lord,
we have gathered to enact laws
that we hope will make the lives
of our fellow citizens better
insomuch that we are here, we
pray that you give us prudence
and insight to do that.
Give us the strength and sustain
us in the long days and nights
to come, Lord, we also ask that
you keep the, the women and men
who are tasked to support us in
this chamber and in this capital
strong and safe every day.
Father, we pray that you place
your hand of protection over all
of our families, keeping them
safe and well in our long
absence and Lord, we ask that
you help us to be joyful, kind
and patient with one another.
We ask for these blessings in
the name of your son, our, our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
Well, the gentleman from Chavez,
Eddie and Lee, Representative
Mason, lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
which it stands
One nation. And the gentle lady
from Donana and Otero Silva
leads in the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Good morning members. Happy
Monday, my favorite day of the
week. Gentlemen from Bernalillo
de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise in
great pride this morning because
today at the Capitol it is
Berlio County Day.
Mr. Speaker, before I
Introduce our our guests at the
rostrum.
I want you to notice, Mr.
Speaker, that I am wearing my
Bur County regalia.
noticed very pretty.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker, we have some
notable guests.
And I would like to call them
and have them rise.
First, we have the chairman of,
of Buro County.
Commission Eric Olivas.
Vice chair Adrian Barboa.
Member Barbara Baca.
Remember Frank A. Baca.
Remember Walt Benson.
Also, Mr. Speaker, we have our
county clerk, Michelle
Kavanaugh.
Our county assessor Damian Lara.
And also the former speaker of
this house and current county
attorney Ken Martinez.
Also with us this morning is
former uh county, uh, I was
gonna call you a sister former
county clerk and now deputy
county treasurer in the Stover.
And also undersheriff Holly
Anderson.
Mr. Speaker, on the member's
desk, there is a wonderful gift
bag.
That has a whole bunch of really
good stuff from Berle County.
Thank you so much for these
gifts, Poo County.
But most notably,
In your bag is a squeezable
little sheep.
And if you don't know the little
sheep.
is called Burco Bernie.
Mr. Speaker, would you please
introduce those in the gallery.
OK, not wrinkle Bernie though.
Just the folks in the gallery,
OK, folks, we've got Doctor
Wayne Lindstrom with Behavioral
Health. We've got Shirley Ray in
DCM Finance.
Elias Archuleta Public works
Greg Perez public safety.
Antonio Jaramillo, director of
operations and maintenance,
Brian Lopez, director, technical
Services.
Jared Deett, director of Fleet
and Facilities, Amanda Colburn,
director of housing.
Jake Mirabal, director of
community schools.
Misha Goodman, director of
animal care, Kai Smith, warden
at MDC.
Ben Hain Silva, field services
manager, animal care. Tia Bland
communications director.
Dein Morales Bond, deputy clerk.
Kelly Baca, deputy clerk, and
Gloria Arts with the assessor's
office. Welcome to your House of
Representatives. Thank you for
joining us on this special day.
Mr. Speaker, before we ask the
clerk to please read.
The um the certificate, I also
want to mention that I have a
memory like a sieve, Mr.
Speaker, and I forgot to
introduce our county manager who
is from Alamogordo originally.
Cindy Chavez, please stand.
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, before
we go to the certificate, I want
to mention for the record.
That Las Cruces is in the house,
the city of Las Cruces, and that
Borneo County has the real South
Valley, not Las Cruces.
Mr. Speaker, if you could read
the certificate.
I think we should amend the
certificate and include that in
the certificate.
Clerk to read.
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
5-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025, declares February
3, 2025, Bernalio County Day.
Whereas Burnleyo County is the
economic and population hub of
New Mexico with nearly 690,000
residents, or one third of the
state's population living within
its borders, including 110,000
living in unincorporated areas
that include land grants and
rural mountain areas.
And whereas Bernalio County's
legislative power is vested in
an elected 5 member board of
county commissioners who share
executive functions with 5
elected county officials, the
county treasurer, county
assessor, county clerk, probate
judge, and sheriff, and whereas
administrative duties for the
county are delegated to the
county manager who oversees a
staff of more than 3000
full-time employees and 41
departments with a fiscal year
2025.
budget of more than $762 million
and whereas the county
commissioners in collaboration
with the city of Albuquerque and
state and federal partners have
spearheaded efforts to expand
housing options for central
regional residents with the
establishment of the Middle Rio
Grande housing collaborative and
whereas the county clerk
operated a transparent and
successful presidential election
in 2024 and whereas the
The assessor has incorporated
electric vehicles into daily
operations.
And whereas the county treasurer
has collected property taxes and
maintains a portfolio of
successful investments and
whereas Bernalo County operates
a juvenile detention facility
that serves 23 other counties
and 2 tribal jurisdictions and
whereas county sheriff's
deputies handled more than
137,000 calls for service each
year, and the Berlio County
Sheriff's Department has taken
the lead in creating a
behavioral health support.
team within the department.
And whereas Bernaleo County Fire
and Rescue has achieved
accreditation from the Center
for Public Safety Excellence,
making it only the 3rd
accredited fire department in
the state and whereas Bernalo
County operates the Metropolitan
Detention Center, the state's
largest jail, with a bed count
that averages 1,092 individuals
per month and partners with the
University of New Mexico
Hospital to provide medical and
behavioral health to
individuals.
there
And whereas
Bernaleo County provides funding
and staff support to the 2nd
judicial district's criminal
justice coordinating council,
which brings together numerous
partners to spearhead innovative
initiatives such as DWI schools
and problem solving courts.
And whereas Bernelio County has
successfully managed nearly $132
million in federal American
rescue Plan Act of 2021 funds
for more than 300 private state
and federal grant awards that
run through 2028, and more than
$250 million in capital outlay
funds appropriated by the state
legislature, and the county
serves as a fiscal agent to more
than 25 nonprofit organizations
that have received
capital outlay funds to further
their initiatives in the central
region.
And whereas Berlio County has
taken an innovative and
proactive approach to addressing
mental health and substance
abuse issues in the community.
Including the expenditure of
$140 million in the behavioral
health gross receipts taxes for
programs to aid the most
vulnerable, including money that
supports crisis triage services
at the University of New Mexico
Hospital in the county's CA
campus, outpatient clinic,
living room program, and
school-based health center.
And whereas Bernelio County
collaborates with the city of
Albuquerque as a critical
supporter of the Gateway Center
and is currently and is working
jointly with the city to develop
a strategic and focused action
plan for the use of millions of
dollars in opioid settlement
funds that will best serve the
needs of the central region.
And whereas Bernao County's
parks, recreation, and open
space department stewards more
than 17 properties and nearly
1150 acres and maintains and
improves more than 35 parks
across the county.
Whereas Burnleyo County
Economic development team has
aggressively pursued initiatives
to further the economic vitality
of the region and the state with
innovative and financing
programs that benefit companies,
taxpayers, small businesses, the
film industry, and special
events.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
Bernalio County for its vital
contributions to the central
region and the state.
By proclaiming February 3, 2025,
as Bernalillo County Day in the
House of Representatives, signed
and sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Gentlemen from Milo, I'd like to
add my congratulations to the
good, uh, the amazing team staff
elected leaders and others that
balio County as a proud resident
of the county. I see firsthand
the incredible work that they do
day in and day out, uh, in terms
of our parks recreation, senior
centers, uh, housing now, I
think it's a great, great idea
to collaborate with the city on
these housing needs that are so
critical, um, upwards of 70% of
the unhoused population in our
county is from other counties.
Um, and that's something that
we, as a, as a state, I think
need to step up and, and
support. Uh, also excited for
our new county manager, uh,
welcome, welcome home, I should
say. We're so happy you're here
and
And I think that you will be a
tremendous addition to
To the county
Um,
and gentle lady from Ber Leo,
are you on Berlio County today?
I am Mr.
Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
gentlemen, will you yield.
Mr. Speaker, I don't have to
yell, but I yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I just want to
welcome all of our Bernaino
County representatives. I know
the job that they do and our
biggest uh city and county in in
the state of New Mexico and uh
as a former county planner for
Bernalillo County, um, the
incredible work that you all do
every day to keep our residents
safe, um, to just ensure that
things are running smoothly as
a.
Former City councilor and
president of the city council. I
wanna thank you all for your
support with the Gateway Center.
That was one of the projects
that I, um, helped fund in the
amount of $10 million prior to
leaving my seat as city council
president, um, and I encourage
all of our representatives to
look at that project in their
both capital and uh grow funds
because it serves the entire
state of New Mexico, um, I also.
wanted to mention Mr. Speaker,
this little um borego that uh
represents, uh, I thought it was
in honor of of my last name, but
I guess it is our lady that's
what they told me this morning.
OK, well then I'm OK with that
and thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady, uh, folks
we've got uh sportsman's caucus
meeting happening today at noon
in Rome 318 announcement by
Representative Duncan,
sportsmen, caucus meeting 12
p.m., room 318, and then LFC is
having a new member training
workshop for Capital Outlay on
February 5th, from 7:08 a.m. in
room 307. Anyone can attend.
The announcements.
The lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, good
morning. I am proud to spend to
sponsor National Lab Day here in
the, in the, in the roundhouse
today we will be honoring Sandia
National Lab, Los Alamos
National Lab and the Air Force
Research Lab, um, Mr. Speaker,
can I get, uh, the certificate
read?
to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session 2025, declares February
3, 2025, National Lab Day.
Whereas Sandia National
Laboratories and Los Alamos
National Laboratory have been
cornerstones of scientific
innovation and advances in New
Mexico and the nation since
their inception more than 75
years ago.
And whereas the Air Force
Research Laboratory at Kirkland
Air Force Base is a nation's
center of excellence for
military space science, research
and development and advanced
technology focusing on United
States space missions and has a
profound impact on New Mexico's
economy.
And whereas Sandia National
Laboratories and Los Alamos
National Laboratory played
pivotal roles in national
security and developing
technologies that ensure the
safety and reliability of the
United States nuclear deterrent
and whereas the Air Force
Research Laboratory at Kirtland
Air Force Base is home to space
vehicles and directed energy
directorates and the air and
space forces centers for
Research and Development
maintains numerous numerous
state of the art research.
Laboratories at Kirtland Air
Force Base and around the state.
And whereas the laboratory's
highly specialist specialized
research staffs are at the
forefront of scientific and
engineering advances,
collaborating with universities
and companies and performing
multidisciplinary science and
engineering research programs
with a significant impact on
national security.
And whereas the laboratories
foster a culture of
collaboration, bringing together
scientists, engineers, and
researchers from diverse
backgrounds to tackle some of
the most pressing issues facing
the world today.
And whereas Sandia National
Laboratories, Los Alamos
National Laboratory and the Air
Force Research Laboratory are
significant contributors to
their local economies, providing
thousands of quality jobs and
establishing partnerships that
drive innovation and
technological advancements in
support of state and local
businesses.
And whereas Sandan National
Laboratories has an overall
economic impact in New Mexico of
more than $5 billion annually,
including more than $600 million
in purchases from New Mexico
businesses and employs more than
1400 people.
And whereas Los Alamos National
Laboratory purchases more than
$1 billion annually from New
Mexico businesses employs more
than 16,000 people and donates
nearly $6 million annually to
community organizations and
whereas the Air Force Research
Laboratory has an overall
economic impact in New Mexico of
$675 million including more than
$100 million in purchases from
New Mexico businesses, supports
nearly 3000 New Mex.
Mexico jobs and employs nearly
400 civilians and more than 200
active duty military personnel.
And whereas the laboratories
prioritize community engagement
and invest in educational
programs and initiatives that
inspire and support the next
generation of scientists and
engineers, including
volunteering employee time to
charitable and education
programs, donating funds to
community organizations and
supporting STEM education in
schools.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
Sandia National Laboratories,
Los Alamos National Laboratory
and the Air Force Research
Laboratory by proclaiming
February 3, 2025, National Lab
Day in the House of
Representatives, signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. As you
can see in our labs are are
immensely important to New
Mexico. I do have some honorees
from um if you could stand from
Sandia National Laboratories
joining me in the Roundhouse are
Doctor Megan Kay Ivory, Doctor
Ivory is a senior member of the
technical staff at Sandia
National Labs working on trapped
ion quantum computing and
workforce development with 15+
years in atomic physics, she has
held roles in academia,
industry.
national labs, she co-leads
multiple quantum education
initiatives and has received
awards for advancing diversity
in the field. Thank you, Doctor
Ivory.
We also had Doctor Engel
Brenner, who was not able to
join us today.
And I'd also like to recognize
the Air Force Research
Laboratory, um.
I'm honored to introduce retired
Colonel Scott Madner.
You could stand. Thank you.
Colonel Madner is the director
deputy director of the Air Force
Research Lab Space Vehicle
Directorate leading a team of
over 1000 advancing military
space science and technology
previously he he founded new
Space Nexus, a nonprofit
accelerating space innovation
with 34 years of experience in
the military and industry
including 25 years in the Air
Force. Thank you, sir. He has
expertise in space research
operations strategy and policy.
Colonel Mather holds.
Multiple degrees in physics,
space operations, and military
strategy. Thank you, Colonel
Mathers.
And we also have Colonel Clark
Allred.
Thank you, Colonel.
Colonel Alred is the deputy
director of the Air Force
Research Laboratory directed
energy directorate at Kirtland
Air Force Base, overseeing over
800 personnel developing
directorate directed energy
technologies for military
applications a distinguished a
distinguished Air Force officers
since 1996. He holds a master's
degree and a doctor degree in
material science and engineering
from MIT.
His career spans research in
hyperspectral detection, nuclear
reactor modeling, hypersonic and
nuclear forensics. Prior to his
current role, he was chief
scientist at the Air Force
Nuclear Weapons Center leading
tech technical collaboration in
and innovation efforts. Thank
you, Colonel Aurere.
We
We also have two from um Los
Alamos lab, but they're being
honored in the Senate, so thank
you Mr. Speaker, thank you for
being here.
Thank you gentle lady. Is there
any debate? Thanks we have, uh,
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
and it's my honor to, uh,
recognize 3 special guests that
we have on the washroom today.
I don't have any uh debate on
the.
Sorry.
May I go ahead and proceed? OK.
My, my apologies. Thank you. um.
Special guest today and these
folks are from the world of
competitive swimming, including
the Paris Olympics and it's my
pleasure to introduce Dana
Covington and Dana trying to
stand up.
Dana is the USA national
official chair for all swimming
in the USA and oversees the
development of the rules and the
other activities, uh, thank you,
Dana for being here and then
secondly I'd like to introduce
Lisa Vilaine.
And I hope I said that right.
Bitter line
Lisa was one of 2.
Of the starters for all swimming
events in the.
Paris Olympics and um which is
incredible to me that only 2
people did all that work because
there were so many events and
also uh such an honor to have
her in Albuquerque today.
And the third guest, uh, has
been on our roster before is,
uh, city council ruler from 4th
District in Albuquerque, Brook
Basson.
And it was counselor Basson, who
when she was elected to the city
council in about the year 2000
or so, well, I'm sorry, and much
more recently than that, but
reminded, reminded the city of
Albuquerque that they had
promised to build an aquatic
center, the North Domingo
Aquatic Center in Albuquerque to
serve not only Albuquerque but
the city, the state, and be a
facility for children and needs.
throughout the country,
particularly the Southwest and
reminded the city that that had
not even been started.
Even though it had been promised
in the year 2000 and with her
urging that we have now broken
ground.
For the North Domingo Baca
Aquatic Center and these uh
these wonderful swimming
officials are here to help us
remind everybody we are so close
to finishing this, and it's
gonna be a great facility again,
not only for the, for the folks
in Albuquerque, but a, a, a
facility that will attract
national attention and I we're
hoping that the next uh Michael
Phelps or Katie Le Dickie is
going to
from New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representatives.
There are further announcements,
uh, we have a representative
Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want
to acknowledge that it's Las
Cruces Day in the in Santa Fe
today, um, thank you, yeah, we
can clap about that, can't we?
Um, we've got some special
guests. We've got Chad Goetz.
He is the vice chair of the
GLCCC board and gets funeral
home.
Thank you for being here. We've
got Christie Goetz, who is also
on the Steinborne Associates.
We've got Michael Law.
Immediate, uh, past chair and
chamber board and Warren Law
Dental, thank you for being
here. We've got our own Jeremy
story, uh, Las Cruces police
chief, thank you for being here.
We are missing, uh, Debbie
Moore, who I know was around
this weekend, but she's, is she
in the, she's around, so she is
here too, so if you all see her,
please make sure to say hello.
Thank you for being here and I
hope you get to say, talk to
everybody in the delegation
today.
Thank you, gentle lady, um.
There are some guests for from
rep Joseph Hernandez up in the
rostrum that I'd like to
recognize. I'd like to
introduce.
Um, Winston Benelli, Winston,
please stand be recognized.
Cheryl Messa?
Daniel Smith
The, uh, these folks are the
recipients of the energy
transition Act funds. Welcome to
the house.
Any other announcements?
I have a gentle lady from Donana
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, I'd
like to announce briefly that
for those who do not know yet
that uh DJ, the Department of
Government efficiency is not a
government department or agency
and that President Trump's
executive order even has the
department name in quotations,
additionally, I'd like to
announce that Elon Musk is not a
federal employee, nor has he
been appointed by the president
nor approved by the Senate to
have any leadership role in the
government. Musk is a private
citizen who has just gained
access to a.
Americans sensitive private
information including their
social security payments among
other data. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Any
other announcements?
Gentle lady, gentleman from
Donana. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I
just wanted to rise in support
of the guests from Las Cruces,
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker, amongst
other things.
Sorry I just, uh, the city of
Las Cruces is soon to produce a
new land use code and, uh, this
month it'll make Las Cruces a
model of where and how to build
affordable housing, Mr. Speaker,
in addition, our police chief
working with behavioral health
providers, uh, healthcare
providers of other, uh, natures
is working to bring uh uh some
of the challenges that we face
as a state in public safety turn
those into opportunities and so
I just want to rise and
and strong support of the folks
who are up here from southern
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker
from Southern New Mexico.
They got here Friday. They've
been here all weekend, and I
believe they'll be here for a
few more days this week. Uh,
folks, they are guests in the
gallery of Riverent Parajon's,
uh, uh, when you're, when they
call your name, please rise to
be recognized. These are our
first year law students at UNM.
Isabel de Catona hint sat mood
and Patrick Reinhardt. Welcome
to the house.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Santa Fer of Cerrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise
today on your desks where, uh,
pins from the land grant of
Chilele and with it was the
legislative session Landgraer
said yearbook 177 years ago
yesterday, uh, the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed and
went into effect and for many of
these land grants, that's what
established this unique, uh,
important cultural tradition,
cultural institution here in New
Mexico over the course of the
lifetime of New
Mexico before it was when it was
a territory, when it became a
state, these institutions really
worked to make sure they were
recognized. They're now
political subdivisions, and they
provide important services to
their communities every single
day. So I encourage you to look
through, uh, their, their
yearbook to look at what all the
different uh land grants have
been up to, what they're looking
for this year, uh, and please
feel free, and we want you all
to stop by and visit the uh
rural development land grants
and cultural Affairs Committee
where we're doing a lot of
in-depth work on these things.
Thank you, sir.
Fantastic and incredibly
important work. Thank you,
gentle lady, gentle lady from
Taos, Representative Ortiz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I
ask you a question, Mr. Speaker?
Asian lady. Why are eggs?
Batted puns.
Why are eggs bad at puns? Yes,
Mr. Speaker, I have no idea,
gentle lady.
Because they always mess up
their yolks.
But seriously, Mr. Speaker, but
seriously, Mr. Speaker, I know
that all of us in the body are
concerned about the rising cost
of consumer goods. We eat a lot
of eggs in my household. I'm
very concerned about the price
of eggs. I just paid $9.29 for a
carton of Lucerne eggs, not even
organic, so expensive, and did
you know, Mr. Speaker, that, uh.
Today, well, January 31st was
the mark the day um for egg egg
prices were at their highest
ever.
Did you know that, Mr. Speaker?
Yes, $7.09 average price in the
United States, uh, that is 230%
more than this time last year
and 350% more than October 1st.
So we're concerned. I know that
all of your constituents are
concerned and with your
permission, Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to give an egg update
periodically for this body.
With jokes take note.
Any other announcements.
All right gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
House Bill 236. Excuse me,
introduced by Representative
Jones, an act relating to
healthcare requiring notice be
provided to patients seeking
medication abortions, providing
penalties, creating a private
right of action. House Bill 236.
3
House Bill 236, 7 minute twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 237, introduced by
representatives Mirabal Moya,
Lundstrom, and Block, an act
relating to taxation, providing
a gross receipts tax credit
against the state gross receipts
tax for taxpayers that received
no more than $1 million in gross
receipts in the previous
calendar year, including the
amount of gross receipts for
which the credit may be applied
in a calculation for a
distribution to municipalities.
House Bill 237.
7 have been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
taxation and revenue Committee.
House Bill 238, introduced by
Representative Colin Joshua
Hernandez, and Alan Martinez, an
act relating to public schools,
allowing up to 60 instructional
hours per school year to be used
for professional work hours for
middle and high school grades.
House Bill 23828 have been read
to us by titles or reprinted and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 239 introduced by
representatives Herrera, Ortiz,
Andrea Romero, Lujan, and
Sanchez, an act making an
appropriation to the cultural
affairs department to partner
with higher education department
to conduct a feasibility study
for establishing a lowrider
museum in Espanola. House Bill
239.
Like I should read this building
with a little bit of, uh, music.
House Bill 239. I haven't been
there twice by title or printed
and referred to the House Rural
Development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 240 introduced by
representatives Herrera, Ortez
Ortez, Hoffman v. Hill,
Gonzalez and Silva.
An act relating to the drinking
water state revolving loan fund,
allowing the New Mexico Finance
Authority to provide grants for
the construction or
rehabilitation of drinking water
facilities requiring the New
Mexico Finance Authority in
cooperation with the Department
of Environment to provide annual
reports on the drinking water
state revolving loan fund.
Redistributing duties held
between the New Mexico Finance
Authority and the Department of
Environment.
Extending repayment period
requirements for loans made
pursuant to the drinking water
state revolving loan Fund Act
renewing the authority of the
New Mexico Finance Authority to
transfer up to 1/3 of certain
grants to the drinking water
state revolving loan fund and to
the wastewater facility
construction fund.
House Bill 240.
As 240 have made by title is
order printed and referred to
the house, agriculture, asecas,
and water Resources Committee
then House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 241, introduced by
representatives Alan Martinez,
Doo, de la Cruz, and Joshua
Hernandez and act relating to
gaming, amending definitions in
the Gaming Control Act to
include allowable gaming
expenses and balance of net
take. House Bill 241.
House Bill 241 haven't been read
twice by title. His order
printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Bill 242, introduced by
Representative Matthews, an act
relating relating to
professional licensure, enacting
the psychology
interjurisdictional Compact.
House Bill 242.
Is 242 takes the prize for the
thickest bill of the session so
far.
session is young.
Having been read twice my title
is auto printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 243 introduced the
Representative Matthews.
An act relating to licensure
enacting the interstate medical
licensure Compact, providing for
the appointment of New Mexico
Compact commissioners requiring
the filing of interstate
commission bylaws and rules with
the state records administrator.
House Bill 243. 243. Haven't
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 244 introduced by
representatives Little Ree,
Duncan, and Johnson.
An act relating to magistrate
court providing for a minimum
age of 28 for magistrate judges.
House Bill 244.
House Bill 244. Haven't been
that twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 245, introduced by
Representative Sareana, Senator
Brandt, and Representative Alan
Martinez, an act relating to
veterans' affairs prohibiting
receiving compensation for
assisting a person to obtain
veterans' benefits, except as
permitted under federal law,
amending the unfair Practices
Act, House Bill 245.
House Bill 2. Have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house, labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee.
the the house Judiciary
Committee.
I didn't know.
I guess that's
be better
uh, power outcomes. What does it
even do?
But we like it.
Yeah. Members, uh, I'd like to
call your attention to House
Bill 237. Uh, I erroneously
You guys, you're on uh I not you
guys, I erroneously, it's me,
um, I, uh, referred it to House
Consumer Public Affairs, the
House taxation, it should be
House commerce and economic
development, then house
taxation.
House Memorial 10.
Introduced by representative
Mirabel Moya Baca Armstrong, and
Sanchez. Memorial declaring
February 6, 2025, Valencia
County Day in the House of
Representatives. House Memorial
10. Is this at all connected to
Matanza Chiarrones upstairs.
Yes, OK, good.
So speaker stable for this one
for sure. How's Memorial 10 have
been twice by title is order,
not printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
House Joint Resolution 2
introduced by representatives
small little Silva Gonzalez, and
Javier Martinez.
A joint resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 12, Section
13 of the Constitution of New
Mexico to establish the
fiduciary duties of members of
boards of regents of state
educational institutions vest
district courts with original
jurisdiction over actions to
remove board members and provide
that the Attorney general or a
majority of the members of a
board of regents may seek
removal of a member. House Joint
resolution 2. How's your
resolution 2 have been read
twice by title.
is ordered, printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Joint Memorial 3
introduced by Representative
Rubio, a joint memorial
declaring February 21, 2025. New
Mexico TRO Programs Day in the
legislature. House Joint
Memorial 3.
How's joint Memorial 3 have been
twice by title.
Is order not printed and placed
on the speaker's table.
House Memorial 11, introduced by
Representative Chandler, a
memorial declaring February 12,
2025, New Mexico, YMCA youth and
Government Day in the House of
Representatives. House Memorial
11 Memorial 11 have been by
tidal disorder, not printed and
placed on the speaker's table.
we need to find
Yeah.
Um
House Joint Resolution 11,
introduced by Representative
Cates Andrea Romero, Chandler,
and Weibal Cabiero.
A joint resolution.
Proposing to repeal and replace
Article 9, Section 14 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
allow the state, counties,
school districts, and
municipalities to make donations
of public funds to private
persons or private entities for
public purposes and to repeal
Article 4, Section 31 of the
Constitution of New Mexico,
which prohibits appropriations
for charitable educational or
other benevolent purposes to a
person or entity not under the
full control of the state. House
joint resolution.
11.
How's joint resolution 11
haven't been read twice by Tidal
is ordered, printed and referred
to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
No, but I'm Doctor James about
that.
Can you hear me? Yes, you can.
supposed to be all.
But it's still on.
Sheriff Duncan said, what?
Members, please send in places I
screwed up again.
Stand in place.
It's Monday.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from San
Juan.
Please maintain the corner in
the house.
I'm gonna ask you again.
Gentleman from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I just, can we
sit in place also, or must we
stand?
You should stand.
OK, we are going to reread.
house joint resolution.
OK, we are going to expunge
House Joint resolution to which
we just read in because it
already exists and we are going
to reread it in with a different
number. See no objection. We are
expunging how's your enjoy your
solution too?
Too late.
by the horn was trying to
object, but it's too late.
Clerk Reed again.
Oh
House Joint resolution 12.
Introduced by Representatives
small little Silva Gonzalez, and
Javier Martinez, a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 12, Section
13 of the Constitution of New
Mexico to establish the
fiduciary duties of members of
boards of regents of state
educational institutions, est
district courts with original
jurisdiction over actions to
remove board members and provide
that the Attorney general or a
majority of the members of a
board of regents may seek
removal of a member. House joint
resolution 12.
How's joint resolution 12 have
been read twice by title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House Education Committee,
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee,
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business Committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
has been referred House Bill 34
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
house agricultural ass, and
water resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 34 do
pass and then referred to the
Energy Environment and Natural
Resources Committee respectfully
submitted Christine Orto's
chair.
Mr.
Christina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption.
We had adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 34.
But a favorable committee report
on how agriculture as a gas and
water resources for House Bill
34. All those in favor signified
by saying aye. I.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture,
aseques and water resources
Committee to who has been
referred House Bill 126 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted.
Cristina Ortez adoption.
We're in adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
126. All those in favor signify
by saying aye.
I was supposed name.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted, Mr. Speaker, your
consumer and public affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 31.
Has had it under consideration
report same without
recommendation and then referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne J
Ferrari, Chair. Mr. Speaker.
You're on adoption of Faville
Community report in House Bill
31. All those in favor C C 9.
the I can report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 38
has had it under consideration
report and with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption favorable report in
House Bill 38. All those in
favor X and a.
Well it was, yeah have it
committee report adopted.
It
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee, to
whom has been referred House
Bill 39 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and the referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne J
Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker,
movement optionavorable report
in House Bill 39. All those in
favor and if I say aye.
A Bosna, the eye have committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 50
has had it under consideration
in report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to Anne J Ferrari,
chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption committee report
on House Bill 50. All those in
favor if I say no.
I was supposed, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 60 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
to Anne J Ferrari, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
60. All those in favor 2589.
Oppose
Yeah I can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 69 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
education committee respectfully
submitted. Dean Wanda Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
69. All those in favor probably
say no.
Was me.
I have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee. Tom has been referred
House Bill 75 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. De Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption committee report
on House Bill 75. All those in
favor, in say I.
Posna, the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 6 has had it
under consideration reports and
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption committee report
on House Bill 6. All those in
papers in a.
name, I have it could be
reported adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 84 has had it under
consideration report, same with
the recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royval
Caballero. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report in House 84
all those papers in 5 and I pose
na, the eyes have it committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 96 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
96, all those in favors I was
saying a.
Oppose the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 161 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
rural development land grants
and Cultural Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted. Patricia
Royal Caballero, chair. Mr.
Speaker,
move adoption committee report
in House Bill 161. All those in
favor in IA 9.
Well I supposed
Well I suppose
the have it committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 46
has had it under consideration
in report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, movement option. We
are adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
46. All those in favor, C Abena.
you guys have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 74 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker,
move adoption committee report
on House 74 of those in favor,
say I.
Although I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 76
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the consumer and public
affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson's
chair. Mr. Speaker, movement
option a favorable committee
report in House Bill 76 sold
those in favor of signified by
say I.
Well, I suppose Nate, the guys
have it could be the report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 77
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and this
referred to the government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, movedoption
adoption of a favorable report
in House Bill 77. All those in
favor of 5, I say I.
Although suppose say nay, the
eyes have it be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services committed to him
has been referred House Bill 79
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, we adoption.
an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
79. All those in favor signified
by say I.
I suppose nay.
The eyes have it reported up to.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 81
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We're
adoption favorable report on
House Bill 81.
All those in opposition say nay.
All those in paper say aye.
The ISI that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Service is commit to him
has been referred House Bill 82
has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
I'm here.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
Double adoption for
A committee report on House Bill
2.
All those in favor of signified
but say I.
I suppose.
I have it. community report
adopted.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I know we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Sportsman's caucus meeting right
now at 120 in room 318. If you
are interested in that caucus
meeting happening right now. Any
other announcements, gentlemen
from Dona Ana, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30
today in room 307.
any other announcements,
committees meeting this
afternoon, gentle lady from
Donana Representative Galle.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
commerce committee will be
meeting at 1:30 today.
In room
317 17.
Members take no gentle lady from
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I just wanted to
make an announcement that as we
are going to win the next
basketball game against the
Senate.
We are starting practices uh
tomorrow morning at 6 a.m. at
the Fort Marcy complex for those
of us that are early risers and
need to get a little exercise
and some practicing practice in,
please join us, uh, and let's
let's get ready for this. Thank
you Mr.
Speaker Nicole Chavez, Serna
Cortez, Lara Block.
Me
Hernandez F Hernandez and AJ
Hernandez.
To the basketball team.
And Liz Thompson.
She played ball.
You all are appointed to the
basketball team and are expected
to be there tomorrow at 6 a.m.
sharp for practice. Any other
announcements, gentle lady from
Donana. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, I was thinking I was going
to announce for our committee
meeting, but that's not till
tomorrow, but tonight is our
committee, um, uh, dinner with
our staff and analysts and
everyone at 6 o'clock at Santa
Fe Cafe.
Very cool. Thank you, gentle
lady members take note. Any
other announcements going once,
going twice, young lady from
Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker, on behalf
of the Asian American Pacific
Islander native Hawaiian caucus
of the legislature. I wanted to
remind the body that tomorrow is
AAPI NH day and we have an
amazing celebration planned for
you with food and amazing
speeches and entertainment and I
think it's gonna be a beautiful
celebration of
all of our cultures, so hope you
all will be there and we're very
excited about the plans.
Thank you young lady looking
forward to it tomorrow here in
joint session. Any other
announcements before we break
for the day.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
note, see you tomorrow morning.
