I'm sure we have a form.
We are going to start with, um,
House Bill 9 immigrant Safety
Act.
Yes, thank you, and also if
you're here for House Bill 306
that has been asked by the
sponsor to be rolled as well as
House Bill 339.
So if you're here for those
bills.
To let you know.
Anytime you're ready.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
I am here to present House Bill
9 and I after my opening
remarks, I will ask both of my
expert witnesses to introduce
themselves, and they will also
have some opening comments.
New Mexico has 3 immigration
detention facilities. The Cibola
County Correctional Center in
Milan, the Otero County
Processing Center in Chaparral
and the Torrance County
Detention facility in Estancia.
was concerning about each of
these facilities is at the
federal government uses New
Mexico's counties as
pass-throughs as shields to
facilitate immigration detention
through contracts called
intergovernmental services
agreements.
Ice contracts the local ice
contracts.
With
The local counties for detention
services and the counties then
turn around and subcontract with
huge out of state private prison
companies to operate the
detention centers.
The reason ICE uses agreements
with local governments rather
than contract directly with
private companies is to avoid a
federal law called.
The competition and Contracting
Act.
Federal law requires the federal
government to come.
Competitively bid contracts for
services to ensure transparency
and scrutiny of potential
federal contractors.
But agreements with local public
entities like New Mexico's
counties create a loophole to
the competition and transparency
that is otherwise required in
federal contracting.
HB 9, the immigrant Safety Act.
would close this loophole.
This is not a private prison
ban.
It only regulates New Mexico
State and local government.
Against New Mexico's public
bodies out of the business of
immigration detention.
By doing
Prohibiting New Mexico public
entities from entering into
agreements to detain people or
civil immigration violations.
Requiring public entities with
existing agreements to use their
contractual rights to terminate
those agreements when the law
goes into effect.
And prohibiting New Mexico
public entities from selling or
leasing public land or property.
Or immigration detention.
Madam Chair, I would like to
expert witnesses. Sophia, would
you like to go next?
Ah, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Genovese and I am
a managing attorney at the New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center. If
New Mexico passes HB 9, we will
become the 8th state to pass
such legislation, closing this
loophole to transparency and
getting New Mexico out of the
business of immigration
detention. HB 9 is on solid
legal footing. States have an
inherent right under the 10th
Amendment to decide whether to
participate in federal
activities like immigration
detention.
To require that states
participate in carrying out the
federal government's immigration
detention operations would be an
infringement on states' rights.
The human consequences of
failing to pass HB9 cannot be
overstated. Right now there are
about 1500 men and women
detained in ICE custody in New
Mexico who face inhumane
conditions and due process
violations. Immigrants advocates
and even the government's own
watchdogs have persistently
reported violations of federal
standards that endanger people
detained in New Mexico.
In 2022, the DHS Office of the
Inspector General can conducted
a surprise inspection of the
Torrance County Detention
facility, and they were so
concerned with conditions there
that they issued an
unprecedented alert calling for
everyone detained there to be
immediately removed from the
facility. Ice and core civic
ignore that alert in just months
later, a 23 year old Brazilian
young man named Kessley Vial
died there.
According to Ice's own report
analyzing Kessley's death, there
were major failures in the
medical and mental health care
provided to Kesley.
In 2023 and 2024, the DHS Civil
Rights Office found significant
violations of the right of
people with disabilities
detained at the Cibola County
Correctional Center. The
oversight agency took the
unprecedented step of requiring
ice and co civic to reform its
disability policies. Neither I
nor Corivic have complied with
these orders, despite being
required to do so under the law.
We continue to document terrible
conditions at these facilities.
People detained at Cibola have
discovered pills in other for
torrents detained people report
being forced to clean up raw
sewage spills without protective
gear.
At Otero, a detained woman
recently alleged that she was
sexually assaulted by the
facility's psychologist.
This woman remains detained
today in local law enforcement
have refused to investigate her
allegations. We continue to find
that the federal government
routinely disregards reports of
significant violations and
egregious condition conditions
persist, uh, all of New Mexico's
facilities, members of Congress
have expressed alarm at the
conditions in these facilities
and called for contract
termination. New Mexico must not
continue to be complicit in this
inhumane system. We urge you in
the strongest of.
terms to pass HB 9. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Ynez Martinez,
and I am an immigration attorney
and the director of policy and
coalition building at New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center.
I stand proudly in my inner
section as an indigenous woman.
My father's family has been here
since time immemorial, and my
mother immigrated from Mexico.
I have lived in New Mexico all
of my life. I have lived in the
north, in the south, and now in
central New Mexico. New Mexico
is my home.
I am proud to be a New Mexican.
We are community centered, and
it is deeply ingrained in us to
fiercely protect our people and
ensure that our communities are
safe. That is exactly what this
bill is about.
When our immigrant community is
under siege, will New Mexico
take a stance to keep them safe.
The Immigrant Safety Act will do
that in at least 2 ways. First,
when the immigrant Safety Act
passes, ICE will have to stop
detaining people at the Otero
County Processing Center will
not be able to begin detaining
people at Lee County
Correctional Facility, as has
been proposed and will likely
opt to stop detaining people at
the Torrance County Detention
facility and the Cibola County
Correctional Center, rather than
try to put core civics dismal
past performance at those
facilities through the scrutiny.
Of federal competitive bidding
right now, New Mexico hosts a
vastly disproportionate amount
of the United States immigration
detention capacity, about 10
times more than any typical
state.
Any reduction in the number of
ice detention beds in New Mexico
will make our immigrant
communities safer because data
shows ice is more likely to
conduct arrests and raids closer
to where it has existing
detention beds. Secondly,
collaboration between local
governments and federal
immigration enforcement
authorities dramatically
increases fear within our
immigrant communities. This
makes it significantly less
likely that immigrants will seek
assistance from local public
safety officials and pushes
immigrants and mixed status
families into the shadows,
breaking the connection between
New Mexico's counties and
federal immigration enforcement
authorities will promote
cooperation and communication
between New Mexico's immigrant
communities and local officials.
And make everyone in our state
safer. We have the power to hold
the line in New Mexico and not
let the Trump administration and
ICE use our state as a
laboratory for cruelty,
fumigating our people at the
border, family detention, family
separation, and transports. We
do not want to offer up our
people on a petri dish. The
risks of inaction are far too
significant for us to ignore.
Passing the immigrant Safety Act
will have the effect of getting
the state of New Mexico and
local governments out of the
business of immigration
detention and ending the state's
complicity in these human rights
and due process violations. We
as a state need to take a stance
and hold the line for immigrants
in New Mexico. We urge you to
help us keep our community safe
and pass HB 9, the Immigrant
Safety Act. Thank you.
And
Oh, yeah. Thank you. Um, we'll
go to the audience. Is there
anyone in opposition.
OK, is there anyone on Zoom?
In opposition
OK. Um
Go ahead and one minute, please.
The story song Bird Woman.
Go ahead.
Shepherd
and members of the committee.
My name is Brenda Marley, and
I'm testifying in support of
House Bill 281.
I'm a master's degree educator,
librarian, performer, writer,
and lock Titian.
As a optician and greater. I've
inspired braiders for over 55
years.
I certificate to uh you are on
the wrong bill we are doing, um,
house bill, um, 9.
Oh, I thought you asked me to
speak. Sorry.
Yes, if you were listening um.
You know, never mind. Um, we'll
go to the next person the next
person on, uh, in opposition.
Hopi 9, the immigrant Safety
Act.
Oh, OK. Um, they must have been
in support. OK, we'll now go to
the audience and those who are
in support, please raise your
hand.
OK, we'll let um
Uh
by people, um, speak.
For just one minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jonathan Sas our
research and policy analyst with
the Mexico Voices for Children,
and we stand in support of HB 9.
In New Mexico, children
experience higher rates of
adverse childhood experiences
than the national average.
21.4% of children in Mexico have
experienced one ACE and more
than 1 quarter of them have
experienced 2 or more ACEs are
linked to serious long-term
consequences and chronic health
issues. ACEs include
experiencing or witnessing
violence, abuse or neglect, but
they also include parental
instability caused by family
separation and unjust detention.
This bill is a critical step for
protecting immigrant families,
ensuring public resources are
not used to increase family
separations and fear in our
communities. And so that ICE and
private prison companies are no
longer incentivized to place a
disproportionate number of
immigration beds in New Mexico.
Instead, this legislation would
prioritize the safety and
well-being of all children,
including children from mixed
status families and help rebuild
many of our communities members
trust in our public
institutions. We thank the
sponsors. Thank you.
Next
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Andresa Esquivel. I'm
the campaigns manager with the
New Mexico Dream Team as an
organization led by immigrant
LGBTQ and by Park youth, we have
heard devastating stories of our
members who have experienced
their families, ripped apart
through deportation proceedings
where in these instances folks
get sent to these immigrant
detention centers where, as
you've heard and as you'll hear,
they face horrible human rights
violations. As the New Mexico
dream team, we stand by the
belief that immigrants deserve
the freedom to move and thrive
in this country.
No one should be locked up for
trying to live a better life.
By passing HB 9, we can get the
New Mexico government out of the
business of immigrant detention
and and its complicity in
families. We urge this committee
to vote yes for a due pass of HB
9.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Arturo Castillo
and I'm the director of equity
and culture at Conservation
Voters New Mexico. I'm also a
queer non-binary
Mexican-American from a mixed
status family. I know all too
well the dreadful fear of
receiving a phone call that I
has detained a loved one and
that they are headed to a
detention center that will
undoubtedly abuse and neglect
them.
A conservation voters in New
Mexico. We believe it is our
responsibility to care for our
land, air and water, and we do
that because we care about the
people of New Mexico, all people
of New Mexico, all, uh, it is
time to stop using our public
resources to harm them and stop
allowing private companies to
use our local governments to get
around basic scrutiny of these
detention centers, just so they
can make more profit.
But so long as we let them,
private prison companies will
continue to worry more about
keeping profit margins high and
ending dangerous conditions.
CBNM supports holding these
corporate bad actors to a basic
standard of care for our
community, our air, land and
water. It is time for New
Mexicans to show that we care
for all of our people and get
New Mexico government out of the
business of immigration
detention. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Savara. I'm the program manager
at Equality New Mexico, the
state's LGBTQ advocacy
organization here to speak in
support of HB 9. From my born
and raised in New Mexican
perspective, our state has a
concrete set of real and
universal values. Those values
are hospitality in the face of
diversity, acceptance and
understanding. We need to ensure
that everyone within our state
is treated with the dignity and
respect they deserve. New
Mexico's ICE detention
facilities have a dark history
of violating these values, and
with them violating the very
nature of human rights. LGBTQ
immigrants, especially our
transgender neighbors and
friends who have been subjected
to harassment, physical abuse,
sexual assault, and medical
neglect. It is our obligation as
New Mexicans to do what we can
to limit the harm these
facilities caused to our
friends, neighbors, and family.
Our transgender siblings don't,
don't, do not deserve for New
Mexico to be complicit in these
practices or from New Mexico to
help ICE and private prison
companies get around basic
scrutiny of their safety
records. This bill will ensure
that New Mexico's complicity in
its harmful practices and
equality in New Mexico strongly
urges the due pass.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tiffany Wong and I am an
attorney with Innovation Law
Lab. I will be reading a
translation of a statement made
this month by Laliya, who's
seeking asylumorvi in the
Torrens County Detention
facility.
My name is Ladya. I am here
imprisoned because it's not
detained, imprisoned here in
Torrance County, where
unfortunately, working in the
kitchen to be able to support
myself here and talk to my
family. I was burned. I had 2nd
and 3rd degree burns for which
there is no adequate medical
care here for that and for many
other illnesses. Here, they
don't even have the capacity,
the staff to do first aid for
burns at the level that I had.
So I had to wait 3.5 hours,
almost 4 hours for an ambulance
to arrive so they could take me
outside.
So we want help from the people
out there. We are people, we are
human beings who deserve
opportunities. We did not come
here to be detained for so long
without argument. We are here in
the hand at the mercy of God.
Please, truly, we need help from
the people outside the closure
of this place. Thank you.
Thank you.
And
We did, um, thank you and um we
have.
Person who didn't get to um
speak in opposition on Zoom is
Mr. Nicholas.
R B Nichols or Taro County
Attorney?
We will now go, is there anyone
um?
Go ahead in one minute.
Per person. Thank you.
Jeannette Williams.
Hi, this is Janet Williams with
the National Organization for
Women, and we strongly support
this bill. We believe immigrants
should be protected in our
state. They're important to our
economy. Thank you.
Bernadette Hardy.
Good evening committee members
and uh chair. My name is
Bernadette Hardy, a lobbyist for
NM Native vote, uh, and a
resident of the International
District. We are here in full
support of HB 9. These
debilitating inhumane detention
centers or prisons are not fit
to be used for ice to
incarcerate our hardworking,
contributing members of our
communities.
They are relatives.
They are indigenous, and we, we
just urge your support. Thank
you.
Hm
Rager.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. This is Kurt Reger
with Lutheran Advocacy Minister
of New Mexico, Lutheran advocacy
also speaks uh the position of
the New Mexico Conference of
Churches on this bill, and I'm
here today to express our strong
support for HB 9. We are asking
you to end immigrant detention
in New Mexico. I won't repeat
the arguments made already in
favor of this bill, but simply
state that as organizations are
advocacy is rooted in our faith,
and our faith teaches us that we
should protect, embrace, and
empower.
All immigrants and refugees
within just and welcoming
communities. Lu through advocacy
in the conference of Churches
urges your support for HB 9.
Thank you.
And Edith Lopez.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Anne Lopez, and I'm here
speaking on behalf of Yaca. We
strongly support HB 9 and urge
you all to vote in favor. It is
unjust for our communities to
have to become an economically
dependent on such a cruel and
violent system of inhumane
detainment, especially when
people are just exercising their
human right to seek asylum. Um,
at the end of the day, private
bad actors are profiting off the
caging of asylum seekers and
hardworking immigrants in our
communities and most
importantly, the presence of
detention centers in New Mexico
is a lingering reminder of our
state's complicity and
sheltering the four separation
of our families. Um, so we
strongly urge you to vote in
favor of HB 9,
Please protect our immigrant
communities. Thank you.
yourself please, Rosalinda.
Rosalinda, there you go.
Yes, hi. Uh my name is Rosalinda
Arrado, and I'm with El Centro
Poderiacion and um we are
located in Albuquerque, New
Mexico, and we urge you to
support HB 9.
Oh, we have many members who
were impacted, um,
And that are in support of uh HB
9. So, thank you.
Thank you. That's, um, our 5.
Um, anything else you'd like to
add?
chair, um, we'll go to the
committee now and.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and uh
experts. Thanks for being here
today. Uh, so a few questions
for you here, uh, Madam Chair.
So
We talked about the
constitutionality of this and
how legal this is. Can you tell
me, Madam Chair, Representative.
And experts how this works with
the supremacy clause of the US
Constitution.
Which states that, of course,
Federal laws
Supersedes state laws, and then
Madam Chair Representative, I
have multiple.
US
Laws that state many different
things, and this could hamper
those.
Uh, I don't know if you know
specifically which laws those
are, but I can just go down the
list for you or if you, if you
can just give me an overview,
that'd be great, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question. As
I mentioned, we would be the TSA
band. This is a permissible and
very much constitu. There is
nothing under federal law which
requires states to cooperate and
participate in immigration
detention and enforcement. And
in fact, if the federal
government did require such
participation and cooperation,
that would be a significant, uh,
we have favorable case law on
our side in the 9s the case.
directly on point in the 7th
Circuit strongly upheld the
ability of its counties and
localities can under the state's
historic rights to regulate the
health and safety of people
within its state, they can pass
such legislation to prohibit
state localities from
agreements. Nothing in this bill
tries to regulate the federal
government or private prison
concern with the activities and.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and
expert. So I, could you, I don't
know if you know what this case
is, but I, I heard that in one
instance.
I think it was
United States versus California
in 2019.
The state prohibited local
cooperation with federal
immigration enforcement and was
challenged for interfering. Can
you tell me how this to that or
is this just using a different
avenue for it's a.
Provisions, Madam Chair and
representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. I
believe GEO Group Bussum out of
California and what California
attempted to do and and did do
was pass legislation banning
private prisons specifically
banning ICE detention contracts
between the federal government
and private prison companies
years earlier, California had
passed a bill similar to the
immigrant Safety Act and IGSA
ban and that bill, that law
remains in effect the night.
Circuit case in Geo Group did
not impact the.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. And then with
this
Like just, oh, if you had
something to add, please.
Yes, and we can also direct you
to our, uh, we have a chart that
kind of distills this down for
you.
In the sense that we know that
we're on strong constitutional
grounds here because of the
wording, it's a very specific
and narrow bill, as we
mentioned, this is not banning,
this is not a private prison
ban. This is a very specific
bill that's prohibiting New
Mexico's own public entities
from contracting with ICE for
the purposes of immigration
detention. So if you look at the
chart on that should be before
you're even right here in front
of us we're on solid legal
ground and because of the
specific wording that we've
we've used and what we're
specifically trying.
to do in this law.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So, I, I did
have a question about that,
actually, cause in the bill, it
says entering into agreements
used to detain individuals for
federal civil immigration
violations. So, I know with the
8 USC 1373, it prohibits states
from restricting any kind of
local cooperation when it comes
to federal immigration
enforcement, and I'm wondering
if you could address that for
me. Just, I just don't want this
to to get into, into legal
trouble, Madam Chair
representative.
And I can repeat that for you if
you like.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
secretary, or, uh, Madam Chair
representative for that
question. Um, again, we are,
this bill is very narrow and
it's regulating the conduct of
local public entities. There's
nothing under federal
lawrequiring the states
enforcement. Uh, this is not
something that would be included
in 287G agreements, for example,
this is completely separate
again, we're, we're dictating
what which cooperative cannot
enter.
to and this is in no way, shape
or form interfering with
federal.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, because I guess
the way I see it.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
If they don't use the facilities
that are in that are in our
state.
Then
It's my understanding that the
federal government would just
use facilities in other states
or maybe even
I've, I've heard some, some
folks have been sent to
Guantanamo Bay, actually. And so
Madam Chair Representative, do
you think that there could be
unintended consequences for
putting this forward because
those folks who are being
detained currently in the state
in these state run or county-run
facilities could potentially be
sent to places that are arguably
a little bit harsher when it
comes to
treatment.
Would you just address that for
me if you have a comment on
that, Madam Chair
representative.
Madam Chen representative.
This bill again is very specific
what we can do in New Mexico is
take action now to prevent our
community and immigrants who are
seeking asylum from unsafe
conditions. New Mexico has some
of the worst, if not the worst
conditions in the country, and
we have a lot of data that
assesses all of that in terms of
Guantanamo, it is a terrible
what is happening, and we
certainly cannot control what is
happening other than advocates
across the country are rising.
to address those concerns. What
we know, what we can do here is
disentangle ourselves in the
same New Mexico to no longer be
complicit in these harms that we
are contributing to what's
happening here is all we have
torturous conditions. There are
people without medicine for
life-threatening conditions.
There are people who have not
been able to get.
You know, reasonable food, have
sewage pouring into their
facilities. We have even had
oversight bodies like Department
of Homeland Security's Office of
Inspector General that was so
alarmed by the conditions and
torrents that they have said to
depopulate and at 5 months
later, there was a person who
committed suicide as a result.
There is a lot that is happening
in New Mexico that we have
control over and authority to
act now, this is our way of New
Mexico to disentangle ourselves
and no longer be complicit and
not offer up our our community
and our um potential harms that
are here in New Mexico, and
that's, this is what this bill
does is being able to actually
act and do something with the
authority that is given to us as
a state.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Oh, if you had something, please
go ahead.
Madame Chair Representative,
thank you and just to add
quickly, you know, El Paso and
in the El Paso area
responsibility, which includes
New Mexico is is quite literally
a a testing ground and
excitement and one way to
prevent our communities from
being impacted um by by these
potential transfers lining of
immigrant communities to one.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So,
That is
Helpful for me because I know, I
know that there is a facility as
well. It's a study that's kind
of
been just built and I drive past
it occasionally when I'm going
to El Paso, and it's kind of
just
Almost like a tent, a lot of
tents and stuff, and that is a
temporary facility, I believe,
and that.
It potentially just be, you
know, I'd rather, I'd rather
have people being in a facility,
an actual facility that has
showers and, and, you know,
actual hookups to water lines
and things like that rather than
kind of a an ad hoc.
approach to it. So could we see
these potential folks being sent
to somewhere like that, because
it's right down the road,
honestly, it's 15 minutes away
from the facility. So,
Have, have we considered that as
a consequence when looking at
this bill, at least with the
Otero County detention facility
that I'm referencing. And that's
right outside of my district,
but it's still in my county,
Madam Chair representative.
Madam Chair, Representative,
That's a federal matter.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I
think earlier it was brought up
asylum seekers, and I believe
Madam Chair Representative,
there's a very specific
definition of what an asylum
seeker is. And in my
understanding,
All these people who are being
detained, they did not go
through the port of entry where
you seek asylum.
They
attempted in some cases to enter
the country illegally.
Not through a port of entry, and
they would not qualify for
asylum with that entryway if
they went to a port of entry,
for example.
They would
Indeed, potentially get asylum
and they would be they would
wait until they their asylum
paperwork was entered. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I, I guess
I'm just a little confused when
it comes to terminology. Can you
clear that up for me,
madam,
thank you.
Immigration law is a big topic
and we're very much focused on a
narrow issue when it comes
between the federal government
and directly to your answer,
there's a variety of
populations, including people.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So do we know
what the populations are, uh,
versus
someone who comes into the
country.
Not through a port of entry
versus someone who does come
your port of entry. Do we have
any statistics is the
federal government providing
you.
Madam Chair Representative, I do
not have those numbers in front
of me, just in my direct
practice with people in
immigration of case postures.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, so.
Then I see here, we're talking
about
Different public bodies and
trying to define who who this
would apply to in the
legislation. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I think we, we
brought up 3 different
facilities in the state.
That could, it could apply to,
is that all? Is it only the 3?
Or could a local government, I
guess.
Work in conjunction with federal
law enforcement to temporarily
hold an individual if they were
violent, for example, and they
were in the country legally. How
would that, how would that work
when it comes to this
legislation, not assisting when
it comes to a violent.
altercation or something, I'm
sure.
Madam Chair, Representatives, so
there are 3 current ICE
contracts in New Mexico, but
this would also prevent future
contracts from being entered
into by other counties and we
also have a exception carved out
in our bill, um, we have that at
section 2.
And, uh, subsection E, allowing
for temporary investigatory
detention. We're also very
limited in this spill focusing
on civil immigrant detention.
This doesn't impact the criminal
state criminal law.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative, and then
regarding that, so we're talking
about invested investigatory
detention as permitted by state
law. So, Madam Chair
Representative, would that mean?
If you arrested someone in there
in jail, that would be OK if
they if there was a crime, for
example, additional,
additionally to being in the
country illegally, for example,
uh, how would that work with
this?
Is it more restrictive or, or is
it just giving them kind of a
leeway? OK, I arrested this guy
who was, who was doing something
illegal, maybe he was, he was
shot somebody or something. I
don't know. Uh, or he, he stole
a pack of gum, who knows? But if
he was doing something illegal,
How would this affect them when
it comes to this section where
it says investigatory detention
as opposed to
Uh, someone awaiting trial or,
or waiting for a court date,
etc. Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative and
answers. So Madam Chair
Representative, uh,
Is there an expectation that
this legislation will decrease.
Any kinds of monies allocated by
Congress for the detention of
federal immigration violations
and do we know what that might
be because Madam Chair
Representative, I know that the
state and different entities,
they do get these federal
contracts and they are quite
important for, for just um
current economy of certain.
Areas of the state, and you tell
me if we are worried that
putting something forward such
as this might not only just be a
legal ramification to our.
Local budgets that are included,
but also could send a sign to
the federal government that
We are intending to do
everything possible.
Other than breaking the law to
Evade
Certain immigration.
policies that may be on the
federal level, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair, representative, no,
this again, this bill is very
narrow to the type.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert. So,
uh,
Has consideration been given to
adopting
New Mexico detention and or
oversight standards for federal
civil immigration detainees
rather than simply seeking to
relocate.
The detainees
And I, I, I just think that
could that be?
A better approach instead, like
we've said there, there's
certain violations that we've
seen certain people having to do
certain tasks that that we're
not humane, for example.
Um, that we, not my words, what
what I've heard in testimony.
I'm wondering, have we, have we
examined that as maybe, maybe a
potential thing that we could
have done instead to um
At least alleviate currently
what's happening currently.
Rather than looking really long
term, Madam Chair,
representative. Madam, thank you
for your question, uh.
There, what we know is that
oversight is not enough. We
don't have the power of
oversight in these facilities,
specifically counties are just
pass throughs, the operators
pass-throughs in in this whole
scheme of, of how this operates.
As a matter of fact, we know
that uh this.
Because, you know, county
manager Jordan Baralla said in a
county meeting that.
The county does not deal with
the internal operations of the
facility. This is squarely
within the within ISIS's ability
to control what happens in these
facilities. We are just merely
pastors and this is why we have
to take action. This is our
first step and and taking action
and no longer being a part of
the scheme.
So unfortunately oversight would
not work.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. So,
I appreciate the answers. Uh, so
I'm just going to go back to the
facility that I have in Otero
County.
Which is one in question right
now. There's 3 of them. And so,
as of today, according to what
I'm reading here from the county
attorney in Otero.
There is $22 million 22,405.
million dollars.
In principle and 4.8 million in
interest remaining on a series
of 2007 OCPC revenue bonds and
this, this bond is scheduled to
be paid off in 2028. And so the
proposed legislation I'm
hearing, uh, it causes the
revenue bond to default,
resulting in significant
investment losses for the
bondholders. Uh, is there any
provision in this, in this
legislation to help alleviate
that as that, that is a direct
consequence of this if it does
pass, Madam Chair.
Madame Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Uh,
we know that there are concerns
about the, uh, to continue
making payment on bonds as well
as the option for the.
County to repurpose the facility
for something else at a private
prison right next door.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I agree
with that, but I, I don't think
we need two different private
prisons right next to each other
to accomplish the same goal and,
and respectfully, Madam Chair, I
don't know how easily repurposed
the the space could be because
it is meant to be very specific
and in its intent. And uh so,
Madam Chair Representative, the
building was designed and built
with a specific purpose to serve
as an ice processing center and
uh repurposing it would take
millions of dollars that the
county just simply doesn't have
in the budget. And so, madam.
Consequently, the building, it
will likely stood empty and
unused in the event that HB 9's
past.
And I just have strong concerns,
at least in my county about.
That issue when it comes to just
the budgetary issue and then,
then also, we have a
facility that was built for an
intention.
And millions to repurpose will
will force immigration judges to
move.
Which there already a shortage
of.
And how will we account for that
immigration judges, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you again for this
question. There's all in the
bond agreement of the risk that
legislation could impact the
ability of the ICE detention
facility so that risk some time,
um, additional is quite clear
evidence that this these jobs
aren't good jobs for for local
folks, and in fact, in the case
of Otero County, Otero County
residents don't work at the
facility. These are El Paso
residents who I do also want to
point out just today, uh, there
is a whistleblower complaint.
by two former employees talking
about the significant
understaffing not only in this
world that jeopardizes employee
health and safety, so these are
not.
Good jobs for for people to work
in it, they're extractive
industries and we should divert.
Madam Chair and Representative,
well, I, I would respectfully
disagree with that. I.
I think that the job.
That pays your rent is a is a
job that pays your rent, Madam
Chair, and I don't think we
should be maligning certain
individuals who
merely are working for a
paycheck to keep the lights on.
So,
I, I
I wouldn't really agree with
that, but
I will continue when it comes to
just the general uh
Consequences of this
legislation. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, um,
Would this prevent
A delegation of immigration
enforcement from the federal
government to state and local
law enforcement.
Like a delegation to local law
enforcement.
Madam Chair Limited to contracts
between the federal government
and such agreements that you,
Madam Chair Representative and
then contracts.
How are we defining that?
Because if we get a call from
ICE, for example, saying that
they need, they need assistance
from the local county sheriff.
How would that work. I needed
assistance in some kind of
situation that
Also was calling state police
in, for example, I would, how
would that go and practice with
the new provisions we're adding
with the legislation, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
again, this is limited to
contracts for the purpose of
civil immigration detention, so
this is not, this is not going
to prohibit any sort of, you
know, cooperation for, for law
enforcement to work with, with
the federal government, um, when
it comes to anything related to
criminal investigations, we have
let those carved out as well. So
this is a very limited and
specific narrow bill.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And then I
appreciate that clarification.
So I'm going to continue on the
FIR and I apologize I'm here it
is. OK, so according to the FIR,
what I'm hearing is the Attorney
General's office is is expecting
litigation.
With this. And so, Madam Chair,
Did you
Uh
Representative, please go into
that for me and the litigation
costs that could be associated
with this because I see it says
New Mexico, AG indicates that
enforcement of the bill
provisions may require legal
action against non-compliant
bodies.
It also would require potential
folks suing.
Based upon immigration
enforcement regulations. I'm on
page 3 now of the FIR.
And so
They, they're expecting.
Multiple
Litigants to start.
Different kinds of lawsuits when
it comes to this. So first of
all, can you address the
AG going after.
The municipalities first, and do
we expect that as a cost? And if
so, do we expect
to need an armchair
representative experts.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question,
and.
Litigation is possible with any
law that's that's passed, but
again, we're on really solid
legal footing here every circuit
court to have addressed this
issue in the bill, Section 4
general or district attorney may
institute a civil action,
there's nothing requiring them
to to engage in such litigation.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative.
So
I still have very big concerns
with this cause most bills that
we passed don't usually get.
Litigation.
Usually bills that are very high
profile that could make large
impacts on, especially budgets,
county budgets like mine where
we, we did get into an agreement
and halfway through, we now have
to backtrack.
Find a new way to to repurpose
the facility, which is quite
rural.
And it's quite hard to
repurpose.
And then on the other side,
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't know what changes are
going to be made.
On the federal government level.
And I, I expect litigation from
the federal government as the AG
is expecting in this.
In this analysis.
And so that would be more cost
to the state, more millions of
dollars in litigation when it
comes to immigration.
And then, not only the economic
impact that would have, but the
people who are who have jobs at
at the facility, those folks
would have to find a different
job.
There's that some cost, and
they're not all living in El
Paso. I know some folks live in,
in the New Mexico side. A lot of
people live in Chaparral who
worked there as well, and then
Madame Chair, representative, I
would just
I, I just find this to be really
short-sighted and very
reactionary.
And I believe, Madam Chair
Representative, if we are
looking for the betterment of
these folks' lives.
I don't think pushing them just
to another facility in another
state, which is in turn what's
going to happen or maybe even
Guantanamo Bay would be the most
efficient way to do this,
because the state's already
helping the state, we, we have a
great state. We, we have very
good local partners who are in
contracts with certain entities
to run these facilities.
And I find this to be quite
detrimental, at least to my
county, which needs that, that
GRT, that revenue.
And they also have a purpose.
There's a purpose for the the
building. So,
I, I'm very concerned with this
legislation and I find it to be
very reactionary, but.
I will stop with my questions
there, um, but thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you all for,
for, um, your
Thank you, Representatives. I
have some questions.
When you, you're talking about a
foreign boy in the country
without authorization.
And is in violation of the
immigration laws.
Also known
As undocumented immigrants,
civil immigration violations
include the United States
without authorization. Is that
correct? Is that what we're
talking about?
And I'm Chan representative,
yes, but again, immigration law
is a complex body of law that
that many of the of the the
immigrants that are being
attained civil detention had
qualified for forms of
humanitarian relief which open
pathways to permanent legal
status, and so it, it expands
beyond that we that the
immigration portal of how this
works in practice, um.
Immigrants include the
possibility for them to actually
get status and so I I think it,
it.
It's unfair to state that.
Immigrants are here just
undocumented as if they do not
qualify for forms of relief.
There are pathways and many of
which qualify in these
facilities are asylum seekers or
special immigrant juvenile
status and other forms of
humanitarian-based claims.
chair and
Representative and experts at
least to another question, how
many per what percentage centers
exactly what percentage are
asylum seekers who have not
committed.
A representative, that's not
relevant to the bill, um, sure
it does everything to do with
this. It's a definition within
this bill. If we're going to say
that this is an issue, and I
need to know what the issue is
because one of the detention
facilities is in my facility and
is in my district and this is
one of the questions that the
people of Torrent County are
asking.
Because when I asked them, uh.
Mote and Torrance County, most
of the people in Torrance County
are not from Mexico or people
that work there, they have a lot
of Turkish people that a lot of
people from other areas, so I
want to know how this is going
to impact.
My
Prison that is in Torrance
County.
So I need to know when it comes
to we're talking about
immigration and the effects on
this, how this is in the area.
So can you tell me how many
people?
In my, in my Torres County in
any of them are people who are
asylum seekers because this is
what we're basing the bill on,
right? We want to make sure we
have protection for asylum
seekers, so what percentage of
asylum seekers that are not
criminals.
are in
The detention centers.
Madam Chair Representative.
I just want to go uh to one of
your first points, uh,
managerian representative that
immi immigrants are not defining
this bill, this is a very
specific bill about what states
can do and what local uh states
have authority to do, um, in
terms of your comments on on
criminals, this is specifically
about civil immigration
detention, narrow bill once
again. Thank you.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, it goes back to
when we're looking at the
definition of immigrant.
And it has an effect on my
prison.
I need to know how many people
are here who did not go through
the process, who might be
eligible, as you said.
But have not gone through the
process. They have not done a
crime. How many of them are in
that detention center right now
that this seems to be an issue.
Madame Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. The
VA recently arrived asylum
seekers who are detained
discretionarily, nationwide at
71%.
Order entries, people know that
that percentage is actually much
higher
look, so I'm just gonna be
straight my grandfather on my
adopted until he got
nationalized and worked in the
mine.
That's not what I'm talking
about. What I'm talking about.
is when we're talking about
people coming here for asylum
seekers, and you're saying that
immigrants coming over who are
eligible for that, I need to
know what percentage of them are
in my Torrance County facility,
right?
And why, why this would even be
an issue.
So Madam Chair Representative,
so in my Torrance County
facility.
Um
How is this, if this goes
through, explain to me exactly
what happens to the it would be
June 20th, and that would
require each of the counties to
termination clauses in each of
the IGSAs, giving at least
contract, um, up until then and
and what advocacy group from
detention or supporting the
County Prison, which by the way,
the county is, is way below the
county.
Um, you're going to take away
jobs and there's really no other
jobs out there, so there's one
thing, but the other thing I
have is if we go ahead, where
are we putting the people?
Like the man who is here, who is
under Riley.
Because not
There are some people who do bad
things.
That are in there for a reason.
Where are we putting in? Because
I could list off at least 4 or 5
or 6 other people that were
murdered or raped.
And I'm not saying, I'm just
saying that there are bad people
in the United States or
citizens, there's bad people who
come here from other countries,
where are we putting these
people? Because there's some
very hardened criminals that are
in.
Madam Chair Representative,
again, this is a narrow bill
dealing with civil immigration
detention. This is not
addressing criminal, uh,
anything related to criminal,
uh, violations, we are talking
specifically in this bill is
very narrow to that and want to
reiterate that it is a very
harmful uh statement to label
all immigrants as criminals, it
is rooted in xenophobia and its
very privilege I did not say
that. I said he was not a legal
doctor, but I did not say. I
said there's horrible people who
are born here in the United
States.
white people. They are horrible
people of all nationalities
there, but there are also people
who came here were not
documented who've committed
crimes, and that is a fact.
I'm not saying all, for God's
sakes, I'm not saying that.
I'm saying there are some
people. So if you close my
Torrance County prison.
Where do those hardened
criminals go. I'm asking this
for every single person in New
Mexico. Are we just letting them
out? Where are we putting them
at Madam Chair representative,
again, this is Nere Lee Taylor
to dealing with civil
immigration detention. This does
not deal with.
Anything related to the criminal
aspect. I will ask this question
can venture and represented and
speaker you're trying, you're,
or what is going to happen
because I just asked and you
said you're going to move
forward in the process of not
having the contract.
So, is it going to?
Madam Chair and Representative,
again, this is not a private
prison van.
facilities that have contracts
to do to deal with the
criminality are allowed to
continue to operate. This is a
narrow bill that deals with
civil immigration detention. It
is up to ice on where people go,
that is under the scope of ISIS
authority, not ours. What we
know is we have the authority to
to be able to prohibit.
Um
Prohibit local contracts between
local governments and our state
to be in the business of of
civil immigration detention, and
this is what this bill
addresses.
So Madam Chair representative,
that's why I was trying to ask.
I'm just asking a basic
question, what happens to the
Torrance County facility when
Madame Chair and representative,
that is up to Korcivic.
So, Madam Chair and
representative.
If they made that
Decision
And I have some very hardened
criminals in there. They are not
people that are citing
criminals.
My concern is, where are these
people going?
And I'm not to say that things
don't happen in prison. I mean,
I understand the lack of
oversight and that is a problem.
I'm not going to say that it is
not a reality. What I'm going to
say is it's frustrating because
that is the only source of
income basically in Torrance
County.
There is no other income.
Um, we have got some people that
that are very hardened. These
are people that are not just
asylum seekers that are in
there, these are people, a lot
of them are Turkish, like I
said, for whatever reason, the
people that were working in
towards County told me everyone
who is uh Mexican or South
American is in Texas and we have
a.
So my point is,
Madam Sharon Representative.
My big concern on this.
Because you keep saying that.
My big concern is what this is
about to happen, and I'm looking
at other ways.
That this could be handled.
And
Mr. uh, sorry, Madam Chair. So
right now we get $6.5 billion
from federal
representative, I just want to
reiterate that this bill does
not mandate closure and what
happens next at each facility
depends on ice, um, and the
county and the contractor
involved to decide what to do
next.
And Madam Chair and
Representative experts, the
Department of Homeland Security.
Yes, that's right. It's been a
very, very long day.
Um
I'm voting no on this, so I
don't have to explain my vote
later.
Because
There are too many questions I
have on this.
And again, in a point of
personal privilege, please don't
ever call me a en.
I'm absolutely not.
And I take deep offense to my
life. Some of the best being who
came here, built his own house,
one of the most amazing men I
ever met in my life who came
from Mexico and I love that man
dearly. I'm not talking about
him. I'm talking about people
who have raped and I, my concern
is I don't want things suddenly
shut down, you don't no longer
have this facility.
There's
not saying anything, have the
right to come here.
If they want to. I'm just
worried about the worst of.
Thank you, rep, um,
Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to the representative
representing this spill, um, I'm
in great support of this and
just hearing much of the debate,
just feel like.
We need to set some of the
record straight on what we're
talking about here, um.
The immigration detention, um,
is not a criminal justice issue
whatsoever. It's a civil matter.
I think we've heard that.
Um, individuals held in ICE
detention facilities, including
in the torrents.
There are people who have been
detained for immigration
violations while often seeking
safety, stability, or
reunification with their
families.
Many are asylum seekers fleeing
violence, persecution, or
extreme poverty in their home
countries.
Detaining them under punitive
conditions is not only morally
indefensible, but also
contradicts the values of
compassion and justice that New
Mexico is striving to uphold.
This facility in particular,
Torrance County ICE detention
Facility, um, is why we're here,
in particular, because it has
been the subject of numerous
reports highlighting inhumane
conditions, inadequate medical
care, poor sanitation, and
allegations of abuse.
These conditions violate basic
human rights and dignity, and
they have no place in our state.
New Mexico has had a long
history of standing up for human
rights and social justice and
continuing to allow this
facility to operate undermines
our legacy.
The Torrance County ICE
detention facility is a
necessary step toward aligning
our state's policies with its
values, and it's an opportunity
to reject the criminalization of
immigrants.
And to affirm that seeking a
better life is not a crime.
New Mexico has the power to lead
by example, and with that, we
can demonstrate justice and
compassion. I would urge the
folks here to take action and
close this facility for all of
those reasons stated. Um, this
is a state where human rights
are respected. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Madam Chair, I'd
like to do a point of personal
privilege, it says in our notes
Mason's.
Um, we have a motion on the
table.
We'll take a bow which
supersedes the motion to do
pass.
Yes to table,
Representative Romero.
Madam Chair. No.
OK, uh, the motion to table.
Um, has failed on a boat and we
will go to the motion um for due
pass.
OK, we have a
No, and I'd like to explain. No.
Representative Rami Madam Chair,
yes.
OK
You have a due pass um from 4 to
2 in favor.
And on house bill, yeah.
Oh, and representative block to
um.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So my no
vote was just because number
one, this would absolutely hurt
my community. This would hurt my
county, and this would be a
direct impact on thousands of
jobs across the state, Cibula
County, they're going to lose
1300 jobs, 880 million in
property tax revenues. I can't
even imagine how that is going
to permeate across our state,
and it's going to be detrimental
to.
New Mexico. So Thank you um
representative.
Next we have House Bill 281.
The hair braiding licensure.
Representative Aanu.
You want your sign.
Yes, sure.
All right, good afternoon,
everyone, members of the
committee, um, I'm too expert
witnesses with me picket and Mr.
Green, and I believe.
Oh, sorry.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Timothy Green, the
4th, City of Albuquerque, a role
in which government.
Today I stand in strong in New
Mexico home.
If passed, SB 281 would make
moving barriers that currently
prevent natural hair braiders
and loitians for licensing
requirements.
Right now, New Mexico is one of
only 3.
Many of whom have perfected
their years of experience to
obtain a
This requirement is not only
outdated, but it also
disproportionate. To put this
into perspective, New Mexico's
current licensing laws require.
And styling.
Raiders.
Or the
Let's be clear,
this accessibility
and SB 281 would positively
informally incarcerated in New
Mexicans by eliminating
unnecessary have paid their debt
to society and are seeking
meaningful employment and
natural hair care offers a
powerful means of
self-sufficiency.
Immigrant and refugee
communities with natural hair.
Many of these girls and their
families but are currently 23
indigenous Pueblos reservatively
impacted across the state, where
hair holds a deep cultural.
Traditional hair care is not
simply a profession. It is a
sacred practice passed down
through generations. Indigenous
hair practitioners should not be
forced to obtain the life the
African American community, for
whom natural hair has long been
a source of cultural pride,
identity, and economic
empowerment.
Across the country thriving
businesses around braiding,
locking and styling natural
hair. Yet in New Mexico, these
businesses are people.
And finally, anyone who has an
affinity for natural hair.
Those who choose to wear
preference.
But beyond individual impact,
this bill is also about we know
that when people have access to
meaningful economic
opportunities, their crime and
incarceration. Economic
stability is one of the
strongest deterrents of criminal
activity and by a hair care,
we're investing in furthermore,
access to economic and
meaningful education.
This is the essence of equality
of opportunity rather than
restrict those seeking a better.
Additionally, by reducing
licensing requirements for
natural hair care, SB 281 also
encourages cosmetology schools
to adapt their programs, making
licensing independent hair
braiders and lockticians
training as well as cosmetology,
for those who do wish to pursue
full this legislation will also
foster cross-cultural
collaboration and learning
through commence and natural
hair gatherings.
By removing barriers to this
work, we are opening doors for
intergenerational knowledge
sharing, cultural appreciation
and economic independence that
will benefit the entire state of
New Mexico.
So in closing, we have an
historic opportunity to make new
economic accessibility by this
moment is especially critical
laws designed to divide us and
communities.
At a time when many states are
doubling down.
New Mexico has the chance to do
the oppo to champion economic
justice, is to build a future
where all people have the right
to thrive.
I urge our policymakers to stand
on the right side of his star
state.
The time for change is now.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I greet you today
with the Zulu greeting Sawabona.
Sabone is the deepest
recognition of looking into who
we are and the village would
always respond with yebo Sabona,
which is likewise I see and I
pour and I recognize into who
you are as well.
I've seen in the great state of
New Mexico, the Crown Act,
proudly being passed and we
stand on the shoulders of those
who came before us to do those
great works. My name is Neima
Kamaria Hanifa Picket.
And I lead the office of black
community engagement for the
city of Albuquerque.
I'm also a licensed clinical
psychologist, anthropologist.
and international business.
Beyond having credentials or
degrees. I want to take you
back.
To when I was a younger person
than I am now.
I've been licensed for 24 years
as a cosmetologist within the
state of New Mexico and during
my tenure also received my
educator's license.
And taught within the system.
cosmetology.
Now I personally learned to
braid hair a skill which my
family, uh, shared and
ultimately that I would begin to
master as I became as a
cosmetologist, I stand in
support of House Bill 281. We
have a strong community.
Of braiders and a history and a
great wealth requirements.
Or barbering and cosmetology are
two different paths.
When we consider.
The great opportunities in this
nation.
And the first black.
Millionaire, actually, even the
first woman millionaire.
Her name was Madam CJ Walker.
And Madam CJ Walker was able to.
Teach
She also was able to allow
apprenticeship.
And was not
barred
by regulation.
And so we have these great
examples of what
Extraordinary strides, natural
hair care and the delivery of
these services has represented
as an enduring.
generational tradition, and that
line of products that she
developed as well or even in.
So when we consider this great
generational inheritance that we
teach.
With grandmothers and daughters
and sons passing down.
1 to another.
I take great pride in
recognizing this exchange as a
cultural rights this passage and
a right and responsibility to
generate income.
And economic empowerment for
Our communities.
It was Mama.
Inzinger, who taught me to breed
when I was only 11 years old.
And through the age of 13 years
old, I would learn to train my
muscle memories for continuing
to do this work.
When I was 19, I was determined
to open my own salon here in New
Mexico and was told an
astounding note.
This was earth shattering for me
because I was a single mother at
that time and desired to be able
to use my skill sets to support
my young daughter and family.
But there is nothing that is
impossible.
So I determined that I would
take the cosmetology course.
I attended CVITI cosmetology
program, now CNM.
But I was forced to learn
chemical services that did not
align with my beliefs or values
the stewardship of land or uh
the ability to provide the care
of service.
That I had grown up with and
learned through braiding and
locking and.
Chemicals are commonplace in
Calons.
They're both harmful for clients
and those who often provide the
services.
Natural hair care.
is environmentally conscious at
its core.
And as we are, I would say that
spending those 1650 hours.
Over a year and a half was
inadequate for the skill set
that I desired to offer
professionally to those who.
In addition
The high rates of tuition, 26
years ago.
My then cosmetology instructor
Mr. John Stah pulled me aside,
and one day he said, Miss
Pickett, if you're gonna
continue to whine about
chemicals and your thoughts
about this, you had better go
show up at the state Capitol.
and talk to them about changing
the laws.
It's been a long road to get
here.
Through focus groups and surveys
conducted.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico, we've identified almost
300 breeders statewide.
From our indigenous communities
from our local community from
our African community and black
community who desire to
professionally braid hair.
Being regulated by a board that
cannot evaluate nor teach the
services natural hair artists
and braiders provide must end.
When you empower us to generate
income, contribute to the wealth
of New Mexico, develop.
Economy through ownership of our
own companies by providing the
services that will support
business development, home
ownership, this is true
empowerment.
I personally have been a salon
owner and could not hire
professional braiders because of
the state licensing
requirements. I have also been.
An instructor
Within New Mexico and globally.
I can tell you firsthand that
haircutting.
And use of chemical service is
not the same thing as breeding.
It does not require a license to
practice. It requires
generational wealth.
No one should live in fear of
fines and closures or be blocked
from supporting their families.
Madam Chair
And members of this committee.
We are here in solidarity to say
New Mexico is calling for House
Bill 281 to pass so that we may
become the 36th state in the
nation to exempt raiders from
attaining a cosmetology or
barber license to it is safe. It
is a timeless tradition in
practice, passed by inheritance
from one generation. We want to
provide healthy.
Here
We're all here.
And should never
limited
In the endless pos potential for
economic growth and stabilizing
arc of these services. Natural
hair care channels billions of
dollars in industry in the
nation.
And we desire to.
The effective in supporting our
state.
Tax revenue as we promote
freedom for breeders, happy
Black History Month, and I thank
you all for your time.
Yes, um, thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Gonzalez and I'm
with the Institute for Justice.
We're a national public interest
civil liberties law firm that's
been advocating for the rights
of natural hair braiders to earn
an honest living for over 30
years now. Thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak in
support of HB 281.
HB 281 simply defines the
practice of hair braiding and
exempts it from licensure.
Currently, raiders must get a
$1200 hairstylist license,
learning how to use dyes and
chemicals, practices that
raiders, as you've heard, don't
engage in and often outright
reject.
New Mexico should join 35 other
states that did not require any
license at all to do something
as safe as braiding hair. This
bill will create tremendous
opportunity for aspiring hair
braiders and business owners,
most of whom are minority women.
I look forward to you all
hearing from some of those
individuals here today. Thank
you for your consideration, and
I'm available to answer any
questions
to the audience, is there anyone
in opposition to this bill.
In office, um, is there um
Jeff Ferrari and esteemed
members of the committee. My
name is Ashley Williams and I'm
a member of the Community
greater and Natural stylist.
My interest into the hair
industry came in childhood as a
competitive swimmer. The cler my
protective hair style was box
braids.
As I matured, I needed my need
for self-expression grew beyond
my mother's braiding skills, so
naturally I began to style my
own hair.
As well as everyone else's.
By the time I reached college, I
was supplementing my income with
rating skills, but that is where
I stopped because of the barrier
that we are addressing today.
is a cultural practice past
generationally, not a chemically
based skill requiring a full
cosmetology license, create a
list. My goal today is to help
change that by advocating for
the declassification of natural
hair from the cosmetology
regulations so that both
practitioners and consumers can
thrive.
Good afternoon, Cheer Ferrari,
and members of the committee.
My name is Marie Germaine, and I
am a proud public servant who
has worked at both at state and
city level.
When I am not working in my
office, I serve my community
with my skills of hair braiding.
Having learned from my mother at
a very young age, I've been
brave 35 years. As a black woman
in hair braider.
Her breathing is a reflection of
our shared.
Culture and identity.
Hell breeding started, doesn't
it ancestral custom and has
evolved into tools of
compassion. For me, waiting here
is therapeutic.
And I'm asking from licensure
requirement for our cultural
practice of hair braiding in New
Mexico.
The hours required for
certification should not hinder
those who are passionate about
their craft and we have learned
the skills through their
community and culture.
Let's split, let's uplift
natural hair braiders and
celebrate our crown. Thank you
for your time.
Chair Ferrari and esteemed
members of the committee. My
name is Tintawi Kaixxabier.
I'm an educator and professional
braider.
I'm here to testify in support
of HB 281.
My journey in braiding began in
my grandfather's car, guided by
my great grandmother as I
practiced on my doll.
I eagerly awaited visits from my
aunt Karen, who would spend
hours styling my hair with love
and care.
Braiding is a cultural tradition
for people of African descent,
and for 30 years I've had the
privilege of braiding for my
family and community.
We advocate for a full exemption
for braiders from the board of
barbers and cosmetology.
Braiding is not just a skill,
it's an art that connects us to
our heritage and tell stories
through unique patterns passed
down through generations.
The current requirements imposed
by the Board of barbers and
cosmetology.
can be a barrier for many
talented breeders who possess
cultural knowledge and
expertise, but may not have the
reason. My name is Alexandria
Taylor, and I'm here commenting
personally as someone who was
born and raised in New Mexico.
And I'm going to try not to cry
cause I'm just so proud of this
sponsor and the experts and
everyone here. Um, every black
girl remembers the first time
they got their hair braided.
Mine was in the back den at my
grandmother's house at 111
Florida.
Avenue in Alamogordo, New
Mexico, when my aunt was home
from the army visiting.
My 2nd time was when my grandma
walked me across the alley to
Miss Tasha's house, and I sat in
her kitchen and got my hair
braided.
When I went to college to play
volleyball at the University of
Delaware. I said in basements to
get my hair braided because that
was the only way to protect my
hair from the stress of all of
the sweat.
It is in our braids that rise
and okra and other grains were
brought across in the
transatlantic slave trade by our
ancestors.
The sacred act of braiding and
adorning our hair is a cultural
practice that shouldn't require
licensing and regulation of the
state.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Raphael.
Mission on the status of women
in Mexico, we work.
Uh, reading to provide economic
security communities.
As we traveled hair braiding is
one of these culturally and
economic security for themselves
and their, their support on
Zoom.
Uh, yes, there are.
Um
Diarmukon.
The name is Balle Soukon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
allowing me to speak in support
of the full exemption for
Natural hair braiders to obtain
a barbarous or cosmetology
license.
Please pass HB 281.
To make New Mexico, the 36th
state in the nation to pass this
legislation in March of 2025.
Thank you so much.
Next we have Kenneth.
Hello, Chair Ferrari and members
of the committee. My name is
Kenneth Winfrey. I'm a full-time
social worker and seasonal
optician who has developed a
specialized product for locks,
one that nurtures natural hair
while firmly rejecting chemical
dyes and perms. I'm here to
express my strong support for
House Bill 281. The bill lifts
the undue burden imposed on
professionals like myself who
learned our craft through years
of cultural tradition and
hands-on experience rather than
a costly timing, timely.
time consuming cosmetology
program. As someone serving the
community on multiple roles, I
simply cannot restart my career
with extensive training that
doesn't match the art of locks.
Licensing barriers not only
restrict economic opportunities,
but also undermine our cultural
heritage. We can empower skilled
practitioners to serve
communities safely and
authentically without red tape.
I respectfully urge you to
support House Bill 281, so that
our vibrant traditions and skill
craftsmanship can flourish
without unnece
necessary constraints. Thank
you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee, sponsors,
advocates and supporters. My
name is Nat Dean. I am a person
with multiple disabilities and
I'm also a disability advocate
and I think things have been
stated very well and very
clearly by everyone who has
already spoken, but I am
bringing forward my voice and my
gravelly voice and support on
behalf of multiple individuals
that I have helped who
are writers, of which I am not,
but who uh would be able to
braid and have had cosmetology
licenses and not had cosmetology
licenses, and it just helped
them to be able to support
themselves and others, also
their communities where their
crown with honor and privilege.
Thank you.
That's all for online.
I'm going to vote on this bill.
I'm voting yes.
The passionate test of the Lord
now.
I want to thank your your expert
bathroom before here, she gave
me a great website to go
shopping on. Um, so, um, my
husband is black and so my son
is obviously half black and he,
I, that was my favorite
hairstyle, unfortunately, he's
following his father's footsteps
and balding, so now that's not a
thing anymore, and I'm very sad
about it, but I do have a
question on page 7.
lines 9 through 11.
I'm not to say it's confusing a
license shall not be suspended
without being licensed for, I
don't, it, it, and I asked my
expert attorney here, and both
of us are confused, so if you
could just clarify what that.
I tried to specific
and for.
Then went.
became licensed, they found out
about the prior citation and
decided to be punitive about
very rare.
Not entirely likely, not. Um, it
may be in a clarify that a
little bit.
Um, because it's just confusing,
but thank you all for bringing
this fashion expert.
Thank you
Thank you,
Madam Chair. I also note that um
eyebrow threading is also in
this legislation, um.
And that being a cultural
practice as well, I'm just
curious again when we look at
the exemptions on page 7.
Um
And I'm not familiar with how
these exemptions were
promulgated prior. Can we just
talk more?
Yeah, I was just curious, um,
but just to reinforce what
representative Thompson was
saying, um, uh, and again,
because if we're trying to think
about sighting that's
retroactive, we can't um.
And I don't know if it reads
that way, so I just wanna make
sure. Thank you, Representative
Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and representative, and I don't
have a million questions for
you, thankfully and like
Representative Lord, I'm
inclined to support this, of
course, but I did have an idea.
I don't know, it's just
potential language from one of
my drafters lists.
Pardon me, words are hard today.
And so it, it would say on that,
that question that we had on
page 7, it would just say a
license.
Shall not be suspended.
Revoked or denied for braiding
hair without a barbering.
Uh, so I don't know, you could
probably do that in the next
committee. Sorry.
Hey, good job, just kidding. But
thank you so much and, and just
to comment on this, I
I'm one of these people who
thinks the government getting
involved is usually a bad thing.
Especially when it's so
emphatically support this. I
hope that this body continues to
Move on that path of letting not
get in the way. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Unanimous support of
6 to 0 on House Bill 281. Thank
you very much, ma'am Chair.
OK, Next we have um.
House bill, um.
2:31 additional crime.
Representative N Chavez.
OK, well, um, Representative
Pettigrews be um representative
this is House Bill 287 telephone
text.
May proceed,
Please do. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um.
This is House Bill 287, which is
um amending and trying to update
it with where we are in today's
world and explain why uh they
came to me for this, uh, to
rewrite this bill, um, with the
situations that my expert place.
Good afternoon. Sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Officer
Burling, uh, I work for the Las
Cruces Police Department been
working there for the last 10
years.
Um
We harassment on a fairly
regular basis and as technology
evolves.
Um
I'm sure everybody here.
Understands and realizes that.
Probably the main form of
communication anymore is through
some sort of electronic
communication, um.
You know, text messaging is, is
probably the number one.
Oh shortly thereafter by.
Social media direct messages.
other messaging applications, so
with that prevalence of that
sort of electronic
communication.
where we have seen.
Implementation of this um.
For me personally, I've dealt
with it numerous times as a
police officer doing these
investigations.
I've dealt with it in domestic
violence situations I've dealt
with it with neighbor dispute
situations I've dealt with it
with.
Gang-related investigations,
domestic.
Kind of go piece by piece on the
domestic violence.
Types of investigations.
We'll have a victim that will
receive text messages that read.
I paid someone to watch you, I'm
going to kill you. I come back
and break all your home.
where the statute is pretty
specific in that a telephone
call has to be made, or that's,
that seems to be the
implication.
Whereas the the spirit of the
intended seems to be.
protect the victim from
That sort of alarming harassing.
Um
Possibly. I had a neighbor
dispute, um.
Where an individual sent.
Pictures of his genitalia to his
neighbor, threatened to re
pattern of conduct that we see
in some other statutes.
But. Seems to have the spirit of
the.
Statute seems to be directed at
protecting people from.
That kind of alarming, annoying
harass um.
In the game investigations that
I've conducted, we see similar
things where people are scared
of.
street gang members who are
known to be committing drive-by
shootings.
and their intimidated because
these members.
Are messaging them either on
typically on social media for
for those instances making
threats, telling him that.
Whether or not this person is a
witness to making threats that
they're going to go shoot up
their house.
Kill their children.
commit other heinous acts, so.
Those are just personally as a
police officer.
the
Makes a lot of sense.
To to update it this lot spent
on the books.
In some form or fashion since at
least the 60s, they anticipated.
prevalence of social media and
text messaging and and
everything else.
When the law was
So I think it's important to
update it to make our job as
police officers.
Easier in in doing these types
of investigations also to give.
harassment is it's not a pattern
crime like harassment,
difference between and it's a
misdemeanor and if you
harassment in general is it's a
lot the what you have to prove
in harassment is a pattern, and
then you have prosecute, Madam
chairs, you have to cause
substantial emotional, you're
talking I'm not eating, I'm not
sleeping, I'm on medication, I'm
in counseling, so it's a very
high burden to harassment with,
um, so that is actually a way
more difficult charge to prove
then uh this charge, this
misdemeanor charge.
So it's, it's actually very
different, it isn't there isn't
a law on the books that I've
been aware of, so uh we, we'll
go to the audience, is there
support of this bill.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Frank
Zubbier, director for the New
Mexico Crime Victims Reparation
Commission for the thousands of
to across the state and the 192
There's one, Enrique.
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Enriqueel here speaking in favor
of uh this bill on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. Uh, Steve Jobs
introduced the iPhone to the
world on January 9, 2007, and
the Android phone phone wasn't
far behind. That was 18 years
ago. Uh, the current generation
of kids don't actually know what
it means even to hang up a phone
in the way that some of us, uh,
old, older folks do.
Um, modern challenges require
modern solutions, and we
absolutely support
Representative Reeve's bill to
update criminal law and account
for the changing ways in which
we communicate with each other.
The the the chamber's number one
goal this session is to position
our state to better compete for
new businesses, for workers, for
residents, for visitors, and a
major part of achieving that
goal is to make it harder to be
a criminal in New Mexico. We
think this bill is a good step
in.
in that direction. Therefore, we
urge your support for House Bill
287. Thank you so much. I'm
gonna hang up now. OK, thank
you. Is there anyone else in
support. Uh, there's one more
admin.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Nat Dean. I'm a person
with multiple disabilities and
I'm a disability advocate. I am
in support of the bill, which
provides protections for
individuals that may potentially
be dealing with stalking
episodes, either digitally or in
person or through social media.
It's part of what I do in the
work that I do to advocate and
support for others. I often am
trying to help someone be able
to communicate, utilizing your
devices to receive assistance in
scenarios of
A personal violence or intimate
partner violence is very
important to have the avenues to
communicate that provide the
protections for the individuals
while still utilizing their
communication devices. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, sponsors and members
of the public.
OK, is there anyone in
Appliances?
Facing.
OK.
All right, do you want to add
anything else with your
questions.
OK.
Um,
representative Lord we do some
questions. This would still not
be applicable to us, right,
because my understanding when I
had a stocker the.
A
Harass us, right, they
they uh Madam chair
representative, I'm not, I know
there's some statue harassment
case pending against me now, I
am and and it was in my
legislative capacity where he
reached out and Madam chair to
me over my legislative email,
but it was from a.
Past experience of being DA that
he kind of found found me again
and he already has like his or
through emails, um, which I
actually thought might be
something to add to this pill,
but um, so we've charged him
under harassment, so I think
because it seems to be this
weird.
And withstand more harassment.
But going on to this bill
specifically, I understand I
support it because we're moving
on to text message. Uh, no,
madam Chair and representative
um I was just kind of thinking
of that when I was, you know,
when I go, I was harassed by
emails every single and I.
Madam, but I got to the point of
where I was suffering
substantial emotional distress,
so if it was me, I'm not a
person. I just have a brief
question.
But then we have
Interesting specific around
social media, etc.
On chair um representative,
it's, it's just something to
charged the most specific
statutes, so um, harassment has
a a very the law requires you to
charge the most for dealing
with.
And and and just to to verify um
of the intent so much, Madam
Chair, representative, I think
we talked a little bit about
this bill and I, I even.
went to sign my name on this
bill because I, I found it to be
super important.
Because like represents as
harassing like a I'm chair
representative. I, I don't, I
can't tell you the amount of
times in my inbox is one person.
Has sent me pretty much every
other day.
Really crazy anti-Semitic stuff.
and he's even called my office.
And I'm like, yes, I have, I
have have ancestry from
Sephardic Jews, right? So that
is super harassing to me and my
family.
And that. And so, Madam Cur and
our emails, so I would love
emails to be included, but
emails to the entire body of the
legislature telling them, oh,
this guy's the F word and he's,
he's really bad and, and he's.
Like, go harass him and his
partner, which is really, really
pissed me off and I actually
want to give props to the chair.
She did send an email to that. I
appreciate.
What she did, but I do think
that there's so much that that's
there when it comes to
harassing. And then also the
violent stuff. So,
Can you just tell me when it
comes to, I know the current
statute says this.
Terrify, intimidate, threaten,
harass, annoy, and then it says
it could use obscene and a lewd
criminal. So there's another guy
and always refers to.
Me in a sense online and and
text them out to people. I mean,
there's a lot of weird people
out there.
So crazy people who want to kill
me, rape me, talk crap about.
Oh, I have
Jewish blood, things like that.
How would this include all those
bundle of crazy people who want
to attack us, Madam Chair
Representative,
I would, I would preface this
with say no matter what happens,
there still has to be a proven
case and if someone's email,
let's say in social media, still
gonna have to have a full
investigation, we're gonna have
to prove that who is this person
that's doing it or um and it's
just gotten so bad, it would, it
would capture all of that, it's
just that nobody should have to
a legislator or or a a family
member, anything like that, I
mean just it can be so.
they've always use these words a
jury to decide if that rise, it
would,
catch it would catch all of that
stuff if if it fell into um the
catter case she would be a
witness, you would have to,
Madam Chair representative
testify about what happened and
doing it to you, and if she, you
know, it, you know, you, you
have to actually prove that you
you have to follow the the
armchairs in it.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative that
that helps me and I know in the
in the age that we're in,
there's a lot of.
When you send a text message,
there's all kinds of weird
metadata and clouds and.
It's weird above my pay grade,
but I know that they do keep
that stuff and, and yeah, I
think it's actually it's grown
to to multiple different like
tentacles, I guess you could
call them.
there's certain people saying
weird things and all kinds of
different platforms and then
threatening messages, so I've
gotten this week. How many crazy
messages I've gotten either
extremely.
It
Horrific
Brett's like, oh, I'm gonna do X
to all the people you love. So
clearly,
There has been distress. I mean,
I don't know how you prove that
intentionally, but for me, I
have stocked up.
On many things to protect
myself, including security,
including firearms, including
ammo.
So
I would just say, Madam Chair
representative, yeah, they do
have it in their daily lives and
it could be, could be a family
raising, raising their kids in
my town and at the base where I
live.
And so it's just
Put all those into perspective
deserves to be harassed in that
sense and if we can add, but
then maybe people quit hiding
behind their computers and and
do it's happened to me, so I
I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I agree with
you. And I think it's actually
probably easier nowadays to do
this kind of harassment because
it's so easy to send a text
message with a bunch of crazy
stuff.
Send it off to the ether and
then attack you. It goes in your
inbox and usually mine, it goes
to the spam folder, but I, I
read the spam folder because and
I have to, and I can't block
anybody because I'm a public
official and you can't block
your constituents expected,
which I think is something that
this could deter people from
doing, because after all, you
know, we're human beings as
well. We're still human beings
here, and we all have humanity,
and I think that this could be a
deterrent.
Because
I don't want any of my
constituents to feel like
they're being targeted or feel
like they are somehow.
In the crosshairs of some
person's problem.
And
You've never even spoken to this
idea they have of you. So I
think that's something that we
also need to consider and, and I
really appreciate you for
bringing this forward and I, I
wholeheartedly support it
because I don't think people's
story.
Thank you so much, man. I don't
know.
You have to take this is.
Legislator or police officer.
There, there is nothing that
says that.
You are subject to harassment,
prove the case beyond a
reasonable doubt, or at least a
case law that exists that says.
Unacceptable.
Thank you so much, madam. Give
me a quick question. I'm so
sorry. Uh, this doesn't go
retroactively, right?
So it would just be whenever
this is in effect I'm sure.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, um,
representative for bringing this
forth, um, you know, I common
laws uniformly because we've
been flagged that there's a
bunch of overlap we protect us
from threats and harassment and
intimidation, etc. um.
That said, I understand the
intent of the bill. Um, I'm
just, um, concerned that and the
construction is a little bit
odd.
Um, um, in your bill, madam
Chair, um, about what social
media is appropriate to have
something like that for this,
but maybe too confined to use
that language to talk about
messaging or teams use or um.
Signal or some of the other
potential threat, you know.
versions of, uh, changed. And
again, I think that many of our
laws already covered this, but
in order to strengthen that or
be more specific, do that, um, I
think.
You know,
As we sort of look at.
Again, the uniformity of these
laws, I would just recommend
that and perhaps clarify I think
as it moves forward, what how it
sort of corresponds to some of
the other laws. We don't want
to.
You know, lessen a crime
depending on the threat because
folks are choosing this one over
another one to to also um.
Um, with that, Madam Chair,
those are my wrecks, I support
your bill and the intent, I just
say and I understand what you're
saying. OK, is there any
opposition or dopa.
Seeing none,
you have.
on a boat and on house bill to
use so I know that drive. We
both do.
OK, um,
Since we don't have to present
the crime victims reparation,
um, we'll have to, uh, roll that
and see if we have time to thank
you all and we will stand and.
Yes.
Adjournment
