Wolcos close. We have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation offered by the House
majority floor leader,
Representative Supinsky.
Good morning, Lord, we pray for
our state and nation. We lift up
all the issues and frustrations
that affect the people of our
state and country.
We pray that you would give us
the ability to listen to each
other and hear the concerns that
we all have.
Let sensibility, genuine
compassion and empathy rise in
the hearts of people in this
body, in our state and in our
country.
Remind us that we are one state
and one nation made up of people
from all different nationalities
and backgrounds, which is the
beauty of our state and country
help us realize that loving our
state and country is also about
loving our neighbor as
ourselves.
We pray that we lead the way in
loving our neighbors as
ourselves.
Finally, we pray for your people
because your people are the ones
who can lead the greatest
transformation in our state and
in our nation. Amen.
And with the gentle lady from
And with the gentle lady from
Berlio Senator Borego, lead us
in the pledge to the New Mexico
flag.
I salute the flag, the state of
New Mexico, the symbol of
perfect friendship among the
united cultures.
A lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
first order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning members. Happy 3rd
day.
Legislative day negative.
58. Welcome, welcome, um, we
have uh a good morning today
and, and we have um
Some really good business to
tend to, um, gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative
Herndon.
I believe you have some guests
on the rostrum to introduce and
also a memorial.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I'm so proud to
introduce the some members of
and residents of La Vidalena,
and they, that's a senior living
facility that is outstanding in
the state of New Mexico and
where individuals get to know
each other and they continue to
grow and to proster even after
retirement. So Mr. Speaker, we
also not only have them on the
rostrum, but would you please
recognize the ones that are in
the gallery.
I will do that, gentle lady.
I'll start with one in the
gallery and then I'll have you
introduce the folks on the
rostrum.
Uh, in the gallery guests of of
Herndon we have and please rise,
we recognize we have Amy Rizzo,
Pauline Trujillo, Steve Turpin,
Patrice good kind, Beverly
Warburton, Marina Moi, Vicky
McNow, Steve Miller.
Carol Pardo and Timothy Nelson,
welcome to your House of
Representatives.
And gentlely you've got some uh
esteemed guests as well on the
rostrum, uh, I have the names if
you'd like me to introduce or
you can. Speaker. You got it,
folks on the rostrum, please
rise to be recognized when I
call your name. Uh we have Steve
Winton, Meg Cox, Edwina Beard,
Peter Evans, Susan Chou, Elaine
Stevens, and Marcia Gault.
Welcome to your House of
Representatives.
And Mr. Speaker, we have a
memorial. Would you get me to
that point.
Gentle lady, I believe we have a
certificate.
Mr. Speaker, we have a
certificate.
Clerk Reed.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes January 23, 2025, La
Vidalena Day.
Whereas 19.2% of the population
in New Mexico is over the age of
65, and whereas New Mexico has
been coined the silver tsunami
state, a demographic shift that
will have far-reaching
implications as a baby boomer
generation ages, and whereas New
Mexico is a desirable place to
retire for individuals seeking
sunshine and the lower cost of
living and whereas the la
vidalena senior
living facility has long been
recognized as one of the leading
progressive senior living
alternatives for individuals in
New Mexico when they retire, and
whereas La Vidalena means the
full life and whereas the
Lavinalena offers assisted
living, nursing home, health
care, and Alzheimer's memory
care for senior residents as
needed, and whereas La Vidalena
has won awards for its
outstanding facilities and
services, and whereas La
Beena residents foster a culture
of friendliness, warmth, and
camaraderie, and whereas La
Vireena empowers senior adults
to live enriched lives, stay
active, and maintain
independence during their
retirement years and whereas La
Vidaena Day celebrates the
senior citizens of New Mexico
recognizing their sacrifices,
contributions, and lasting
impact on the history, culture,
and growth of New Mexico.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
January 23, 2025 be recognized
as La Vidalena day by the House
of Representatives signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Happy la vidale Day. Thank you
for joining us today, folks.
Your lady from Berlio back to
you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
for recognizing these
outstanding individuals who are
with us today and who are, are
here for the first time in the
history of La Vitalena existence
to be with you and to be with
the members of the House of
Representatives.
Thank you for arranging this,
and thank you folks for making
the drive up to Santa Fe to your
state capital, uh, we have other
folks in the gallery, guests of
Representative Alan Martinez.
This is the Sandoval Academy of
Bilingual Education, we've got
14.
middle schoolers, 7 adults, and
3 to 4 teachers, give or take.
They are here with the
University of New Mexico School
of Law, Wildri, Citizen science
program and I see the teal
shirts, that's what I was
looking for, uh, and their lead
teacher is Maria Cisneros.
Welcome to the House of
Representatives.
My very first session, I got
bombarded, um, perhaps ambushed
by a group of little kids in
teal shirts uh when I was out in
the annex and, uh, it was fun. I
don't remember. I think the
bill, the, the bill dealt with
bees, if I remember, or the
memorial that with bees if I
remember correctly, so welcome.
I'm glad you guys are here.
Other folks in the gallery,
guests of Representative Ross,
uh.
Ross
Folks in the rostrum or gallery?
It is unclear, uh, but regards
of Representative Johnson. We
have Cody Vicente, a 4th year
medical student at UNM, Shanna
Vicente, Superintendent of
Navajo Prep School.
And if you can hear your name,
rice, there you are. Hey, good
to see you. Welcome, welcome to
your house.
Fantastic, uh, announcements
from the floor.
OK, I've got a couple of quick
announcements, seeing that there
are none from the floor, uh,
folks today we're going to, um,
do some intro and then at 11, we
will be enjoying session with
the Senate for the state of the
judiciary address. Um, and then
I believe there is a lunch, uh,
at noon, a big lunch, um,
something about friends.
Amigos
Amigo's luncheon at noon.
Yeah
It's at La Fonda at noon, so
we'll try to get out there on
time or hopefully they keep our
meals warm, uh.
You also have for the rookies in
the chamber.
We have school photo day.
In the house lounge, January
30th and 31st, put it on the
calendar, wear your best looking
tie suit.
Dress, whatever.
Uh, January 30th and 31st, this
is the picture that goes on the
website. This is the picture
that goes on the big composite
photo, so trust me, I've made
the mistake before of uh wearing
something that didn't look too
good and then I had to live with
it for 2 years. Um, so the 30th
and 31st financial disclosure
statements due by the end of
business January 31st, 2025.
Check with the clerk, check with
your staff to make sure you get
that in MBD transactions, MVD
transactions during the regular
session, the
Motor vehicle division makes
itself available to you to
complete simple transactions.
Staff will be set up in the
house lounge, the 28th and 29th
of January from 8 to 12 and 1:30
to 5, the types of transactions
include titling a new vehicle,
titling a used vehicle
registering, uh, registration
renewal and issuance of a
legislative plate, that's the
red plate.
Um
Which does not allow you to
speed, trust me, I have a couple
of tickets to show for it, um,
MBD will accept payment with
credit or debit cards only, no
cash, please contact my office
or MBD regarding specific
documentation for each
transaction, um, furthermore,
Blue Cross Blue Shield of New
Mexico will be providing flu
shots from 10 to 1 on the 23rd
on the east side of the
building, look for the Blue
Cross Blue Shield Cavan.
Um
And lastly,
If any of you knew David Abbey,
David Abbey, former LFC
director. I ran into him in the
hallway today, and he has
invited all of us on January
30th at 5 p.m. to the New Mexico
Military Museum.
Where they are presenting.
Flags of freedom honoring the
80th anniversary of the
liberation of Ubaton, prisoners
of war. This is the opening
reception on the 30th at 5 p.m.
at the New Mexico Military
Museum. It would be great if a
lot of us can attend, um, if, if
you're schedule permits. Uh,
let's go back to announcements.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Lee.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. With
your permission, I would love to
recognize one of my esteemed
guests.
Are they, are they in the
gallery up against the left side
of the wall here. OK, please go
ahead. OK, thank you so much.
Our chief judge from Lee County,
Mark Sanchez is here.
Welcome to the house.
He works with my husband in the
5th Judicial District complex.
So I'm so grateful that you're
here. Thank you for coming.
I think that's where I got one
of those speeding tickets.
Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley, Representative
Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you for introducing my
guests from San Juan County and
members of the house, if you
could oblige me, I would like to
share a little bit more about
their accomplishments, so it is
my pleasure to recognize and
introduce Cody Becenti.
He is thenay from La Plata and
Crown Point, New Mexico. He is
red running into water, born for
water flows together.
He is the son of Shana Allison
Becenti, who is head of school
at Navajo Preparatory School and
she is also here with him.
And his dad, Kevin Becenti of
Crown Point.
Cody is part of the 2017 cohort
of the combined BAMD program at
the University of New Mexico for
his undergraduate studies and is
now a 4th year visiting medical
student from the University of
New Mexico School of Medicine.
His professional interests
include rural medicine, street
medicine, and indigenous health
policy.
And he plans to apply for a
family medicine residency this
fall. Cody is also the proud
grandson of the late Donna
Becenti and Emily and Arthur
Allison, the former secretary of
Indian Affairs under Governor
Susanna Martinez.
In his free time, Cody enjoys
playing basketball, running, and
cheering on the UNM lobos. Thank
you for joining us today. We are
so proud of you and
congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Congratulations. Thank
you for being here.
Go lobos.
The lady from Berley
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want
to introduce to a young man who
worked with me, um, during the
campaign season. He's only 18
years old, um, his name is David
Trujillo. He is up in the
gallery and I'd like for him to
stand, um, this young man, uh,
started in politics at about 15
years old, I think, and um he's
worked on a lot of different
folks campaigns. I am
encouraging him to start at CNM.
Hopefully, um, this spring and
um I was just so impressed with
his credentials, um, I think
it's really important that we
mentor our young people and kind
of guide them along as they as
they uh start their careers, so,
um, David is right right up
there. Thank you, thank you.
Welcome, David. Welcome to the
house.
And and members just just as a
reminder, uh, when you have
folks in, in the gallery, let me
know and I can introduce him
here from from the from the
chair, um, unless folks are in
the rostrum, uh, then, then you,
the rules allow you to introduce
some from, um, from where you're
sitting. Um, I've got an
announcement to make, big
announcement. Hang on to your
shorts here. Enrolling and
engrossing a.
Enroll in and engrossing aim
that's.
A committee don't ask me what it
does, but it exists.
And Madam Clerk has been on me
the last two days about this, so
you really engrossing, hey,
write this down. I will not
repeat it.
Um, representatives Mejia,
Colin, Henry, Silva, Torres
Velasquez, Abeta chair and I am.
Well, you all are writing this
down fast.
You're rolling and engrossing
bee.
Representatives Hall.
Chavez
Nicole Chavez.
Murphy, Senna Cortez Corola
Pajon.
Joseph Hernandez.
Chair Gonzalez.
You rolling in engrossing A and
B.
In all seriousness, those are
the committees that sign bills
as they pass, and it's uh
official procedure that has
happened before the bill can be
delivered to the governor, so,
um, those are the two committees
rolling and engrossing A and B,
uh, and Madam Clerk will no
longer be blowing up my phone.
Right, any other announcements,
um, all right, we're gonna go to
some Billy intro, um, and then
from there we're gonna break 4.
And then after that, we're gonna
break into joint session and
hear from the judiciary.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 1 with
emergency clause and return same
herewith, respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
House Bill 13.
And introduced by
Representative.
with 64.
House Bill 64 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to higher
education, expanding the scope
of the nondiscrimination policy
for eligibility for
postsecondary tuition rates and
state-funded financial aid.
House Bill 64.
House Bill 64 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 65 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to public schools,
clarifying that local school
boards and governing bodies of
charter schools shall determine
the total number of
instructional days per year and
the number of instructional days
per week that students are
required to be in school
programs, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 65.
House Bill 65 have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Education Committee.
House Bill 66, introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to workers'
compensation, increasing the
amount of money that can be
advanced by employers for
discovery costs, increasing the
maximum amount of attorney fees
that can be collected in a
worker's compensation case.
House Bill 66.
As Bill 66, 7 minute re twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the house, labor,
veterans, military affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 67, introduced by
Representative Garrett. An act
relating to unemployment
insurance, defining reasonable
assurance for employees of
educational institutions. House
Bill 67.
House Bill 67 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Labor,
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 68, introduced by
Representative Garrett, an act
relating to apprenticeships,
requiring a 1 to 1 ratio of
apprentice to journeyman for
construction industry trades,
providing that the
apprenticeship council will
formulate standards to ensure a
1 to 1 apprenticeship
apprenticeship to journeyman
ratio requiring apprentices to
be supervised by certified
journeymen.
House Bill 6868 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 69 introduced by
Representative Garrett, an act
relating to higher education,
enacting the public service loan
forgiveness multiplier Act,
providing a multiplier for
adjunct and contingent faculty
at post-secondary educational
institutions, providing for the
certification of full-time
employment status, providing for
notice and renewal of a public
service loan forgiveness form,
providing for the dissemination
of public service loan
forgiveness information.
House Bill 69.
House Bill 69 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 70, introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to healthcare, enacting
the behavioral health Medicaid
Waiver Act, making an
appropriation, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 70.
As Bill 70 have been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 71, introduced by
Representative Gallegos. An act
relating to public finance,
increasing the amount that is
annually transferred to the
early childhood education and
care program fund from the early
childhood education and care
fund. House Bill 71.
House Bill 71 haven't been met
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 72 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to healthcare
requiring the healthcare
authority to promulgate and
enforce minimum nursing staff to
patient ratios in licensed
hospitals, creating the staffing
advisory committee requiring
licensed hospitals to develop
and implement policies and
procedures, providing
administrative penalties,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 72.
As Bill 72 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 73, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to limitations on
actions, eliminating the statute
of limitations on actions for
damages due to childhood sexual
abuse, applying the elimination
of the statute of limitations on
actions for damages due to
childhood sexual abuse,
retroactivity.
Or to actively
House Bill 73.
I 73, haven't made it twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, House
Judiciary Committee, thence the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 74 introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to behavioral health,
enacting the firefighter and
emergency service provider, peer
support Act, allowing state,
local, and regional public fire
agencies to create peer support
programs for their employees and
volunteers, making peer support
services confidential, limiting
liability for the provision of
peer support services. House
Bill 74.
House Bill 74 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 75, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Health for county
and tribal health councils
statewide. House Bill 75.
House Bill 75 have been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House government
election and Union Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 76 introduced for
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to newborn infant
health, adding
echocardiograms and
electrocardiograms to the
required tests for newborn
infants who are at higher risk
of congenital heart disease.
House Bill 76.
How do you pronounce that word
again?
you
How do you pronounce that word?
Uh-huh
I don't
It's
pronounced
You
There are echocardiograms and
electrocardiograms.
It's hard words to say, my
tongue gets all twisted.
that territory was explaining
how to pronounce the word. Uh,
OK, how's Bill 76? Haven't been
there twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
Thence the house consumer public
affairs Committee.
House Bill 77 introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to public assistance,
requiring the healthcare
authority to develop annual
federal supplemental nutrition
assistance program state
outreach plans. House Bill 77.
but
Hospital 77 have been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, that's
the House Government Elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 78, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to prescription drugs
enacting a new section of the
New Mexico Insurance code to
prohibit discrimination against
entities participating in the
federal 340B drug pricing
program. House Bill 78.
House Bill 78, having been read
twice by Tidal, his order
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee House Bill
79 introduced by Representative
Thompson, an act relating to
intergovernmental agreements
enacting the audiology and
speech language pathology
interstate compact. House Bill
79.
House Bill 79. Haven't been
married twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
convinced the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 80, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to insurance
prohibiting the use of credit,
education, and occupation
information in underwriting,
rating and renewing certain
insurance policies. House Bill
80.
How's my lady? Haven't been read
twice by Tidal is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 81, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to intergovernmental
agreements enacting the
occupational therapy licensure
Interstate Compact. House Bill
81.
House Bill 81 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 82 introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to professional
licensure enacting the physical
therapy licensure compact,
amending the Physical Therapy
Act to provide for state and
federal criminal history
background checks, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 82.
House Bill 82, haven't been
there twice my title is order
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 83 introduced by
Representatives Block and Lord.
An act relating to firearms
providing for the permitless
carry of firearms by adults,
repealing sections 30-7-2.2
through 30-7.3 NMSA 1978 being
laws 1994, chapter 22, sections
2 and 3, laws 2003, chapter 253,
section 1, and laws 1975,
chapter 14.
9, Section 1 as amended. House
Bill 83. House Bill 83 have been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 84 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to employment
enacting the employee Free
Speech Act protecting employee
free speech from captive
audience speeches, providing
remedies for violations of
employee free speech. House Bill
84.
House Bill 84. Haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 85, introduced by
Representative Cates.
An act relating to turf,
prohibiting the installation of
non-functional turf on a
state-owned or state funded
property beginning in 2027,
prohibiting the use of water
other than recycled or reclaimed
water to irrigate non-functional
turf on a state-owned or state
funded property beginning in
2032, requiring non-functional
turf on state-owned or
state-funded property that is
removed to be replaced with
drought and climate resilient
landscaping.
in 2032. House Bill 85.
How's Bill 85 haven't been read
twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the house, agricultural asset
gas, water Resources Committee,
the the House government
election and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 86, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to crime removing the
time limitation for commencing
prosecution of human
trafficking, increasing the age
for sexual exploitation of
children by prostitution to 18,
adding human trafficking to the
definition of racketeering,
amending the elements of human
trafficking, providing a
definition of harm.
Prohibiting certain defenses in
a prosecution for human
trafficking, adding victims of
human trafficking and sexual
exploitation of children to the
victims of Crime Act.
Prohibiting earned meritorious
deductions for a human
trafficking sentence, House Bill
86.
I was really 86. I haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house.
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 87 introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
an act relating to criminal
sexual contact, eliminating the
requirement that the
non-consensual touching be to an
unclothed intimate part.
House Bill 87.
How's Bill 87? Haven't been
written twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 88 introduced by
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
an act relating to zoning,
enacting the electric vehicle
charging station zoning Act,
establishing standards for
permitting electric vehicle
charging stations. House Bill
88.
House Bill 88. I've been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house
transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 89 introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
an act relating to higher
education, amending the graduate
scholarship Act, changing
eligibility, increasing awards.
House Bill 89.
House Bill 89 has been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 90 introduced by
Representatives Zamora and
Armstrong.
An act relating to higher
education, enacting the
veterinary medical loan
repayment program, providing
powers and duties, establishing
selection criteria and
eligibility requirements,
providing for contracts between
recipients and the higher
education department, providing
for release from contract or
recoupment, creating a fund,
prescribing a penalty, making an
How's Bill 90? Haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, the House
Judiciary Committee, the the
House Appropriations Committee.
House Bill 91, introduced by
Representative Ortiz, an act
relating to public utilities,
allowing additional rate
structures. House Bill 91.
House Bill 91? Haven't been that
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House, government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the house energy environment and
natural resources committee.
House Bill 92, introduced by
Representative Ortiz, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Environment to
plan, design, and construct
projects to improve river,
stream, and wetland habitat and
surface water quality. House
Bill 92. House Bill 92. I have
it twice by title is printed and
referred to the house
agriculture assegas and
watersources Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 93 introduced by
Representative Ortez, and act
relating to utilities, providing
for the filing of advanced grid
technology plans by public
utilities to the public
regulation commission, providing
for cost recovery through tariff
writers or base rights,
including advanced grid
technologies and utility
integrated resource plans and
the annual reports of
distribution cooperation,
cooperative utilities, House
Bill 93.
Housesville 93, haven't been
there so as my title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 94 introduced by
Representative Lara.
An act relating to public
schools, providing for maximum
class loads for kindergarten and
grades 12, and 3, providing
additional requirements for a
school district seeking a
temporary waiver of maximum
class loads, requiring school
districts to include information
about class loads in the school
district's education plans for
budget purposes, making an
appropriation. House Bill 94. 94
have made by title is order
printed in to the House
Education Committee, the the
House Appropriations.
Finance Committee.
House Bill 95, introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to insurance enacting
new sections of the Healthcare
Purchasing Act and the New
Mexico Insurance Code to require
fertility preservation services
in certain cases. House Bill 95.
House Bill 95. Haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee.
House Bill 96 introduced by
Representative Sanchez, an act
relating to public employee
pensions, providing a temporary
additional non-compounding
payment to retired members under
the Public Employees Retirement
Act, making an appropriation.
House Bill 9696 have been
written by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Labor Veterans Military
Affairs Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 97, introduced by
Representative Anya Narnu, an
act relating to motor vehicles
requiring minimum amounts of
insurance against uninsured and
underinsured motorists. House
Bill 97.
House Bill 97 have been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed, and referred to the
house transportation public
works.
My apologies, it is ordered
printed and referred to the
house transportation, Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee then the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 98, introduced by
Representative Anya Narnu, an
act relating to records
providing for the automatic
expungement of eviction records
after 5 years. House Bill 98.
Osville 98. I've been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
election in the Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 99 introduced by
Representative Anya Narnu, an
act relating to motor vehicles,
reorganizing provisions related
to the non-repairable vehicle
certificates into a new section
of the NMSA 1978, allowing
insurance companies that pay
total loss claims to vehicle
owners to obtain a salvage
certificate of a title or
non-repairable vehicle
certificate, amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978. House Bill 99.
How's Bill 99 haven't been
written to us by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
house transportation, Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee, then a House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee.
House Bill 100 introduced by
Representative Anya Narno.
An act relating to property
management, exempting services
rendered by attorneys at law and
contractors in the performance
of property management from the
provisions of Chapter 61,
Article 29, NMSA 1978. House
Bill 100.
And
How's the 100 haven't been there
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
gentle lady from Britta Lee or
Representative Hochman B Hill.
Well
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Congratulations on the 100 bill.
We expect a fun celebration,
round of applause.
Announcements, the gentle lady
from Los Alamos in Santa Fe
representative Chandler.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just
a reminder that House Judiciary.
Will be meet House Judiciary
will be meeting today at 2 p.m.
The topic is assisted outpatient
treatment and an update from the
Supreme Court on how uh pilot
projects are being implemented
in 5 districts. We have changed
the location given the intense
interest in this topic from room
309 to the house floor, Mr.
Speaker, thank you. Thank you,
members signaled announcement is
the gentleman from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, your house
preparations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30 p.m.
today in room 307.
Any other announcements on the
floor.
All right, folks, at this point,
we are going to begin the
process of
Organizing into joint session.
And if you give me a moment to
get my bearings, I will move to
that point in a minute.
I found my bearings. Jo lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the Speaker appoint
a committee to invite the
lieutenant governor and the
honorable members of the Senate
to meet in joint session with
the house in this chamber for
the purpose of being addressed
by the Chief Justice of the New
Mexico Supreme Court, the
Honorable David K. Thompson.
objection, the chair will
appoint Representative Andres
Romero representative Mejia and
Representative Johnson.
To invite the lieutenant
governor and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the House for
the purpose of being addressed
by our distinguished guest, Mr.
Speaker.
Which I recognize is
Representative Supansy. I ask
unanimous consent that the House
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and that the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint sessions,
we will stand in recess subject
to the call of the chair. Don't
go far because we will start
right on time so that we can go
to the lunch afterwards.
there
What
and I have 3 guys already
sitting on chairs.
they have badges though, right?
No, they're sitting on the
senator's chairs.
They, I think that's quite well.
We'll wing it. We'll see, I
don't know who they are.
Well, that's Glenn, that's
Ellington, Judge Ellington, the
guy I was just talking to him.
The black guy sitting on the
chairington.
Senate chairs
we go
Speaker right here.
Oh, let me have that. Yo, I need
that.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, the sergeant at
arms.
The Honorable Howie Morales,
lieutenant Governor, and the
honorable members of the Senate,
the sergeant at arms please
escort the lieutenant governor
and the honorable members of the
Senate to the rostrum.
is
is it
My seat for a long time
and then someone keeps taking
it. You gotta.
lay down the law.
I
Good
the
was hell.
I
the
Right
you know.
I
They
Great
you're
Thank you.
Looks like they're gonna be all
right with chairs.
2
Going to be a little while
I'm gonna get.
you
Oh, you got it.
Where?
you
I can tell it's been a few days.
The joint session of the House
and the Senate will come to
order. What is the pleasure of
the joint session, Mr.
President.
The chair recognizes majority
floor leaders fancy.
Ask unanimous consent that we
resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole House and
Senate to be addressed by Chief
Justice of the New Mexico
Supreme Court, the Honorable
David K. Thompson. If there is
no objection.
It is so so.
Committee of the whole, House
and Senate will come to order.
Mr. Chairman, recognizes
majority whip Hochman Viheel.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous
consent that the chair appoint a
committee of 6 to escort Chief
Justice David K. Thompson to the
House chambers. no objection,
the chair will appoint Senator
Paul. Senator Doig, and Senator
Padilla.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Representative Lujan, and
Representative Silva to escort.
The Chief Justice Thompson.
To the House chambers.
At this time, it's my honor to
recognize some of our guests who
are here today.
Joining us for this special
joint session.
First, I'll begin with the
family of Chief Justice David
Kate Thompson.
Patricia Thompson, Ava Thompson,
and Thompson, and Carol K.
Thompson.
Sanna be recognized.
The justices of the Supreme
Court, the Honorable Michael
Ehel.
The Honorable C. Shannon Bacon.
And the Honorable Julie J.
Vargas.
Yes sir, the Chief Justice, our
former Chief Justice, Judith K
Nakamura.
Chief clerk of the Supreme
Court, Elizabeth Garcia.
Director of the administrative
Office of the courts, Carl
Rifsick.
Our New Mexico State law
librarian Stephanie Wilson.
Chief Justice Thompson's law
clerks, Maddie Claba and Jackie
Monroe.
And Keith
Tamara Mitchell
Leo and Chando.
Sarah Jacobs.
Mr. Barry Massey.
Bethel on.
And the Supreme Court's law
clerks or Jonah Grego, Ricardo
Gurama, Lionel Betts, jazz
majorhar Royeller, Jordan
Velazquez, Yvonne Zelle,
Victoria Lovato.
He's rise.
Joining us today are the
Gonzalez family Este on Ataria
Araya and Asher.
New Mexico District Attorney
Association president, Mr.
Marcus Montoya.
Chief public defender of New
Mexico, Ben Barr.
Bernalillo County District
Attorney, Mr. Sam Brigman.
General counsel to the governor
Holly had your name.
Dean of the University of New
Mexico Law School, Camille
Carey.
I'm president of the state bar
association, Asia Brooks.
Joining us from the Court of
Appeals today is Chief Judge,
the Honorable Jennifer Urip.
The Honorable Miles Hennessy.
The Honorable Jacqueline R.
Medina.
The Honorable Megan Duffy.
The Honorable Zachary Ives.
The Honorable Shamara Henderson.
The Honorable Jane Joham.
The Honorable Gerald Bacca.
The Honorable Catherine Ray.
From the first judicial
district, the Honorable Brian
Bishop, Chief Judge.
The Honorable Glenn Allington.
The Honorable Matthew Wilson.
And the Honorable Shannon Woman.
And the Honorable Denise
Thompson.
Thomas, I apologize. Denise
Thomas.
On the second judicial district
we have the Honorable Marie
Ward, Chief Judge.
The Honorable Courtney Weeks.
From the 3rd judicial district,
the Honorable Conrad Perea,
Chief Judge.
From the forth judicial
district, the Honorable Flora
Gallegos, chief judge.
And the Honorable Dwight Torres.
From the 5th judicial district
we have the Honorable Mark
Sanchez, Chief Judge.
The Honorable Dustin Hunter.
And the Honorable Jimmy Foster.
On the 6th judicial district,
the Honorable Jared Hoffaet,
Chief Judge.
The 7 district District, the
Honorable Shannon Murdochoff.
From the 8th judicial district,
the Honorable Emilio Chavez,
chief judge.
From the 9th judicial district,
the Honorable Donna Mayer, Chief
Judge.
On the 10th judicial district,
the Honorable Timothy Rose,
Chief Judge.
From the 11th judicial district,
the Honorable David Peterson,
Chief Judge.
Also for the 11th Judicial
District, we have the Honorable
Curtis Gurley.
And the Honorable Janelle
Griego.
From the 12th Judicial District,
the Honorable Andrew Snyder,
Chief Judge.
The Honorable Daniel Bryant.
On the 13 judicial district, the
Honorable James No, chief judge.
And the Honorable Alison
Martinez.
The Honorable John Chavez.
And from the Berlino County
Metropolitan court, we have the
honorable Joshua Sanchez, Chief
Judge.
Sergeant at Arms.
Mr. Chair,
The Honorable Supreme Court.
Chief David K Thompson.
Ladies and gentlemen, please
welcome Chief.
Thompson into the chamber.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. If I can have
everyone please rise.
For the singing of our national
anthem sung today by Ava
Thompson.
Araya Gonzalez.
And Asher Gonzalez.
Yes.
you
so
Um
Who's?
It
Yeah
The
Oh
Or the
And uh
Right
Thank you Tiaa Asher.
And Chief Justice's daughter.
Eva.
You may be seated.
The chair recognizes the Chief
Justice of the state of New
Mexico Supreme Court. The
Honorable David K. Thompson.
Thank you, Lieutenant Governor.
Speaker
Martinez, President Prote
Stewart, minority majority
leaders of the House and Senate.
Distinguished members of the
legislature.
My colleagues on the Supreme
Court.
Dean Carey
President Steve Bar in New
Mexico, Asia Brooks.
Polly Againian general counsel
of the governor, family and
friends. Good afternoon.
After that national anthem, I
should probably just walk out,
right?
I know being a litigator, it's,
uh, and when you're strong and,
uh, thank you very much for
that, for that today.
I stand at the podium today
representing members of the
judicial branch, many of whom
are here today.
I deeply appreciate the presence
of the judges and staff that
have joined us.
I want to take this opportunity
to recognize the distinguished
members of my own court.
They joined us today from our
historic courtroom.
Now celebrating its
eighty-eighth year.
Senior Justice Michael V. Hill,
Justice Shannon Bacon, who was
appointed the court the same day
as I, 66 years ago, and Justice
Julie Vargas, Justice Amora
could not join us today.
I want to thank retired Justice
Judy Nakamura for joining us as
well.
I want to thank my law clerk's
current and formal, including
Mattie Claibach and Jackie
Monroeehy. Please welcome my
family, Ava, you met, my wife
Patricia, who she gets her looks
and talent from.
Uh, who sang the national anthem
with the Gonzalez Boys. My
sister Anne is joining us, uh,
in live stream with my mom, who
I know is watching in memory of
my father. I thank you all for
your support.
And your encouragement.
On the evening of January 10th,
1912. The no don't worry, speech
isn't going that long.
The territorial court was
terminating its existence.
And our government was
transforming from a territory to
a State of the Union. In their
place came 3 justices, Roberts,
Parker and and Hanna. They came
to be sworn in.
They drew lots
As to their term.
Justice Roberts drew the
shortest term or the short
straw.
4 years and having drawn the
shortest term,
Became Chief Justice.
It is spitting as I stand before
you today, 113 years later.
In the forty-third Chief Justice
of New Mexico Supreme Court.
It is still the justice who
draws a short straw that is
chief.
Um, while times this job is
challenging, it is very
rewarding. And today talking to
you is an honor.
And it's a privilege.
This ceremony was borrowed from
the federal government in 1970.
Chief Justice, then Warren
Burger delivered his first
stated judiciary to the American
Bar Association.
Our federal court never received
the honors bestowed to its chief
executive. That is an
opportunity to present in joint
session. That is why I'm humbled
by your invitation to speak to
you in this venue.
I begin my remarks with a thank
you. I want to thank the
legislature.
And I want to thank the
governor.
For signing a bill that
increases salaries for our
judicial officers. This has made
a difference. Last week,
We had a judicial nominating
commission in the 11th. We had
11 candidates and we sent 5
qualified names.
To the governor for appointment.
I will ask that my colleagues on
the judiciary, please stand and
show your appreciation.
Our role on the Supreme Court
and my role, Chief Justice is
Uh, has divided obligations. The
first is what I'm trained to do,
which is to decide matters to
work its way up from our
numerous lower courts.
But my comments today focus on
my second role, and that is the
role of the minister, its chief.
The focus, however, in these
comments will not be on my
court.
The focus in today's comments
will be on the numerous public
service servants who work
tirelessly.
To ensure that we stay true to
our motto dedicated to the
administration of equal justice
on the law.
A member of your legislature
asked me this question in an
interim committee.
What can we do about
The question was about crime.
It is a very simple.
Propositional phrase.
But a very complex question.
What policy could you fill in?
In that blank
I was asked about crime, but you
could ask in half, ask the same
question with different objects.
What can we do about substance
abuse?
What can we do about
foreclosures, about child
welfare.
Or as we approach the 57th
session, what can we do about
behavioral health?
This question reveals itself the
challenges and burdens imposed
on the judicial branch in the
operation of the state
government.
At the same time taking these
tests on and maintaining our
core function.
Let at the time the question was
asked, I didn't answer it well.
Upon reflection and taking it
apart, I think it serves as an
outline for my comments.
Let me introduce you first to
who we are. We are the numerous
public employees, judges, and
justices, partners within the
judiciary.
This slide
Which is a replication of what
you had on the back of your
badges at the legislative
breakfast.
Shows how many judicial
employees you have in your
district.
Let me introduce you to one of
them.
In the gallery, Ms. Perez, if
you'll stand up.
Ms. Perez is a certified court
monitor from the 7th Judicial
District in Socorro. The 7th is
the largest judicial district in
New Mexico, covers reserve the
truth or consequences, so to
stancia. Ms. Perez worked at the
local Walmart while attending
college at CNM where she earned
an associate's degree in, in
pre-general health sciences,
decided to move to the court for
better pay and benefits as a 21
year old.
As she approaches her 3rd
anniversary, she is advancing in
the court. She is a dedicated
enthusiastic employee and
daughter of proud magistrate
Judge Felix Saedra.
During my visit to the 7th
traditional, she advocated for
security and better working
conditions.
She just reported that is
recently been approved thanks to
the county sheriff on site and
renovations for the courthouse
provided by fundings by provided
by funding by you. Thank you,
Esperanza.
This legislative session our
number one priority is employees
like Ms. Perez. For many years,
the judicial branch has fallen
behind the executive branch. A
workforce improvement plan was
funded by the legislature.
But now we are again falling
behind to the executive as well
as the local governments and
pay.
Not only are they
non-competitive with the
judicial branch or entry-level
employees are paid below the
living wage.
In fact, at our current
compensation levels, 1 half of
our judicial branch employees
likely qualify for government
assistance. This is not
acceptable.
Raising our judicial staff to
pay to pay of the executive
staff is not only essential to
retention, but reflects
integrity and fairness in New
Mexico government.
In the largest and most
comparable job classifications,
judicial employees, average pay
is 17% lower than the executive.
In the lowest pay raise, 25%
lower.
To level the field so we can
reduce costly turnover and more
efficiently maintain the
workforce. We request pay
increases for those employees.
Closing this pay gap of our
lowest
our lowest paid employees is
critical. It will affect 1400 of
the people you see on that
screen.
Here's the news you want to
hear.
It excludes judges.
And excludes employees that make
over $100,000.
This is our largest ask of $14
million but we'll directly
impact employees in your
district like Miss Pettis.
She is who we are.
And who we want to support.
The sentence also can turn the
verb can do, and I want to talk
about can do in a moment. I want
to focus, focus first.
On what we do.
In the opening, I showed
pictures from the doors from
courthouses across the street,
across the state.
It is through those doors that
our civil and criminal justice
system operate and conflicts are
resolved in a way that ensures
the civilized democratic small d
society.
And after like 24 in New Mexico
State courts have heard more
than.
350,000 cases.
The overwhelming majority of
individuals seeking justice
through the courts seek justice
in state courts. 98.5% of all US
cases were filed in state
courts. 1.5 were filed in
federal court.
The judiciary is committed.
To doing the hard work.
To support the policy
initiatives of the legislature
and the executive in all areas,
including behavioral health. We
will do our part.
My request to you is that we are
not asked to do more to the
detriment of our core judicial
function. Provide first
assessinance for our basic needs
before I can lift the shovel to
help on other tasks.
Let me focus on a couple of
those basic needs.
First juries
How many of you either yourself,
were called for a jury or a
close family member.
Quite a few. Look around.
Thank you for your service.
You are part of us.
The American jury system is a
constitutional right. All
persons accused of crime or
involved in a civil dispute,
have a right to have their
matter decide by a jury. Jurors
make important decisions
affecting other people's lives
as well as those in their
communities. It is one of the
greatest civic duties a person
can.
Perform. It is so important, in
fact, it is the one civil duty
ordered by the court.
Perhaps you among many others
watched with some interest in
the criminal proceedings
involving Hollywood actor.
Mr. Baldwin,
That first trial in that case
took 9 days.
In that same time,
31
31 other jury trials were
conducted in the state.
Those other 31 jury trials may
not have been as high profile,
but for the defendant.
For the victim
For the state prosecutor and
most often for the public
defender, they were just as
important. We can't do this
without citizen jurors.
As Chief Justice, I'm committed
to shortening questionnaires,
dire terms of service and
smaller jury panels, so we can
make most of the money you
appropriate to us and make the
most of our time for the jurors.
But trials are increasing 32%
from FY 22 to 23.
With nearly 47,000 jurors
appearing.
To serve
This required increase in
funding to pay jurors for their
service has come in the form of
one time appropriations, and we
appreciate that infusion.
We need 2.2 million in recurring
funds.
To ensure an FY 26, we have a
stable source of funding.
Let me now turn to judicial
security.
Unfortunately, threats to
judges, staff, and other elected
officials increased daily.
Just last week, we had to close
the magistrate and district
courts in Farmington because the
father of a juvenile defendant.
threatened a judge.
This follows on the heels of an
ensign in Simola County in which
an individual with an ax entered
the courthouse.
The security funding we asked
for is also to keep our citizens
safe.
To improve safety in accordance
with requesting a one-time $25
million request for court
security infrastructure
upgrades.
Security for all of us is a
concern.
Legitimate legitimacy and the
concept of providing a civil
resolution to dispute.
hinges on the people entering
those courthouses, entering
those doors, feeling they are in
a safe environment.
On the morning of October 24.
2024, non-custodial parent
removed his 12 year old child
from school in Thero, New
Mexico.
Without lawful authorization.
Police actively investigated the
incident. They ultimately called
it a kidnapping.
The parent and child with him
later on the same day when he
entered the McKinley County
District Court in Gallup to file
paperwork.
The circumstances of the
kidnapping were unknown to
anyone in the courthouse.
While at the courthouse,
12-year-old signaled to court
security she was in danger.
The signal is performed.
I've learned this.
By holding your hand up.
And your thumb tucked under your
palm, then folding your fingers
down symbolically trapping your
thumb and your fingers.
Court staff and security, law
enforcement work together to
keep that child safe.
To law enforcement and social
social services to control the
situation. The parents'
intentions with the child are
unknown, but the child had
already reported to be in harm's
way.
Thankfully intervention by the
court.
Provided safety to the child.
In this situation we know the
security personnel and staff
have been trained.
See something, say something,
fight the polite.
Had been embedded
In their training.
I want to recognize and I've
brought today some of the Gallup
team who are on site at the
courthouse until nearly midnight
when the situation resolved.
They didn't have to stay.
But they understood that a
traumatized child felt safe in
the presence of people who had
rescued her.
They didn't want to abandon her
until she was safe.
Please join me in recognizing
two individuals that were
instrumental in helping this
young person. McKinley County
Sheriff Officer Gilbert Padilla.
Mr. Padilla.
Mr. Padilha's security bailiff
Derwyn Jones were the first to
recognize a hand signal and help
the child.
Mr. Jones is a point person for
the district court assisting
Officer Padil to separate the
child from her parent. Mr. Jones
was responsible for the child
safety throughout until CYFD.
Officer Padilla, thank you again
for your service.
Officer Padilla is who we are
and it is who we want to
support.
And you can support us through
court security.
Let me turn then to improving
judicial performance through
technology.
Can we go from this?
Chief Judge Hoffaett's
courtroom. We have Chief Judge
Holkacket over there.
This is a witness box on wheels
from the territorial days.
Remember when I told you those 3
justices came over and were
Sworn in
That was the witness chair.
Can we go from that to this?
This is Judge Lee's Levy's
technologically advanced
courtroom in the second
judicial. The witness box is ADA
compliant. The witness, jury
attorneys, and judge have access
to exhibits at the same time.
You can provide remote witnesses
and translators, making it
easier for both language access
and for parties to appear.
And that flight 24 with
legislative financial support,
we modernized. Thank you again.
We modernized courtroom
technology. This included speech
to tech speech to text
technology that trans drives
proceedings in real time.
It provides a record which is
searchable and 95% accurate for
judges, court employees to
access.
We have installed dozens of
these.
Courtrooms, it takes some amount
of time in the 2nd, 9th, 11th,
and 12th.
In 2025, will lead the next
phase. In Roswell,
Santa Fe, Las Cruces, Lovington,
and Carlsbad.
Technology also supports.
Performance measures you are
interested in.
Looking at and guiding our
performance.
Our court will lead by example.
My colleagues have agreed that
the Supreme Court's performance
measures will soon be available
for all to access on data
exchange.
Through the public portal, the
public will have access to the
number of outgoing cases from
the Supreme Court.
One just went out today, by the
way.
The percentage of criminal and
civil cases disposed in 180 days
or less, and pending criminal
cases, 5010 days or less. And FY
24, these percentages were over
96%.
Last year, the legislature did
not provide any of the requested
7.1 million in IT funding.
This year we are requesting
approximately 3 million to fund
connectivity, cyber
cybersecurity for courts
statewide.
This funding directly impacts
the filing system for litigants.
Case processing document
management and data production
to inform the decisions often
you all are making.
Because the data you rely on for
much of your policy is generated
from the courts, and we need the
support.
We are requesting 40 million to
compete to complete, uh, FTR in
our integrated courtrooms in
every courtroom across the
state.
But
Let me turn now.
To a topic of some conversation,
which is pre-trial detention.
As I recall,
Um, and as I described to you,
there are 2 rules of the Chief
Justice.
One is a judge and one as an
administrator.
One requires adherence to
precedent and the other requires
pragmatism.
In the operation of our court
systems.
These sometimes contrasting
philosophies are apparent in our
conversations surrounding
pretrial detention.
As a justice, stare decisis is
an important legal concept for
the rule of law.
It is derived from Latin to
stand by things decided.
It provides finality, certainty.
And consistency.
But we stand by and continue to
stand by as a bedrock principle
in our criminal justice system,
is that the accused are presumed
innocent until found guilty.
A pretrial deprivation of
liberty requires assessment of
the dangerousness of the
individual and likelihood they
will not appear to answer their
charges.
Not their wealth.
While I will always choose
cooperation with the political
branches of government. Our
founders have required from my
office an obligation to first
and foremost.
Interpret the laws that you have
written.
And signed and protect the
constitutional rights enshrined
since our fam since our
founding.
Leadership, however,
In the operation of the courts
does not require dogma.
Or adherence to legacy.
But instead requires the ability
to adapt and cope to problems of
our evolving judicial system. I
must be consistent in my own
message to you. I cannot ask you
to update our courtroom to
accommodate today's litigation
and refuse to update our process
with regard to our approach to
public safety.
As you are aware, crime has been
the central focus.
Of this session and New Mexico's
pretrial justice initiative.
The guiding principles are the
presumption of innocence, used
the least restrictive conditions
to reasonably assure parents and
public safety and use
preventative detention where no
reasonable conditions can be
applied to protect public
safety.
We have developed a framework
that focuses on legal and
evidence-based practices.
In FY 24, the background
investigations unit completed an
average of 1300 background
investigations. 16,000.
for the year.
However, we do not remain
static. It improved improvement,
strike that and additional
improvement to the pretrial
detention was implemented in May
2024 with statewide automatic
holds for defendants who are
arrested.
While on pre-child release. The
initial judges notified upon the
2nd arrest to evaluate the
initial conditions of pretrial
release.
Currently
Pre-trial justice exists in 16
district courts. To date, there
have been 20,750 holds based on
this change in our policy.
Supporting pre-trial detention,
and we're asking for
approximately 3.5 million to
monitor.
Um, electronic monitoring will
allow for safer communities.
And respect for the guarantees
in our Constitution.
That is what we do. Let me turn
to what we can do.
In each of the 3 350,000 cases
you saw on the screen was an
individual or party that came to
the court to resolve a dispute,
be it commercial, civil,
domestic, or criminal.
Disputes, as we know, are born
of conflict.
And conflict often comes from
underlying societal conditions,
drug addiction, homelessness,
access to legal representation,
the ability of defendants and
victims to have swift
And fair justice.
The judiciary does not sleep on
the court's work.
As a problem solver for the
community.
Courts have a front row for the
many challenges facing our
communities and work every day
to address them.
Including diversion programs,
guardianship, specialized
dockets for veterans, mental
health, and rural justice
initiatives.
I would like you, I would like
to introduce you to Bobby
Brookhauser, the program manager
for Luna County Adult Court in
the 6th Judicial District. The
Lunar County Adult Treatment
Court provides intensive
supervision and comprehensive
rehabilitation by strengthening
participants, families, and
support systems. When I visited,
uh, the courthouse in Deming. I
was impressed by his program and
commitment not only to the
participants, but these are
people in your community. For
For example, they used a holiday
dinner for the adult treatment
program for participants, their
families and kids to teach them
to have a normal Christmas.
Without
Substances
The program hosts a Valentine's
Day community party in
Lordsburg, a national night out.
Movie night in the park and
foster partnerships with
community leaders.
Mr. Brookhauser is a Narcon
instructor in the 6 and was the
1st district to have every
person issue NACO and provided
training.
His program receives a referral
for every charge of possession.
The recidivism rate is 15% after
5 years.
Mr. Brookhauser, please stand so
you can be recognized.
Mr. Brookhauser is who we are
and what we can do.
Thank you, Mr. Burkhauser.
The challenge is recognized by
the chief of that district and
Mr. Bruckhauser and other court
employees now require a larger
response.
Behavioral health.
is at the top of your agenda.
We are a system of government
upon which the citizens rely for
their public safety.
It is in the end a system where
one is judged fairly by their
peers.
Upon reliable facts.
And still the best system
invented.
In the history of personkind.
For the innocent.
To be acquitted.
And the guilty punished.
While our court system interacts
with individuals with behavioral
health issues.
Or housing issues.
Most of these individuals do not
engage in criminal activity.
They are simply as a kind and
wise citizen from Hobbs
described to me.
The least, the last and the left
out.
Some secret redemption, a path
perhaps of repentance.
But the Greeks used in the
secular form to mean turn
around.
Or return
This can be achieved.
Through court assisted programs.
During the special session this
summer, the judiciary was
allocated $3 million to
implement assisted outpatient
treatment.
Pilot programs in the 3rd
judicial districts and 3
judicial districts, 1st, 4th,
and 12th.
The appropriation also supports
4 competency diversion pilot
projects in those districts.
This appropriation.
This idea
was a result of a collaboration
and leadership from your body
and the governor's office with
input from the courts.
And this occurred last fall.
This is a commendable.
Process to find solutions to the
complex problems you are facing.
The session, the AOC requested a
total of 1.8 million in
recurring AOT funds, LFC.
Recommended 900,000 through
growth funding.
We requested the $3 million to
be recurring.
We need that extended if this is
a program that is of value to
you, so we can have consistency
in its application.
But let's get to a fine point of
what we have done after that
meeting.
Last August.
This is a timeline, hard to
read. I'm going to tell you a
little bit about it narratively.
In August of 2024.
We received the appropriations
for AOT.
In September, the AOC began
recruitment and finalized the
budget. In October, we secured
national experts for technical
assistance and held stakeholder
meetings. In November, we
created the program process and
secured a database. In December,
we developed policies and
procedures circulated formal
agreements and trained new
staff.
At the beginning of this year,
we secured treatment providers
and attorneys and finalized the
referral process.
From August
Until the beginning of this
year.
Today
I am pleased to announce we will
lodge the first of the AOT
programs in the first judicial
court.
Only 5 months after receiving
funding.
And we're happy to report that
the 2nd judicial district is
relaunching its program.
And the 3rd judicial district is
also well on its way.
I received a report. I asked for
a report because you wonder
whether the names behind these
individuals.
Who are we helping? Are we
helping them? How is our money
being spent?
One AOT participant from the 3rd
judicial district was involved
in the criminal justice system.
However, his AOT referrals were
from the hospital and the second
one from a behavioral health
provider.
He was ordered to AOT in 2023
and it's close to successful
completion.
He's currently stable.
Taking his medication.
He went to a sober living
facility has had no relapses in
almost a year.
And it's been housed since 2024
with no issues.
This is a small success.
But it is a success.
Is AOT the answer to the
question you posed to me at the
interim committee. It is not.
It's not
by itself.
But together with other
programs, public safety
initiatives that you're
implementing in your funding. We
can do
Our very best to ensure the
public safety and the health, I
should say, of our community.
What is more important to me,
I don't provide, provided only
to a lesson of myself and not as
a matter of lecture.
That the lessons provided is as
a conversation between the
branches and trying to seek a
solution.
That was a real success.
In this program.
That itself.
is part of the answer.
Let me close.
I want to encourage
Certainly funding for all the
programs I've described.
But I cannot leave this podium
without recognizing our judicial
partners and encourage you and
urge you.
To support funding for our
justice partners.
Including district attorneys,
public defenders, mental health
and treatment service providers,
law enforcement correction in
our county jails.
I would like to thank and
recognize Sam Bregman, the
district attorney in the 2nd
judicial district.
Ben Bower, chief public defender
for the state of New Mexico and
Marcos Montoya, the president of
the New Mexico District
Attorneys Association.
I want to recognize the work of
the New Mexico commission on
access to justice.
Which works collaboratively with
civil legal service providers to
ensure equal access to the
justice system for the most
vulnerable in our community.
Lastly and most importantly, I
want to publicly thank our
frontline court clerks and
employees.
They are the ones that enable
our courts to serve all New
Mexicans.
The judiciary looks forward to
working with you this session.
But although I told most of
them.
State work first and then.
And then come to the
legislature. We know that
working together we can ensure
equal justice under law.
And provide the citizens of New
Mexico, the very best services
and outcomes.
When they are indeed.
So what can we do?
Here is what I know.
We can do a lot about
The things we have just
described.
And the things you need to
tackle in the next 60 days, and
I thank you for your service.
What I do know is we can do a
lot about it.
If we do it together.
God bless our great state. God
bless our democratic system of
government. Thank you for your
attention today. Thank you for
your service.
Once again, thank you to our
Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, the Honorable David K.
Thompson.
Mr. Chairman, recognizes the
House majority floor leader
Spansky ask unanimous consent
that the whole House and Senate
rise and report progress. The
joint session of the House and
the Senate will come to order.
Mr. Chairman Chair recognizes
this majority floor leader
Spensky. I ask unanimous consent
that the joint session of the
House and Senate now be
dissolved.
It is so ordered.
Thank you, Chief Justice
Thompson, and to all of the
members of the judiciary for
this briefing. Uh, I'm gonna
kindly ask our guests as they
exit the chamber to please do so
as quietly as possible so that
the house can get back to its
business, gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business of this
announcements on the floor.
The gentle lady from Berlio and
Torrens, Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to announce that uh in
Torrance County we've had a huge
issue with human trafficking and
Chinese slaves and uh with
illegal grow houses and the feds
are there today and they're
actually rescuing the Chinese
slaves where they've been
working for 2 years and I'm very
grateful that the issues being
fixed, but we need to address
the issues on why this happened
in the first place and how do we
stop it from happening in the
future. Thank you.
Duly noted, thank you gentle
lady, gentle lady from San
Miguel in Torrance, uh,
Representative Gonzalez, and
before you make your first
announcements, you have to sing
a song first.
I'm just kidding. That's only
after you pass your first bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but I
apologize. The only song I know
probably could sing my memory is
a little better, and I don't
think you want to hear that on
the House floor.
But, um, uh, first off, I want
to, uh, thank you for your time
and I want to call attention to
um the items that were left
there on your table. Um, I'm
proudly wearing purple today in
support of Highlands Day at the,
at the legislature in New Mexico
Highlands University, um, so I
wanna welcome today many um
students, staff, faculty from
New Mexico Highland University,
um, they're out in the hallway,
they're wandering, uh, the
roundhouse, so just please say
hello and welcome them to the
Roundhouse.
Welcome to the house, Cowboys
from Mexico Highlands
University, my little cousin
actually plays baseball for
Highlands University. Benito
Martinez, the.
4th, I think, 3rd maybe um
congratulations Cowboys. Any
other announcements, gentle lady
from Brinley Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. How's Health
and Human Services won't be
meeting Monday morning at 9
o'clock in room 307 and our
committee dinner is Monday
night.
You will be notified shortly.
Members take note gentle lady
from Bernard Leo Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker the House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs meeting uh a meeting
will be Tuesday at 1:30 or
immediately following the
session.
In room 315.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Bernard Leo Representative
Aardo.
Mr. Speaker, your House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee will be meeting Friday
at 1:30 in room 317
gentlemen for Leoresentative
Romero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Your House Education Committee
will meet on Monday morning at
8:30 for a brief organizational
meeting and then we'll be
working with the LESC folks on
what happened in the interim and
the budget. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker take note.
Any other announcements
going once going twice, folks
have got a quick announcement,
uh, an introduction, uh, we, uh,
introduced House Bill 73. We
need to switch the primary
sponsor, that is because of the
inability of an incoming member
to prefile. So this bill was
pre-filed byent Thompson, the
new primary sponsor is
representative Anaya, um, House
Bill 73 introduced by
Representative Anaya.
Any other announcements.
OK, folks, uh, we gentle lady
from Donana. wow, that was a
good, uh.
Last minute. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I thought we'd already
adjourned. Um, I'd just like to
announce that you're, um.
Uh, consumer and Public Affairs
Committee will meet today at
1:30 for a quick orientation.
Thank you. Members take note,
uh, also remember members of the
House Judiciary will meet at 2
p.m. here on the floor for a
briefing on behavioral health
and also we will be off
tomorrow, uh, so folks who live
far away, you um have hopefully
a little bit of time to go home
and see family and whatnot, um,
and, um, be safe. I, I
understand the weather's a.
a little bit funky out there.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until 10
a.m. Monday, January
twenty-seventh.
All right, folks that are there
for today, the House will stand
in recess until 10 a.m. Monday
morning.
