Here.
It
would require it so
first some housekeeping stuff
First to the committee that
yesterday I was fielding
questions on the agenda.
And
The question confusing the like
are you doing here that the fuel
spill or at this bill.
Well I finally realize with the
features of this published is
very different than the engine
that I thought.
So the bills are on the agenda
for their initiative.
so.
For that fusion
That was the problem
which reduction that.
With the five packs for the
That doesn't has experts
available so yes just the role
that bill.
we're also bringing back to grid
modernization plans which we for
before.
so.
Here's to bills today
You will need to
On Saturday.
So time to be here at nine yeah
you also on Thursday and.
For future deals are serving in
the Senate thirty
for example we have diversity of
for ten thirty today.
Thus the speaker several times
the service back and forth to
work between ten thirty eleven
eleven thirty and Tuesday
Thursday tend to go up which but
can you just.
Yes if you should.
Get the floor session at eleven
and he told me that earlier so.
I guess.
and the other than the others
factor we have for today is for
the first five the session we
have members on the.
So.
Thank you for some reason this
period.
Right yeah we have the first
virtual session where we all all
of the it is this year we did a
committee meetings but there and
that we as a hybrid
so that we're we have
Representative or by your
Sarinana.
Really a positive.
At the.
Source the other.
in the questions for the
committee.
Okay.
our fiscal today's world issue
plastic waste reduction that.
The result for the year of the
new year.
Thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
mobiles.
Thank you all just want to also
introduce everyone that's here
all.
And the panel I have all this
winter if you you know I'm up in
the air parent.
We have the Senate sponsor
senator Jeff Steinborn one of
the house Sanchez Representative
said that low level and we have
with us there appear point who
is the executive director of the
New Mexico recycling coalition
our our expert witness and good
morning again I'm here to print
introduced house bill four
thirty two which is the plastic
reduction act and what this bill
does is it addresses the
significant environmental
impacts resulting from the use
and disposal of single use
plastic carry out bags in New
Mexico which caused
contamination of the environment
the death of animals through
ingestion and entanglement and
widespread public litter.
Ten states have banned single
use plastic bags including
California Delaware Connecticut
Maine New Jersey Hawaii Oregon
New York Washington and Vermont
and many municipalities I will
turn the floor over to senator
Jeff Steinborn who will be
taking the lead on this
presentation today Mr chair.
What Mr chair can make way for
second I need to be on this
committee for years that that
figure out what was again good
to be with you this morning and
we're excited to be putting on
this bill to ban single use
plastic bags in the state of New
Mexico in short Alex is this
bill is estimated to save could
save five hundred million
plastic bags we going into
environment every year.
Which is significant because
we're finding that plastics
never really biodegrade it's
it's turning into one of the
biggest pollutants that we have
in our society which is single
use plastics and they're showing
up in the most pristine places
on earth poppers rivers
wildlife
they're also most littered items
so a colleague in the Senate
joke that this is the the New
Mexico the flag of New Mexico to
the plastic bag on a yacht that
So we feel like this bill can
have really positive public
policy impacts in addition to
that it's costing local
governments in fact there's a
lot of money having to clean up
these backs from later
You know they get caught storm
drain systems are getting caught
or recycling systems but in
reality we know very few of them
do get recycled and that's part
of the problem so this is a
public policy shift they can
that they can get a lot of bang
for our Buck and so with that Mr
and we have a set up in front of
you and that.
They start
to look this up for zerochan
Abbas is up for consideration.
Senator.
Transaction.
So we're on the side of.
Mr the set this up just makes a
few improvements as we continue
to get feedback in our
definitions just streamlining
the bill we've made a little
justice for example between
this.
Time and the other Tom this bill
was heard we heard from the news
media industry and what about we
delivered newspaper what about
plastic bag to protect
reasonable so there's a section
in the bill that deals with the
exceptions of common sense
exceptions to this which is.
I want to ask you to read the to
the two.
That was chaired two numbers two
two five four two of twenty two.
Yes yes was ended up yeah.
Those three lines just some
streamlined definitions and
that's with this up as Mr.
Okay we're on the subject you
the the.
Presentation on or would you
like to go to one yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for sharing
this today my name is there a
fair point I'm here on behalf
The New Mexico I think coalition
we are a statewide nonprofit
there were two hundred twenty
members and you might think that
this doesn't really relate to
recycling because single use
plastic bags are not recyclable
anywhere in our state but how it
does relate to recycling is that
it's very expensive and costly
for recycling programs to manage
this material this bill this
material gets caught and
equipment it's considered a
tangle are what that means is
you know we have these flappers
and these peers and it tangled
up and for safety they have to
shut down operations for an hour
and a half every day to remove
this material out of the
facility in Albuquerque not only
that but eighty percent of all
of the items that go into blue
bins in the recycling program
that don't belong there they're
called residuals are
contamination eighty percent of
them are single use plastic bags
so all in all that adds up to
almost four million dollars in
added expenses in our recycling
program just in the City of
Albuquerque each year through
this contamination so this is
why the recyclers of our state
our really big supporters of
this bill and I'm happy to
answer any questions about this
topic in particular.
Mr chair of the co sponsor house
co sponsor that the
representatives and be able to.
Representative so I'm actually
very delighted to do this and to
sign on to this bill
so if you all recall last year I
was on the city council and
three years ago the city council
bans plastic bags in Albuquerque
that was in twenty nineteen it
took and the fact in twenty
twenty and people were
transitioning into that
into that realm of reality
the plastic bag ban was also
called to clean and green
ordinance which actually had
it it actually went a little bit
further than the plastic bag to
had some other things that dealt
with solid waste and recycling
and I in reading this bill I see
that included additional
types of plastics a plastic bags
then the city so it was more
this is actually more
restrictive in terms of the
types of bags and so on the
city's ordinance only dealt with
the actual plastic bags that you
get in the grocery stores
since then the city council has
overturned the plastic bag clean
green ordinance and it's really
unfortunate because we have
quite a bit of support and we
have a lot of kids
come to yes I that are hearing
Mr chair representative so the
use were really involved in this
and the city council now has
turned a lot more conservative
and so I guess that's probably
why they overturned it but
in this round I definitely
support this bill thank you.
That we're having to stand for
questions okay first the the
thank you for that of the public
comment
will do the
fifteen minutes and
maybe after person
first with the opposition is
there anyone in the room with
speaker this is.
K. nine will go online.
If you'd like you can opposition
to this bill please raise your
hand if you're here to speak in
support of the bill please but
you're and they are.
Okay so we're doing opposition
first up we have to do with me
this.
Yes
Mr chair the members of my name
is that W. this call number
Karki and I'm speaking with
officers of this bill Alexius
the band the bill not the bank
and I'll give you lots to this
is why we should keep that
plastic bags first of all.
The firm still uses some of this
number because the space can be
used lotus purposes such as such
trash can liners we think about
that people can use the specs
for fresh Carolinas but plastic
bags the store anyway so what we
accomplishing to prevent these
plastic bags for those purposes
secondly the grocery store you
can use a useful facts but not
everyone wash these bags after
done with them and if you don't
do that basically carrying
around I guess with state
insurance back and forth to the
store which is not a good thing
and finally the bags I found
that when they Benham
Albuquerque paper bags of a
we're very easy to chair they
had to groceries going
everywhere across the parking
lot so it's not a good thing
you.
And also these plastic bags
purpose energy to manufacture
transport and store them the
other option so I lex yes all
the more request recycling
program for these plastic bags
if we come up with the actual
war information from the thank
you.
Thank you for that listening we
have syrup fitz Gerald.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose this
legislation this is yet another
intrusion of state government
and business operations that
will ultimately raise costs on
consumers this path was rejected
in Albuquerque just last year I
will affect small local
restaurants especially deeply
thank you.
Thanks that we have need to.
Yes a need here we.
The ticket.
But.
Yes my take away from in
Albuquerque I stand and
bipartisan opposition to this
bill that the idea that that
this was a conservative changing
the.
Albuquerque council as as
misnomer it was actually
bipartisan it was Democrats and
Republicans oppose the as a
plastic
band that's right the reason why
that that they bandits the band
the band in Albuquerque plastic
bags are actually a lot better
for the environment the paper
paper actually cannot be reset
reset cannot be
a actually does not bio degrade
in the in the landfills either
they have they found paper at
newspapers from the nineteen
forties in the New York that
landfills that were not that
were readable because they
simply do not biodegrade either
so the that's the misnomer that
that's uh the the alternative is
is better for the environment
the plastic
the and it is pretty outrageous
that we have you have discussed
today and The New Mexicans are
be very upset when they find out
about this bill
I can't believe that this bill
is even the proposed thank you
so much for a please vote no for
this.
Thank you they'll do support
just by your hands.
Okay so I was able to the little
five people online
we would like you to come up and
use the Mike so maybe just
formalized will take
seconds
The very people maybe
so just just come on up it will
take turns.
Okay.
A good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Kevin Bixby I'm from
Los crucis and executive
director of the nonprofit called
while I for all and I support
this bill we support this bill
it's worked pretty well as far
as I can tell in Los crucis
we've seen a reduction in the
number of plastic bags blowing
around in the streets and in the
number of.
state flags flying on this he
pushes so you know.
we still use plastic bags in our
household for a bunch purposes
but we found that we can do
quite well without them and we
have a couple of the sturdy
canvas bags that we use we take
shopping with us and they're
probably going to help me so
eight thirty to support this
bill thank you.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is really
uncertain and I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico chapter of the
solid waste association of North
America.
I just wanna is the biggest
industry representative for
solid waste and recycling
entities in the country and
includes Canada.
we ask you to vote yes on this
bill.
Single use plastic bags caused
considerable cost to landfill
and recycling operations
everywhere.
No matter how much public
education is conducted residents
are confused about plastic bags
and consistently include them
and recycling where they end up
wrapping around the machinery
that sorts things out of the
recycling facility.
Managers have to stop operations
every day to clean the equipment
Albuquerque estimates this cost
about four million dollars a
year as Mr points at.
On the other hand paperbacks are
a hundred percent recyclable.
Levels are required by law to
clean litter every day but the
lion's share of litter that
escapes from the working face or
the area where the trucks are
currently dumping is plaster
single use plastic shopping bags
this to cost landfill operators
in time and money.
Handling waste at the end of
life is essentially a subsidy
one that is paid by our
residents through fees that are
charged to them by waste hauling
entities whether they are public
or private she so New Mexico
swana supports this action but
urges you to continue to think
bigger towards extended rich
producer responsibility that
would ship these costs back to
producers thank you.
Hi Mr chair sorry.
Mr chair and members of the
committee Alyssa Kenny guy are
former state Rep from Oregon and
I cosponsored a bill in twenty
nineteen call house bill two
five oh nine ascension email
this morning with a link to that
as well as the FAQ sheet from
the department of environmental
quality that because a lot of
really interesting information
about how it's implemented part
of the faqs are why did Oregon
adopted out adopt a bag man what
does this mean for consumers
what what do businesses need to
know how will this be enforced
are there any exceptions
provided do businesses need to
keep track of fees collected
where does he go what do local
governments need to know what
types of bags require fees so as
was mentioned a lot of states
have already passed this I just
want to be a helpful resource in
how it's been implemented in
Oregon which has been very
successful and I urge you to
pass it thank you.
Thank you.
Hello chair committee members
Andrea Fernandes from Lincoln
County I'm I would encourage all
to bend the back come as an
environmental steward
I've learned that several years
back we had plastic in the ocean
the size of Texas well since
then it has doubled and we need
to act quickly we we can't
continue the trash that plastic
mess with that we see littering
the roadways it's a cost to
everybody not only to consumers
but to discard them regarding
discarding the waste so we I
would appreciate your support
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Marcia it's registered lobbyists
for south central solid waste
authority which handles hauling
and recycling from northern
white sands missile range to the
Texas border we stand in support
of this legislation and we do
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward single use plastic
bags are huge nuisance to
running our landfill and to any
efforts that we are currently
embarking upon upon when it
comes to recycling it also has a
huge impact on our economy from
tourism on down so we ask you to
support this measure thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for
hearing this legislation I work
with a local organization that's
focused on closed loop
sustainable way solutions and
we've in collecting over a
million pounds of food waste in
the Santa Fe area since two
thousand fourteen which notably
is before the City of Santa fe's
big ban went into effect and
we've seen a dramatic
improvements in the amount of
plastic bag contamination at our
facility blowing off of our
facility since that time and I
would urge you that this is a
simple piece of legislation to
have a dramatic positive impact
on the cleanliness of our waste
streams and our state thank you.
Okay anyone else in the audience
okay so what we'll go online
thanks.
First we have the big.
Thank you your needed on your
end.
Hi I'm I'm speaking from
Albuquerque New Mexico and I was
actively engaged with the city
council when they were
discussing this years ago before
the pandemic and I was very
excited that our city was going
to take that leadership role and
banned single use plastics I was
very disappointed after the
shift in our city council and
that band got taken away because
what I was seeing was a
reduction in plastic bags flying
all over I'm a bicyclist I see
the trenches in the ditch is
completely covered in plastic
it's a very sad state of affairs
and I when I hear all these
other folks talking about the
costs it's an exorbitant cost to
the environment but also we
can't recycle our standard
plastics because of the damage
that these bags due to the
machinery so I strongly support
this legislation and I
appreciate that you're looking
into it thank you.
Thank you next up with
teamviewer report.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for letting me
speak to this morning I'm Tammy
people Corman Albuquerque city
councilor and I'm here
representing the vast majority
of my constituents who want to
see a prohibition on single use
plastics
this bill makes New Mexico more
beautiful in the two weeks after
Albuquerque implemented its
original band it was already
noticeable difference there were
fewer bags in the parking lot of
the grocery store there were
fewer bags and in the end when I
walk my dogs in the afternoons
it was fewer bags on trees stuck
all around our city and there
were fewer bags and storm water
drains which were causing major
problems for water getting away
from our constituents in into
the Rio Grande.
Because many people who say they
will re use these bags many many
of these bags don't even make it
home after they leave the store
so to me it makes no sense to
continue to allow single plastic
bags and it didn't make a lot of
sense for the young people in
Albuquerque are I've never seen
a political issue that got so
many young people to participate
and it was heartbreaking after
the band went away one young
person emailed me and said that
I thought government was
supposed to do good and I think
that this is our opportunity to
show young people that
government can do good this bill
can do good for the City of
Albuquerque for the entire state
of New Mexico and I think the
Sanchez for bringing it forward
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Angelo Committee.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
of I mensual Committee on the
residents of the New Mexicans
use about five hundred million
single use plastic bags which as
pointed out already are not
recyclable municipal recycling
programs in New Mexico they're a
top contaminant recycling
programs it's estimated that
single use plastic bags
contribute eighty percent of the
contaminants New Mexico's
recycling program has been
mentioned earlier the resulting
estimated costs for about four
million dollars a year New
Mexico is also home for
recycling paper mill.
McKinley Papen New Mexico SB two
forty threes requirement that
retail sales that was meant use
recycled content paper bags
ensure market for New Mexico's
recycled paper and cardboard
this bill is a clear win for New
Mexico from a pollution
standpoint an economic
standpoint thank you committee
and I hope that you will say yes
to this bill.
Thank you and accept we need
lots of.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is jeans Loxton and I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico I
went to let you know that the
league supports and backs
strongly supports the plastic
bag reduction act in both the
Senate and the house because it
is consistent with the league's
position on sustainability and
on waste management is
particularly important if we
want to recycle other materials
we have to control the use of
single use plastic bags or else
it will interfere with the and
the recycling that we're doing.
Right now thank you very much
for letting go we contribute to
this discussion.
Thank you and that's that we
have one in the.
Purchase fail.
Then that you're needed on your
at.
Thank.
The need to introduce yourself.
Okay we're gonna move on and
accept we have journalists.
Good morning my name is Caroline
I'm a small business owner in
Albuquerque I strongly support
the single use plastic bag ban
they're not necessarily reused
and allowing them to continue to
pollute our landscapes waterways
and recycling facilities for the
chance that they may be reused
is not reasonable or just
because to keep them.
We're talking about paper not
breaking down in landfill yeah
that's true but what's also true
is that plastic bags regularly
contaminating recycling streams
causes their batches to be sent
to to the landfill therefore
increasing landfill rates and
that's a huge problem here in
Albuquerque it's also as we've
heard an incredible expense to
maintain facilities that are
getting jammed with these backs
and lastly right now plastic
bags can only be recycled and
specialty recycling services if
bags are collected here and sent
to recycling services which they
often are not that's an
additional financial and natural
resource expense they're
typically turn into plastic
lumber like the brand tracks an
individual research has found no
companies to source from New
Mexico myself and my business
customers strongly urge you to
vote yes on this band thank you.
Thank you thank you next if we
had any yeah that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is ani
Hannah I'm an organizer and the
photographer and a mother in
Albuquerque and I speak on
behalf of so many of the
children and families who
brought this forward in Santa Fe
and Albuquerque it was really a
student led movement and it was
very disappointing to see it
quickly repealed in Albuquerque
and I think at the statewide
level is that where we really
need to see this go now and as a
photographer I really support
local tourism and the beauty of
our state and welcoming people
in to see that not to see
plastic bags strewn in the wind
to keep it out of the Rio Grande
and lastly from a climate
justice perspective of frontline
communities in New Mexico and in
places like cancer alley in
Louisiana share the burden of
plastic production and pollution
and it's a racial justice issue
that we need to address so I
wrote you to I urge you to vote
yes on this spans thank you.
Okay we still have half dozen or
so people on the list and
interest if I were to do one
more and that's that was my
pleasure.
It.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Douglas Mikel John I'm a
registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico
CVM ma'am urges you to support
this bill
particularly because the plastic
bags in question do not degrade
they remain in the environment
and state continuing source of
pollution long after their
single use for that reason and
for the reasons that have been
stated by the sponsors and by
other speakers conservation
voters urges you to vote yes on
this bill thank you.
Okay thank you it thank you to.
All the participants I apologize
to those that we can get to
the Sanchez at anything that
like that before we get to the
committee.
Mr chair Committee thank you for
allowing all that public comment
I just want to make one
correction of paper does about
great if you use the right kind
of paper about operates rather
quickly and I think this is the
the geography study that they
council commission but it about
grace's within a month.
So that's why to far more
preferable material to switch to
it doesn't have that legacy
effective hundreds of years of
contaminating the land wildlife.
It's.
Okay.
Members of the committee.
Representative with.
Thank you Mr.
Senator
In that curious
Several cities have.
Have.
Past their own Maez.
we we have been.
It's just interesting we can
jump back and forth on whether
mobile professionals.
What not.
And it it does appear as if this
is an.
Health which is the.
Which would be the largest.
the users.
Consumers.
of plastic bags and and.
I'm just.
Interesting that's why I would
just leave this hands local.
Communities that act as far as
climate change those.
Ask banks or non that.
There's not that much of the
plastics and we're not gonna get
rid of plastics.
Everything.
We have here this last.
so.
By.
What was.
Plastic bags statewide really
still a couple of things one of
them that we did find.
The increases.
Salmonella and E. coli for
people using these chapters
backs that.
Be around for the vegetables
needs around and you get to be
there or not Washington like
they they they could manage that
and.
So I'm just wondering.
Albuquerque did have an.
And.
For all act questions have
consequences.
There was a there was a change
and I I don't know why we
wouldn't leave this.
To the local communities.
Mr chair representative question
this is one of those
environmental issues it's
serious it's enough to warrant
state action
this is
helpful policy to all the
citizens of the state.
And so it's just you know we're
we're seeing lots of states
doing this and so we feel like
it's time I mean those of us in
government looking at the date
on plastics looking at the
persistence in the environment
this is fairly new research
H. is shocking and it's
something that I think demands
urgent action from government
you're right this is a start
we're not we recognized classics
has many uses of our world
that's what this is called
plastic waste reduction that
we're dealing with plastic waste
is being disposed disposed of in
seconds
not recycled and in fact other
states are going far beyond what
we're talking about here other
states like Colorado they just
had a lot going to fact to get
rid of single use plastic straws
to get you get rid of containers
a lot of these have fees and
other things we really
simplified this to just start
with this issue and collect
data.
And then explore how we can
reduce plastic waste further in
the future but it's a pressing
environmental issue and that's.
Because of this.
I am more concerned that during.
So.
There was actually a.
Wish to go back to plastics.
For.
Health reasons.
and so I'm and I and I'm not
sure if that didn't play a
little bit of the states in the
Albuquerque decision to.
To go back in and it just seems
to be even even in the midst of
a pandemic.
That if we pass this.
There would be many local
control all rights.
On the legislature and Mr
chairman.
And Representative said what we
saw during the pandemic was
government.
Really strong act.
We have to remember we have the
color.
Caller that's and state level
and talking about.
The stories.
state.
We have a communities that.
Want some read.
Two dollars and and a lot of
times by the time the active in
the community to.
Or
News apparatus.
Late each time and local
governments a little quicker to
be able to move on that I don't
see anything in here.
As we go forward I would like to
see something in here that.
For health reasons.
That local governments can
override is if we leave it up to
the state.
And we're not it session to be
called in the session I can
imagine for something like this
would be called in the session
and act.
Since we're not in your body.
there's nothing in to allow for.
Local governments to to to to be
able to do so that when I have
to not sure if that's of any
interest but.
and
Mr chair just one last line of
questioning
I I see that that the lower the
blowing backs on really what is
that everybody's attention but
the reality is a lot of people
including my family we use the.
Max.
For secondary use.
If we choose to take up dog
waste wanting animals we use of
the to line our little trash
cans.
After.
The only thing this is going to
cause in those instances are
just I want access.
I don't know that it necessarily
reduces plastic people on these
plastic that is we.
Getting.
And particularly for folks.
Them getting their groceries and
getting whatever is fine.
And they're going on line
trashcan and all
of their.
Still the need plastic bags.
And and I'm I'm actually little
concern that.
Trash.
Townsend.
We'll just go online people will
just waste in their.
I just drove the waste in the
trash can.
And I think we'll see different.
The streets as wider drugs and
other plastics that would go
into a bigger plastic bag tied.
Thrown in the trash.
Specially specially mystery.
Government.
That one round as well so I'm
I'm not sure this gets you where
the distributions.
Lasting so all it just reduces
that.
Folks.
This.
Thank you Mr.
someone to anyone else
survivors.
With that back a little bit
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Representative
just a couple questions are
Senator you made the comment
that you're going to start with
this issue.
Visit your attention to that
take further steps to go toward
which is that Colorado is
members uses is this the one
measure you want to do that
stop.
Mr chair representative yeah and
I said we we want to start this
collect data and then see I mean
there's certainly other single
use plastics that would be very
desirable to get rid of
single use plastic containers
and a lot of food is packaged
in.
Usually problematic but one
thing we're very cognisant of
the reason this bill is only
limited to this is we do need
more research we we we do need
to see what the alternatives are
if we remove one item from usage
what is it could replace with is
it better or is it really the
trade offs so so we're we we we
know this is an issue that's
been studied we're comfortable
with that I do think plastic
pollution is very serious issue
but with this is a measured
approach to take a start here
and then you know we'll
collected in wall collectively
decide if we want to do more.
Mr Chairman programs Senator.
Property have this band for time
do not have the data.
Available to you now do we have
to this band State water to
collect the data.
Well Mr chair representative we
know the plastic act to been
successful where there exists I
mean that that that data is well
established it's been a great
experience in Santa Fe it's been
a great experience in
Albuquerque sorry when it when
it lasted for the time it is
period right experience in Los
crucis so I mean this is what we
hear from communities where
excess so what I say collected I
mean just.
Yeah.
Collect data from the US but
disorders other endeavors as
well.
Mr chair Senator if there was
such a success why did they go
back.
Mr chair representative I mean
maybe Representative radio I
think you know it was it was a
difficult time obviously during
the pandemic there was a change
in leadership on the council and
the.
So their private of.
Mr chair
maybe I can help answer some of
these questions
the when the bag ban was
implemented it really helps it
really had to deal with deal
with the thickness of the back
and some of the stores were very
innovate innovative their
manufacturers started producing
biodegradable backs that we're
actually a little thinner but
they were more acceptable and
they actually did but they were
biodegradable so that was really
a good thing because people were
starting to think a little bit
more out of the box I guess you
could say and as I mentioned Mr
chair and representatives
And Senator I'm sorry
The council make up did change
and when the bag ban was
overturned this past year the
vote was sixty three and I and I
have to be honest I mean there
were more when I was on the
council and I was serving as the
chair there were more Democrats
than there were Republicans but
we did have some Republican
support as well
and so when the council make up
changed the bag ban was
overturned and that was really
unfortunate because it a lot of
people really really
disappointed by that
and even the stores you know
they were already working in the
realm of started to move forward
with the new type of back and
even the little tiny you know
the ones that you put your
lettuce and stuff in those or
more biodegradable as well.
So it wasn't just limited to the
the the bags that we take our
groceries out with
the things that you put your
lemons and so on and they became
I degradable as well and I think
that is one of the biggest
issues with these backs is that
these are not biodegradable.
Mr Mr chairman and
Representative I'm I'm obviously
from Albuquerque Bernalillo
county I live in the far
southwest quadrant which is very
high and borders on the I forty
corridor and the winds are
extremely high higher the lost
city in that part of town and I
have constituents.
Very concerned because the bags
were flying everywhere they were
in the water clogging drains
they also became really
problematic with walking the
dogs and animals because small
animals tend to get entangled
when they mess with these bags
you know they're curious Mr
chair and the yeah they they
want to get into the bags and
they can strangle and they can
ingest which is very poisonous
toxic so there are a lot of
reasons why in my particular
district they're very I have the
environmental
women mothers and grandmothers a
very active environmental
justice they're the ones that
have brought all of these bills
and concerns to me and to those
of us in that in that area
that represent that area they're
very strong because of the air
pollutants
that tend to also stay in that
area and so this is another way
to.
And and so they were very
disappointed with the change we
would have preferred to have not
had that change for those
reasons thank you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative
Senators up.
Yes.
What my real concern is when I.
See people.
Who are carrying their groceries
walking down the street.
They have through for
legislative can't do that with a
program that they can do it with
the plastic.
M..
What
are we.
Providing some inconvenience to
those people to.
Either choose to walk to the
store for do not have
transportation for the community
where there is very limited
public transportation and and so
how do we address.
Those issues sure Mr Chairman
representative there are other
alternatives including in this
bill I mean people can still
number one go out and get.
Purchase any kind of back they
want including what do you see
where there are back down to to
see a migration to more durable
backs that are also very
affordable for us
that are reusable so I think
you're gonna see a shaft from
those single use plastic bags to
something a little more durable
but also very affordable for a
citizens
Center representatives Mr chair
one of the things that the City
of Albuquerque did is we went
ahead and and
I graduated the reviews that we
get them out to the public so
they sit City of Albuquerque on
them and the public loves and I
mean they were they were using
and they were asking for that
and that was one of the programs
that provide.
Mr chair representative did you
find a lot of those bags on the
runway you know they were.
Terry that Mr Representative.
Six zero
sentencing
Madam chair of this committee as
well as raise this year.
Mexico.
And there's grant money for each
community to receive funds to
purchase using.
So there's an opportunity that
I'm happy to community.
Costs money that the state
times.
Thank.
Mr Chairman.
In that regard.
You know cleaning up the island
highway and stuff you see a lot
of interesting things
unfortunately
that.
I have seen some of those more
durable.
Tags.
On the side you know on the side
of the highway and they don't
seem to.
Decompose quickly are you see
some of the plastic bags and
they're usually shredded or
something state of
decomposition
milk cartons and things like
that that are made out of
plastic the ultraviolet rays
seem to deteriorate that plastic
fairly rapidly
to the point that you can't pick
it up related to put it in your
trash Act so there's a lot of
things that that one see the one
thing that I noted was some of
these.
Reusable bags.
State to be a lot tougher than
the bad you're replacing it with
a when they're discarded
improperly
I just made that comment.
I don't know what Albuquerque's
experience but there are some
miles around where you see
those.
Goes back to keep raw we will
tax in the portage that are not
breaking down by the.
Walmart plastic bags each year
this check out so
Our view is somewhat skeptically
and and really have been
surrounded by up to.
Folks.
Don't have
the ability to put their.
The card they're having to walk
around and I I just.
That action that caters are
moderating.
I will turn alternative.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert
is the.
The.
Senator
eight
For.
That.
dollars the it is that.
Share.
User our.
Yeah libraries that.
Sure that although the you look
at the substitutes.
Just.
Just if you could just make sure
you have the right to the right
on
Four five three one three eight.
I line three.
Right off the bat.
That is a fine.
Mr Chairman representative of
the fines if levied if the.
This would allow them to
necessary that really the retail
outlet that is failing to comply
with the law.
Right yes.
If I can add this to this is the
lowest fine we can find anywhere
in any state it's not intended
to be
Enforcement happy bill by any
means it's just you have to have
some.
Meeting for authority if you
have some entity out there to
just willfully doesn't follow up
so this allows environment to to
they may do it but not to
exceed.
Twenty five dollars.
That's if a local government
decides to not do it this also
doesn't.
Yep local governments from doing
their own equipment so that's an
important piece of this too it's
as if of local government to sit
out do anything in the state may
do that.
I.
We.
All right.
Our system has the added they
come up with.
Five dollars a.
Mr chair you know the the
Representative the next section
talk about part of the moment
promulgate rules.
Just so you know they will I'm
sure defined when somebody is in
violation they will document
that they will quantify the
duration of period of violations
to ultimately assessed a fee if
that's what they decided to.
That.
I.
Mr chair representative I.
I think it does because the the
law this bill really is about
what retail outlets are required
to do and food providers are
required to do.
If there for their prohibited
from issuing at the point of
sale the single use plastic bags
so it's really no way for a
private citizens to file it this
long unless there retail
provider.
If there's no it doesn't
prohibit them from walking down
the street and one for raising
one that's and they're covered
find them in a store
predicts retail outlets for
mission.
As.
Okay share this.
We are I.
At.
Jennifer thank you thousand
representative got.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Representative yes.
Is not a comprehensive and.
Any plastics outside of.
We.
Plastic bags.
Grocery stores and retail
outlets.
And we.
So.
X. milk jokes.
Which.
A lot of other tests back this
check.
A lot of other sections of the
built into this from laundry
bags to leave for her.
And your previous testimony
Mister chairman Senator that.
Try this gather data.
True.
See if the process could move
forward to plan.
A touch of class was actually.
I mean Mr chair that's
Representative that's kind of
outside the bounds of this bill
that's my thought process on the
issue of plastics but this bill
is that in a exclusivity issue
of plastic bags.
So what Mr Chairman mentioned to
could you describe.
Formal data gathering process
for me how that's going to work
who's responsible for reporting
Schalch and how much will that
cost yeah Mr chair
representative
there are organizations like the
New Mexico recycling coalition
who are ready to support this
we've been around for decades
but you know that is also kind
of you know when I talk about
collecting data looking at
policy solutions in the future
that's also a part of this bill
so.
Yep that's just.
One thing that our people are
serious about environmental
policy are going to be looking
at
but that's part of the bill that
Senate mandated the bill for the
environment department this is
pretty straightforward where
begins or ends it doesn't
include.
you know like everything we do
we're going to gain experience
as we do it.
And we're gonna hear from them
in the interim committees and.
We'll hear from communities also
what was also chief.
She so Mr Chairman
representative.
There is no your existing or
proposed formal evaluation
process it will be sponsored by
the state.
To change this.
Mr chair representative knows
that in the bill.
Okay.
All these banks.
Mr Chairman she's for
Representative.
Thanks recyclable.
No recyclable not economically
recyclable or not recyclable
equipment that is available in
New Mexico could you describe.
Different churches yes I can
answer that thank you Mr chair
members of the committee these
bags are not economically
recyclable in New Mexico less
than five percent of this is
called LDPE low density
polyethylene film is recycled
nationwide the only market for
it is that tracks lumber that
you know that maybe you might
see a playground made out of
that and they have more than
they can use they do not source
any of that material from New
Mexico there is very few of the
material recovery facilities
those big processing entities
that I'm sort recyclables to to
turn you know the mixed
recycling into available
cardboard available women a
bailiff plastic bottles very few
of those nationwide are able to
handle this sort of plastic
because simply there is not a
market for it one thing about
recycling is if nobody wants it
and if there's no market for it
it's garbage and as much as we
want to aspirational your
wishfully recycle things because
we want under recycled there's
not a market for it if nobody
wants it it's garbage which is
why it's so great that this bill
includes those paper bags have a
forty percent recycled content
in those bags because our only
market are only and market in
the state is in their grants New
Mexico and Peru New Mexico it is
a paper recycling of cardboard
recycling facility that employs
two hundred and eighty people in
that small town so it is
recyclable because somebody
wants it at the end of the day
to turn it into something new so
that's kind of where these banks
get mixed mixed up in the in a
what's recyclable what's not
recycle question.
Mr Chairman expert.
Actually the question was it is
technically these banks are
technically recyclable but not
economically recyclable it is a
yes okay.
And Mr Chairman.
Senator are experts I believe
her she conversation the
technology improvements.
Moving this material to the
point of bio to credibility
thank you.
No not this material this
material is made from
petrochemicals which are not
biodegradable there are some
plant based plastics but it it
it becomes confusing a lot of
the those are green and so you
think about a great but if
they're not certified by third
party entity to make sure they
actually art by agradable that
they are actually biodegradable
the other issue is that if we're
growing corn to make single use
plastic bags instead of growing
corn to feed livestock livestock
or feed people then you know
what is the overall
environmental and economic
impact of that.
Mr chairman and next program
corn to my counseling.
That's true of the Russian.
Sure.
So.
Mister chairman Senator.
Use.
For a.
If you will.
The technology is becoming
available.
To distribute these matters.
To plastic bags that would be I.
Right.
Is that thank.
Mr I'm gonna answer the first
part of it because you said free
or virtually free that I think
you just kind of a two part
question the first part about
making affordability of reusable
bags yes absolutely so and you
know some stores even give them
away
or their dollar and so for sure
and then of course you can use
clapped back and have it for the
rest your life as far as whether
or not those bags are recyclable
that's a tougher issue but I
will I will let their attempt to
answer that part of it.
That technology is not widely
available or or in any near term
Entity as far as I know I might
need to have one of our
composition experts speak to
that.
If you know.
Okay Mister chairman Senator
next porch.
Though there has been.
Compelling reason.
To provide these banks to
consumers.
And.
One of those.
Has to be the cost of the bag.
So she's the utility.
Think back.
So I was disappointed to see
that there wasn't going to be
any sort of formal valuation as
to what this was going to do to
the cost to our consumers is.
No we're in the plan.
Well Mr chair Representative no
it's not it's not I mean that
I'm not opposed to I mean I
think it's a great idea to do a
life cycle cost analysis there's
a lot of costs sometimes we look
at just one cost we don't look
at the other we consider the
cost of litter cleanups our
state has a million dollar your
litter cleanup program we just
started Albuquerque it's costing
them four million dollars a year
dealing with these backs so
that's a cop she is really what
these backs are doing they they
create cost mandate to local
governments have to do it so I
think the idea of doing a life
cycle analysis is great it's not
something we require generally
in the bill we passed quite
frankly we have some up
operators here like a weed up
you know that's not something is
budgeted for but I think it's a
prudent thing to do attic with
recycling coalition I would
totally be supportive of
encouraging something like that
you know down the road after
this event place well I thought.
Mr chair
and Senator Representative I
think that some of this data may
actually be available in
Albuquerque so because we did
quite a bit of studies before we
decided to move this forward so
I think if we contacted our
solid waste
Matthew just last night he would
she may have some of that data
already available so it's not
that we haven't done any
analysis but the biggest of
violators that we found or these
plastic bags that often go to
the streams as well and you know
the partition jestem which is
not good from an environmental
standpoint ecologically and then
the other.
Biggest violator force or
styrofoam containers that are
used widely by restaurants and
that that was the initial
the bill that we have proposed
is we had included the styrofoam
but you know we wanted to get
the bill passed and and so we
stuck to the last band.
Mr chair would just have
Representative that all of the
coalition's and groups
environmental and animal
protection rights and all of
the strips are constantly
monitoring the results of these
types of of bills and the and
and as the senator mentioned the
lifecycle of these bills in
order to be able to help us in
general as an environment and
local communities know how to
proceed so they're constantly
monitoring it constantly
collecting data and they're
constantly feeding that data
into their local communities and
decision makers as well as with
the state so it's something that
that environmental justice
groups to just a practice
anyway.
Mr chairman presenters sure can
appreciate that.
All of those folks have
mentioned.
And what which which track.
Check.
What made you.
Let me move on to the last
hot line of questions and that
is.
Final.
Local control.
Mr chair representative again
this is this is a pressing issue
for all of us it's not unlike
other types of environmental
issues that we may not agree on
respectfully but that we feel
are the state's provision for
quite frankly the federal
government as the same
deliberations you can say why
I've given everything The Little
John some issues mandate for
the.
For the welfare the environment
The something's pressing enough
that you have a bigger solution
and plastic pollution is one of
those issues.
Mr chairman and senator.
Local authorities have gone back
and forth and back and forth.
Health safety Senator Lucian
June these.
All these reusable buyers.
At this issue with one of.
Flexibility in the circumstance
were.
Space.
Campos April.
Are not suitable for.
Use one.
Senator issues.
Last question.
I think that's all I have check
Senator.
Thank you for your courage.
Representative
the couple just once you're out
uh first off
There's a committee your
audience if you go in you to
these and I videos about how
recycling centers were and the
machinery and the general store
and it's really it's really kind
interesting because it's not you
know it's not fortunately you
know something say there your
point out the bottles to one
pilot this is so Seoul process
and it's very evident.
That one of the problems with
our recycling system is the
amount of foundation a few days.
plastic bags these plastic bags
do get chances and the gears.
Electric cords I meet people
people want to recycle and so
they just sort of threw
everything in there thinking
someone else will figure it out
and it actually cause us
problems.
well I think it's important
about what this bill is in.
Necessarily the landfill impact
because I get the for the
Brian million bill even if it
doesn't agree to some extent.
Still taking up that space
what I see is.
We know how to Mexico people of
special spring I do see these
everywhere they are persistent
I think the days and like the
Santa Fe river community and.
And they're not only everywhere
the third party to pick up if
they get into a waterway for
even a rodeo they can have a you
know strong flow of.
Alright they get questions very
their fill the sand I mean it
just seems like this significant
properties.
And finally.
I think we have an altar we have
the opportunity to use a refusal
that answer to that
By these days.
So.
the what the too much weight in
their.
All but
Seems like living in Santa Fe
County were see where these of
the pandemic you know I go to
the store.
Percent a good story by that one
or two items and I ended before
I would like to the the ten
cents for people that are judged
right now it seems to me we can
work through this and this is
the best.
so that.
So with that I would there too
much.
Mr chair of the defense houses.
Of the.
I
not pass on the bill at two
thousand subsidy.
Second progressive tax and to to
take the.
We do it online members of this
is.
Representative break up yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend no.
Shares or any other.
Yes.
Chairman queen yes.
Seven to three so five of seven
three of the past thank you Mr
president.
If you if you're not staying for
the next bill I just ask you to
leave the room.
But I can't.
Is excuse.
The.
the.
For the for the role the regexp
changes.
we have just so.
The seven dollars
out.
Is that the one percenters just
go over the changes.
we will not yes on this bill as
you are the best.
Representative Lujan.
With the are you ready for us to
move the.
Checks and.
The stuff that transaction to
the committees of.
Considering the committee said.
They're on the face of
good morning Mr chair the number
is two two five two seven four
point three that's correct.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members just quickly we do that
the steps to take into
consideration some of the the
comments
from members and I just go to
page one online twenty four.
We.
Changed.
The word show.
May.
So may include measures and.
Then change.
We struck this.
The words in a lecture public
utility so the the clear
sentence reads now it grid
modernization plan may include
measures of cost effectiveness
and reliability of the
distribution grid.
And then from the original bill
which would be a second place we
struck.
Planned expenditures for
operations.
And struck maintenance and
proposed projects and how.
Their plan.
The planned expenditures so that
the line now reads.
For a start again from page one.
Twenty three a great
modernization plan may include
measures of cost effectiveness
and reliability of the
distribution distribution.
And how the plans are consistent
with the states.
Roadmap for grid modernization.
And that's the gist of it Mr
chair.
Thank you to the committee for
these the percent tax yes thank
you.
Okay.
At
this.
The.
Everyone is following.
It water division.
There is water damage want to
get passengers on that that is.
Water.
Mr chair representative was
really good question because we
have plans we have plans so I'd
like to actually
set the record straight for some
of the comments that were made
in some maybe this information
that was delivered yesterday
committee I would Mr chair on
the issue of what plans are in
place and what plans.
How they are defined essentially
and I'd like to turn to my
expert witness
that.
The nation thank you Mr chair
and representative my name again
the record is assumed payments
online independent.
Energy economist and on Saturday
a representative to that the
abilities have not filed
comprehensive distribution plans
and I did go back yesterday and
get a a fact check with the
public utility regulatory staff
on that and I do want to confirm
today with you that
el Paso southwestern and PNM
have filed components of grid
modernization plans in this
specifically el Paso and
southwestern have filed
applications for the advanced
metering infrastructure R. A.
money programs kids just a
component of great bond and then
el Paso's filing is already been
approved and then Southwestern's
filing is in hearing now no.
PNM is a little bit different in
March twenty twenty two they
were ordered by the commission
to file components of the grid
modernization plan to address
reliability and resiliency
issues that may arise from heavy
system loads that could result
in planned or unplanned outages.
If you wish directed to file an
application on grid management
programs in controlling demand
and A. in line K. and I reviewed
PNM filing and while it's closer
to a plan.
It was done without the
structure of a rulemaking based
plant in as such it does not
include key items as.
In the commission's order and it
goes in directions we on what
the PRC has requested I don't
need to discuss those details.
Only to say that without the
structure construct okay what
the commission once with the
plan they're now faced with
something that PNM is
representing a plan but does not
in the first instance meet their
order and I don't believe would
be comprehensive under of
rulemaking.
Chair.
Lactation that idea.
Trying to figure out.
With the.
Shortcomings that you believe
are and within those filings how
this is going to fix that.
But because to my point that I
made and I didn't I didn't try
to.
Reiterated that.
That we had this conversation
that we were going out really we
didn't know where we would go
on.
You Mr chair thank you I'm not
finished.
When you look at the Ms lamb.
I think the estimated cost of
there's like three hundred
thirty six million dollars.
If you look at sales appointment
right it was like.
Forty thirty six of forty yeah.
In fact the yeah and I know the
representatives there.
My friend was sitting there
thinking about this I mean we
walked on top of them three
hundred million dollars with the
day at.
We've seen PNM rice prices rise
yeah we're.
Our C. not.
We're seeing.
Representative modernization
again at three million dollars
those all.
And I see a bill that I'm not
for sure.
Anything to try to capture that
is built this great
modernization.
was required to reduce costs
are.
Be all I could get the people of
Albuquerque V. right.
Get it but I don't see that and
that's what I'm trying to figure
out how does this may file.
Do anything.
To help with the cost of
electrical rates.
In that area.
Could I just clarify these Mr
chair and representative.
So.
The cost of the in the and
whatever comes PNM.
The plan is for the commission
now and then what would come out
of subsequent plans under a
comprehensive rulemaking do not
represent solely incremental
costs on top of an otherwise
operating system these then
become clause that substitute
for monies and projects that
would otherwise be spent it's an
optimization of the process we
are actually creating a system
of distribution that functions
and then move more optimal as in
terms of reliability resiliency
and then the modernization that
we're seeing within the industry
in the country of
electrification and
incorporation of renewables and
set it so that all in the
direction of
Keeping costs as low as possible
as we move forward with the
provision of electricity.
The state level as possible.
That needs of the origin as low
as possible.
That might values attached.
And and and I want to be as low
as.
As she mobile.
Protecting.
The people of the Mexico in the
future.
That's what I states are.
Our.
There are ciation he is.
Portability reliability.
And and dispatchable.
Thank you Mr so I'm I'm not the
discourse yeah that is that.
This is the most important
things so thank you.
That.
Thank you Mr chairman.
To the next part such.
To be consistent with states
proposed.
The room.
This.
Mr chair let the expert is the
service.
Mr chair representative service
for you just reminder run the
setup we talked about the last
last time it was.
The done pursuant to statute
passed by the legislature.
Good discussion on the.
What.
Experts to articulate that.
Legislation one more time could
Mr chair if you can answer
briefly the person.
Thank you.
Mr chair and representative at
you sleep as possible.
Each of.
Is.
So Mr chair representative
budget you decide you have any
quick review of the state that.
Senator upset December of twenty
twenty and that and that date
this season workshops give up
with the roadmap and those but
the road ahead for a I think you
get that but with the different
senses and it also had four or
five to echo voice would be
checked and says was not need so
what this bill is suggesting is
that the PRC follow that
development and if the right
those ideas that are perfect.
So Mister chairman.
Representative.
Mr Q..
The roadmap is developed in yes
Mr chair representative yes and
Mr Chairman representative to
stop what.
They feel heard made comments to
the US for.
There were too many cooks in
the.
Electric utility kitchen.
And this is to it is time to
give me any confidence that
their situation is not.
Still the case thank you Mr
chairman that's all.
Very of.
Mr Chairman and representatives.
I know that I'm a planner
retired twenty eight years this
bill helps me to understand give
direction to the PRC sort of
what the expectation of the city
have sorry Hey councilman states
you can.
Of of what the state is
expecting and I think that.
I have to.
For that reason because I think
it really helps us to understand
and I want to talk to you after
this because I have some
thoughts as.
But I just think that it gives
us a clear direction of what our
expectations.
And.
Thank you Mr that just a quick
comments from.
Committees to order it's at the
point
Two shells look to the
committees of.
Utility shall also in the plan
and the piercing shell shocked
rules.
Yeah I think that's for us and I
think having the PRC the thing
your is in charge of that
process the range of.
the the plans may include cost
effectiveness and reliability
which I think are important so I
think what we're what we're
doing is we're just sort of
pushing that the PRC and the
utilities be proactive because
it requires issues I think we
all agree that.
Our station is proud
so that is for.
I would there two more motions.
Sure I would do not pass on
house bill two.
You have on Senator
for.
So unless there is a small and a
second for immersive radio
station to the.
Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend no.
