Roll call is closed.
We have a quorum. Please rest
for today's invocation led by
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Nicole Chavis.
Heavenly Father, we come before
you today with humbled hearts,
seeking your wisdom and guidance
as we gather to serve the people
of this great state. Lord, grant
us clarity of mind and strength
of spirit as we deliberate and
make decisions that will impact
the lives of those we represent.
Bless us with the spirit of
unity, respect, and
collaboration that we may we may
work together beyond party lines
and personal differences for the
common good.
Help us listen with open hearts,
speak with integrity and act
with justice and compassion.
Lord
May our work today be guided by
wisdom, fairness, and a
commitment to serve not only
those who are heard, but also
those whose voices often go
unnoticed. Keep us mindful of
trust placed in us and the
responsibility we bear. We ask
for your protection over our
state, our communities and our
families may all that we be done
be honor in your service to the
people in your holy name, we
pray. Amen.
Mm
Well, the gentle lady from
And well, the gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Hernandez
lead us in the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
Play ball.
Gent lady from Bern Leo Speaker,
I move you go to the next order
of business, announcements and
miscellaneous business. It is so
ordered.
Good morning, members.
Good morning members.
That's what I needed to hear.
Happy Tuesday. Legislative day.
Oh, still 7. Let's leave day 7.
Let's go for an announcement.
General lady from Catherine
Sierrascoto Valencia
representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new
grandbaby.
Number 13 arrived this morning
at 5:15 weighing in at 6 pounds
5 ounces, a little baby girl in
Montana.
So yeah, that's an issue, uh,
but Mr. Speaker, I just wanna
let you know that her name is
Madeline Gail Rug.
So, congratulations to my
daughter and her husband and,
and the big brother Walter and
uh so this makes number 13, 5
girls, uh, and, and the rest are
boys, so, uh, I am very, very
blessed and I wish I could see
her and hold that baby. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Congratulations, gentle lady.
Now serious question, can you
keep all the names and birthdays
straight?
The birthdays, Mr. Speaker, I
have an issue with. I know every
single one of their names.
Of course, but the birthdays, I
have it on my calendar, so I put
it in this morning after I
ordered a bunch of Amazon girl
clothes because she didn't know
what she was having, so, uh, but
I do remember all of their names
and their middle names.
Congratulations, gentle lady,
very, very cool, and I hope
that, uh, mom and, and baby are
in good health and that you get
to see them soon.
Congratulations.
The lady from Dona on our Rubio,
are you ready on your item?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
you get me to that point?
lady, do you ask unanimous
consent that how your memorial 3
be removed from my table and be
made the next order of business.
See no objection. It is ordered.
I will now let the record
reflect that all action is
necessary for placing joint
Memorial 3 on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate, amendment, or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the joint memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for
helping me out with that, um, so
thank you. I am honored to
introduce how Joint Memorial 3,
which declares February 21st,
2025, New Mexico TRO Programs
Day and also urges Congress to
continue funding TRO programs in
New Mexico, including Upward
bound and student support
services, TRO programs provide
critical academic and financial
support to low income first
generation and underrepresented
students.
Helping them access persistent
and graduate from college in New
Mexico, thousands of students
rely on these programs to
overcome barriers to higher
education.
I personally participated in
Upward Bound when I was growing
up and attending Lake Arthur
Junior and high school and it
was an incredible experience for
me.
But when I transitioned to the
big city of Las Cruces and
started college at New Mexico
State University. I flunk to my
first semester of college,
overwhelmed and not knowing how
to navigate the system. I nearly
gave up, but student support
services at NMSU stepped in my
second semester, giving me the
guidance resources and
encouragement I needed.
With their support, I turned
things around, eventually
earning above a 3.5 GPA, the
remainder of my college career
and graduating with the bachelor
of Arts degree from New Mexico
State University and going on to
my graduate degree and many
other accomplishments such as
serving in this legislative
body. There are so many stories
like mine.
Programs like Upward Bound and
Student Support services change
lives. They make higher
education possible for students
who might otherwise fall through
the cracks, and today I ask our
members to honor New Mexico
Trio's programs TRO programs day
and continue to urge my
colleagues to support HJM3 and
to call on Congress to continue
funding these essential
programs.
And so with that
Um, clerk to read.
If you want
Clerk to read, you, you, you,
you, you heard her clerk to
read.
House Joint Memorial 3
introduced by Representative
Rubio, a joint memorial
declaring February 21, 2025, New
Mexico TRO programs Day in the
legislature, whereas trio is a
series of programs funded by the
United States Department of
Education that helps low income
students access higher
education, and whereas Trio
derives its name from the
initiative's original 3
programs, Upward Bound, created
in 1964, educational talent
search created in 1965 and
special services for
vantage students created in 1968
and now known as Student Support
Services, and whereas since
1986, the United States Congress
has recognized a national trio
day in recognition of the
achievements of the TRO programs
and the more than 10 million
students from low income and
working families that have
benefited from the services of
TRO precollege and college
programs, and whereas
2025 is the 61st anniversary of
the creation of TRO programs and
New Mexico was one of the first
states to implement these
programs. And whereas all TRO
programs are vested in the
notion that committed students
deserve an opportunity to obtain
higher education without regard
to race, gender, national
origin, disability status,
family economic resources, or
family educational backgrounds
and whereas in addition to the
original 3 programs, TRIO
programs now include Talent
Search, Upward bound math.
Science, veterans upward bound,
educational opportunity centers
and the Robert E. McNair
Post-baccalaureate Achievement
Program, and whereas there are
42 TRO programs in New Mexico
that attract nearly $13,500,000
in annual federal funding and
serve more than 10,000 students,
and whereas
The successful federal programs
help students with disabilities
and low income first generation
and economically disadvantaged
students prepare for and gain
admission to college and obtain
college degrees that should be
expanded in order to serve more
students. Now, therefore, be it
resolved by the legislature of
the state of New Mexico that the
New Mexico TRO programs be
recognized for the important
role they play in encouraging
and assisting students seeking
higher education by declaring
February 21, 2025 as New Mexico
trio program.
Day in the legislature and be it
further resolved that February
21st, 2025, be recognized as
national trio Programs Day in
New Mexico and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to be
transmitted to Richard Martinez,
President-elect of the TRIO New
Mexico Association.
Is there a debate on the
memorial.
Seeing none, the gentilated
clothes, Mr. Speaker. I just ask
everyone to support this joint
memorial and that you um send
Good vibes and props to a lot of
these programs across the state
who provide such amazing
services to young people, um,
who are future leaders here in
New Mexico. Thank you, do you
move that housemorial 3 in the
past and unanimous consent of
the House that the record shows
that the role has been called
and all members present have
voted in the affirmative.
Yes, I do, Mr. Speaker.
We're a final passage of House
Joint Memorial 3. The vote is
not open.
The boys are closed by a vote of
69 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. How's Memorial 3 has
really passed this house.
Congratulations.
Gentle lady from Catherine
Sierra Secordo Valencia,
Representative Armstrong with a
memorial.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that House Memorial 3 be
removed from the speaker's desk
and made the next order of
business
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Memorial 3 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate,
amendment or substitution. The
gentle lady to explain the
memorial. Speaker, this is a
memorial declaring February 18,
2025, the New Mexico
HomeBuilders Association Day in
the House of Representatives in
recognition of the New Mexico.
Builders Association long
service to dedication to
fostering a vibrant and stable
housing industry. We are working
really hard, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen and body that, uh, to
try to, to even build more
houses in the state of New
Mexico, as everyone knows
there's always issues, but I
would just ask that, um, we, uh,
support the housing in New
Mexico for New Mexicans and this
um.
This entity, uh, the New Mexico
HomeBuilders Association is an
important member-driven trade
association that was chartered
with the National Association of
Home Builders in 1959 to improve
working and operating conditions
in the construction industries
in order to provide the
residents of New Mexico with
safe quality housing and
commercial buildings. So with
that, Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
Is there a debate on the
memorial.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield?
I yield to the gentle lady from
Berna Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Madam Leader, um, I just wanna
acknowledge your um memorial
today, um, having served as a
city planner for over 28 years
in Berlio County. I worked with
the homebuilder on pretty much a
daily basis, um, built many
houses, many subdivisions
throughout Albuquerque and
commercial buildings, and the
day these days I drive around
Albuquerque and think, oh, I
works on that project. I worked
on that project.
Um,
the homebuilders really provide
a service to the county, to the
state of New Mexico that um
helps encourage housing and uh
with that, Mr. Speaker and Madam
Leader, I thank you for bringing
this forward.
There is further debate on the
memorial. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will my
friend yield? Yes, I yield to my
friend from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, um, I think there
is an unwritten rule amongst um
Contractors, my father-in-law
was a contractor and uh during
college, um, I had the
opportunity to work with him one
time he, he asked me to come up
and work with him and uh so I
worked with him during the day
and I, I gotta tell you, that's
not my cup of tea. I, I didn't
come from that world and uh at
the end of the day, just about
at the end of the day, Mr.
Speaker, I accidentally stepped
on his tape measure.
That what we just heard now was,
was silent compared to what I
heard then. My father-in-law
invited me not to come back. He
would just pay me to stay away
after that his son-in-law.
He passed away, sir, or I may
not be, um, great guy, um, but I
appreciate what they do. I still
don't have a clue how they do
it, uh, but I live in a home.
I'm so grateful for that and uh
so um.
Madam, I appreciate this
memorial. I, I can't cannot say
enough about what these folks in
the trades do for every one of
us every day. Thank you,
appreciate it.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Eltero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
leader lady yield. Oh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I yelled to my
friend from Lincoln and Otero.
Thank you, Leader lady.
I also stand in support of your
house Memorial 3 today and
I am able to work with my home
builders back home, and they
invite me to meetings every
quarter, and we talk about
things and they're very
interested in the legislative
process.
And how we're gonna take care of
them. And, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady,
If everything goes accordingly,
we are going to be able to stand
up a sawmill.
In Mescalero that I think is
going to really make a
difference for a lot of our
local home builders and with all
these forests that are
overgrown. I'm hoping that
everyone that lives in a
mountainous community is able to
get a sawmill stood up in their
community and get a logging
operation going to where we can
support our home builders. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Is for the debate on the
memorial.
gentle lady, I think this is a
good opportunity for me to say
build baby build.
See no
Woo hoo.
You all get extra capital outlay
generated or close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I couldn't agree
with you more, build baby build,
uh, let's, uh, uh, thin our
forests in a respectful manner,
uh, let's open up those forests
where we can get some of this
logging going. Let's remove red
tape for all of this industry so
that we.
It doesn't cost us more to build
a house in New Mexico than it
does in Texas. So with that, Mr.
Speaker, um, I now move that
House Memorial 3 do now pass,
and I ask for unanimous consent
of the House that the rules be
suspended and the record, well,
that's not it. I'd, I asked for,
is that it? OK. I asked for
unanimous consent of the House
and the rules be suspended and
the record show that all action
for placing House Memorial 3 on
final passage be taken and that
everyone votes in the
affirmative.
more or less close enough,
we'll, we'll take that we are on
final passage of house Memorial
3, the vote is now open. The
vote is now closed by a vote of
69 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative, House memorial 3 has
really passed this house.
Congratulations.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan with a
special certificate for a
special celebration.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I have some guests on the roster
as well so when we read the
Read the certificate first and
then do introduction.
Clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico declares
February 18, 2025, Santa Fe
County Day.
Whereas in 1852 Santa Fe County
was established as one of the
first counties in the United
States territory of New Mexico
and whereas Santa Fe County has
within its boundaries the local
government jurisdictions of the
cities of Espanola and Santa Fe
and the town of Edgewood and
whereas Santa Fe County has
within its boundaries the
sovereign tribal government
jurisdictions of the Pueblo of
Santa Clara, the Pueblo of San
Idalfonso, the pueblo of Nambey,
the Pueblo of Paaque, the
of Tesuque the pueblo of
Cocheri, and the pueblo of Santo
Domingo and whereas Santa Fe
County also encompasses many
long-inhabited traditional
communities and whereas county
residents are governed by
publicly elected officials on
the board of county
commissioners, the county clerk,
the county assessor, the county
treasurer, the county probate
judge, and the county sheriff.
And whereas Santa Fe County
honors and promotes the strong
traditions and cultures of all
peoples in the county. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February 18, 2025 be proclaimed
Santa Fe County Day in the House
of Representatives and be it
further resolved that Santa Fe
County residents passed and
present be recognized for their
contributions in creating an
inclusive environment, honoring
the county's diverse cultures
and traditions signed and sealed
at the Capitol in the city of
Santa Fe.
Gentle lady, back to you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We have some,
uh wonderful guests on the
rostrum today that represent our
beautiful uh Santa Fe County,
and I'd just like to thank them
for all the work that they do
and all the work that they're
going to be doing. We have some
new members on our county
commission and, and, um, other
elected officials that are, are
coming back for their second
term, and I just want to say
from the bottom of my heart,
thank you for all the hard work
that you do and really the
important thing is how you work.
With all of us here at the state
governments and how we get
things done together. You are.
You are continuously in in
communication with all of us in
our delegation here, um, with
the state, and I want to say
thank you for all the efforts
and all the communication as we,
as we work through this session
again, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Speaker, excuse me, on the
rostrum we have.
Um
Mr. uh, Commissioner Hank
Hughes. He is a commissioner for
House District 5.
We have
Camilla Bustamante, Santa Fe
County commissioner for
commission District 3.
We have Justin S. Green, Santa
Fe County Commissioner,
Commissioner, uh, for District
one.
And newly, new commissioner Lisa
Kacari Stone, Santa Fe County
Commissioner Commission District
2.
A new commissioner Adam F.
Johnson, Santa Fe County
Commissioner, Commissioner
District 4, my commissioner.
And Mr. Speaker, we have more
esteemed guests and I would, uh,
defer to or yield to um our
house floor leader Shipansky.
Right, so I will yield to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Sapansy. Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, so
excited to be celebrating Santa
Fe County Day, um, you all
provide such valuable services
and um are truly present for the
constituents of Santa Fe County
and we have um additional uh
elected officials from Santa Fe
County that we want to recognize
today, some of whom are in the
chamber, I think some of them
may be in the Senate right now,
um, Isaiah Romero, Santa Fe
County Assessor.
Catherine Clark, our Santa Fe
County clerk is here.
Cordelia Montoya, Santa Fe
Probate Judge Adan Mendoza,
Santa Fe County Sheriff.
Uh, we have Jennifer Manzanares
our Santa Fe County treasurer is
here.
And Greg Schaeffer, the Santa Fe
County manager.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker, I just
want to express my gratitude to
you all, uh, Santa Fe County
provides a wide variety of
services to our residents and I
always know that when I have a
constituent that's struggling
with something difficult,
there's always someone at Santa
Fe County who can help them out,
so truly appreciate all the work
that you all do and the
difficult issues you grapple
with, so thank you for being
here and happy Santa Fe County
Day.
Anybody else with guests to
introduce for Santa Fe County
today?
All right. Well, I will.
I will add my words, um, of
gratitude.
Young lady from Berle
Representative Borego. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to
acknowledge, uh, Santa Fe County
Day. I grew up in Santa Fe
County, uh, in, and I have to
say this because many people
don't know this, but parts of
Espanola are in Santa Fe County
and the area that I grew up in
was in Santo Nino de Atoche and
there's a little mission down
there and we just celebrated
that the, the first day of
January.
Uh, where we had a little mass.
I also want to acknowledge that
in 1776, um, Diego de Vargas
founded the Villa Nueva de Santa
Cruz de la Cannada and Santa
Cruz de la Cannada is where the
church is, the holy Catholic
Church that exists in Santa Fe
County and I just want to
welcome all of our dignitaries
from Santa Fe County. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
Right, uh, Santa Fe County,
Santa Fe County Da. Let's go to
the gentle lady from Donana
Sierra Secorro Resentative Doo.
Thank you very much, speaker. I
just wanted to say welcome to
the chamber and thank you for
being so welcoming to us as we
visit the community for, you
know, 60 days away from our
family. I'm definitely a small
town girl. I miss home. I'm
ready to get home, but I sure
enjoyed my time in Santa Fe,
especially shopping, um, so I
would eat ramen noodles and
whatever else is offered in the
hall so I can spend all my money
at the Santa Fe Antique.
small. Um, but anyway, thank you
guys so much for being so
hospitable and it's such a
beautiful city to visit.
Oh.
You took the words right out of
my mouth except for the shopping
part.
But I do want to extend my
gratitude to Santa Fe County as
well for being so welcoming and
uh hospitable to us over the
course of the session and, and
of course year round because a
lot of us are here over the
course of the interim as well.
Um, Santa Fe is one of my
favorite places, uh, for obvious
reasons, but also because the
people are just amazing, um, so
thank you, Santa Fe County and
congratulations on Santa Fe
County Day.
Any gallery guests for Santa Fe
County Da?
If you are here, rise to be
recognized. Welcome to the
house.
How about anyone for TRO
programs if you're in the
gallery, please rise to be
recognized.
OK, I don't see you, so.
I do know that there are guests
of Representative Chavez, Nicole
Chavez in the gallery from La
Cueva High School we have Terry
Whitney with the College Board
and the la Cueva.
Advanced placement students led
by their teacher Jeremy Jensen.
Welcome to the house.
La Cueva Bears, welcome to the
house.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from Berlin and
Sandoval send their kids. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. I would just
like to take a moment to
recognize it on your desk today
is a little gift from our
Anderson uh roses and uh
Albuquerque International uh
museum.
And I just visitors may immerse
themselves in captivating
exhibitions and enriching
educational programs and
world-class events showcasing
and fascinating history,
science, sports, and artistry of
ballooning. They have 2 tickets
there, please go check it out.
Um, uh, uh, maybe our, uh,
minority leader would like to
bring her grandkids because it
is a wonderful interactive
section of our Bloom museum and
a great economic driver.
For New Mexico, thank you.
Thank you gentle lady, uh,
folks, we have a birthday to
celebrate and I'm gonna ask the
gentle lady.
From civil uh no.
really oribula McKinley, San
Juan to go to Valencia of a beta
to please rise and lead us in
her rendition of Happy Birthday
to her 4th year old daughter,
Halia Beta, gentle lady to sing.
Thank you, speaker. Yes, today
is my oldest child's birthday.
Her name is Hayley Abada, and
she's at school right now, but
she will be joining me this
evening for a few of the
receptions happening in Santa
Fe, so she's gonna watch this
later if you all could join me
in singing Happy Birthday, I'd
appreciate it.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday to.
you
Happy birthday, dear.
Hayley.
Happy birth
to you.
Happy birthday, Hayley Abeta.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, there
are some gifts on your desk
today, uh, courtesy of the
American Heart Association, they
are encouraging everyone to
learn how to use an AED and
remembering that the heart's not
going to start itself. Don't be
afraid to give CPR and save a
life. And Mr. Speaker, we also
have a little hard stress button
to uh ball to help make sure
that you can.
stress out of your life. So I
will be presenting a certificate
to the American Heart
Association, but as we celebrate
CPR day today at the state
Capitol.
Gentle lady, would you like the
certificate read, Mr. Speaker,
we would like to have the
certificate where. Would you
please have the clerk read the
certificate.
Clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session 2025 declares February
18, 2025, CPR Day at the state
Capitol, whereas for over 100
years, the American Heart
Association, the world's leading
nonprofit organization devoted
to healthier lives for all has
been dedicated to understanding
heart disease and strokes
through scientific research and
the association's millions of
volunteers and whereas the
American Heart Association is
the
and resuscitation science,
educational.
Education and training and
publishes the official
guidelines for cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and emergency
cardiovascular care and whereas
CPR is a life-saving skill that
if performed immediately, can
double or AAA person's chance of
survival during a cardiac
emergency, and only about 46% of
people who experience cardiac
arrest receive CPR from people
nearby while waiting for
emergency responders to arrive,
and whereas the American Heart
Association set a goal of
increasing survival from
cardiac.
arrest by turning bystanders
into lifesavers so that everyone
is prepared and empowered to
become a vital link in the chain
of survival and provide CPR in
response to a cardiac emergency.
Now therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico, the
February 18, 2025 be declared
CPR Day at the state Capitol in
the House of Representatives and
be it further resolved that the
House of Representatives
recognized the American Heart
Association for its role in
providing guidance to New Mexico
residents to live longer,
healthier lives by mitigating
risks for heart attacks and
strokes, and be it further
resolved, the recognition be
extended to the American Heart
Association and the
Association's life saving work.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
and the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you for representing me uh
recognizing CPR Day at the state
Capitol.
Congratulations CPR Day at the
New Mexico State Capitol.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe thank
you Mr. Speaker. I was trying
not to take a ton of time since
I am also supportive of the
HomeBuilders Association, little
plug for our weekly Wednesday
housing convening that the
homebuilders has been a part of,
um, since, since we started
here, um, at the legislature,
Mr. Speaker, talking about
housing. We have to build our
way out of this crisis, no
question, and they have some
great solutions, um, and just
would encourage, um, also
talking about housing tomorrow
morning.
7 a.m.
Room 17. 2nd announcement, Mr.
Speaker.
Is that, um, on your desk, you
have a really cool one week of
unlimited classes at Jazzercise.
I have
I have been doing jazzercise
since I was in the womb, Mr.
Speaker, literally, and um I
just needed to let you know that
locally, we have this
opportunity to engage in this
incredibly fun fitness, um,
activity, um, and my mom, um, is
an instructor along with many of
my friends, so would love to see
you there, um, and I will pull
you into a class anytime. I also
do on demand.
Um, 3rd announcement, Mr.
Speaker, is that Santa Fe
County, of course, with Espanola
and Santa Fe that we represent
in the four pueblos that were
mentioned, um, our, our
district, we are so grateful to
have even though they are now no
longer on the rostrum. That
said, Mr. Speaker, also
happening in Santa Fe County is
an incredible, incredible
program that on your desk, I
will invite you to look at.
There's a beautiful box of food
by an award-winning chef, um,
who is in the
Senate side right now.
But I want to tell you about the
um incredible food and the story
behind it. This food was
developed by the entrepreneurial
Institute of Northern New
Mexico. It's a program that this
legislature appropriated for,
um, starting to 2 years ago, 3
years ago, um, and our community
was able to incubate this
program, which is now serving
numerous folks across the state
that are coming out of, um,
incarceration and have a place
to land, Mr.
speaker. This is an incredible
program that talks about
professionalism, personal
growth, how to navigate certain
situations for those that have
been in the incarcerated spaces.
It helps build skills, job
readiness, and for those that
are coming out of incarceration,
have a place to land, Escondido
is in our district, Mr. Speaker.
It's also open till 11 p.m. on
Fridays and Saturdays. So if
you're one of those people that
just is a really remarkable
thing to have in Santa Fe.
Super late. But that said, Mr.
Speaker, the folks that are here
and behind the program, I really
want to, um, recognize that are
here today, um, in the gallery
and just want to make sure that
you get a chance to know them as
well, Mr. Speaker, with us is
Ralph Martinez, one of the
program leads who has provided
the coursework for the folks.
that are learning through the
process, um, he's an incredible
leader and has an incredible
backstory.
For those that are in recovery
as well as getting on their
feet. Adam John Griego, who's
also here with ACLU.
Um,
is supportive of this program,
Jennifer Montanares, who is on
the rostrum, has been a
volunteer with the program and
Ryan Dimez, oh there you are,
uh, Ryan Dimas is also one of
the educators in the program,
uh, Mr. Speaker, this is how we
save lives and continue to build
our community, um, and I'm sore
to uh appreciative of everyone
here and to the program leads
lots and lots of love to my
brothers, um, and appreciate you
enjoy your lunch, and we hope
that he wins the James Beard
Award this year, Mr. Speaker,
um.
Chef Fernando Ruiz was uh just
recently nominated. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you and
welcome to the house.
Gent lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just want to
thank uh Representative Romero
for bringing forward all of
those announcements, but I'm
gonna focus on the last one that
she wrote for, um, and I wanna
give special thanks to chef um
Ferdinando Ruiz. He's the owner
and executive chef at Escondido
and condido is right in the
middle of my, my house district
and really, I mean, we we share
this very closely.
with um our districts here in
Santa Fe and we take ownership
of this all together I think but
I wanted to say.
The amount of work and the
vision that uh chef has brought
to uh Santa Fe in his efforts to
really bring home that the, the
issue of, of um
Transition and what that means
for our communities and what
that means for those that are
looking to better themselves
and, and have a pathway once
they they're they're no longer
incarcerated. I have a hard time
even saying that, Mr. Speaker,
but
He is, um,
To me, when I look at him, I see
his, his, uh, wings, uh, as he's
one of our angels here that are
watching over our, our, our
people and our public and doing
incredible things. He's a
problem solver and he is
spreading his vision and
anything we do to support that
vision is, is the holistic path
that we need to take. So thank
you Representative Romero for
bringing this forward and and
thank you, chef and, uh, Adam,
Ralph, Ryan, and, and, um.
Jennifer, for being here to to
represent what we're doing and
building our communities and
building them stronger and
better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
gentlemen from
Chavez, Representative Murphy,
do you have a guest to
introduce?
No, sir, I do not. I thought
that he might join us on the
floor, but he's had other
commitments. Thank you. Got it.
No problem if, if, if he comes
back, let us know we'll, we'll
get him introduced you.
Generalated from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
It is so ordered. Clerk.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 77 has had it under
consideration report, same with
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted. Do
you want Johnson chair?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
77. All those in favor if I say
no.
I suppose name, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 117 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
117 as amended. All those in
favors if I say I.
Of the supposed name, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 129 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair?
I move adoption, Mr. Speaker of
a favorable committee report on
House Bill 129. All those in
favor say aye.
Proposing the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 157 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Dowana Johnson chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
157 as amended. All those in
favor 5 by 9.
Of the supposed name. Yeah it's
a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 193 has
added under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted. Deanna Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move.
Adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
193, all those in favor
signified by saying I.
On the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted. Thank
you.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 214.
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 2144. All those in
favor, if I say a.
I suppose knee.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 111 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted. Do you
want Johnson, chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable community report in
House Bill 111, all those in
favor and if I say 9.
All those opposed? Nay, the ISF
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee 2 has been referred
House Joint Memorial to.
Has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on how joint
Memorial to all those in favor,
I say no.
I'll suppose nay, yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Joint Resolution 11.
has had it under consideration
report same without
recommendation and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
wantna Johnson, chair?
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption of a report without
recommendation. All those in
favor, sitting up 9.
All the suppose nay.
The ISF committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to has been referred House Bill
27 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Greer
chair Speaker, I move adoption
of the committee report.
We're an adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
27. All those in favor 75 by
saying I.
I suppose nay.
Yeah it's not a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
team has been referred House
Bill 32 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Gro
chair, I adoption of the
committee report. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
32. All those in favor and
probably say aye.
All those.
Yeah, it's have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to has been referred
House Bill 89.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Greer, I adoption of
the committee report.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 89. All those in
favor 75 but see I.
I suppose na.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 269 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
Move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 269. All those in
favor, signified but say 9.
Although suppose nay, the eyes
habit committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 329
has had it under consideration
report same without
recommendation and the referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. We're on adoption
of a report without
recommendation on House Bill
329, all those in favor see if
up by saying I.
Although suppose name
The ads have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 341 has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair,
adoption.
We are on adoption of a federal
committee report in House Bill
341. All those in favoring 5 but
say 9.
Although suppose nay.
Yeah, it's committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Rural Development Land
Grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 24 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house judiciary
Committee substitute for house
rural development land grants
and cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24 DuP
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
We are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report and
how rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 24, but a favorable
committee, a favorable committee
report on how rural development
land grants.
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 24, all those in
favor of sendified by saying I.
All the suppose nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 74 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 74. All those in
favor if I say I.
All those opposed nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 79 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for
hospitals 79 do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 79, but a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 79, all those in
favor signify but saying I.
All the supposed nay, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 81 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81 do pass, respectfully
submitted, Christine Chandler,
Mr. Speaker,
adoption of unfavorable
committee report in House Bill
81, but a favorable committee
report on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81, all those in favor
signify but say I.
I suppose nay, the committee
reported up.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 98 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report in the
House with 98. All those in
favor say a.
I suppose
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 215 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 215 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption unfavorable committee
report in House Bill 215, but a
favorable committee report in
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 215.
All those in favor of 75 but say
no.
I suppose na.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, the judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 220 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption favorable report in
House Bill 220. All those in
favorines I.
All the suppose nay, the
committee report adopted
members.
I'm gonna go back to the very
first Judiciary Committee report
because it is.
Backwards on my sheet. So I'm
gonna reread it.
Um, and I'm gonna explain what's
happening, so.
It's an unfavorable committee
report on the rural development
Committee sub, but a favorable
committee report on the House
Judiciary Committee sub for the
Houser Rural Development
Committee sub and I read it
backwards, so.
Uh, let's just do it now because
otherwise these folks are gonna
have to reprint it and redo it.
We can just do it now if it's OK
with everybody, which I think it
probably is.
OK, we are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
how rural development land
grants.
Cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24,
but a favorable committee report
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house rural
development land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
Or the suppose nay.
Yeah, I have it. Community
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker,
Your energy, environment, and
natural resources Committee tomb
has been referred House Bill 91
as amended, has had it under
consideration reports and with
the recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair.
Move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 91 as amended. All
those in favor 25 to say not.
Of the supposed name
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, energy,
environment, and natural
Resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 259 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass as amended and hence
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen,
chair of a committee report in
House Bill 259. All those in
favor of I would say no.
Opposed Nate.
Good try.
You guys have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 361 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair adoption
adoption of a favorable
reporting in the House Bill 361.
All those in favor 5A9.
What was Nate?
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Joint
Memorial for has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen, chair.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report and how is
joint Memorial for all those in
favor signified by saying a.
All those suppose nay, the eyes
have it be report adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Introduction of legislation.
House Bill 451 introduced by
Representative Cerrado, an act
relating to sexual offenses,
creating the crime of indecent
exposure to a child out of
public view, providing a
penalty. House Bill 45151 have
been read twice by titles or
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 452 introduced by
representatives Ferrari, Serena,
and Silva, an act relating to
utilities, amending the
renewable Energy Act, clarifying
calculation of renewable
portfolio standards. House Bill
452 452 haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 453 introduced by
Representative Anya Nornu, an
act relating to housing,
amending and enacting sections
of the Affordable Housing Act,
creating the creditworthiness
assistance program, providing
for a creditworthiness
assistance grants, creating the
creditworthiness assistance
fund, making an appropriation.
House Bill 4533 haven't been
read twice by title, his order
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Appropriation.
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 454 introduced by
Representative Baca, an act
relating to educational
retirement, providing a
temporary additional
non-compounding payment to
retired members under the
Educational Retirement Act,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 45454 have been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 455 introduced by
Representative Baca, an act
making an appropriation to the
early childhood education and
care department to provide
online math and reading support
for students in pre-kindergarten
through 3rd grade. House Bill
455455 have been read twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 456 introduced by
Representative Baca, an act
relating to procurement,
increasing the limit on the
total amount on contracts for
procurement of architectural and
engineering services and
construction that state agencies
and local public bodies may
enter into and for purchase
orders under the contracts.
House Bill 456.
House Bill 456 haven't been read
to us by tilers or the printed
and referred to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 457 introduced by
Representatives Dixon,
Chetfield, and Small, as well as
senators Scherer and Lanier.
An act relating to the
environment, enacting the
geologic carbon dioxide
sequestration act, providing for
unitization of formations for
subsurface sequestration of
carbon dioxide, creating the oil
conservation division systems
and hearings fund, establishing
fees, House Bill 457.
As will 457 have been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House energy,
environment and natural
Resources Committee, the the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 458 introduced by
representatives Dixon,
Chetfield, and Small, as well as
senatorscher and Lanier, an act
relating to the environment,
enacting the geologic carbon
dioxide storage stewardship Act,
providing rulemaking authority,
creating a fund, permitting
transfer of stewardship to the
state, making an appropriation.
House Bill 458.
I was 458 have been it was by
toddlers or printed and referred
to the house energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House of Recreations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 459 introduced by
representatives Ferrari,
Barajon, Ortiz, and Kates.
An act making an appropriation
to the higher education
department for a program at the
Institute of American Indian
Arts for research into and
education and outreach about
pollinators to support a healthy
habitat and conservation. House
Bill 459.
House 459 have been read twice
by title.
I ordered printed and referred
to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 460 introduced by
Representative Block, an act
relating to taxation, repealing
the liquor excise Tax Act, the
distributions of the liquor
excise tax and the local DWI
grant Program Act, making
conforming and technical
changes. House Bill 460.
House Bill 460 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 461, introduced by
Representatives Gallegos, Dixon,
and Serrado, an act relating to
insurance enacting a new section
of the prior authorization Act
to require health insurers to
establish procedures to grant
exemptions from the prior
authorization process for
healthcare professionals that
meet certain criteria. House
Bill 461.
House with 461 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 462 introduced by
Representative Lujan, then act
relating to housing, increasing
the notice period for nonpayment
of rent.
House Bill 462 462 haven't been
read to us by toddlers or
printed and referred to the
house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 463 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to children, creating a
pilot program for a
Perinatal investigation and
support unit within the
Children, Youth and Families
Department, making an
appropriation. House Bill 46363
haven't been read to us by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 464 introduced by
Representative Doo, an act
relating to public schools,
providing that a public school
shall not deny enrollment to a
school-aged person on the basis
of race, ethnicity, sex,
religion, disability,
socioeconomic status or
residential address, limiting a
local school board's ability to
establish enrollment preferences
requiring local school boards to
determine the capacity of each
public school by grade level,
post their number of vacancies
at least once every.
12 weeks and enroll applicants
throughout the year on a first
come, first serve basis if
capacity allows requiring local
school boards to report annually
to the public education
department on enrollment data
for each public school and
requiring the department to
publish that data on the
department's website, making
conforming amendments. House
Bill 464464 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to house Education
Committee, the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 465, introduced by
Representatives Torres Velasquez
and Herndon, as well as Senator
Stefaniks, an act relating to
employment, providing nurses who
invoke safe harbor additional
protections. House Bill 465.
House Bill 465 haven't beenized
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 466 introduced by
representatives Montoya.
Tao
Vincent
Duncan
And Reeb
An act relating to children,
enacting the hormone therapy and
puberty blocker child protection
Act prohibiting certain medical
procedures for minors,
prohibiting knowingly
distributing hormones or puberty
blockers to minors, requiring
parental notification by a
healthcare provider or a public
body if a minor takes gender
affirming action.
Providing enforcement and
penalties, providing a private
right of action. Amending the
reproductive and gender
affirming healthcare Freedom
Act.
Requiring parental notice and
consent for minors, adding
definitions requiring parental
notifications, providing that a
parent of a minor may bring a
claim under that act against a
public body or an individual,
including parents among those
with a private right of action
under that act.
Providing penalties for
violations of that act.
by a licensed healthcare
provider, amending the
reproductive and
gender-affirming Healthcare
Protection Act prohibiting that
Act's applicability to minors
except for required parental
notifications and certain
reproductive healthcare
activities with parental
consent. House Bill 466466 have
been read twice by titles or
printed and referred to as
consumerublic Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 467, introduced by
Representatives Torres
Velasquez, Herndon, and Royal
Caballero, as well as Senator
Lopez.
An act relating to public
education, amending statutes
pertaining to safety and support
services for multicultural
students, broadening elements of
discrimination or disparate
treatment subject to discipline.
House Bill 467. 467 have been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 468 introduced by
Representatives Murphy and Dow,
an act relating to the state
flag establishing the manner of
retiring a state flag. House
Bill 468.
House Bill 468. I'm in retw by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, then the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 469 introduced by
Representative Latta, an act
relating to border development,
amending the Border Development
Act, changing the composition of
the border authority, providing
professional qualification
requirements for the position of
executive director, making
technical and clarifying
changes, amending and repealing
sections of the NMSA 1978. House
Bill 469 469 haven't been read
twice by toddlers or printed and
referred to the House of
Commerce and economic.
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 470 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to children revising
the definition of neglected
child in the abuse and neglect
Act to include circumstances
when a child has unsupervised
access to a firearm or deadly
weapon.
House Bill 470.
I was 470 have mids by title is
order printed and referred to
the house Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 471, introduced by
Representatives Sanchez and
Gonzalez, an act relating to
livestock, restricting livestock
running at large in traditional
historic communities defining
traditional historic community.
House Bill 471 41 have been was
by titles that are printed and
referred to the house as.
To the house, agriculture, agas
and Water Resources Committee,
then the house rural Development
land grants and cultural Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 472, introduced by
Representatives Henry and Dow,
an act relating to taxation,
creating the abandoned building,
revitalization, corporate income
tax credit. House Bill 472472
have been read to us by title is
or printed and referred to the
House commerce and economic
development Committee, thence
the house taxation and revenue
Committee.
You lady from Santa Fe
Mr. Speaker, I believe we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business
Members, we're gonna take up
some 3rd reading. I think
everybody's got a list of the
bills we're gonna do today.
Um, and then after that, we're
going to break 4 committees for
the
Afternoon slash evening.
Gentle lady from Berle.
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business, 3rd
reading legislation. It is.
Gentlemen from.
Rea Riva Sandoval and San Juan
Bente, are you ready on item
number 8.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you
please get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 198 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Speak to members and good to
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, well,
House Bill 198 is a continuation
of the tax and revenue
Department clean up bill that we
had heard, uh, and passed last,
uh, on Saturday night again
every 60 days session, the tax
and revenue department brings
forward a tax code cleanup bill
worked on by staff.
Tech practitioners and
stakeholders. House Bill 198
does that and relates to
adjusting penalties contained in
the tax code to adjust for
inflation with that, Mr.
Speaker, it's time for
questions. There is a gentle
lady from Ca Sierras Coto
Valencia representative
Armstrong. Thank you Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentleman
from?
Uh, Rio Riba, Sandoval and San
Juan, please yield.
Speaker to the gentle lady from
all those counties and
congratulate her on her new
grandbaby.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you again for that. I,
they are a blessing, that's for
sure. Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, can you please, uh,
go a little bit more into detail
about what this bill does.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, as I mentioned before to
just several penalties contained
in the tax code for inflation
that in many cases hasn't
happened in over about 3
decades. And so it updates that
and then also uh elevates
unlawful disclosure of
confidential tax information
from a misdemeanor to a to a to
a fennel to a felony, excuse me,
to match federal code, uh, I can
go further and say that the tax
and revenue compiled these
changes over the 2024.
interim session by reviewing the
entirety of chapter 7 in the tax
code. Uh, those proposals were
presented to the interim revenue
stabilation and Tax Policy
Committee in October of 2024.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
um, Mr. Speaker.
So it changes, it increases the
crime of uh revealing taxpayer
information from a misdemeanor
to a 4th degree felony. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, ma'am.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, and uh
does the bill increase the
dollar amount, um, on, uh,
delinquent tax installment
agreements.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
would be just the amount that is
subject to inspection.
By the public.
Perfect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
for that answer. I appreciate
that. Um, and then one other
question, hold on.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
does this have anything to do
with any, any kind of disclosure
of uh sales of, uh,
commercial buildings.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
no, ma'am.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
appreciate that.
I think that's all my questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
Mister Speaker, I do not ask
that house but 198 do pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 198.
But it's about the clothes?
The votes are closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's Bill 198 has
really passed this house.
The gentle lady from Akilly, are
you ready on item 13.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point?
Well
that.
If the record reflect that
election is necessary for
placing House Bill 160 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good
afternoon, everyone. House Bill
160 is a simple bill. It amends
the motor vehicle code to
require to require all drivers
to stop a certain distance from
the look and look uh for other
on track equipment besides
trains at railroad crossings,
and with that, Mr. Speaker, it's
time for questions.
the Baca Guadalupe Roosevelt and
San Miguel, a representative of
Samoa.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady so.
I read this bill, and, but I
didn't debate it in committee or
anything. I didn't see it in our
committees.
Why has this bill come forth?
Is, is it liability reasons or,
or?
Or why, why is the bill come
forth with it with this.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen from
Curry, the bill has come forward
as a bill to help protect
employees of, of the railroad
basically what's happened here
is, is in, um, when you think
about it from the way we deal
with highway maintenance and you
see the big equipment on on our
highways that are, uh, fixing
pavement what's and and so forth
and you'll see the workers on
the side of those big pieces.
pieces of equipment, visualize
that now for the railroad when
the railroad has large pieces of
equipment that are fixing track.
They also have employees that
are next to that equipment, uh,
and what we're wanting is to
make sure that the traveling
public stops at those crossings
and allow it stops, so.
Our employees are protected and
the and uh they don't get hit by
the equipment.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
But to me that's already in play
and people know that they need
to watch the railroad track.
But my concerns are, are we
switching the liability.
From the railroad.
To the general public, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
have a hard time.
Accepting that.
Because
If it just pertains to safety.
Why is, why aren't we addressing
this like with more signage.
Maybe be more lights on the, on
the equipment that's running on
the railroad track.
Uh, better.
Better
Uh
Maybe, maybe more railroad
crossing flags or or anything
like that. Why, why?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
does it have to be
Put into law now.
If, if the general public knows
that that you have to look both
sides of that railroad is, is
there a problem we're trying to
fix other, has there been an
accident that
That relates to this bill,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is a
bill that's both, both supported
by rail industry.
And labor.
And the purpose is to protect
the employees as things are
being fixed and currently in
law, it does not state that you
have to stop when there's a big
piece of equipment coming uh
through the crossing, and that's
what we're trying to do here is
to make sure that the motorist
knows that you have to stop when
you see the equipment.
And, and I guess, I guess I want
to reiterate on my first
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, what does this do to the
liabilities laws, uh, when, when
it comes to if somebody wants to
get in an accident.
If we run this bill, does it
change the liabilities?
Mr. Speaker, I guess I'm not,
I'm not tracking with the
gentleman. I'm not sure where in
the bill that's even mentioned,
so again, Mr. Speaker, what
we're asking is that the public
stop, look and listen for
railroad equipment before it
gets to the crossing. So in
other words, you have to stop.
That that that concludes my
questions. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Catherine
Sierrasco Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from McKinley
Yield. I yield, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, kind lady, um, are we
going to update like driver's
education to make sure that new
drivers, uh, know this, this new
law.
Mr. Speaker, yes, gentle lady,
we will be doing that. There's
going to be an educational
component to this, um, certainly
through the railroads and uh
through through um motor
vehicles.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady. I just wanted to make sure
I have a lot of teenage
grandkids that are driving and I
want to make sure they know the
law is unlike the people that
drive between Albuquerque and
Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker, who all
drive in both lanes when there
is one that is a passing lane.
So that's just a little pet
peeve of mine, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, well there'll be more
signage possibly put up, um,
because I understand, you know,
people always look for flashing
light trains, but some of this
other equipment
They don't have, they have
lights, but possibly not
flashing lights. And so will
the, will there be new signage
put up.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I heard
this bill um in one of my
committees, I think it was
transportation and, and uh it
seemed like a good bill just the
way it is, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady the debate,
gentlemen, from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from McKinley County
Hill. I yield, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
if I understand the crux of this
bill, this will impact any
Vehicle from POVs all the way
through semis, carrying
hazardous materials. Would that
be correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
what this is about is
maintenance type equipment and I
was, uh, remiss Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen to point out that we
do have a copy or you should
have a picture on your desk of
the of a sample of the type of
equipment that we would be
talking about in this bill.
But the plan is, is that we'd
make sure that um the traveling
motorists would know that they
need to stop at all rail
crossings.
To make sure that uh this
equipment can get through.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that does include all travel
vehicles, correct? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
Thank you very much for that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you tell me with respect to the
real. Are they required to put
construction signs up or notice
of construction signs up at
every crossing right now when
they're doing work on the
Ralphs.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
my expert says.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, if
they're doing construction on
the railroad, the railroad
itself is doing the
construction. They have to put
some kind of signage up.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
did you introduce your, um
your witness.
No, Mr. Speaker, I didn't,
gentlemen, because he came
running and, uh, after I had
started talking, but if I may,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, my,
uh, expert witness is Robert
Romero. He's with BNSF.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies. So if I
understand it, the real company
is required from right away to
right away any work within the
right of way within a certain
what would that be that distance
away from any crossing that they
would have to put a sign up that
they're working either within
the right of way or on rail.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is,
uh, from my expert, uh, it
depends on the speed of the
railway at the time.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think we can all agree that that
speed can change dramatically
depending on where you're at. I
mean, there's times between
Levington and Hobbs, they're
traveling 60 miles an hour and
there's times, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, they're running 5
miles an hour.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
true, and if we were talking
specifically about the
locomotive piece in state law
that would absolutely apply, but
right now, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we're talking about
the maintenance equipment.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that clarification.
From my standpoint, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, right now,
Would you agree that any vehicle
for hire for passengers, school
buses, hazardous equipment.
Already have those requirements.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, they
may, but I know in our motor
vehicle, um,
Our motor vehicle code, it does
not, so that's what we're trying
to do here.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
this bill were to pass both
houses and be chaptered, would
there be a penalty that could be
assessed for uh somebody not
stopping before they go across
the rail track.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it would be an
existing law, if you don't stop
at railroad tracks, we have
penalties assessed for that, um,
but I can say, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that this bill has
passed in 39 other states, uh,
what we're hoping is for, uh,
consistency throughout our
state. We're one of.
Just a handful that haven't
haven't approved this law yet.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that answer and let
me just clarify something that I
think I heard in that your last
answer was that inside existing
law right now, there's already a
penalty for not stopping.
Would that be correct? Did I
understand that right?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if
you live in Gallup, New Mexico
and you live at the crossing
that's close to my house, and
you don't stop when those rail
arms go down, the police officer
sees you, you can be arrested.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Let's expand that a little bit.
What is there's nor arms there.
What if there's no blinking
lights there is that still
against the law to not stop.
Mr. Speaker, it is if, uh,
current current law, if you
don't stop at a crossing, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when you see
a train coming, you can get in a
lot of trouble for it if you're,
if the sheriff or someone sees
you.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you for helping me get to
the point. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, what, what I think
I just understand stood in this
conversation is that we already
have existing law that requires
this. So Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, how does this
Bill, how does House Bill 160.
Help that alone.
Mr. Speaker, the difference is,
is what we have in law now is
for locomotives for an actual
train. What we're adding to the
law is maintenance equipment
like the picture, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that I've, that I've
passed out and they're very
different maintenance uh,
equipment, Mr. Speaker, travels
at sometimes just 1 mile an
hour.
But it's a slow mover. You've
got people walking along, making
sure things are going just like
we do with highway construction
and highway maintenance. A lot
of employees are surrounded, you
know, surrounding that piece of
equipment to make sure things
are running correctly.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate your answers and I
understand the process of uh
Designed and built several
different roads, so I understand
this process, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, with this apply to
Say when survey work's being
done within the right of way.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, what
we're talking about here is
changing the uh motor vehicle
code.
When it comes to a construction
component, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, like surveying.
That's a little different, uh,
oh I'm trying to do here is, is
update the motor vehicle code.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you for uh
answering my questions. You're
welcome. There is further
debate, gentlemen from Lincoln
and Otero, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to this
gentle lady from McKinley Yield.
I yield, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. This equipment that
you passed out, uh, the picture
of this would the
BNSF, do they own this
equipment, Mr. Speaker?
Uh
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they do, and, and, uh, you can
see the little BNSF guys, the
picture there to the, to the
lefter and gentle lady, thank
you for that. So, uh, with the
signs be temporary or are they
fixed signs that would
Help with our motor vehicles.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, at
the are are you asking at the
crossings.
Mr. Speaker, General Lydia, yes,
ma'am.
Yes, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they would be, and they'd be
fixed at the crossing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Does, does this
maintenance equipment, does it
work at night or is it only
during the daylight hours?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
expert says they work both day
and night. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentle lady,
and I appreciate those
hardworking people working day
and night to, to maintain the
tracks to provide the safety for
our, you know, our engineers and
our conductors, and, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so
this, this is only gonna require
People stop and look and listen
at railroad crossings, correct?
Mr. Speaker, that's correct,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
You're switching to meet,
gentlemen from San Duban and
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
kind lady from McKinley yield
happily yield, Mr. Speaker.
Hi, lady, um, has there been
incidents that precipitated this
like an accident.
Somebody in a vehicle stopping
on the tracks that got hit by
some of this equipment.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, yes,
uh, we have, um, I've just been
informed by my expert that
throughout the country, um,
because I can't possibly be all
for New Mexico. He just, he told
me that, uh, throughout the
country there's been about,
there's over over 1000.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, that, that's a lot of
people not paying attention.
Um, throughout the rural parts
of the state, there's not always
the, the arms that drop down, is
that correct, kind lady? Yes,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
particularly you take my, my
home county. We have lots of
public rail crossings, public
roads, uh, and many of them do
not.
Thank you, kind lady. Well, even
in the urban areas, you see
those people who
For whatever reason, the arms
drop and they try to beat the
arm through and.
Uh, bad things tend to happen,
um, kind lady, my last question
is that this, this.
Um
Equipment that you have pictured
here.
For those intersections that do
have the drop down arms. Will
this
Equipment trigger those arms to
drop.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
they will.
Thank you, kind lady. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. no further debate
generally to close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I now move House
Bill 160 do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 160.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close. The
vote is now closed by a vote of
61 in the affirmative, 2 in the
negative. House Bill 160 has
Gentle lady from.
Leo Sandoval, are you ready? On
item.
Number
2
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Would you get me to that point?
reflect that all action has
served place in House Bill 26 on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. So
House Bill 26 is a simple 1.5
page bill. In fact, there's only
slightly longer than 3 lines
that have been added to an
existing statute.
So currently, um, our arts
programs in New Mexico and as
many of you know, we are one of
the top art centers of the
world, so much so that um uh we
were able to pass in this uh
chamber and create a new uh
division, the creative
industries division because it
is such a strong economic uh
engine here in New Mexico.
So this is very important. We
have very uh uh very significant
New Mexican uh art programs as
well, um, that are providing um
all kinds of cultural as well as
entertainment services. I bring
this bill to you today because
uh there is uh as technology is
saved, we have an issue where
um,
Fraudulent ticket sales are
going up to the um our, are
putting up false websites.
On the web to divert you to real
box office sales, so if some
place like Santa Fe Opera, you'd
like to go see uh uh uh uh an
event there. They have many
fraudulent ticket sites that
will try to divert you to a
false site that will have
inflated prices.
This does not require any kind
of risk as we would consider
illegal ticket sales and third
party ticket broker in the past
where they would take the risk
and buy tickets at one price and
then sell them in another. This
is a fraudulent diversion and
where they are telling potential
uh customers that this $40
ticket is really a $200 ticket
and then buying it on
speculation.
Um, what we found when we want
to redress this sort of
situation is that we already
have a law in place since 1989
to prevent this kind of
activity.
For our university sports
programs.
So house Bill 26 adds three
lines to the bill to make sure
that our state presented or um.
Or our nonprofits.
Sorry.
Or our or political subdivision
of performing arts will be
protected by the same bill that
we already have been doing since
1989 with our universe sports
programs.
Uh, this, uh, this is a simple
result but we have seen that
over 20 states in the United
States have similar laws now
that have passed and what we
found is that search engines
such as Google does a search and
when these laws are in place,
they geo fence the area to make
sure that our local arts
programs are covered, um, Mr.
Speaker, in the body.
This is a real issue, um, our
our arts programs are running on
very thin margins and.
Um, they are very well attended
and for the first time since
these AI, uh, uh,
Uh, illegal sites have been in,
they've actually will have seats
available because individuals
searching for tickets will
believe all that I thought this
ticket was $40 and now it's $200
and so they may not attend or um
they they may think that they
may show up to the show with a
falsely printed ticket.
Um, this is something that um we
have talked about in judiciary
as well as other committees and
where we had a very strong
showing from our arts programs
across the state who said that
they are asking strongly for
this bill, um, I would like to
introduce my co-sponsor, our
leader Supanski is also um a
very much supportive of this
bill. Thank you.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
think, Mister Speaker, will the
kind lady, uh, from
Sandoval and Bern Leo yield.
I kindly uh yield to my Sandoval
uh colleague.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, when we were in
judiciary, I had a few questions
on this bill, and I don't feel
like those questions were
Satisfied or maybe I was not
satisfied with the answers.
So I'm gonna pose the question
again.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, if I
buy.
4 tickets.
To an event and I realized that
two of my children are not
going, but they have.
Their spouses or girlfriends
that would like to go and I sell
those tickets.
To my sons.
For $10 more. Am I going to
jail?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, it's, uh, I
would not.
Uh, be prosecuting you so I
wouldn't determine whether or
not there would be a penalty or
jail time, but in this bill, it
does state that you can have up
to a $500 penalty and up to one
year in jail. I would assume
that prosecutors would be
looking at your intent and the
egregiousness of the violation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I realize you're not a
prosecutor.
Uh, but as a sponsor of this
bill.
If this bill were to pass, and
that scenario were to happen.
Is it possible that I could be
prosecuted under this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you, um, currently, the
way the law states right now in
your scenario if it was lobo
tickets, you could be prosecuted
currently.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, but I'm
talking about.
Going to the opera or some other
event that you're trying to
cover.
In this.
Bill
Would, would there be a chance
that I could be prosecuted for
that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So once
again we're going to make
criminals out of
Fairly innocent people who
are trying to get the tickets
used.
Uh, let me go on to my next
question.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
Why has, you know, there's,
there's Ticketmaster, there's
Other, uh, third party ticket,
um, sellers.
How am I supposed to know?
Which are gonna be
Proper third party and which are
not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you, uh.
My colleague from Sandoval, I
will say that you are probably
having difficulty determining
that right now in the current
condition, as most of the United
States has, um, the way this
bill reads is currently, you
Ticketmaster will not be selling
your university sports programs
and now we're asking them not to
sell.
Our local
501C3 state presented um
programs as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
So who is going to sell these
tickets.
The arts programs and their box
office and who they choose to
sell them.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So how
are these third party?
Ticket sellers.
Are they lining up at the box
office window to get these
tickets. Thank you so much Mr.
Chair and thank you very much
for your question,
Representative. Uh, no, we have
not found there to be a
difficult problem despite the
fact for decades that performing
arts programs were not part of
this bill. There was not a
problem with our performing arts
programs until we started
creating until we developed the
technology and the websites to
create false.
Websites to divert customers
from real box office ticket
sales. That is where the AI and
as well as the technology has
developed and it has become an
issue that is hurting our arts
programs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and have you identified
Uh, these nefarious people here
in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I,
I identified who are these
people? I'm not sure what your
question asking Mr. Speaker, let
me rephrase that. Have you
identified
in New Mexico that are setting
up these websites to sell these
tickets to
The art show downtown
Albuquerque.
I, I thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, um, the false
websites that is usually under
the AG's office, so I personally
have not tried to find who is
selling them. I will say that
what we got uh testimony from
arts programs across the state
who have looked because they
have been able to see that some
of these third party brokers
were from out of state and some
were in-state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, um,
Have you identified any of these
bad players that are, that are,
um,
Here in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I have not identified any bad
player.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
kind lady so in your um.
Research for this bill have
Have any of your experts or the
people that are helping you with
this bill, have they identified
anybody in New Mexico that might
be doing this.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, Representative. Yes,
they came and they did speak at
public comment about that, that
they have had to either turn
away or honor false tickets that
were printed out that they have
um searched um how uh diversion
links and, and, uh, and, and
false websites to make them look
like their websites to be able
to sell their tickets they have
found that
these websites, some they do not
know who have created them, that
would be a report to the AG's
office, um, they have found some
of them have been from other
states, but what I think it has
been more important to the
progress of the development of
this bill is that we have found
that over 20 states have this
similar um law on their books
and the search engines.
Have identified this law and
geo-fenced around the area to
make sure that the mitigation of
these false websites are no
longer an issue.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you kind lady. So why don't we
geo fence these places now
without having to pass this
bill. Thank you, Representative,
uh, we, I cannot geofence the
the search engines, geo fence,
and they need to have a law, Mr.
Speaker, and, and representative
to tell them that this is no
longer acceptable. They already
do that and have been protecting
our university sports program.
So we're asking for the same
protections for our university
sports programs since 1989 we're
asking them for our local arts
programs now.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
realize you wouldn't be the one
setting up the geo fence.
I'm, I'm speaking in general
terms, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
So why aren't these
organizations
Setting up that type of geo
fencing if it's protecting.
People in other states. Why do
we need to pass a bill?
In order for them to be able to
do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Representative. You're
asking why local nonprofit,
small margin arts programs are
not setting up their individual
geo-fencing.
I'm not sure if they are legally
allowed to without directive.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so why don't we pass a
bill allowing them to geo fence.
Instead of drafting a bill.
Who was going to punish somebody
out of state if we can identify
them.
With a fine of $500.
Or an a term of imprisonment of
less than one year.
Is that, do you think that's
going to be effective in
shutting these places down?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Representative. I do not
think what would be affected is
to allow every to pass a bill to
allow every individual arts
programs throughout the state of
New Mexico to individually geo
fence. Mr. Speaker. My question
was,
In this bill,
On page 2.
Starting at line 10.
It says whoever commits.
Uh, ticket scalping is guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by
a fine of up to $500.
Or imprisonment for a definite
term of less than one year.
My question, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
First of all, how are we going
to get these people who are not
in New Mexico appear in court
because I don't know that we're
gonna be able to.
Have them arrested in Los
Angeles, California.
be extradited to New Mexico.
To
Face
A trial where they're they're.
Uh, punishment would be $500 in
less than a year in jail. Do you
think, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
That this is going to be
effective in stopping this type
of activity.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, um.
Representative, um, I will say
that the part of the bill that
you refer to is our existing
law, you are debating me on an
individual lines that are laws
that are existing right now for
our university sports programs
this is not part of the bill in
which we've introduced.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I'm looking at House Bill
26.
So part of this bill that's
printed here.
On page 2.
Shows that
Ticket scalping is pun
punishable.
By a fine of $500 in less than a
year in in prison. What I'm
asking.
As if this bill passes.
And your changes on page one,
line 21 through 24.
Is this gonna be effective.
In stopping this type of
activity.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would
argue that if I am
Uh, bold enough to set up a
website and
Some other state or some other
country.
That's gonna scalp tickets for
hundreds and hundreds of
dollars.
I would, I would gladly pay $500
and keep my business going. I do
not think, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
That
This, this, um, $500 or less
than a year.
First of all, we're not going to
extradite anybody from another
state.
Second of all, I don't know if
this is such a big problem. This
is the way to fix it.
Coon lady, um, I understand that
you didn't want to debate that
part of the bill because it's
existing language.
But it is part of the bill that
you introduced.
Um, how many of these um.
Websites or.
Other types of scalping.
Do you know how many there are
in New Mexico?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you I'm, you'll have to what,
what type?
You'll have to clarify your
question.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, let me, let me
Let me rephrase this as clear as
possible.
Do you know?
How many websites.
Or other ticket scalpers,
whatever type they may be,
whether it's a single person, a
corporation, some big mafia led.
Uh, organization, how many of
those are selling.
Tickets to some of these small
local art shows.
So thank you Mr. Speaker, and,
and thank you uh kind person
from Sandoval. I am, uh, this
bill.
Has been working for local
university sports programs since
1989 and it was never an issue
with performing arts programs
until our technology has changed
to create the false and
misleading websites that are
currently happening. We have on
record that over 20 states have
resolved this problem by putting
into law.
This, which will give permission
for search engines to geo fence.
As you referred to the penalties
and fines that already have been
existing since 1989, I will
refer to page one.
Line
19 through 21.
That says it consists of
selling, offering, or sale or
attempting to sell any ticket
privilege license, admission, or
pass.
So I am not an attorney or a
prosecutor, Mr. Speaker, and
Representative, but I would
assume that that penalty and the
lines I just read that have been
existing in law since 1989 are
related.
And that a prosecutor might
prosecute a penalty or fine per
offering.
Of that ticket.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um, you brought up a good
question, um, you said that if
we pass this bill, it
will then allow
The search engines to geo fence.
Can you show me in the bill
where it says that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, Representative. I'm
not aware of any bills or laws
that we talk about what third
party corporations may do if the
loss passes. I am not, I'm not
aware of any of that in our
laws, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but you
just said that if we passed
this, it would allow search
engines to geo fence and I'm
trying to find in the bill where
it says that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Alright, is there a further
debate or should we move to the
next one?
I asked the question of where in
the bill it was talking about
allowing.
Uh, the geo-fencing to happen. I
think the gentle lady answered
that already.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, what was
the answer?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, kind colleague from
Sandoval.
It is not in the bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady. I was just.
I couldn't find that when you
said that it was included, Mr.
Speaker, I do have an amendment.
I'd like to get that passed out.
What is the number on the bottom
left, gentlemen? Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The, the 230 number is
230825.1. Alright, we'll get
this passed out and on the
website, and I'll come back to
you to explain the amendment.
Has the amendment been passed
out?
Right, the amendment is online
and it is passed out, gentlemen,
to explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, uh,
the amendment is pretty simple
on line 13 of page 2, it just
removes, removes the quotation
mark at the end of.
Line 13.
And uh.
Between lane 13 and 14, we
insert a new section E that
reads the provisions of this
section do not apply to an
original purchaser who purchased
the tickets for personal use.
is this a friendly amendment?
No, Mr. Speaker.
Is there a debate on the
amendment?
The lady from Tours and Berlio
Representative Lord thank you
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentlemen
from Sandoval County, please
yield your time. I will happily
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so I'm looking here.
If I'm understanding correctly,
you want to add a new section,
is that correct? That would now
add to the end of that section
E.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, that's
correct.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh sorry, gentlemen, sorry. It's
been a long, it's been a long
month already, Mr. Speaker. Um,
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, so
the provision of this section
does not apply to original
purchaser who purchased the
tickets for personal use. So
when you talk about the
provisions, I think you mean all
the provisions that have been
stated earlier, and can you
explain to me what you mean by
for their personal use, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, kind lady, this
goes to the my first question in
this debate.
Um, in the scenario where I buy
tickets, I decided that I wanted
to take 4 of my kids to an art
show and two of them couldn't go
and I decided to sell the other
two tickets to the other two
kids so they could take a
friend.
This would stop me from being.
Prosecuted under this bill.
It's, it's simply.
Trying to cover that person who
Purchase the tickets and then is
reselling them not for $1000
more, but maybe a couple of
dollars more so I could make
enough money off of my kids to
buy me something to drink while
I'm there.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
one of the questions that I had
before when this bill came
through, which I did vote no on
was somebody gets the tickets
because they they could have
been gifted too. There's no
exclusion for gifting, um, so
this could have been gifted to
you.
I could say that resale value
sometimes says it on there says
it doesn't, but if you don't
know the resale value, if you
had those 2 tickets for your
kids, that were given to you,
wouldn't you fall under
persecute or being prosecuted
for this because you didn't know
what the tickets were going for
if you accidentally sold them
above and beyond, uh, what they
were going for at the ticket
booth.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
according to um
My friend who introduced the
bill, I would be liable for
prosecution.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
was one of my huge concerns was
Grandma gets us gifted. We're
sending you to a play you wanted
to see, and she gets a ticket
she can't go she sells a ticket,
she doesn't know about this law.
She has no idea what the tickets
go for. She sells for more boom
we're throwing grandma to
prison, so that was one of my
biggest problems is that we are
persecuting people who are not
knowingly and intentionally
being malicious, so I wanna say
that absolutely agree with this
because if you have
for personal use and you don't
even know about this law, which
most people don't, and your
grandma and you're selling
tickets, I don't want to make
this a pipeline to prison bill
for our citizens of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is
further debate on the amendment,
the gentle lady from Santa Fe,
representative Romero. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, does the
gentleman yield?
I yield to my friend from Santa
Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, I'm just, um, I, I
think I understand the intent of
this. I'm just really trying to
wrap around the language that's
presented to us, um, here, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, how do you
define personal use since it's
not in the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um, I would define that as
that I was gonna use it for me
or my, uh, my party.
So that said, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, since it's not
defined, um, and we're trying to
tamp down on, I think what this
bill's intent for the resale of
that situ of of a ticket, how
does that apply to personal use,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
Thank you, my friend from Santa
Fe. I, I'm all for protecting.
The local art scene because uh
they work on such tight margins,
but the intent of my bill.
Or my amendment is just to make
sure that if I purchase those
tickets.
Uh, I would be the original
purchaser and it's for my
personal use.
I don't think that I should be
prosecuted if I sell it for a
couple of dollars more to my
sons or my son's friends.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
that's my question. If you are
using them for personal use, the
tickets themselves, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, how are you also
selling them?
You can't do both, and that's
why I'm worried about the
construction of this, um,
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady from Santa Fe, that's a
great question. Um,
In my scenario, for some reason,
my other two kids couldn't go.
Um, so I'm.
Taking two other people.
I'm not reselling blocks of 500
tickets. I just want to protect
the individual user while at the
same time making sure that the
local arts scene.
Um, can benefit from the bill as
it's written.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
while you may be profiting from
your children in this
hypothetical, I hear that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my concern
is the folks that see this
personal use provision as
something that may be a loophole
for purchasing all of the
tickets that are available from
that nonprofit and then having
this loophole of saying, well,
it was for personal use, I gave
them out to all my friends at a
$5 profit. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what prevents
somebody from saying that with
this provision in place.
Mr. Speaker, that's a good
point. I think.
Um, personal use is.
A lot less than 500 tickets.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but
unfortunately your amendment
doesn't say that.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, you are
correct.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I would
recommend that the body vote
this down.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I move to table
amendment number one Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I was standing for
quite a bit of time to debate
this sir, you never got my
attention, uh, the gentle lady
from Bernalillo did and then the
young lady from Santa Fe.
So there, there's plenty more
time to debate the bill.
Generally from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I moved to table House
floor amendment number 1 to
House Bill 26. We're on a motion
to table Houselo Amendment
number 1 to House Bill 26,
although those assume in favor
if I say I.
Opposed 8.
The eyes have it the amendment
has been tabled.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, you
sell the floor. Thank you Mr.
Speaker.
Going back to the original bill,
I want to make it very clear
that this is the
My opposition to the way this
bill is written has nothing to
do with the local arts
community. I think there's other
avenues that we can use to, to.
Protect the local arts
community. I just don't, I'm not
sure that this bill, the way
it's written,
Um, is the right way to do it,
but I appreciate the great
conversation as usual, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, thank you
very much.
There is for debate, gentlemen,
from Montero Representative
block.
Howdy, Mister Speaker, will the
kind gentle lady please yield
the lady from Sandoval in Berne
Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I kindly
yield to my friend from Ontario.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, a few questions
before I head into the, the fun
part, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I was
wondering, I heard in the
debate, and correct me if I'm
wrong, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we, we were talking about local,
these local 501c3.
And state presented programs,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
does it say in your bill
specifically that this would
benefit those local programs.
Uh, thank you, ma'am, uh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and, and thank
you, Representative. It does say
a 501c3 state and political
subdivisions state would be our
state and 501c3s would be the
nonprofits.
In our state, which is local.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because my, my next
question about that, so if we
put 501c3s in there, that would
include all 501c3s in the state
of New Mexico. Is that what I'm
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you,
Representative. It's, uh,
clearly states that an event
that is presented by
So it has to be presented by a
state.
A political subdivision or
nonprofit corporation which are
501c3s if they are presenting
this event.
This
Law would apply if passed.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so, so a
501c3, as long as the event.
Is
Well, I guess it says, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, any ticket
privileged license license
admission or pass.
Or an event by.
The state or a nonprofit. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, could
this theoretically be
Like an arm of a nonprofit like
a national nonprofit, they have
a smaller nonprofit in the
state.
And, sorry, I got distracted and
then, and then that event we
just have to take place in New
Mexico and that's pretty much
the only.
needs for that is that kind of
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when it comes to
requirements.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and, and
thank you, um.
Kind gentleman, yes, if they are
presenting so.
Yes
OK. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then I
guess my, my other question, you
may have already answered it and
I, please forgive me if you
have, does this include tickets
that are online tickets like you
can print them out at home, or
is it just a physical copy of a
ticket that you've, you've
purchased for an event somewhere
across the state, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and, and thank you kind
person for that question. I
think it
States in the bill that it is a
ticket privilege, license,
admission, or pass.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So it doesn't
really say specifically, so it
could.
Fall into an online.
ticket, is that my
understanding, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you kind person from
Montero. I will tell you that it
depends upon the event, the
event decides how they are going
to sell their tickets.
OK, got it. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
That is helpful and then Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies, what is,
what is needed to show that this
person is quote unquote
scalping.
Because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I kind of have some
questions about how we, how do
we prove that this is like a
malicious intent to say, you
know, I'm going to go after this
nonprofit. I'm gonna get a
ticket for $5 and I'm gonna get
Let's just say I'm gonna sell it
for $10. How do we, how do we
show intent, because we did talk
a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about
the litigation. How, how, how is
this litigated? How do we prove
intent when it comes to this.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thank you, kind person. I wasn't
sure that that was a question.
I, I will say once again we are
debating the law that already
exists on page 2, section C, it
clearly states that nothing in
this section shall prohibit
charging a fee for service, but
it talks about how if you are
charging above the retail price
and that is what defines that
law.
it has been in existence since
1989.
Thank you so much, gentle lady.
uh, Mr. Speaker, so I guess my
question is not about what the
law states now, it's, it's what
the current law does in
conjunction with your changes
when it comes to how we
prosecute this. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I don't see any
intent like a, let's just say.
Some of the statues that we have
say you have to knowingly be
defrauding a business for etc.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh.
Why didn't we put that knowingly
language in there so that we can
ensure that someone who just
innocuously is selling a ticket
to somebody who
As a friend of theirs and they,
I don't know, for any, for any
reason, they sell it for $2
more. They could be charged
under this. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you just give
me a little insight on, on why
we didn't.
Intentionally put that wording
to say knowingly and to, to
prove that they are indeed
trying to defraud this entity.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, kind person. I will say
that um it because it is a bill
that exists and is working to
protect the Aggies and the lobos
and our other university sports
programs.
We do not want to.
Rewrite we want to expand the
protections for our arts
programs in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so can you tell me
why, uh, or how many folks have
been prosecuted under this law
since it took effect, I believe
you said 1989, 1989, it looks
like. So can you tell me how
many instances we've had, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, kind person. I will
say I do not know that would
probably be maybe statistics
that the Attorney General's
office might help. I will say
that this approach has been
provided because we have seen
other laws, other states have
similar laws that created
protections so prosecution
didn't have to occur.
I'm very confused, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I apologize. So
other states did something like
this and.
I, I guess my question was just
how many folks maybe just in
recent history has this recently
been used as a law to prosecute
under the current provisions in
the current statute that we're
now trying to amend to help
bring more people in. So can you
tell me specifically about those
lobos and Aggies games like we
talked about, we said it's
working. How do we know it's
working currently, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you, kind person. I, I have
forgotten to introduce my expert
witness today, um, I have the
executive director from
Southwest uh Opera and um and uh
maybe I shall.
As for an individual from the
AG's office if we were kind
enough to get this bill into the
other chamber. I do not have
that data, kinder.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I guess I would
just be interested in that
because it sounds like there's a
problem we're trying to solve
with this legislation, but if I
don't really have an idea of how
the current law is working
because maybe we're just
rounding people up for selling
Aggie's tickets. I don't know.
Maybe we're not.
And I mean, I have no idea.
Maybe there's some kind of like
weird like ticket farm.
Somewhere that's selling Aggie's
tickets versus selling Lobos
tickets and maybe it's not.
I don't know, Mr. Speaker, but
so I, I do have a, a solution
for us all.
I do, Mr. Speaker.
I have a, I have a very good
solution, and I think it's gonna
be extraordinarily friendly in
every single way. And so, Mr.
Speaker, I have an amendment to
this great piece of legislation
that I believe shall enhance it
tremendously.
And I would request a roll call
whenever I read this number on
this sheet of paper. Very well.
You have a roll call. Can you
please kindly read the number on
the bottom left. Of course, Mr.
Speaker, the number is 231059.1.
we'll get that passed out and up
on the website.
It's already up on the website.
We shall pass it out.
Is anyone buying Aggie's tickets
these days.
I think they're giving them away
for free.
Point of order, Mr. Speaker, how
dare you?
Right. Has the amendment been
passed out?
Gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So this
amendment does not put everyone
who scalps Lobo's tickets at
Guantanamo Bay, but.
And I, I did get that from
Representative Murphy over here,
which is pretty funny, but the
amendment does do a very
important things. So this will
clarify in no uncertain terms
what scalping actually means
when it comes to the intent. So,
Mr. Speaker, as I will go
through this amendment, it's a
little bit long. It's only Mr.
Speaker, I don't believe
everyone has the amendment yet.
Oh, apologies. OK.
Does everybody have the
amendment?
Did you guys run out of copies?
Gotta make sure we read that
amendment closely, gentlemen.
There we go. Everybody got the
amendment, gentlemen, to
continue with the explanation of
the amendment.
OK, Mr. Speaker, here we go. So
this amendment has new material
added for burden of proof for
enforcement of tickets, scalping
violations, Mr. Speaker, this
pretty much says no prosecution
under this section of law shall
proceed unless the enforcing
agency provides clear and
convincing evidence that, and
then it gives 3 stipulations,
the reseller personally acquired
the ticket directly from the
event venue, the official event
promoter, or an authorized
ticket agent number.
12, the reseller is sold or
attempted to sell the ticket at
a price greater than the price
charged at the place of
admission or printed on the
ticket and the reseller acted
knowingly with the intent to
defraud, as demonstrated by
repeated sales, use of automatic
purchasing software or
concealment of the reseller's
identity in this transaction. It
further states a person shall
not be deemed to have acted with
intent to defraud under this
section if the ticket was one
sold.
resold at an amount equal to or
less than 20% above face value
to account for fees and
transaction costs.
2, the person resold 5 or fewer
tickets for the given event and
provides reasonable proof of
original purchase then on these
next few ones it says on C, the
burden of proof shall rest
solely on the enforcement agency
to establish each element of the
offense beyond a reasonable
doubt, and then it says no civil
or criminal penalty shall be
imposed for the violation of
Section 30-46-1.
Unless all elements under
subsection A of this section are
met. So, Mr. Speaker, it's very,
it's very detailed. It is very
concise in what specifically is
scalping. And so I think it
would, it would help get those
people from those big ticket
farms or whatever they're called
to be found and hunted down and
prosecuted, but Granny, who's
selling a ticket to her, her
friend from knitting class or
whatever is not going to be
prosecuted and put in jail for a
year, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady from Bern Lea
Sandoval is is a friendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. No, it is
not a friendly amendment.
All right, we do have a debate
on the amendment. We'll go first
to the gentle lady from Berna Le
representative Hochman B. Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentleman from Otero County
Yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
gladly yield to the general lady
from Bernal Leo.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
and while I can understand and
appreciate the gentleman from
Otero's, uh, suggestion that um
this is just a simple fix. I
see, uh, a few.
Pretty large problems with it,
if I may, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So, um, gentlemen
from Otero, so let's go to
section 2A of your amendment. No
prosecution shall proceed unless
the enforcing agency provides
clear and convincing evidence.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentleman from
Otero.
Where did, where does this come
from, this standard
specifically. Why, why clear and
convincing evidence.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, very good question and,
uh, number one, I do wanna say
I'm not an attorney, so I'm not
trying to sound like one, but
with this amendment, which I did
get professionals to look at and
help me draft. You have some
kind of element that you put in
there to show that there is some
sort of intention to be making
this.
Illegal act and so when it comes
to clear and convincing
evidence, it would have to be
something that was.
Overwhelming
Innocence to be able to prove
it. It can't be something
that's, that's vague or lacking
details or something that could
be very innocuous sounding or it
would have to be pretty glaring,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I want to remind
uh the gentleman from Otero that
we are here to draft laws and
the people of the state of New
Mexico are um.
And they are ensuring and they
are depending on us to get them
right and so the first problem I
see with this amendment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is this
would upend uh pretty standard,
um, concepts that we have in
criminal law. So for instance,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, to
begin an investigation, we
depend on a concept called
probable cause, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, what that
means is the um the
there the law enforcement agent
or agency has to have a probable
cause or reason to investigate.
Um, however, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, in your amendment
here, Section A, you're saying
that um they can't even proceed
to prosecute, investigate unless
you meet clear and convincing
evidence. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, that in
itself just doesn't work with
New Mexico criminal law, so I'm
starting off with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
I wanna move on, um, and talk
about, you know, the necessity
for offering a burden of proof,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
while I can understand that, you
know, you want to make sure that
we don't catch innocent lobos or
Aggies fans go lobos, um, who
wanna, who want to resell
tickets, um, in their individual
capacity. I know that we're
trying to prevent unnecessary
prosecution, but there's another
concept in New Mexico law that
we have Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
It's called the Unfair Trade
Practices Act. Are you familiar
with that? Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, lady. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So essentially my
fear with your amendment is that
it would create an entirely new
standard applicable just under
um this law, this piece of
legislation that we're
considering that would conflict
with the unfair trade Practices
Act. For instance, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the unfair
trade Practices Act basically
encompasses any transaction that
is done fraudulently or with the
intent to defraud, and so
By creating this different
standard in um section A, you
could be conflicting with unfair
trade practices, you could be
unknowingly, um, uh, widening
the scope of it, it would again
disrupt that delicate balance
that we've already cut in well
settled law. Um, next, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the problem
I see with your amendment, oh,
and one other thing I wanna, uh,
another point going back to the
previous point, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
from Otero, um, by requiring a
clear and convincing evidence to
prosecute, that means that we
would be requiring
A higher burden of proof.
To investigate this than we
would to investigate a murder
investigation. I definitely
don't think that we want to do
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, but I digress on to the next
point, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, going to subpart D no civil
or criminal penalty shall be
imposed for violation, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you keep on
sighting section 304630-46 in
New Mexico law, um.
Do you know what that section?
Is about
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, this section is about
ticket scalping.
30-46-1.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, OK, and so
is this considered under Mexico
criminal statutes criminal law
is this a criminal, uh, was, is
this a crime?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, it's currently a
crime.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So then in subpart, I
think it's D, I can't.
I need more than one hand here.
Give me a second.
Some part uh see burden proof
shall rest solely on enforcing
agency to establish each element
of the offense beyond a
reasonable doubt, so you're
again referencing the reasonable
doubt standard which is correct
as it relates to criminal law,
but then in subsection D, you're
saying civil or criminal
penalty, you keep referencing
section 30-46, which indeed is a
criminal statute, criminal
penalty. So your
language, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it's, I, I, I
appreciate the intent, A for
effort, but um this would just
not.
Go well with settled law. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment, gentlemen from San
Juan, Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentleman from Montero County
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
gladly yield to my friend from
San Juan.
So, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, been reading
through the provisions in here.
It, it appears as if all you're
really trying to do.
Is protect someone.
Who resells
A ticket
That
There is not an intent to be a
professional scalper.
But for whatever reason is
needing to resell. I'm looking
at, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen under uh your item.
One
Under a under the new material,
the reseller personally acquires
the ticket directly from the
event venue.
The official event.
Uh, promoter or as an authorized
ticketing agent.
Um
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
it appears to me that you're
completely excluding
Professional scalpers.
I, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this provision alone I like.
It identifies who I understand
the bill sponsor is trying to
target.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
I'm, I'm looking at the second
provision, the reseller sold.
Or attempted to sell the ticket
at a price greater than the
price charged at the place of
admission or printed.
On the ticket
So, uh, could you delve into
that a little bit more, item 2.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, gentlemen, pardon me,
pardon me. It's a, it's been a
day. But, so Mr. Speaker, what
that means is.
It just has to show that you are
just selling it for something.
In a different price and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
When we're calling on these
people to be prosecuted, which
are actual ticket scalpers who
truly do a disgrace to our
state, those folks are usually
organized. They usually have a
plan to, to defraud in a larger
scale, more than 5 tickets and
also this could
Really exclude a lot of those
people, like we said with
represented the gentle lady from
Bern Leo and Torrance, the
granny who just got an extra
ticket and said, OK, let's just
sell it for a little bit more.
So this is specific to make sure
that these folks are being
caught, the actual bad
perpetrators and then the people
who are not, they are not being
unduly prosecuted for something
they shouldn't be prosecuted for
in the first place, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen.
Um, so as a member of the
legislature, have you ever been
given?
A ticket
To some.
Museum or an art vent or or a.
That's probably the wrong
question for you, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, considering how
meticulous you are not accepting
even uh gifts from lobbyists,
but Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
more generally have members of
this body or this legislature
received tickets to events
before.
Um
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I don't
know how many of those tickets
have said what specific amount
of money was on the ticket, but
I do know that actually a gentle
lady who has this very bill just
gave me 2 free tickets, guest
passes to the New Mexico balloon
fiesta Museum. So definitely
check that out if you need 2
more tickets. I, I don't know
how often I go to Albuquerque,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, how much?
Depends on the price, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Depends on if this bill gets
passed, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. In reality, this is
not what we're talking about in,
in general, however, have you
ever been given a ticket?
Or one a ticket.
In a raffle.
Or something like that and you
had no use for it, but it did
have value.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
if you, if you receive something
of value.
Uh, do you always know the price
of that ticket?
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no, oftentimes you
don't know the, the value, and
you'd probably have to go see
the actual venue that that is
selling the tickets to see what
that cost may be, and it could
be higher, it could be lower,
it, it all depends on what your,
your version of what that ticket
may, may be worth, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Uh, so thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, I'm looking at item number 3
under A on your new material,
the reseller acted knowingly.
With the intent to defraud.
As demonstrated by repeated
sales use of uh automated
purchasing software or
concealment of the resell
reseller's identity in the
transaction. So this appears if
you're targeting.
That group, can you explain this
to me under section 8.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So yes, that means
you have to.
Be intending to defraud this
entity and so Mister Speaker,
gentle lady gentlemen, when
we're talking to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo, we were talking
about, I mean, it kind of
devolved, I don't really
understand much of what happened
there actually. We, we like
compared ticket scalping to
murder or something, which
definitely is not what this bill
does. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what this does is it
says, OK, if you're intending to
defraud and demonstrate repeated
sales, so it has to be something
that's, that's like a chronic
thing that's happening
repeatedly has to be a pattern.
It can't be a one-off. It can't
be, oh, I sold one ticket, a few
tickets this one time, it has to
be at least 5 tickets has to be
repeated, has to show that you
are intending to repeatedly do
this in multiple occasions and
even have some kind of
Maybe even some kind of business
entity or some other kind of
entity that you were trying to
use to funnel these funds
through once you've defrauded
that 501c3 that.
The lobos or the Aggies and
everyone else who's included in
this, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So under a
One of these three provisions.
Or more would have to be
demonstrated as clear and
convincing evidence, um, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, so
you're, you're, you're looking
at not harassing someone.
Uh, just for the mere resale of
a ticket.
Um, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, who
Are you trying to protect? I, I
under I heard Granny, I heard,
but Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
have you ever purchased a ticket
that you were unable to use.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, I have purchased
a ticket that did have a dollar
amount on it and I was unable to
use it and I did not scalp it
just for the record, Mr.
Speaker.
So, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, it, it might be
uh.
Uh, fodder for some and other
people might be happy to hear
this, but I'm a big Broncos fan.
Um, and, uh, I can say that
again with a little bit of less.
Uh, uh.
Let's just say uh there's a
little more pride in my voice
this year than maybe previous
years. But Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, in the past.
I have had to resell tickets.
Because I was not able.
To use them
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Sometimes reselling those
tickets, there's a cost.
To that resell. Does your does
your uh amendment deal with
that.
particular aspect.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it actually does on
the 2nd page of the amendment.
On the 1st and 2nd section, it
says the ticket was, was re
resold for an amount equal to or
less than 20% above face value
to account for fees and
transaction costs.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
I, I appreciate that, but it's
still maybe doesn't cover all
instances.
Um
Uh, being a Broncos fan from
near the Colorado border, there
are other Broncos fans there,
friends of mine.
Um
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
all the microphones are touching
in this building.
So Mister Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
Mhm
There
have been instances instances
when I've had tickets.
To a game
That I want to go to.
But I've had friends who have
said, you're going to the game,
I wish I had the tickets. I'll
give you $10 more. I'll.
You know, whatever.
I, I'm just wondering, uh, does
your, does your, how does your,
your, uh, amendment cover this
or is it silent on this?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So,
I can't speak for those entities
that are
like a
Like the Broncos and I don't
know who's buying those tickets,
but someone is and so Mr.
Speaker, it looks like you may
have had a ticket for the
Broncos. So that would not be
included in this in the bill and
in the amendment we're only
talking about nonprofits, so I
guess if you were super jazzed
to go to see maybe a a
greyhounds game in eastern New
Mexico as I usually am, then
that could be something that I,
I might pay an extra few bucks
for that ticket, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I understand Les
Miserables is coming to New
Mexico and I'm very interested
in going that, so if you have a
ticket, I'm willing to spend a
few dollars more if uh if if I
can uh potentially get you to
part with it.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I C.
You have on here the burden of
proof shall rest solely on the
enforcement agency to establish
each element of the offense
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Um, how, how, how different is
that from current law?
Uh
In, in other areas of fraud.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, from my
understanding, it's, it's, it's
somewhat similar. I know in
section 30, there are a lot of
different provisions that are
That are crimes, right? When it
comes to fraud, uh, the burden,
this pretty much puts the burden
of proof at a
At a reasonable level, just kind
of to make it.
More practical.
For the entity to actually have
that clear and convincing
evidence, because if you were
going to prosecute this, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, if I was
gonna go to a district attorney.
Or if I, if I was.
Law enforcement going to a
district attorney trying to get
them to.
Do this case, I would need a
package of an insane amount, or
maybe not an insane amount, but
something substantial when it
comes to making sure that we can
have a clear-cut case, we can
get a conviction. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this would
just give them the tools to say,
OK, this is, this is the entity,
the, let's just say Department
of Justice going after this
scalping ring that is doing
business in New Mexico and we
have all this evidence they're
selling way more than 5 tickets,
way more than 20% of the.
Of the proceeds and a lot of
these are just fraud. They're
not even real tickets that
they're selling, they're just
fake tickets. And so the real
tickets are just not included,
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that this would be very
complimentary of current law,
and I think it would be a
service to the state to pass
something like this in this
provision to at least tighten it
when it comes to ticket
scalping, and I don't really
like that word scalping, Mr.
Speaker. I don't know why we
call it ticket scalping, but
that's what it is and I'm not
going to change that in this
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I resemble that
remark.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, uh, I appreciate this. I
understand what you're trying
to.
Uh, get done here and uh before
I, I step down and give up my,
uh, give up the microphone. I
would like to point out I
believe I see Representative
Lord standing to speak on this
as well.
Thank you for uh alerting me to
that, but I had her on my list,
so.
I'm good.
Don't need the help. Thank you.
General lady from Berlin and
Torrance. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and I want to sing
because your list you list is
never mind,
um, thank you, Mr. Speaker for
the gentlemen from Otero, please
yield your time.
Uh, maybe I should only for a
song, Mr. Speaker.
Please don't torture the no
no, I will, I will yield proceed
with the debate. Thank you. Um
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen for
Otero County, look what I have
here in my pocket.
I have tickets that were given
to me from the museum of New
Mexico Foundation, which I'm not
giving these tickets away or
selling them to anyone, but to
proceed further with what we
were just debating, I got these
for free as a representative. I
have no idea what the value is.
So if I were to sell them even
for $1 more, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that would, uh.
Make me a criminal. Is that
correct?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I think we might have to
look at that portion of the
bill. One moment, Mr. Speaker.
Because I believe it says a
greater price charged at the
place of admission or printed on
the ticket. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if they're selling
those at the, at the door for
So many dollars, let's just say
$50 and you sold yours for $55
because the price of admission
at the door was 50 and you sold
it for higher than that, yes,
you would be included, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that was
the point I was trying to make
because I got these, uh, as a
great gift which I plan on using
because I definitely want to go
to our museum, but if I decided
I didn't want to go or if I
wanted to sell my guest one, I
really have no idea and without
having the intent which you have
on section 3, the reseller acted
knowingly and with intent to
defraud, I think is a great part
of that amendment because that
goes back to what I said
earlier, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
that.
If we have a grandma who gets a
ticket or any of us here.
Uh, get a ticket and resell
them, uh, especially for us
that's gonna be a mailer the
next time we run for office.
Isn't that correct, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, I hope not, but
maybe someday.
Potentially with some people,
not me, not you, but maybe some
people. Well, I wouldn't want my
point is I wouldn't want anybody
Republican or Democrat to get a
ticket for somebody and they
don't know what the price is and
resell it and so I think your
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on this is on the
reseller acted knowingly with
intent to defraud and
demonstrated by repeated sales
use of automated. So what you're
trying to say there, Mr.
Speaker, gentleman, you're
trying to protect us, you're
trying to protect the people of
New Mexico and.
you're looking at capturing the
big resellers, the ones who buy
100 tickets and sell those. Is
that what that intent is there?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is correct. And so I
do share the sentiments of the
sponsor of this bill, where this
could be a problem. I don't,
I've actually never seen any
specific.
Entity under the current law
getting prosecuted. I just
haven't seen the news clippings
of, of that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I will say when we're
trying to amend the statute to
be extraordinarily broad when it
comes to any C4 organization,
right? See for like the, the
National Rifle Association,
which I'm a member, they have a
C3 that could apply to them. Uh,
it could apply on the other side
to uh.
I think there are some of these
advocacy groups regarding guns
on the other side of the aisle
that could apply to them. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when we're
opening this section up and
broadening it so much. I think
that there needs to be some kind
of parameters in, in this bill
to ensure that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that.
The regular Joe who's just
giving a ticket to somebody for
a little more money, let's just
say $5 more is not going to be
prosecuted under this new
section of law because of this
new provision and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this just
intends to make sure that the
bad guys who were actually
harming these, these places of
art and culture, etc. they
actually are catching these
people because I think that's
who we should be going after,
not grandma in the knitting
circle, we need to be going
after the
guys who are fraudulently and
intentionally ensuring that they
can.
Take away the profits or the
monetary flow of nonprofits in
the state, which I believe is
the point of the bill, but it
kind of is diluted in my
opinion, without this, this
amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, on
the original bill compared to
your amendment. I'm trying to
think about somebody if they put
it on a broker website like a
StubHub or something, and the,
the ticket, these go, let's say
for $50 and I put it on there
for $50 but StubHub now collects
a fee that possibly could be
another way, correct? Because
the way the bill is written,
it's just any amount over, so
even if StubHub collected
something, you would still be
looking at uh fraudulent
behavior, isn't that correct,
Mr. Speaker?
and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, and I, I'm not very
familiar with StubHub, but I, I
know that people sell things on
eBay a lot and they could be
concert tickets. I think one of
my first concerts I ever went to
was a ticket I bought on eBay
and it was at.
I think it was a
The amphitheater, but it wasn't
actually a nonprofit so I would
say if it was a nonprofit that
was putting on an event, because
in my town, for example, we
have, it's called the Flick and
Drew Center for Performing Arts,
and they are nonprofit, they
partner with the county and they
put on a lot of very good
programs in our city, so it
could definitely apply to those
because they're nonprofits, but
It could also mean that they are
utilizing certain online
websites like StubHub or other
places to be doing business. It
would all just depend on, on the
scenario. However, I think that
if we do try to
Being so broad in this statute,
it could have negative
consequences just for the
everyday New Mexican.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's actually one of the
points I was gonna make. I have
no idea if these tickets the way
they, these tickets are given me
from the museum were from them,
from an organization that is for
profit or nonprofits that leads
back again if I were to sell
that ticket and it turns out it
was from a nonprofit that I'm
looking at uh a criminal
conviction, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so we've gone over
intent, so your tent is to make
sure that you're going after the
people that actually are selling
tickets for much higher rates.
If we go to the 2nd page.
You have the ticket was resold
for the amount equal to or less
than 20% above the face value.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in my
understanding that you are
allowing for a 20% hike or is
that are you putting a cap on
that or am I misunderstanding
that section?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, yes, that's correct,
but it's only pertaining to the
fees and transaction costs. So
it could theoretically be, I
mean, I don't know how closely
we follow what these
transactions are if it's cash,
for example, you have a ticket
that's worth $100 and you're
asking 120.
Then that
Additional cost could be your
time, your effort, and having to
try to find somebody to resell
the ticket to, and it also could
include if it was online, it
could include costs regarding
processing fees, etc. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's
kind of trying to give a buffer
to folks. So it also proves that
you're not being malicious in
this way, you're just trying to
get rid of this ticket and get
it to somebody, a good home for
the tickets so they can go and
see the show and ensure that
we're not gonna be.
Locking folks up just because of
this section. And usually, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this body
is has a proclivity to not
support enhancing penalties for
certain things, but this would
be an exception.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, is
that also why you put the cap on
there, they, they could sell 5
or fewer tickets. Is that each
time or or at one time or what
do you mean by that section?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, so, uh, in the bill,
it says the burden of proof
regarding this section is a
person sold 5 or fewer tickets,
so you only had 5.
Or for and then it also says it
has to be repeated. So it has to
be something that's really
repeated, as I said before and
so when we're talking about the
repetition of this, it means
that this is a serial offender
when it comes to ticket
scalping. This is not just
someone locally trying to sell a
ticket for a nonprofit event.
Maybe they want to increase the
prices because they see that
there, there's a big name coming
to town and there's a higher
demand and, you know, basic
economics, higher demand, the
higher the price of.
The ticket, right? So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that would
probably
It would probably give a buffer
for that, and I think that's
also well-intentioned and
necessary, especially when we're
amending this section of law.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
and gentlemen, that goes back to
the part of intent. I got these
tickets. I'm going to use them.
I have no idea if a a nonprofit
got them and gave them to me or
if the museum themselves gave
them to me, but if I dared to go
out and sell them or, you know,
somebody says, I'll give you 20
bucks and they're worth $15. I'm
now looking at criminal charges,
so I understand what you're
trying to do. You're trying to
take away the intention, what's
in somebody's heart? Are they
technically trying to profit off
of numerous tickets or you're
trying to make exemptions for
people who like our.
we get a ticket profit
nonprofit, we don't know we
don't know what the amount is
and somebody says they'll give
us, yeah, I'll give you 20 bucks
for those and you do and you've
now become a criminal. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, and young
lady?
a gentle man.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I appreciate it. Uh,
you're right. Uh, I think that
that would allow for that, and
that's also why the burden of
the proof that's needed to
prosecute these people is where
it is in the bill. We're not
intending to make this, um, an
act of
Congress essentially to to
prosecute a case. What we're
saying is it just needs to be.
A case that has all the, all the
facts, all the details necessary
to prosecute this ticket
scalping ring.
And when we do prosecute the
ticket scalping ring, which has
been proven in the sections that
we're adding, now we know this
is a this is a bad person. This
is a repeat offending ticket
scalper and this person who is
intentionally and knowingly
trying to defraud this 501c3 or
the sporting team on a, on a
college level, etc. or a city or
locality, this entity will be
held accountable, and I don't
see how that's controversial. I
don't see how that's trying to
equate this with.
murder, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this is merely attempting
to find a good amount of
evidence to ensure that we have
a a case that is.
Perfect.
Essentially, we want a case that
is perfect to prosecute. We want
something that we can easily
throw these people behind bars
because we have all this data,
all this.
All these receipts of all these
crimes that they've created, Mr.
Speaker, and so that's pretty
much what it means. It would
Save the everyday New Mexican
from.
Having to deal with this.
terrible situation if they
decided to sell to a friend a
ticket that was $5 or more,
which I don't think is something
that we want to do and I think
that's what the current bill
does, but I, as a person who has
compassion for my fellow man and
my fellow New Mexican, I wanna
make sure that we don't go
rounding everybody up just
because you sold your ticket for
$5 more, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and um
gentlemen and I agree with you
and this is just the last thing
I want to say that the problem
with this bill is the intent.
The intent I get it I get we get
free tickets here, we get free
entrance or something we don't
know. Somebody says they want to
buy it for $20 makes us and
anybody in the state of New
Mexico criminal. I don't think
that's fair. I think the bill
should be intended to go after
someone who's doing many sales
with the intention of scalping
the tickets, not for people of
New Mexicans who may innocently
sell something and not know and
make them a criminal. So Mr.
Speaker, that's all the
questions I have. Thank you.
of it.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 26. All right,
we're on a motion to table House
floor amendment number 2 to
House Bill 26. We do have a roll
call. We have a 32nd bu clock a
vote of yes and the amendment
would have been tabled a vote of
no, and we're back on the
amendment. The vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 2 House Bill 26
has been tabled. Gentlemen, you
sit on the floor. Oh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Uh, I, I guess I
would ask more questions, but
what's the point, Mr. Speaker,
because I, I cannot support this
legislation. I find this
legislation.
does not adequately protect
everyday New Mexicans, and I
urge the body to oppose it
vehemently with everything
they've got. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. There's
further debate, gentlemen, from
Lee Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady ye?
I yield to my kind colleague.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I believe you
mentioned that you're
Uh, professional witness is with
the Upper Southwest, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, yes, that is
correct, kind person.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you tell me, or can, can your
witness tell you how many seats
they have inside their opera.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It
depends upon the venue. They
have many different productions
and so their seats vary.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you give me a range?
Thank you Mr. Speaker. They go
up to 631 seats at the National
Hispanic Cultural Center.
Excellent. Thank you. And Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, with
all the different events that
they hold, what's a good average
ticket price?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thank you, Representative. I,
uh, personally purchased a
ticket.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you for your patience, kind
person. I, uh, the average price
is about $45. They can range
anywhere from 19 to 109. It just
depends on the event and the
venue.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
reason why I'm asking, so if we
could sell 600 tickets and, and
we could sell them for over.
$10 a piece, that's $6000 over
The sale price, would you agree
with that math, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
You'll have to repeat that math,
kind sir, and sorry, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if, if we had
Over 600 tickets and we sold
them for $100 a piece and I just
picked something that was easy
math for me, um, that would be a
profit.
And we sold it for $10 more. How
much more would we make off
that?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
not sure what you're saying. I
know the kind person as a
business person and we're
talking about price of ticket,
we're not talking about profit
yet use the word profit.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that, Mr. Speaker
really doesn't impact the
changes to the legislation, but
I had a question that kind of
goes with this with respect to
the concern of different events
that may be out there.
If I understand in section 2
Section D on page 2, the maximum
fine.
would be $500. So if I bought
all the tickets and just say I
made $6000 in profit, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
get a $500 fine, that's a
win-win for me.
Mr. Speaker, is that a question?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, in, in, in, in the sense
that if I'm understanding what
we're trying to do, and somebody
can turn around and make a and,
and buy all the tickets, make a
profit, and only have to pay a
$500 fine.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
trying to understand the value
of the change.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you, kind sir, uh, uh, let
me, uh, go over it again. So on
page one in section A.
Um, and these are both uh both
the sections were gonna be
reviewing right now are in
existing in law.
So it says consists of selling.
Offering for sale or attempting
to sell any ticket privilege
license, admission or pass.
Then in section D, it says
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by
a fine up to $500 or
imprisonment.
For a definite term of less than
one year or both, so if, and I
am not an attorney, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, but if I was a
prosecutor, I would assume that
every offer of a ticket could
be.
Uh, charged with that penalty.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's exactly where I was
trying to get to was in it, it
took a long winded way around
it. I'm not an attorney either
and I didn't set a Holiday Inn
last night, so.
Um
With that,
These can be stackable offenses.
So if I sold one ticket, I could
have a fee or a fine of $500 if
I sold 2, it could be 1000, so
on and so forth. Would that be
correct?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, kind sir. Yes, it's my
understanding.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's what I needed to hear,
needed to understand. Thank you.
There's there's a debate
generally from early and
Torrens, a representative Lord.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Will the gentle lady from
Shoot. I can't read this. Bernal
Leo just er a Leo rap.
And sound ball, please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Singer. I, I
yield to the kind lady, uh, from
Valencia and Bernalillo. close
enough Torrance,
Valencia keep doing that.
That's OK. Um,
I only have a few questions.
Thank God for everybody's
excited about that. Uh, I just
have a few questions. So on
this, Mr. Speaker, generally, I
just wanna make sure there is
nothing in here of any
exemptions for anybody for any
reason of selling a ticket even
for $1 more than what the ticket
price was. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes.
OK, so if.
any of us, if anybody in the
state New Mexico, if any, uh,
grammar gets a ticket and sells
it to one person, there's
nothing to exempt that person
from being charged with the
misdemeanor, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, uh, kind lady, that
is correct. OK, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, if anybody
sells anonymously in Craigslist
online fake name, etc. there,
how would we prosecute those
people, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
So I, Mr. Speaker, a kind lady,
I don't prosecute.
But your bill is about
prosecuting people for
misdemeanors. How would that
happen, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Thank you, Representative,
so the bill is um about
protecting, uh, corporate
nonprofits and state, our state
in New Mexico and political
subdivisions who are presenting
an event. These.
Categories are receiving state
subsidies, they are either tax
exempt because they are 401c3.
They are receiving reduced rent
from maybe the National Hispanic
Cultural Center.
They are receiving your capital
outlay so that they can make
sure these are entities in which
we have wanted to preserve our
cultural history and to make
sure that we are making sure
that we are surrounded by the
arts here in our great state of
New Mexico. This is through
public dollars. This bill is
asking that when these uh
entities that are putting on
events with our public doll.
Someone
is not profiting from it outside
of the person who's presenting
it. Thank you and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, hallelujah. Amen. I
agree 100% with you on what you
just said, however, we're
missing the intent part.
And we're going to put people
with we're gonna charge him with
a crime for something they
didn't know that they did, which
I know Anderson laws is no
exception, but a grandma who
gets a ticket or any of us who
get a ticket or anybody who gets
that and sells it for $1 more is
looking at a misdemeanor. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle Lady, go back
to the question.
If the goal is, OK, I know
you're not trying to go after, I
would imagine specific people. I
really wish you would amend this
bill to say intention knowing.
Knowingly willfully and
purposely, I think you would
have everyone's support, but the
way that you say it, at least
for me and a bunch of my
colleagues, we're not gonna vote
for it because you're going to
give grandma a misdemeanor for
selling a ticket that she got.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
does have to do with uh.
Sorry, it was just got loud for
a minute. It does have to do
with charging with a
misdemeanor. So if your
intention, Mr. Speaker Deli to
go after the worst of the worst
people, the people that are
actually scalping tickets and
they go online and let's say
they look at this, they listen
to this, they go, well, how
we'll just go online and do some
cryptocurrency and with fake
names, how is that? How do you
plan on prosecuting those people
if you're looking at giving
people a misdemeanor and you're
trying to go after the worst of
the worst people. It's, it's
kind of the core of your whole.
issue here, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, uh, it
is the law since 1989, uh, if
grandma is in jeopardy of being
prosecuted for reselling that
lobo ticket, that's what's been
in law still today we are now
making sure that it is not uh a
bill intended to go after big.
ticket resalers, it's a law
making sure we are protecting
our own state funded and
nonprofit and local arts
programs here in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker Joli, but see, you
had the opportunity to fix this.
Is what I'm trying to say. You
have the opportunity to change
this in here and just add the
words intentionally, knowingly,
maliciously so that when grandma
sells a ticket for $1 or even
you're saying 1 penny, we're not
looking at charging our family
members for selling a ticket
that is so benign and it doesn't
really have much to do with the
crime issue because you're
trying to go after the big
sellers and and you had the
opportunity, Mr. Speaker,
generally to
fix this and you didn't,
therefore, that's a big huge no
for me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Catherine Grant
Hidalgo, Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. The
gentle lady, please, uh, from
Bernard Leo and Sandoval, I
believe. Please yield.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
kindly, uh, yield to my kind
colleague.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General
Lee, you know, I, I was reading
thank you for the handout it
kind of makes me understand what
you're trying to do, right?
But as I'm reading here,
It looks to me from, from your
handout and please if I miss
something, please uh clarify it
for me, but it seems like a lot
of this has to do more with
vendors who are outperforming
themselves coming out probably
on the top of the Google search
or uh or they're mimicking
websites and, and, and then
selling the tickets that way is
that the way I understand some
of the problems that you're
having?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, kind sir. The law has been
in place protecting university
sports since 1989, but our
performing arts programs have
not had issues. So you're
correct until the Internet and,
and having this, um, egregious
uh fraudulent uh way to be able
to uh yield and, and get uh
buyers to go to false websites.
So you're absolutely right.
There was not an issue before.
technology change. Mr. Speaker,
gentle, the reason I'm, I'm
saying that is, I mean, I, I
think we need to protect these,
these entities, of course the
arts and all that, but my, my
question is.
First of all, I was thinking
some of these um and I don't
know this, OK, I'm just thinking
because this this we had
something kind of similar to
this happened to my wife and I
when we were in a, uh, in Las
Vegas. We were trying to buy
tickets and there's sometimes
fraudulent things that happen.
you purchase the tickets and
then our our phone glitched and
I said please reenter now this
is more of a fraudulent type
thing and my wife said, oh no,
I'm getting out of this and,
and, and.
Anyway, the next by the next day
they hacked our credit card and
trying to and trying to just buy
some tickets uh out there uh for
an event.
But
We don't know who these entities
are and, and, and I respectfully
I'm asking how do we, how do we,
how is this gonna help us if
there's individuals and and I'm
trying to just strengthen this
somehow and please don't take it
as more than that or.
You know, if there's a foreign
country of people in a foreign
country, a group outside of the
United States is our.
Is New Mexico going to go as far
as is trying to prosecute these
people in other countries or I
don't know, you know, I'm not,
I'm not a investigator, so how,
how would we handle that, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and thank you, kind sir. So, um,
let's go back. We've heard a lot
of scenarios um in this debate
in this heated debate for the
last couple of hours. So this
bill will not protect
individuals who are buying
fraudulent tickets.
in Las Vegas, Nevada or at a
Broncos game or a Taylor Swift
concert. This is only
About protecting as it is
currently our university sports
programs are using public
dollars that supplement our
universities here in the great
state of New Mexico and now
we're expanding it to our local
arts programs, so that is what
it is accomplishing and it has
shown that laws like this will
allow search engines to geo
fence to protect as.
They are doing currently with
our greyhounds and our aggies
and our lobos.
Mr. Speaker, generally, OK, I
understand. So, so, and I'm
sorry, I, I, I understand that
it's just for the, for the um
arts and that it has nothing to
do with Broncos or anything
else, and I understand what you
were saying for public events.
I, uh, like colleges and so so
forth, so what you're telling me
this is, I think the answer I
was looking for so you're saying
that this legislation would make
the the search engines exclude
geo fence, in other words, keep
outside entities from doing
this?
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and thank you, kind sir. What
I'm saying is by passing this
law, then our electronic our
search engines, then we'll have
the right and we'll be obligated
because they don't want to be uh
vulnerable for litigation for
allowing these kind of uh events
to occur.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
understand that a lot better, so
I'm gonna move on to the next
question I had is and and if you
were asked this, I'm sorry I
didn't hear it the cost of the
ticket, uh, on in your
legislation does it include the
taxes, the sales taxes, OK, and
the cost is it also the service
fee or whatever does that is
that in this you protect I don't
know will you buy it for 20
bucks, but the service fee and
the taxes end up being 30, we'll
just say is, is it, does that
mean that you can sell the.
take it to reclaim all the money
that you put into the ticket.
Uh thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, kind sir. It does. It
uses the word fee in this bill
and allows for you to be able to
capture any fee, um, maybe the
box office itself might charge a
fee as well because that's how
they will offset their box
office uh expenses.
And, and that brings me to my
other question is does this any
any way, shape or form, um.
Since let's just say a third
party is selling these tickets
anyway.
Uh, this, I don't know, I don't,
we'll use, uh, I don't know,
Ticketmaster, we'll just use
that. I don't know if they would
do this, but if um they did that
and they.
The, uh, so the I don't know the
one of these entities will just
say the Santa Fe Opera decides
to sell tickets for $100 and
they charge a service fee.
For the service of purchasing
them online and so forth, are
they in violation of this, uh,
legislation, Mister Speaker
general.
I'm so sorry, Mr. Speaker and
kind, sir, can you clarify that
question again? Are you asking
if Santa Fe Opera is in
violation or Ticketmaster is in
violation. Ticketmaster Mr.
Speaker, I'm sorry, uh, maybe
let me clear this up.
OPEA says we're gonna sell
tickets for $100.
Ticketmaster or whatever third
party says we're gonna, we're
gonna sell them for $100 but
we're going to charge a fee.
For our services, right, of $10
are they in violation of this
since it's to be sold for only
they're asking to be sold for 10
number of dollars.
I thank you kind, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you so on in
section C it says um nothing in
this section shall prohibit
charging the fee for service
rendered in connection with the
sale of the ticket privilege or
license, so, uh, I don't believe
that Ticketmaster's business
plan is just to capture fees. I
think they have other expenses
and we will worry about them
both.
Federal government, but the fees
that you are going to get from a
uh box office or a third party
ticket sale for your local arts
programs that is accepted in
this bill.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the last question I have is the,
you know, do they is there does
uh association exist for the
arts.
cultural
Um
I don't community will say, is
there, is there an association
that they maybe can belong or
they do belong to?
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like
a performing arts coalition or
Mr. Speaker, Jo, yes ma'am.
Sometimes they all in order to
kind of uh promote their type of
and protect their their interest
they they belong to an
association, so is there an
association that exists and I,
I'm just gonna cut to the chase.
The reason I say that is I
belong to some associations
where um that gives us
privileges for special, let's
just say uh credit card service,
uh, um, broker or uh company.
they can since you belong to the
association you're privileged
to.
Uh, take, uh, advantage of
certain rates and so forth and
certain vendors do they have any
sort of and and the reason I'm
going down this, this, um,
direction, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because I'm wondering if,
if because I mean I don't think
anybody's trying to get
everybody in trouble here. I, I,
I don't see that. I, I, I get
what you're trying to do and I
think the, the, the, the back
and forth here is.
They're afraid that somebody.
Unknowingly gets in trouble for
doing something really, you
know, simple says yeah I think I
paid $30 and they paid $25 and
they sell for $5 more and now
they're in violation of
something like this or the round
up and say hey you know what I
bought it for 2550 give me 26
bucks. I don't know. I'm just
trying to, I think that's what
the the the the other side was
trying to to find some middle
ground on that little
protection, but I was the reason
I was bringing up uh
associations and sometimes they
can be they can find a vendor.
That all of these um entities
can use to.
To promote their tickets and say
this is our vendor, you know,
that, that a preferred vendor
and they themselves monitor some
of that that's, that's where I
was going with that. Is there an
association that that exists
like that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, kind sir. No, there
is not.
OK, that's all I have, Mr.
Speaker, I was just trying to
wrap my mind around this. Thank
you.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady from
Bern Leo and Sandoval yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I kindly
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I, I did get
Those are both your counties,
correct?
Yes, sir.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um
So we've had a bit of a debate
on
Specifically trying to protect.
Someone from
Violating this unintentionally
and, and.
And maybe having to to defend
themselves over that, um, is
that just something that you,
you don't believe there that
that's a possibility that
someone could get in trouble
from this or be targeted.
Uh
An example could be
I bought
10 tickets to my for my family
for something I thought they
would really enjoy.
all of them opted out and I, I
end up selling and that, that
happens to me more often than
not with just going to the movie
theater, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, that, uh, something I think
is a great surprise that to them
maybe not so much.
Um
Well
Is there, is that not a concern
at all that
Someone accidentally
Uh, get in violation of this and
maybe fearful of
Of, uh, being prosecuted
gentlemen, I think we've beat
this horse long enough, I think
that's been answered many times
and current law would actually
make it illegal to do that if
it's to a low or or an Aggie
game or a greyhound game and the
general lady has explained over
and over and over again that she
is simply adding nonprofit
public arts programs into this
statute. So I think that answers
been asked and answered many
times, but please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, I appreciate that. I do
believe that happened a couple
of nights ago as well to on
amendment that someone on the
Republican side we are on this
bill, so please, uh, stick to
this bill and that Mr. Speaker,
but you asked the gentle lady,
uh, Miss Ree to a gentleman
that's a completely different
issue. We are on House Bill 26.
Please proceed. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I will be looking to
have fair treatment in the
future though always for
treatment from me, sir. Proceed.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, the reason I'm asking this
question again.
is because I believe this is
gonna receive similar
questioning.
In the Senate.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, in general,
is there any language?
That you would be comfortable
with.
Uh, to have your bill amended to
put some protections for someone
who
Uh
Puts them, gets in that
position. Is there any
willingness on your part to
consider language or Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, if it were to
come back altered with
something, would that be
something you would consider at
that time, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, um, no, uh, I think
37 years of the existing law as
showed that we are, have the
right verbiage.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, or maybe through
this debate, we've found that
the existing law.
Might need to be altered
slightly.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady,
Uh, I do appreciate.
You've had a robust debate here.
I think it is very clear.
That there are concerns of
unintended consequences.
And so, um, I would uh suggest
that uh you're probably gonna
hear similar on the other side
and uh I would hope to see this
bill come back with some
protections for the average
consumer. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
that House Bill 26 to passage of
House Bill 26. The vote is now
open.
Well, it's about to close. The
votes are closed by a vote of 41
in the affirmative, 26 in the
negative House Bill 26 has
really passed this house.
Gentlemen from Bern Leo, are you
ready on item number 9.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that action
necessary for place in hell 22
with an emergency clause has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment, or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, if
I might take a moment before I
start to explain the bill that
my co-sponsor.
And although we have only one
line at the top and a second
line, my co-sponsor really
should be next to me on the
first line because he will also
be acting as my technical expert
and that is my good friend from
Sandoval County, Joshua
Hernandez, Mr. Speaker
from Sandoval, Hernandez. Mr.
Speaker, um, so real quick, uh,
House Bill 22, uh, is a simple
but significant measure that
ensures that tipped
workers in New Mexico receive
every dollar that they um
We intended to receive.
So what happens is in POS
systems for restaurants, um, by
default under federal law, um.
Part of the credit card charge,
uh, sorry, part of the credit
card fee is charged to the, um,
tipped employee.
And um a lot of restaurants
don't even know that this is
happening, um, what we're trying
to do and what's happened in
several other states now is um
make it so that that credit card
fee on the tipped employee is
not allowed, um, and this bill
would do that. So back to.
Gentlemen from earlier. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I have greatly
appreciated his technical
expertise and experience in this
regard.
Mr. Speaker, this, uh, this is
about fairness.
Uh, credit card fees are cost of
doing business and employers
should not be passing that cost
on to their employees. Workers
in the service industry rely on
their tips. It's not extra
money. It is their wages.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman if he wants to add,
otherwise we will stand for
questions.
We will stand for questions
from San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Who's presenting the bill that
you know. Sandoval or Ber Leo?
Mr. Speaker, I am presenting the
bill, but I will yield to my
colleague as necessary.
gentleman from Berlio, would you
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Uh, generally, uh, so we're
talking on tips, the service
charge. What what Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, what is the
service charge generally on, uh,
credit card purchases. Speaker,
the gentleman from Sandoval.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So, um,
what we're talking about is that
fee from the financial
institution for when you swipe
your credit card, um.
Everyone is different, but on
average it's about 3% plus a 30
or 30 cent charge, um, depending
on the financial institution,
um, that can go up or down from
there, um, Amex charges more,
uh, dinner's Club, if that's
still around, charges more, uh,
Visa and Mastercard are are
about at that like 2.93% range.
So thank you Mr. Speaker, and,
and, uh, and gentlemen from
Sandoval.
So, um,
What is exactly happening is
that.
Being split.
Uh, percentage wise, how is
that, how is it ending up on the
tips of the uh of the waiters,
waitresses, the workers. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, so, um, for
instance, let's say that we have
$100.80 dollars tab, $20 tip,
it's an easy round number, um,
out of that you have your 3%,
um, that's taken out, so $3 what
it does is in the POS system it
automatically cuts that $3 fee.
Um, into the two separate parts,
so, uh, 80% of it will be paid
by the establishment and the 20%
will be paid by the tipped
employee.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I, I
I do appreciate this, uh,
obviously we you sign another
bill.
That we're looking at to deal
with something similar, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um,
But uh,
This fee.
I is it a static fee? Is that
the fee virtually every time a
credit card is swiped or a or a
debit card is swiped, is it, is
it a set fee, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, so for most
financial institutions, it is a
static fee there is certain
financial institutions that um
do it on a tiered system so it's
one price until you get to a
specific amount of monthly, um,
So like when once $50,000 goes
through the account or whatever
that number is, um, then the fee
gets smaller and smaller and
smaller as that goes up, um,
those.
Aren't the norm anymore, but I'm
sure that they still exist, but
yeah, normally, um, it's a set
percentage, um, and then a per
transaction fee, like I said,
usually it's about 30 cents.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
gentlemen.
So, uh, I.
I like this bill, but there in
my mind some of the some of the
smaller.
Uh, businesses.
That maybe Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Have, um,
Smaller margins.
Um, if it's a set fee.
For instance, on a $20 tip or a
$20 bill with a tip.
That
Say 3 $3 plus, and I think
they're generally, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
$3 plus.
Set
Uh, fees
Or, well, first off, am I
correct in that or am I
incorrect in that? Uh, Mr.
Speaker and Representative, so
it's, it's 3%, not $3 so 3% of
whatever that total bill is, so
for that $100.
Fake
Bill, it would have been $3. So
if it's $20 then it would be
much smaller than that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen do quick maths for
some reason today. OK, so I was
reading that wrong. That's,
that's helpful to me cause that
makes us a little more
palatable, but uh generally the,
uh, I, I'm concerned with the
businesses on the.
On the lower end, which have
much smaller margins, um, I
think this is a good thing for
workers. I, I am concerned
about, about, um.
Businesses and how they deal
with this and Mr. Speaker and,
and, and gentlemen, I, I think
the likelihood and, and I think
this is what's currently
happening anyway, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. I, I think we, we
see that that the consumer.
And ends up uh dealing with that
most of the time. So I, I am
concerned with.
Uh, I'm concerned with the fee,
frankly, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I financial
institution, it has bothered me.
I'm a speaker and gentleman,
they charged this.
Anyway, um, especially on small
businesses and I, um, so maybe
in the future that might be.
Some legislation that we look
at, but I appreciate you
bringing this forward, um, I'm
gonna listen to the rest of the
debate. I'm leaning towards
voting for this bill, maybe the
rest of the debate will help me
get across the finish line.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. There's further
debate generated from Grant
Hidalgo, and Sierra
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield.
Miss
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
To the minority caucus chair
from Donana Sierra and Socorro.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman from the
Transportation Committee from
Vernalillo County. Um, I am
wondering if, um, is this a is
this a prevalent issue that this
is happening across the state,
where, how did you learn of
this?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I was hoping that I would be
asked that question, so thank
you very much.
Uh
I was reading an article.
And I read that this was
occurring and, and Mr. Speaker,
I want to make it clear and make
it clear to the body and to the
viewing audience that this bill
is not intended to insinuate
that every business is doing
that.
It is simply
A way of controlling it if it's
happening where it's happening.
And also, Mr. Speaker, that it's
a bit of a preventive measure,
so I read about it, thought it
was a good idea and I thought I
found some great expert help,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you, Chairman, and I, I mean, I
visited a lot of restaurants
over the last 2 years in my
little community of District 38,
and I'd asked them how are they
doing? How'd you survive COVID
and, you know, they're just
reinventing themselves. They had
a drive through, they created an
outdoor patio, you know, we lost
40% of our local restaurants
during COVID, and many of them
are, you know, they're
recovering and, and, you know,
they're bringing a lot of things
to our attention, and I'd say,
what can we do to help you?
And they would say, tip in cash
because we want to make sure
that what is intended for our
wait staff for our servers,
reaches our servers, but we
lose, we eat out, we eat that
3%. So, repeatedly, small
restaurants across Socorro,
Sierra, and Donana County said
the best thing that we can do is
tip in cash. That's what they're
asking me for, because they
didn't want to lose the 3%. Have
you heard that from? I haven't
heard this in the committee, so
did you hear that from any of
the folks as you've gone
through committees, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I not only heard it
in committee, I heard it outside
of committee. It's an issue and,
and I tend to try to tip in in
cash as well for for those same
reasons because financial
institution is going to take it
one way or another.
And so in this way, if you pay
by cash, it, it all goes to the
server, but as as you can
imagine, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
These little establishments that
you're describing might have
been in my district as well. I
always described the Salt Valley
as a little village that isn't
incorporated, uh, and so we, we
face exactly the same thing, but
if you imagine Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if it's hard for
those little establishments and
we know that it is, it's also
hard for those servers and those
tips really matter.
Mr. Speaker and Chairman, I
absolutely agree. In my first
job that had a deduction that I
got a paycheck on was at a
Mexican restaurant in Truth or
Consequences. It's changed a lot
of hands. It's still there. It's
still Mexican, but it's, it
doesn't have the same name, but,
um, and I did that all the way
through college. And so, um, I,
I always felt like my employers
gave me the shifts I've wanted.
I was, I, I made a good living.
I made more as a server, um,
then I did working in early
childhood for the 1st 7 or 8
years.
that I was in New Mexico. I was
like, man, I need a lot more.
I'd make more in one shift than
I would in a day. But I, so I,
so I appreciate servers and, and
the support staff and, and
worked at places where they, uh,
we split tips. I worked at
places where we got to keep our
own, but, but I, but I think
that the restaurants are, are
really in a squeeze right now,
especially with the other bills
that we see coming through. So I
want to make sure that there's
not any implication or any
suggestion that this is
happening and I wish there was
some way that we
To get it off of the, the credit
card company did not charge 3%
on the part, that's the tip.
That's the bill that I'd vote
for because as inflation goes
up, as the cost goes up, these
people are making millions by
the hour, by the hour in our
restaurants are really
struggling to survive. So I hope
folks will consider the other
ways that they can help servers
is keeping their small
restaurants open, keeping their
restaurants viable and there's a
lot of bills that are like the
final nail in the coffin for
these folks. So we've got to
think about the bigger picture.
And I'm not opposed to this
bill. I'll probably support this
bill, but I know that it must be
just a few restaurants that are
doing this. The quality of
their, their servers and the
quality of, of the, the
hospitality in those restaurants
is what keeps them alive. It's
part of, it's part of the
package that they provide and
they are the hospitality
industry and that's what they
specialize in, and I know that
they, um, they want to see their
employees keep, keep more, um,
and take it home and provide
better for their families and
their and support their
communities. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate,
gentlemen, from Kari and Grant
Hidalgorazas.
You, Mr. Speaker, with a
gentleman from Bernali Port
Favor yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Kari Grant and
Hidalgo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I, you know, this
is a good bill. I, I, I know
that there's confusion on it,
um, I'm gonna try and express, I
think some of these smaller
probably restaurants that don't
can't afford a CPA or they don't
have somebody on on site or
don't have time to calculate and
I think some of the
representatives are expressing
that you know we don't wanna
hurt the restaurants and, and,
and I agree. I think it's just a
matter of process of how it's
handled and, and.
And I think sometimes they, uh,
some of the um restaurants don't
have time some of the restaurant
owners, they're smaller, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they don't
have time to sit there and look
at their statements, how much
they're getting charged for
their service fees. It's
confusing to them and, and so,
uh, so it's difficult for him.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
problem is this, is depending on
how you take a card.
As a restaurant or I'll just
keep it as a restaurant or any,
any entity, the way you take
that card, there are different
rates.
If you take that card and you,
you, you have the person in
front of you and you, you take
it and you run it right there in
front of them. That's the lowest
rate.
You can also get a low rate if
you have uh uh some sort of uh
app that will accept it to
verify that you're the card, the
card holder. That's another
lord, but sometimes what happens
is.
They call the, they call the
restaurant and they order food
on the phone. They say, look, I
wanna buy this and and they pay
with their numbers over the
phone. It's not really smart,
but it happens.
And so when you do that, you're
there's a there's a higher
probability of fraud, right?
Because it's over the phone and
so your cost goes up.
On the processing fee, so but I
think what so that that can be
very very um confusing to a
smaller business and when they
when they're selling food and
they see I wanna keep the math
simple is they, they sell $100
worth of food and they get
charged 3% is usually the the
number that they get charged uh
when they're.
For the service fee of the use
of the credit card, OK?
And when they see that,
If they take it right there on
the spot, no problem, it's 3% if
they take it over the phone, you
know, it's gonna be different.
And then if someone then after
that if we all know when we go
to a restaurant we get the cost
of our food first.
And then we decide most
restaurants allow us to then
give 15, 10% whatever you're
gonna give most people give 2,
so you give 20% and if it's 20%
it's another 60 cents.
And so what is happening, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, as they go
and they look at that and they
go, you know what? I think, and
this isn't it it's wrong, but
this is what I think they're
doing. They're, they're going
over there. I need to share the,
the, the fee because.
The restaurant business, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, has a super
thin margin paper thin margin.
You have a lot of um uh uh.
Uh, perishables, there's a lot
of variables. There's a lot of
things that can happen and so it
causes a real thin margin
because of that margin these
guys are, are have to be very,
very careful of all the costs of
going to doing business.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what,
what can happen is if they would
just say, you know what? I'm
getting, I'm, I'm gonna take
cards a certain way.
Well you can take them both ways
and my and and I say you know
what I'm getting charged 3%.
What some of the restaurants are
doing is because the losses you
can charge a fee for the use of
that card. It's as simple as
raising it 3.5%.
And that 3.5% covers a lot of
these these issues and and the
the um restaurant owner doesn't
have to go go through all the
tips and see who got paid what
and calculate that and and
deduct that they can by charging
that up front on the, you know,
for the entire bill.
That solves the problem right
there because then it's now uh
they have a 0.5% to work with
and so then they they because
you're only gonna get usually a
1.5%, right, or of $100 like 20%
of of of that fee if that makes
any sense does that make sense,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen? Mr.
Speaker, it makes sense and, and
I appreciate your wealth of
knowledge, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
the, the state of New Mexico
does for I'll give you an
example for death certificates
when we purchase a death
certificate.
It's $5 but there's a $3 fee.
period. If you buy 1 $5 deal
where you buy
20 it doesn't matter or 30, it's
$3. What they've done is they've
averaged that out and that way
they cover those those fees
because they know they were
losing money. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this is a great
thing. I think it's, it's, it's
something that I'd like to see
maybe the association stuff come
out and not scare them and say,
look, if you'll, if you'll maybe
reach out to us and let us, uh,
maybe review that with you. Uh,
your statement and see what
your, your, your fee is and then
give them let them add a 0.5% or
1% over that or 3.
I think that would solve this
problem and they wouldn't be so
confused, but I understand where
they're where where they're
coming from and I and my other
representatives in in
understanding that this in
itself is, is scary to them
because they're barely making it
with the with all the
compression that we're seeing of
How much the costs are going up
and what the consumers can can
can actually sustain so thank
you for bringing this
legislation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Otero Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with a kind gentleman from
Bernalillo County Police yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Montero County.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you for
bringing this forward. Just a
couple of questions, uh.
I know you're all, you're all
very pleased Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh,
So, one question I had was, has
anyone ever filed a complaint
with the Department of Workforce
Solutions for
This kind of thing that we're
trying to fix in this bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, not that
I'm aware of, and I do want to
clarify, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that this bill is not.
Neither intimating nor
suggesting that this is any kind
of a rampant problem, uh, it is
preventative, largely
preventative if there is an
issue somewhere and so I hope
that answers that a little bit.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, know that, that does,
and that helps me a little bit
on that and then when it comes
to the actual.
entity, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I.
It's been a while since I've
worked in restaurants. It's been
probably about
10 years since I worked in
restaurants, maybe 9 years, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
remember
There was a initial processing
credit card fee with the initial
restaurant just charging the
Meal
And then Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we had to go in and manually put
in what the tip was on the, on
the receipt. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm wondering, does,
does that include?
Only one transaction when that
is added or Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if, if someone else
has an answer, I, I'd be happy
to, um.
Just ask them, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm gonna yield to my
co-sponsor from
Saville.
from Sandoval.
Mr. Speaker, can you, sorry, I
had to run out and grab my phone
real quick. Can you please
re-ask the question, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I swear I'm
only keeping it to a few
questions, but I have to repeat
it. So the question was, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, so
there's other two different
Transactions that happen when it
comes to the actual putting the
tip in. So number one, we've got
the restaurant charges the meal,
what that cost let's just, let's
say it's $100 and then you put
the tip for $20. Does it have
two different transactions when
that happens because Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it would, it
sounds like it could.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, the way
that it normally works is you
Run the card, um, and it keeps
it kind of.
Suspended, um, yeah, it keeps
the credit card number and
everything that it needs to run
it and then it keeps it
suspended until someone puts in
the tip information. Now what it
does is in the back end, if you
go and you play through the
settings, which most people are
never going to do, um, it has an
option or a series of options
that says to break up the credit
card processing fee, uh, between
the two, between the tip and the
full amount and then take it out
so when you get your little
printout.
the end of the night, um, let's
say you put in $10 now your $10
is a smaller chunk of that, um,
based on the percentage of the
total fee that has to come out
of it.
Um, and that's all done
automatically in the back end of
the uh point of sale system. OK,
thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and thank you for,
for helping me understand cause
I, it's a new world for me, so I
apologize, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So, uh, when it comes
to these, these fees, so it
would just be taken out of the,
the meal, let's just say
whatever that meal was for the
processing fees on the one
transaction which is held in
limbo and then Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, last question
regarding the fees themselves.
I, I've never done this before.
I've never had to go in the back
end of the settings. Is it
something that restaurants may
need help with? Is there
something in place on the state
level to help them make sure
that they can, they can hold
those funds in the current pots
of money to make sure that we're
not taking away from the fees
for or from the tips, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, so with this
bill, um, what's OK, so what's
happening in other states, uh,
when they've passed this, which
right now I believe there's 5
states, um, that portion in the
back end of the POS system, um,
is just grayed out, um, so you
can't go like click on it or
doing anything like that, I'm
sure that software updates will
need to happen on some of the
older systems, um, but what
we're really looking forward to
is.
As people are getting new point
of sale systems which most
people, you know, they last 5
years now because it's on a
tablet um instead of an old
school cash register or a
mainframe or something like
that, you know, you get an iPad
or an Android tablet and that's
now what runs it, that, that
only lasts so long. So when you.
Um, get a new one that will no
longer be. Will it get everybody
now? Will it get a majority
pretty quickly, yeah, probably.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that helped me a lot
to understand how it works in
the back end and uh those are
my, my main questions and I
appreciate you all for bringing
this forward.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from Colfax, Currie
Harding Que San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Colfax Curry,
Hardy Quy, San Miguel and Union.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. As you well
know, I own a restaurant, soon
to be reopening in the spring,
uh, upon my wife's return from
Houston and and cure from cancer
that we're very grateful for.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, you know, some
of these restaurants, they pay
A couple of dollars an hour and
then they they take part of the
part of folks' tips. We always
pay minimum wage or better.
And they keep all the tips.
We don't do it because, because
we think we're going to get rich
in the restaurant business. We
have 2 or 3 businesses actually.
We do it because there was no
place in Mosquero.
I had a business running. There
wasn't a place to have a meeting
with some of my foremen to sit
down and have a cup of coffee.
There was no jobs for the, for
the girls that were going to
school and the boys or whoever,
and, uh, we thought, well, my
wife had owned several
restaurants and, uh, so we just
went there.
Found us a building open as a
restaurant and started
Got all the
Licenses and things you have to
do with the state got straight
with the Environment Department
and we started cranking out some
food and we have had a many a
dance, many a party, many a good
time at that place, and that's,
that's what it's for, you know,
and we don't.
We don't, uh, take part of their
tip because of the credit card
companies, which are a little
greedy when, when I get that
bill from him, I usually cringe
just a little bit, you know, I
think, man.
That was some of our money, but
Uh, don't do that. So what,
what, uh, explain to me kind of
what, what's happening here.
They, they take the cost of the
transaction out of these folks'
tips.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of
all, I, I'm happy to hear that,
that your wife's ready to get
back to work at the restaurant
and uh I look forward to eating
at that restaurant, by the way,
we've had this conversation, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, I'm gonna break it down as
simplest forum, and my
co-sponsor can expand, but it's,
it's, it's simply that right
now.
Establishments can.
They can take part of the tip
amount to pay for service.
Charges on the card.
And by adopting this bill that
will no longer be allowable.
It'll be the cost of the of the
entity of the of the business
and the server will get the
entire amount of the tip, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and
Co-sponsor if you would like to
expand on that, I would yield
to.
The co-sponsor, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, he
hit it right on the, on the
head. So, yeah, um.
Again, not usually on the
restaurant, uh, the point of
sale system has a programmed in
the back, um, that it splits
that credit card fee, um, what
he's calling a service fee it's
the same thing, um, yeah, so
that the uh tipped employee does
not get their full their full
tip amount.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, if I'm not making a
profit, I can always go up on
the cost of the food, right?
And, uh, that'll increase the
tip if they're going by 20% or
whatever, you know, so, so I can
do something about it if I, if
I'm not making a profit, uh, a
server is kind of at the mercy
of the, of the owner and, and
the customer and, and oftentimes
they're, they may or may not
have quite as
Much funding as as the owner,
so, uh, you know, I think it's a
good bill. I think it's a good
thought, and, you know, the the
old deal, the rich get richer
and the poor get poorer. I, I'm,
I'm against that. I think that
we all ought to prosper
together, and I like the folks
who work for me to like to come
to work. I like the folks that
are waiting on my customers to
be happy that they're waiting on
a customer and I invite you both
to come down and have a fried
pie with me one of these days.
Mr. Speaker, I have a deal with
the gentleman.
I can figure
See her for the debate,
gentlemen, close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move that HB 22
do now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 22 with an
emergency clause. The vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative. House Bill 22 with
an emergency. Speaker, I pushed
my button, but it didn't.
I missed it. I'm so sorry.
How would you, how do you wish
to vote?
No, please.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 5 in
the negative. House Bill 22 with
an emergency clause.
You, you guys.
How do you wish to vote?
Yes, Fer Hernandez, please.
The board's now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 5 in
the negative. House Bill 22 with
an emergency clause as duly pass
his house lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements
You had a lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to announce that tonight
the National Caucus of
Environmental Legislators, uh,
as having bills and brews.
And you get to connect with your
peers and discuss your
environmental work this year and
it's going to be at 5 o'clock
until 7 p.m. at the door of
rogos restaurants and food and
drink will be provided. So
that's right next door to the
pink adobe for those who don't
know. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Representative Romero
House Education Committee will
be meeting tomorrow at 8:30 in
room 39. Thank you.
And a lady from Donanarita
Ferrari. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Your, um, consumer and public
affairs Committee will meet, um,
10 minutes after we leave the
floor.
Members taking note, gentleman
from Ria Riba.
Sandoval and San Juan. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker reminder your
taxation and revenue Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
8:30. Thank you, sir. The lady
from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like
a point of personal privilege.
So Mr. Speaker, this morning my
son with autism who many of you
have heard about, went to a
dental appointment because he
has a toothache.
He, um,
Had had had any.
He broke a window at the
dentist's office, so they
decided that he needed to be
seen by a dentist under general
anesthesia.
Can anyone guess when the next
available appointment is for
toothache?
September 2026. So just, I just
want the body to understand that
people with disabilities were
treating them, uh, we have an
invested in that. I mean, to
more than 18 months to wait with
the toothache.
We, that's inhumane, Mr.
Speaker, and also I have the
Health and Human Services will
meet at 8 o'clock tomorrow
morning.
Didn't we pass a dental
hygienist bill to actually
prevent this issue like 5 years
ago.
Mr. Speaker, it, it, he has to
go into an operating room and he
needs a dentist and, and they're
few and far between and the
operating room at UNM only has 2
days a month for people with
special needs, so we've got to
do something. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker from San Juan McKinley,
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning at 8:30,
room 305. Thank you.
Any other announcements,
gentlemen from Santa Fe.
gentle lady from Berlin.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee will meet.
At 3:45 this afternoon, room
315. Thank you. Members say no
gentle lady from Santa Fe and
all those other counties. Um,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, just a
reminder that your House
Judiciary Committee will meet
tomorrow at 1:30, but I imagine
that they really won't be 1:30,
Mr. Speaker, so let's say 15
minutes after the conclusion of
the floor session. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Dona Sierra a quarter
representative Dow Mr. Speaker,
I felt like, uh, the chairman
was looking
right at us over here. So I just
want you to know that I think
what happened to your son is
absolutely unacceptable. And
I'll vote for any bill that
helps resolve and relive that
effort, including torque reform
and including reforms to the
medical malpractice law. Thank
you.
And that's what happens when we
use announcements in
Miscellaneous to advocate for
bills. This is what it becomes
so members take note.
Thank you very much.
Generally from Santa Fe once
again nogen lady from Borrego.
Mr. Speaker, if you would all be
so kind to help me find my
silver bracelet which uh fell
off somewhere between my office
and my and here so thank you.
Silver bracelet with an orange
stone, please return it to its
rightful ownereno Borego, gentle
lady from Donana and Silva.
Thank you Speaker. Um, there
were 2 phones in the women's
restroom in the, in the house
lounge just if you can't find
your phone, it's probably in the
bathroom. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Members take note.
Young lady from Santa Fe,
Representative.
Suansky.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
The house will sit in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
