And so we are aware that in
general Representative is that
would be covered in this the
question.
We would like to be holding
insurance to cover my insurance.
Additionally we're aware that
cases in which fire or EMT
volunteer or paid would be
engaged in behavior that rises
to the level of civil rights
violations I would be quite rare
but when they do occur they
would also be quite Regis and so
we're also in contrast to the
that claims under one claims.
Jobs and so we're we're talking
about different kind of
violation of the civil rights.
We were very proud of the work
the New Mexico legislature did
to pass the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act I think it's a really
strong protections for
communities we want what we can
still Rights Act.
Are not exceptions like this
bill is doing thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Anyone else on that site in
support in the opposition.
Okay on the side opposition yes.
Committee members my name is
Zachary Q. one of twenty
Albuquerque and Santa Fe
I also served on the Civil
Rights Commission passage of the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act
your digital assets.
I stand in opposition to the
bill before because the Mexico
native value just constitutional
right to citizenship act these
issues regarding the cost of the
cost of.
Implementing the act were
studied by the commission and
recommendations were made and
you can find those in the
commission you can find those
and commission work there is
insurance available individuals
are not liable under the act and
there's a cap also on the act to
make sure that insurance
remains.
And so for those reasons and for
the protection of our
communities members for the
deprivation of civil rights that
would echo the concerns they
were just dressed that way in
these encounters happened they
can be very increases including
taking of people's lives and so
that's why these productions are
critically important that's a
value judgment or staging state
funds thank you.
Thank you anyone else.
Is there anyone in opposition on
the.
Okay.
we'll go to the committee.
I have to work.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and that you
know I appreciate this bill I
think right now this new terror
County years ago we were asking
for more volunteer firefighters
and we still are today and we
definitely need to get those
positions bill because it's the
safety of our communities that
are referenced I appreciate the
thought process this bill and I
just wanted the background about
some concerns we are in the
audience about insurance and
they said that this would be
covered by insurance there would
be no need for the bill could
you tell me why this bill is the
first.
let me Representative could you
introduce your I'm going to get
out of trouble right now I'm
not.
I've built to inner case the
brains of this topic in this
case but jobs.
Thank you madam chair
representative pop one thing I
want to clarify is we're not
addressing liability on
individuals we're addressing
liability on individual
volunteer fire department I'm
not a lot of people know this
about me and it's actually
A trauma I'm working through but
my family was involved in the
hermit's peak at canyon fire and
that disaster actually resulted
in the death of three of my
neighbors and family friends and
a significant amount of the work
the monitoring that went on was
done by who is known as the
capital the Cerro volunteer fire
department.
They collect no income they get
paid nothing
when you ask them how you can
help them they say could you
bring the case of waters because
we can't afford that so that is
what we're addressing with this
are the individual
Volunteer firefighters on the
ground and in in places like Rio
dosa and places like the Las
Vegas area that just shoulder
the weight of these natural
disasters that we have happening
and in in honestly.
Cannot afford one claim cannot
afford a case of water and
certainly cannot afford
insurance and unfortunately for
our state that is the majority
of
Our fire in some of our Ian T.
services the outfit so I just
want to clarify its individual
departments were exempting not
individual people.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative and and
Mr Johnson very fine that for me
So.
I'm sure there are many
firefighters volunteer
firefighters.
Very rural areas like mine and I
know the average income of the
person using my my district and
so you're right I think it
probably would be a big burden
on that individual firefighters
get insurance and I'm sure it's
a hundreds of dollars annually
or at least thousands so yeah
that was my next question could
you tell me what that might be
for someone in average in Mexico
to get a policy like that madam
chair representative.
Yes Madam chair representative
the quotes that were offered us
range from one to five thousand
dollars of individual costs
twenty five to a hundred twenty
five thousand dollars for
departments for firefighters and
and twelve to sixty thousand
dollars Department of EMTs so
for rural counties it's very
expensive thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
yeah that's a that's a lot of
money especially for smaller
counties I'm sure that add up
very quickly and especially the
visuals that's negative five
thousand dollars they would be
putting in as well as risking
their lives for their
communities madam chair
representative.
I'm just reading some of the
requirements to be a volunteer.
It is very expensive what you
already have to get just because
I called the manager hi I read
your yet to be two hundred fifty
hours of training in addition
boxers regular.
Once that into the department
they need sixty hours of drivers
training.
and then you have so much
training regarding extreme
conditions that they also have
to go under I think it's sixty
hours per surging six hours for
others so you know I really
appreciate you bringing forward
this bill madam chair
representative and I certainly
agree with you that we need to
do whatever we can to recruit
more days that firefighters EMTs
to serve our communities well so
thank you madam chair thank
Representative David Johnson.
Thank you Representative Lord
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Townsend I
had a question that was actually
in FY and somebody in the fire
department which was interesting
question because I don't know
the answer is
are you still covered our
volunteer firefighters this was
removed would they still be
eligible for capital outlay I
think the answer would be yes
but I just want to start chair
yes that would be still eligible
for capital outlay.
If they were no longer able to
my understanding
I would have to run.
Get the opinion from the council
but.
I don't see that that makes a
difference on their capital
outlay status or canceling
government entity we just went
through we all this with our
capital Madam chair
representative we just want our
capital out and when I know I
just know was the only question
I have on that
I do I'm very invested in this
bill because my new district is
very rural and depends very
heavily on volunteer
firefighters and issue notices
being volunteers ourselves
pretty much we we make enough
for hotel and retail is what I
tell everybody every day
that.
It's challenging to find people
that are going to want to do
this and have this extra burden
so I understand totally
completely what it is you're
trying to do because we have got
you right here is and we're
short supply in rural areas in
this decreasing.
Our market was a move out of
rural areas is going to be even
less muscle pool so I think that
we should do whatever we can to
make sure that we have got
ourselves covered because where
I'm at in the east mountains a
bit of a horror story up in my
area because it's federal it is
a tender box and it scares the
heck out of me because of it
ever does Bernice is going to
roar right down to seconded.
And our last fire and there's
nothing to stop it because we've
got over growth of brush
everywhere you know we can't
turn the thing down so I go by
the one I read my motorcycle and
I can hardly see with the dear
John about the Turkey stamp out
because it's just so thank.
So I think the extremely
important that we try to.
Make it more enticing.
To have firefighters in our
rural.
Rural district and I do
appreciate you bringing this far
thank you that so and so madam
chair Representative thank you
Representative Romero thank you.
Representative I guess I'm short
on trying to understand the.
Sort of systemic issue that
we're trying to address here you
know we pass the Civil Rights
Act with the intent of.
Maintaining liability for those
that were bad actors right and
so when we talk about the
problem that we're trying to
solve for this hearing
understand there's a risk of
liability but we're asking that
of.
Basically all government
employees at this point right so
I guess I'm just curious from
your words what is the problem
that we're actually trying to
solve that this is directly yes
it is that we heard about
recruitment of volunteers we
don't have any data to that
point and we don't.
Have any information regarding
where there is a problem today
that this is something for can
you just address that madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Romero I hear you and
That is that is a basis.
But I think the unintended
consequence of.
That bill.
Toward the firefighters was
that.
Seventy eight and a half percent
of New Mexicos firefighters are
volunteers.
Seventy eight percent.
That's a huge number in it
cannot be.
We cannot fill that void
financially.
With a deal to hire enough
firefighters to go out and
protect rural New Mexico.
It's just not possible.
In nineteen eighty three the
Attorney General provided legal
opinion that volunteer
firefighters our employees
however that opinion was only
for the purposes of option.
Occupational health and safety
act which was the end of which
is that's been amended to
expressly exclude volunteer non
salaried firefighters from this
definition of the need for.
So.
I
I understand your the COVID
madam chair representative I
just think when you look at
rural New Mexico.
And look at the safety of the
vast majority of people that are
protected by a real firefighters
they were just.
Time to consider harming them
out of the definition for the
good of the whole there may
still be isolated cases issue
well.
I've stated I get that.
But for years and years and
years volunteer firefighters
have been in critical in the
protection of our.
Our citizens and I don't think
that that's going to change
that.
The average age of volunteer now
this like sixty plus years ago.
Not real good H. for
firefighters.
one in particular that route was
sixty nine years out.
I don't think that's fair for
sixty nine year old to be put in
that position let's just a
comment I think it's important
thank you madam chair
representative Romero I have
three thoughts on this
hopefully they tend to gather in
a way that makes sense the first
is this one actually bring us on
par with what's been done in
OSHA and actually what's been
done for a few people in the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act for
whatever reason during the
discussions of house bill I
think it was for
we felt the need to protect our
state yes we felt the need to
protect our soil and water
conservation district because of
the great service that they
provide our community and we
for.
For lack of
When everybody got together to
discuss what is the public body.
For whatever reason those two
were exempted that's essentially
what we're asking here and then
I would also just point now for
clarification that a claim
brought under the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act can be brought
for violation of the in the bill
of rights of the New Mexico
constitution and I'm sure some
of us in this room remember from
the bar exam or some of us
remember from law school that in
our constitution we have an
eminent domain clause and New
Mexico's eminent domain clauses
actually stronger than the
United States class and it says
that any time private property
is taken or damaged for public
use without just compensation
there has to be just
compensation sometimes like in
these or if they fired in the
land is taken for public use
before you can even seek out the
compensation process because
you're dealing with an active
wildfire.
so I think that the practical
the facts that give rise to this
issue are different than they
may be for someone that works
for DFA or someone that works
for the department of health and
then if you pair that with the
volunteer component as well
and you you look at how this is
been exempted from both federal
law and something similar is
been done in our own so Rights
Act I think it makes sense at
least from my perspective.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative expert my concern
to all of the unintended
consequences of this is that
when you accept them from a
public bodies well when we look
at the
The firefighters volunteer
firefighters act that allows
them to access retirement if we
exempt them from the public body
they're no longer no longer
public retirees and therefore
they would be access that
anymore I don't see anything for
the analysis that would allow
the conflict but once you're
taking them out of that you know
you don't access P. R. A. last
year serving the public I guess
I'm we're concerned that that
might be a conflict as well.
Madam chair representative
Romero that is not.
There are essentially a
definition of a public employee
and the peril loss this is just
the definition of a public body
in the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act so as far as that's
concerned goes there's they're
actually on related although.
It does make sense that they
would be related.
At.
That is my concern to all there
are minimal benefits to the
amount of work that these
incredible volunteers do that.
The team green with these what
we're trying to sort of pick and
choose who gets what and who's
exemptions not from these laws
that we are going to create
other unintended consequences
surrounding that public body you
know they're already the
volunteers are already exempt
from criminal liability in
wildland firefighting
you know we really sort of
focused on where we might be
able to
insure safety and and security
for them also be able to offer
benefits such as that retirement
I don't see.
The nexus and for removing them
it from the the Civil Rights Act
I would you know if we do have
the unintended consequences that
come about as we continue to see
how the Civil Rights Act is
enacted how it's you know doing
performing in our state I think
it would be helpful to
understand that but preemptively
doing that before we know what
the consequences might be for
these public employees you know
what we've already been able to
do to exempt them from liability
cutting this out at this time
point time just doesn't seem
like a unnecessary actually so
unfortunately can't vote on your
legislation but I do appreciate
your comments thank you.
Anything else the representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair so I'm I'm
I'm just curious so are you
talking about agencies that are
completely independent of
government maybe funding or
creation.
I don't know that I all of Madam
chair representative Thompson
maybe yes and no we're talking
about an agency that we're
exempting from this bill so it
could be
It's kind of independent of that
question I think I may not
understand chair so that the
follow up is if they are
completely independent of
government funding and creation
the Civil Rights Act doesn't
apply to them so I have the
money the water is getting a
little money here for me in
terms of who's whitened house by
yeah and this is Madam chair
representative Thompson this is
kind of a quiet sigh because
they are independent they're
totally volunteer they receive
no funding but there are laws
that govern and govern them in
state law but it's not the same
thing you would think of if we
talked about an agency or a
board or commission so it's kind
of somewhere in between which
make maybe leading to the
committee Asian and madam chair
that's that's my concern and and
just the tap the short title to
removed from public body is a
concern to me so I understand
what my dad was a up a volunteer
firefighter in Crown Point for a
lot of years and I understand it
but I think as Representative
Romero said I don't want to do
something that is going to mess
up something else because
because it's not necessarily
clear about how all that works
thank you.
Okay I just like to add that on.
Individual volunteer
firefighters and volunteer EMTs
are already in use of from suit
in the tort claims act.
So the civil rights.
Act.
Only pertains to you know like
government or entities that are
issues part of that Mexico
constitution.
So even though they have those
rules they aren't thank
government entities.
This volunteers.
Go ahead.
Madam chair you're right.
there are.
Many.
Rural.
I think we gave but now they're
buying insurance and being sold
insurance and quoted insurance
but because they have been told
in their councils as told in the
state last with they must have
that protection so like I said.
Volunteer firefighters brought
me this bill they were this idea
they wanted to prop.
before the committee.
I I do believe.
That there is an issue with
volunteer firefighters that
needs to be addressed I don't
think.
Leaving it alone.
And not doing anything to
address it is proper.
It's a will of the committee I
bring the bill based on their
their recommendation I.
I get it
But there is an issue out there
outside of this room for
volunteer firefighters are
leaving the protection and are
not our our.
Are not working want to see more
because of and that's the
problem I believe Mr grant.
Representative so is this
brought to you by the volunteer
firefighters for the
Yes the entities it was brought
to me by a group of volunteer
firefighters.
Thank you.
Yes Representative would be
proper I requested a motion.
To to pass without
recommendation and then at
Representative Townsend can work
with.
Was this committee to get a.
That we have to make.
Yes.
Okay I will make that most.
Chair I'd like to we can take
that vote I I I or so I know but
I'm and I will move to table
following.
just because I don't.
I believe that we need this bill
right now I really just don't
see the data backing why we
would pick this one group out of
all of that that we put into the
Civil Rights Act and I feel very
uncomfortable without knowing
why it perhaps targeting the
real need which is recruiting
volunteers and making sure that
rural communities and all
communities I mean my community
service urban and rural
we have a problem with with
recruiting volunteers as well so
madam chair I would love to
tackle that problem but I don't
think this bill does that you
were going to move to table I
think we need to do that.
I will institute motion to table
and we can go to the doctor.
Okay I was going to occur I'm
not not.
Not the habit of trying to kill
my own bills.
But her motion motion takes
precedence so you don't have to
take that other of of.
Thank you madam chair thank.
It's been moved and seconded to
table.
At the table.
Representative walked no to
table.
Representative Lord no to table.
Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Ferrary yes table
sure we have the table.
we have a.
I'm sorry.
Do.
Medicine you can't able to table
house bill eight thousand to
fourteen thank you thank you.
We are going to hear house bill
eighty six but
the sponsor has asked for it to
be
removed from today's date that
so that concludes today.
Yes.
Well it
as
efficiently we are rolling.
Thank you.
During.
Thank you.
