We have a quorum.
Dries for today's vocation
Representative Jones.
Let's pray.
Father we're grateful for this
day and in many ways you blessed
us in many ways the blessed our
beloved state of New Mexico.
We know that with you all things
are possible and today we ask
for your continued guidance in
your and this wisdom to help us
make good decisions for the
people we serve.
We ask these things in Jesus
name amen.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative CF for the pledge
of allegiance.
James the flying.
Representative Mason and for the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
Label
good morning members.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
innovation is so ordered.
Members plan for the day will be
to take up.
A memorial a certificate
recognize some distinguished
guests that are here joining us
today
we'll do some introduction
legislation and committee
reports we are planning on our
first third reading tomorrow the
bill is on the calendar.
and the please check with
experts and and other folks to
make sure that we're ready to
go.
Announcements the generated from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker
Members to to date is aerospace
state I don't have a memorial to
read but we do have more on the
that is registered with us
So today's the New Mexico state
state here in the state capital
New Mexico is the birthplace of
the United States space and
missile program and if any if we
all know that Mr speaker and we
do we do have some guests here
today.
And I'd like to introduce her on
the rostrum.
Honoring airspace State we have
Scott McLaughlin.
Is executive director of space.
America.
We have Casey the rash was the
CEO of new space New Mexico we
have Eric Sanchez the director
of physical science laboratory
at NMSU.
Mike Moses who's the president
of virgin galactic and Ross bow
who's executive director of
aerospace states association
members can we.
Thank you and give our respects
to our our guests today want to.
The house.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and I just want to say we're
honored to have you our guests
here today and just acknowledge
the economic development they
bring to our state and and they
are continuing leadership in
their space education through
stem programs initiatives and
research and I just want to say
in our other change in the
Senate chamber today they're
honoring the students from NMSU
R. Tomic eighties from our
students from Mexico tech or mop
mop miners and a student from
UNM the launch Lobo's as they
participated in the the chili
Cup
here in New Mexico and is it
going to be an annual event and
competition and you need anymore
information please let let our
guests know and let you know and
they have a website as well I
believe they're going to have
the next Cup in June and all are
welcome thank you Mr chair
presheaf of excuse me Mister
speaker I appreciate the time
thank you Gillian and welcome to
the house to our guest other
announcements the gentle lady
from McKinley is on one
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker and colleagues of the
house today it is my pleasure to
introduce our special guests on
the rostrum from the Santa Fe
Indian school in honor of Santa
Fe Indian school day here at the
legislature Mr speaker I will
present a certificate to our
special guests but before I do
Mr speaker let me just say a few
wonderful things about the
school to our body.
Mr speaker the Santa Fe Indian
school and its predecessor
institutions have been providing
top notch education to native
American students for over a
hundred and thirty years since
eighteen ninety.
And when I say top notch
education Mr speaker I mean top
notch the Santa Fe Indian school
consistently graduates ninety
eight percent of their students
our students Mr speaker compared
to an overall New Mexico student
graduation rate of seventy seven
percent the Santa Fe Indian
school recently received the
twenty twenty two school of
distinction award given by their
we know and accreditor Kaguya.
The Santa Fe Indian school
excels in high academic
performance the school does so
in an environment that respects
and values tribal communities
cultures and traditions
graduates are usually
academically high performing
students who are committed to
maintaining their native
American cultural values.
On your desk colleagues this
morning is a brochure that
speaks to the many achievements
of the school and I would ask
that each one of you please take
a moment to review it.
Making the success is possible
are the administrators.
Governing trustees students of
the school Mr speaker.
Mr speaker may I introduce my
guests on the rostrum the lady
please go read thank you
Christie Abeyta superintendents.
Robin as you are board of
trustees president.
Katie in when you go board of
trustees secretary.
Alvin Warren board of trustees.
State the Rosetta high school
principal.
Karla Salazar middle school
principal.
Campbell said tia for tribal
board broadband project
director.
And I am does your Enos
Education development director.
And our students Jonathan Vigil
eleventh grade students student
at Santa Fe Indian school.
Jonathan is from Santa Clara and
to see people pueblo and is the
son of Tricia the Shino and
Jonathan Vigil he is the
grandson of two former to suki
pueblo governors well to reduce
you know and federal the hello
Jonathan this fires to go to
college and get a degree and
wildlife conservation or
environmental science family his
native language and culture are
most important to Jonathan
congratulations.
Caden updated seventh grade at
Santa Fe Indian school Caden is
from okay Wingate and Hey miss
Pueblo and is the daughter of
one to data and Lonnie from Goa
Caden dreams of playing college
volleyball and basketball while
working to become a teacher.
With that Mr speaker may I ask
the clerk to read the
certificate the clerk to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
proclaiming January thirty first
two thousand twenty three Santa
Fe Indian school day.
Whereas the Santa Fe Indian
school has been providing
quality education to native
American students of New Mexico
for more than one hundred years
and whereas students attending
the Santa Fe Indian school in
grade seven to twelve come from
all nineteen Indian pueblos the
Navajo Nation Correa Apache
nation and the Mescalero Apache
tribe which together cover
thirteen New Mexico counties
and.
Whereas at its core the mission
of the Santa Fe Indian school is
to foster ideal graduates who
are responsible productive
members of their tribal and
global communities with a clear
understanding of the issues
facing the tribes in the
southwest and commitment to
maintaining native American
cultural values and.
Whereas the economic purpose of
the Santa Fe Indian school is to
provide students with the skills
necessary to be critical
confident independent and
interdependent lifelong learners
to bursar that pursue the
education and careers that will
benefit them the families and
their people and whereas these
skills include creative problem
solving analyzing complex
problems synthesis of collected
data communicating clear
solutions learning and working
productively with all types of
people and making good choices
and whereas students at the
Santa Fe Indian school are
provided with an academic
environment that allows them to
explore create new Platt has
been seeking to experiences and
career opportunities while
remaining true to their native
American identity and we're as a
Santa Fe Indian schools rigorous
academic standards produce high
performing students resulting in
a ninety seven and five tenths
percent graduation rate in two
thousand eighteen.
And whereas this places Santa Fe
Indian school students well
ahead of New Mexico's latest
graduation rate of seventy one
and one ten percent and the most
recent national graduation rate
of eighty four percent and.
Where as the Santa Fe Indian
school is committed to providing
the state of the art technology
required to deliver the quality
of education stated in the
school vision and mission of the
Santa Fe Indian schools ideal
graduate and support of the
Santa Fe Indian school public
education network connects
tribal school libraries with
broadband middle mile
connectivity to increase
collaboration among tribal
educational entities New Mexico
higher education institutions
and their peers and national
research and education networks
leading Indian Education
adoption of next generation
technologies and programming
capabilities and whereas New
Mexico is proud to have the
Santa Fe Indian school a leader
in native American education as
one of its finest educational
institutions.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
January thirty first two
thousand twenty three be
declared Santa Fe Indian school
day and house of representatives
and that recognition be extended
to the leadership and members of
the Santa Fe Indian school for
their invaluable contributions
to New Mexico.
Sign in sealed at the capitol in
the City of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you to the Santa Fe Indian
school for joining us today to
the members of the board of
trustees the staff and the
students it is a real honor I
know their students up in the
gallery as well as well as staff
on behalf of the New Mexico
house of representatives welcome
to your state house
representatives thank you for
everything that you do thank you
for preparing our children for a
bright future all we centring
identity culture and language
thank you very much thank you
gentlelady for bringing this is
difficult.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker my colleague
representative Lente would like
to make a comment.
Certainly delay the delivery of
us some of us and one
representative and thank you Mr
speaker good morning good
morning members for the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
county please yield.
I yield to the gentleman thank
you thank you respect everyone's
time I just to want to take a
quick second to recognize the
incredible work the Santa Fe
Indian school board it's
educators and students it's
parents it's communities have
done to our future of native
American New Mexico from the
dark history that Indian
education has gone through with
the policies of the federal
governments to take children
from reservations plant them
into schools to assimilate them
into more of a western society
to what you see today is night
and day the fact that we have
individuals here representing
their students not from a top
down approach from a community
approach one that takes into
account community one that takes
into account language culture
religion identity knowing that
we don't match anything that we
see on TV.
And that's fine because we match
what we see in the community
that has been here since time
immemorial within this state so
Mister speaker a sponsor of this
of this memorial thank you so
much for honoring this
incredible school and all of its
incredible students that again
their stats stand for themselves
ninety eight percent graduation
rate watching the students go to
Ivy League colleges universities
across the across our great
nation has been absolutely a
blessing to be able to be an
observer of so once again Mr
speaker thanks for the
opportunity thank you again
Sanchez thank you we just remind
everybody we are on
announcements so you don't need
to yield the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan
thank you Mr speaker I do want
to stand in honor SFI just
setting school you the school
resides in my district here and
and Santa Fe and I want to say
what an honor it is to have you
here in our community and the
representation from across our
states and I think maybe in two
other states as well hi I want
to I would like to call assisted
school I went to Saint
Catherine's.
No one knows about saying kids
we shared a lot of families
between the states and we always
had just a wonderful and
friendly competition with one
another with our sports and
other things so I just want to
stand here
With the Representative are
chairwoman here and say I'm
honored that you are here and
we're honored with all of your
accomplishments continue to grow
and let us know what you need
thank you.
Thank you ladies.
The gentle lady from.
Do you are legal and Luna
announcements Representative
Jones.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to welcome some special
guests today from district
thirty two which is the
southernmost district the land
of the boot heel the border
hatch green Chile and they are
from the heart beat of our New
Mexico wine industry the silver
spikes Deming Luna county silver
spikes is the name of the group
here today they're actually
meeting with cabinet secretaries
right now so I I don't think
there are many if if any here in
the room with us but but they
will be around the what the
round house today and they'll be
wearing their they're at a black
Blazers and their name tags so
they for the they were
responsible for the gift that
was brought the gift of wine
that everyone received yesterday
so we have we also wanted to
call attention to the invitation
tonight the state that you have
on your desk to their event and
Mr speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial fifteen be
removed from the speakers table
and he made the next order of
business see no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker would you get me to
that point I certainly can
gentle lady let the record
reflect that election is a
search for placing House
memorial fifteen on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the
memorial.
Find the memorial okay the
Deming silver the Deming Luna
county silver spikes the
memorial as a is pretty self
explanatory there are group
that's existed that began as a
social group that has has
developed into a pretty large
group of community leaders
elected officials and business
owners and just other interested
individuals who are eager to see
the Deming and Luna county grow
and that they're just a
foundational group in our
community and therefore I wanted
to honor them with this
memorial.
Thank you gentle lady.
Click to read.
House memorial fifteen
introduced by representatives
Jones and assess a memorial
declaring January thirty first
two thousand twenty three Deming
Luna county silver spike stay in
the house of representatives
House Bill number House memorial
for fifteen introduced by
representatives Jones and
trucks.
There debate on house memorial
fifteen the gentleman from.
Katrin and granted me the legal
representative that us us thank
you Mr speaker with generally
please yield.
Yes.
I like the thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker load sorry
cutter the middle of
conversation Mr speaker I want
to I want to think of of my
colleague Representative Jones
for bring this legislation's
memorial
okay bringing attention to our
beautiful County Luna
wonderful wonderful wonderful
community the committee of unity
and I think the there is there a
big ag producer and they have
the.
The what is it the the national
duck races on it there's no
nationally for the duck races
but I can tell you that they're
wonderful people and I'm so glad
to be here supporting her
memorial and heard supporting
Luna County and the city of
damning and those good wonderful
people thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen is there for
the debate on house memorial
fifteen.
For that house memorial fifteen.
Gentle lady I too want to thank
you for bringing the memorial
Ford this is my.
Nine here in this body
and every year we've had this
celebration it is one that is
important in terms of
remembering our cultural.
The traditions and and and and
validating the cultural
contributions made by.
Citizens and residents of your
community
from the decreases to.
The wine it's all very good if
any further debate on the Morial
the gentle lady from Chavis
curry and Roosevelt
Representative read.
Not on the memorial.
All right.
I see none the gentle lady to
close.
I now move that house memorial
fifteen do now pass and I now
ask unanimous consent of the
house that the record show that
the role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative.
There has been a motion to show
that all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative on house more
fifteen see no objections there
it is so ordered well final
passage of house memorial
fifteen the vote is now open.
What is a close one of seventy
in the affirmative line in the
negative house more fifteen has
duly passed this house
education is aiming to counties
over spikes thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentle lady the gentle
lady from Chavis curry Roosevelt
Representative Lee thank you Mr
speaker I'm sure all of you have
noticed this large block of
cheddar cheese in front of you
from southwest cheese they
continually find this to us
yearly for all the legislators
and we're very thankful for that
but I I just kind of wanted to
say southwest cheese is the
largest cheese plant in North
America sits between Clovis
amber talismans like a four
hundred thousand puts a foot
facility but I think what's kind
of neat about it is that it
produces five hundred and eighty
eight million pounds of cheese
annually and processes over five
point billion pounds of fresh
local milk and that milk all
comes from a thirty mile radius
from the plant in Clovis and
seventy five percent comes from
a fifteen mile radius so all
those dairies are there and
they're really providing the
milk for this facility and so
I just want to thank south with
cheese and I would also Mr
speaker like to recognize some
people from Clovis in the
audience if if I have your
permission.
Generated in the other yes I can
absolutely do that for you if
you give me the names it to be
the leadership of Clovis in the
city of Clovis to the leadership
as you've called this New Mexico
welcome to the state house
representatives thank you for
coming down.
The gentle lady that is a lot of
cheese that is made in New South
was Jeez and if you don't want
to you can return it to me
because many people want more.
We'll gladly keep my cheese
gentlelady.
Other announcements the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker request the a
point of personal privilege
state your point thank you Mr
speaker I would like to address
the body about an existential
crisis.
We talk a lot about.
Climate change is the
existential court crisis and to
be clear I I do think that
climate change is real but I
don't think it is the
existential crisis facing
humanity rather Mr speaker I
would submit that the
existential crisis facing
humanity right now is actually
poverty.
According to the World Health
Organization climate change is
expected to cause about five
million deaths between two
thousand thirty in two thousand
fifty and that's just that I
think we need to take note of
however in the next ten years
alone poverty is expected to
kill fifty six million children
under the age of five and that's
just children under the age of
five and one of the leading
factors in generational poverty
is actually access to affordable
and reliable energy.
Indoor air pollution in
particular according to the
World Health Organization is the
world's and this is a quote the
world's largest single
environmental health risk indoor
pollution and indoor air
pollution is the largest factor
for every deaths are to be early
deaths among the poor as indoor
air pollution is responsible for
one point six million deaths per
year and so the body understands
we talk about indoor air
pollution what we're talking
about is folks that don't have
access to affordable reliable of
sources of energy and so they
have to burn would have to burn
down they have to burn coal.
The poorest among us deaths
really need access to affordable
and reliable energy Mr speaker
for serious about the
environment which I believe this
body is that I think we also
need to be serious about
delivering affordable and
reliable energy if you look at
the poorest among us they often
times have no choice but to cut
down local for us to to burn
down to things like that that we
that we know is is actually
quite harsh on the environment
Mr speaker New Mexico is
actually position incredibly
well.
We have access to some of the
cleanest natural gas in the
entire world.
We have access to New Mexico
natural gas that's affordable.
We have access to Mexico natural
gas that's abundant.
And because of the advances in
technology we now have the
capability to produce some of
the world's cleanest energy
through natural gas of the input
with the output being incredibly
clean and so should this body
have discussions about climate
change absolutely we should.
Mr speaker I submit that
whenever we consider passing
legislation in the name of
climate change we also need to
keep in mind what that
legislation does to the poor.
So again I think the existential
crisis facing us as a body as a
nation is not climate change I
think it's the poor and I need I
think Mr speaker that is a body
we need to be serious about
making sure we're doing
everything we can to deliver for
New Mexicans to have affordable
abundant and clean energy and Mr
speaker I submit the best way to
do that is through natural gas
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the gentle lady from
Torrance.
Embed Leo Representative Lord
okay good thank you Mr speaker
be very brief I have somebody
shadowing to I me today they're
from my district is a twenty two
they wanted to see how this all
works so I wanted to thank
Dennis Kellogg for coming for
have an interest in politics and
I hope you have a great time
today.
Welcome to the house the
gentleman from who needed just
got.
Mr speaker also rans.
Personal privilege not profound
as a point articulated by the
minority leader.
I would like to know if it would
be impossible to have the exit
door underground open
automatically when we pull the
vehicle up to the door rather
than making us jump out of the
truck percent our record and
then jump back in before the
door closed.
I'm told that it's broken
they're trying to fix it but
they're waiting waiting on some
parts.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
for your attention to this
matter.
My pleasure gentleman.
Any other announcements
gentleman from but in service
center Baca thank you Mr speaker
I do have announcements and I do
have a.
Turn the child in me from
inversion Mexico this is Haley
downs she's a poli sci major
senior at the university of New
Mexico with an interest in
politics and so the working in
this as an analyst so she's been
she's been here so bear with me
all week so
I thank you for the opportunity
this is something that I think
it's good forces are too young
people so that they understand
what we is the citizen
legislature what are tasks
before so I thank you Mr speaker
and I welcome alley door our
chambers welcome to the house.
Members of the other couple of
announcements we've got picture
day today tomorrow and Thursday
in the house lounge.
Also today is the final day to
submit your financial disclosure
forms they are do electronically
to the secretary of state's
office today you would use a
Seve as website to submit it.
And there's somebody in the
lounge from the Senator states
office to help you if you need
help financial disclosures do
today please don't forget to do
that by today.
There's a staffer from secular
States office in the lounge to
help support you in that
process.
What else business generated
from the you know thank you Mr
speaker they can House consumer
public affairs committee will
meet today at one thirty and all
the bills we're going to hear
from Representative Freeman so
we're calling it re day.
The legislature thank you Jim
lady.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order of business committee
reports.
I see no objections so ordered.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
house bill one thirty four has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that do pass finance referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker
and optional Federal report on
house bill one thirty four of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose name the eyes of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections and in Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill ninety five has had
it under consideration forcing
with recommendation that it do
pass an answer for to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson
chairwoman.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption of federal committee
report on house bill ninety five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose name the S. have a
committee report up.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one forty five has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation to do
pass and it's referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption Brett
optional Federal Committee port
for House Bill one forty five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Oppose me the eyes of a
committee report up to.
Mr speaker the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house joint resolution one has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation that a do
pass as amended finance referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted to Wonda
Johnson chairwoman of adoption
we're and optional fable
Committee port on house joint
resolution one all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Proposed a the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
tunes been referred house joint
resolution three has had it
under consideration point same
as recommendation that to pass
sentence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson
chairwoman move adoption we're
on adoption of a federal
committee point on house joint
resolution three all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose may.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
nine has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption adoption available
committee report on house bill
nine of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Opposing the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
terms been referred house bill
twenty six has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption reduction
of federal committee report on
house bill twenty six all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
All the supposed.
I just have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
forty three has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair the speaker move
adoption for that option okay
favorable committee report on
house bill forty three all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
This post may.
The I. seven we report opted.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation see no objection
it is so ordered.
Click to read.
House bill two forty introduced
by representatives or tests and
Castellano and act relating to
motor vehicles providing for a
special registration plates
expressed support for a C. kia
and Community ditch associations
making appropriation house bill
two forty entities by
representatives or tests and
Castiglione.
House bill two forty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation revenue committee
themselves appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two forty one
introduced by Representative
Kate's and act relating to
building permits prohibiting a
county municipality or the state
from issuing a building permit
for the construction of multi
family dwelling units consisting
of twelve or more units for less
than fifty five percent of the
total units of owners occupied
house bill two forty one
introduced by Representative
Kate's house bill two forty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee invents the
house commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill two forty two
introduced by Representative
McQueen.
And act relating to the
environment providing for a pro
private right of action to
enforce certain statutes
enacting new sections of the air
quality control act the
hazardous wastes Act the water
quality act and the solid waste
act house bill two forty to
introduce by Representative
McQueen.
House bill two forty to have
amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house energy and natural
resources committee vents the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two forty three
introduced by Representative
Lujan an act relating to energy
requiring electric public
utilities to file a grid
modernization plan with the
public regulation commission
house bill two forty three
introduced by Representative
Lujan house bill two forty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
thence the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two forty four
introduced by Representative
Chavez and act relating to
public assistance providing a
statutory benefit for amount for
general assistance house bill
two forty four introduced by
Representative Chavez.
House bill two forty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee invents the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two forty five
introduced by representatives
Chavez and on in our new.
An act relating to employment
enacting the employee free
speech act protecting employee
free speech from captive
audience speeches providing
revenue remedies for violations
of employee free speech house
bill two forty five introduced
by representatives Chavez and on
in our new.
House Bill to forty five minutes
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee that
the house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two forty six
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for central
New Mexico community college to
develop and operate intensive
short term boot camp training
programs house bill two forty
six introduced by Representative
Matthews.
House bill two forty six amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
so house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two forty seven
introduced by representatives
Matthews Thompson and Armstrong.
And act relating to licensure
and acting interstate medical
licensure compact providing for
the appointment of New Mexico
compact commissioners requiring
the filing of interstate
commission bylaws and rules
within the state records
administrator.
House bill two forty seven
introduced by representatives
Matthews Thompson and Armstrong
house bill two forty seven I've
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two forty eight
introduced by representatives
Matheus Thompson and Armstrong.
And act relating to health care
connecting the physical therapy
licensure compact declaring an
emergency.
House bill two forty eight
introduced by representatives
Matthews Thompson and Armstrong
house with two forty eight have
been read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two forty nine
introduced by representatives
Matthews Thompson and Armstrong.
An act relating to professional
licensure enacting the
psychology inter jurisdictional
compact house bill two forty
nine introduced by
representatives Matthews
Thompson and Armstrong house
will to forty nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two fifty introduced
by Representative at night Burt.
And act relating to property
amending provisions that
authorize corrections of minor
drafting or clerical errors or
omissions and recorded
instruments of real property
house bill two fifty introduced
by representative Nibert.
House Bill to fifty minutes by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
connection in the Affairs
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two fifty one
introduced by representative
Nibert an act relating to public
records providing that security
system records are exempted from
disclosure under the inspection
of public records act house bill
two fifty one introduced by
representative Nibert house bill
two fifty one min read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee invents the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two fifty two
introduced by Representative
Zamora.
And act making appropriation to
the public education department
to provide school districts with
funding for incentives to
increase student attendance
providing requirements to
receive the incentive house bill
two fifty two introduced by
Representative Zamora.
House bill two fifty to have
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then so house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two fifty three
introduced by Representative
Zamora an act relating to gaming
changing the operating hours for
a nonprofit organization gaming
operator licensee changing the
net take percentage for a
nonprofit organization gaming
operator licensee house bill two
fifty three entities for
Representative Zamora house bill
two fifty three having been read
twice by title is are printed
and referred to the house
consumer Public Affairs
Committee vans the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill two fifty four
introduced by Representative
Zamora.
An act relating to public
education and acting the school
marshal Act requiring school
martial training establishing
school martial procedures house
bill two fifty four introduced
by Representative Zamora.
House bill two fifty four have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed on the front of
the house Education Committee
then the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two fifty five
introduced by Representative
Serrato an act relating to
employee leasing providing that
certain benefit plans offered by
an employee leasing contractor
to the least workers of the
employee leasing contractor be
treated as a single employer
welfare benefit plans house bill
two fifty five introduced by
Representative Serrato house
bill two fifty five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
as the house commerce and
economic development committee.
House bill two fifty six
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
An act relating to higher
education creating a three year
pilot project to determine the
efficacy of hybrid dual credit
instructional model for public
high schools and providing
graduate credit to participating
teachers to qualify as adjunct
faculty teaching dual credit
courses using cyber security
courses to test the model making
appropriation declaring an
emergency house bill two fifty
six introduced by Representative
G. Andrés Romero house bill two
fifty six have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then it's the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two fifty seven
introduced by representatives
Thompson Kate's and Ferrari.
And act relating to behavioral
health and acting the
firefighter and emergency
service provider peer support
act allowing state local and
regional public fire agencies to
create peer support programs for
their employees making peer
support services confidential
limiting liability for the
provision of peer support
services making an appropriation
house bill two fifty seven
introduced by representatives
Thompson Kate's and Friday house
bill two fifty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
representative the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two fifty eight
introduced by Representative
block an act relating to
abortion creating a new criminal
offence for health care
providers providing certain
abortions imposing penalties
house bill two fifty eight
introduced by Representative
block house bill two fifty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee sense the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two fifty nine
introduced by Representative
Rehm an act relating to
licensing amending the private
investigations act requiring
registration for instructors and
private patrol employees
requiring coursework to provide
traffic crash reconstruction
services specifying limitations
on unlicensed persons
prescribing license fees
providing for biennial renewal
of licenses changing a sunset
dates for the private
investigations advisory board
repealing a compiled a temporary
provision house bill two fifty
nine introduced by
Representative green house bill
to fifty nine have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee thence
the house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to sixty introduced
by Representative Hochman Vigil
an act relating to health
coverage and acting sections of
the health care purchasing act
and the New Mexico insurance
code to prohibit life insurers
from applying limitations on
coverage for mental health or
substance use disorder services
that are more restrictive than
limitations on coverage for
other types of health care
services providing for ensure
compliance making appropriation
house bill two sixty introduced
by Representative Hochman Vigil
House Bill to sixty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee vents the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to sixty eight.
Introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia.
Senator Gonzales is
Representative Ortez and
Representative havia Martinez
and act relating to land grants
applying the general provisions
of chapter forty nine article
one in M. S. A. nineteen seventy
eight to the oil on the uneven
land grant amending a section of
the N. M. SA nineteen seventy
eight House Bill to sixty eight
introduced by Representative
Miguel P. Garcia.
Senator guns Allah's
Representative Ortez and
Representative have here
Martinez House Bill to sixty
eight ten min read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Lankford.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee then is the house
Judiciary Committee.
House memorial seventeen
introduced by Representative
should pan ski on in our new
Chasey and Roybal Caballero a
memorial to clearings they're
very seventh two thousand twenty
three Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian day
and house of representatives
House memorial seventeen
introduced by representatives
should pan ski on in our new
Chasey and Roybal Caballero
House memorial seventeen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and plays on
the speakers table.
House memorial eighteen
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
A memorial to could declaring
February second two thousand
twenty three school board
appreciation day in the house of
representatives House memorial
eighteen introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
House memorial eighteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and if it's
ordered not printed scratch that
house memorial eighteen is that
are not printed and plays on the
speakers table.
House memorial nineteen
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew green Vincent Townsend
and Madrid.
A memorial commemorating the
fiftieth anniversary of the
national wild Turkey federation
recognizing the national wild
Turkey federation significant
contributions to scientific
wildlife management researching
habitat conservation and the
promotion and protection of the
long honored outdoor traditions
of the United States House
memorial nineteen entities for
representatives Pettigrew green
Vincent Townsend and Madrid
House maligned team have been
read twice by title is our
printer effective house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
House memorial twenty introduced
by Representative block.
A memorial supporting the
completion of a border barrier
along the New Mexico New Mexico
border and increasing public
safety while encouraging legal
immigration of those seeking
refuge in the United States as
asylum seekers House memorial
twenty introduced the
Representative block.
House memorial twenty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
Members on house bill two forty.
On house bill two forty which we
read in the earlier
mistakenly place the house
trying to have sex issue revenue
committee instead of the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
I'd like to make that change now
well we're still introducing
legislation.
Action it is so ordered.
Deliver Leo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
announcements.
I see no objection it is so
ordered.
Announcements.
Speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker house Education
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty in the morning
House education eight thirty in
room three oh nine thank you
all.
Members take note.
Deliberately or percent Thomson
thank you Mr speaker we will
have the house health and Human
Services tomorrow at eight
thirty and we're moving to the
big so don't forget we're in
rural
three oh seven tomorrow thank
you members signaled any other
announcements.
The gentleman from the Indiana
thank you Mr speaker in your
house appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty today in room three oh
seven thank you Mr speaker
members take note.
Any other nonsense.
Really from Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker your house Judiciary
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow at one thirty PM or
whatever the floor fans thank
you Mr speaker members signaled
generated from Santa Fe
Representative set up to thank
you Mr speaker your house
commerce and economic
development committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty in room
three seventeen thank you number
signal to generated from
Achilles and Juan Representative
Johnson thank you Mr speaker
your house government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
will meet tomorrow eight thirty
eight am room three zero five
members adult.
Is anybody have any basketball
scores to report.
Call in Mumias.
Members I direct your attention.
To the gallery we're we're
joined today.
I former state representative
from outside aside and is why
floated Senator sad welcome back
to your house of
representatives.
The region is very handle smacks
good to see you thank you for
joining us.
Representative members that will
be it for today at the request
of the sponsor we will not be
taken up third reading tomorrow
I've let our minority leader
deals so we will plan on taking
that up on Thursday and we have
more now Spence facility from
Catherine zeta support of an
incentive percentage of
Armstrong good job Mr speaker
thank you just wanted to wish my
sister who would tell you she is
my younger sister and brought
that in a very Happy Birthday
and her name is Lynn majority of
my teller every day don't let
the old lady and thank you Mr
speaker at the very the land
thank you for hopefully your
webcasting this and you can hear
the birthday wishes credible
plus Happy Birthday.
The lady from Santa Fe thank you
Mr speaker I also have a
birthday announcement for former
member now congresswoman Melanie
A. Stansbury it's her birthday
today so centered twee attacks
or a little homing pigeons
teller we Mr thank you Mr
speaker however they Melanie
happy birthday Congress woman
Stansbury.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker my husband's birthday
is today to so I I always used
to.
I was used to remember that
melody's birthday was the same
day as my husband so Mister
speaker what time are we going
to come in tomorrow.
This is speaker of the house to
in recess till eleven tomorrow
morning I think that motion
thank you members for a
productive day Happy Birthday to
former speaker Norvell hope is
watching us and all.
The house was in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
