For creation rules but that
gives them the right to lease
that water to put it into the
water main or some other kind of
creative solutions so we're
we're looking at all those
options to to help us deal with
the transfer but long term water
shortages of going of the the an
issue that we need to look at we
have some
Changes to of the rules that
have created some constraints I
think I think by sending the
notice for the provisions of
that was done under Senate bill
twelve.
Really.
Continue the coming of
constraint I would say slow of
that's I think what I with the
intent of the bill is to slow
up.
Water extraction but it also in
a drugs setting when you need to
move water quickly around to
meet the needs of the water
users the normal rules that
really takes quite a time that
also applies to to the leasing
after that we need to talk to
Sanchez of HB one twenty one for
yourself the.
Representative the madam chair
Representative January to
discuss how we want to protect
senior water rights to the
fullest extent but we also want
we don't want to constrain
ourselves tightly that just the
the the process produced we have
to address the needs it like
Portland us for example of
groundwater transfers sh we have
willing partners to do something
like that the the process and
delays along that maybe that
that particular drilling project
will just fold and go away you
know so the solar things we need
to talk about but but
nonetheless we're very hopeful
that we can come to a logical
approach that continues to
protect senior water users while
allowing for some.
Reasonable.
Way to work with all the
different water users senior and
junior to make it work force for
everybody else so so that's the
something that we're we're very
focused on in the state
engineers office and elsewhere
throughout the agencies in
partnership with the NMED and
others that are of some
professional programs
Of the last thing I'll mention
on the challenges and restraints
with the current litigation to
New Mexico we think will be
cleared a big hurdle.
On.
Six when we hear of the we will
hear the ruling right away with
the hearing will be held and
then the ruling from the special
master of her probably within
thirty days of whether the that
he's going to recommend that the
three state solution consent
decree goes forward to the state
I mean this the U. S. supreme
court for them to go ahead and
accept that consent decree and
move forward with that
particular Madam that doesn't
resolve all the issues down
there and I'm sure
Representative Lara is very
familiar that we still have
education issues at the state
level and things like that but
what it does do is it settles
the litigation between us in
Texas with no penalties.
Those financial requirements
whatsoever just affirmation that
we can continue to deliver what
is rightfully of Texas is water
under the fifty seven forty
three sharing of the Rio Grande
projects fly out of the office
why and if we and we have
methods to guarantee that it's
going to take a lot of work and
a lot of
Workers you know of.
Difficult and.
The but what do uble agreements
with all our users in the they
sent that will allow us to come
to a conclusion under a warm or
whatever point that we come up
with to actually controller
depletions right now we're
depleting too much water in the
basin relative to the amount of
water available we have to
figure out how to do that but
this agreement allows for more
surface water come back to New
Mexico we have more surface
water that needs less from our
company for the agricultural
community.
And and over time restores that
thank you for system that worked
very well up until the year two
thousand or so when the rules
changed and because we're
pumping to occur so so that's
under way
I also wanted to mention.
It's like twelve of we have a
president funding opportunities
I sat on a stretcher or
transport we we have approved a
hundred
one hundred and thirty.
One.
One point three eight million
dollars.
The thirty million dollars of of
of of the applications for
legislative approval this year
and Senator Wirth who sponsored
the bill for the water trust
fund for us to continue to see
that.
I think it's two fifty million
the secretary being.
Also so that's a really good
program there's other pearl if
it's going on to try to reform
of the state of to be more
proactive in managing of course.
From what we're.
Of the two of serve and then the
governor's office.
And the LESC of provided
recommendations
that have provided for you that
talks about some great
opportunities of both of from
the governor's recommendations
and LESC there's a big gap there
of the street that I.
I find that shows our both our
operating budget our staff from
from the agency and then what
was after
Senator we we find it very well
staffing request and it was
covered by the.
The LFC some but we're so
appreciative of that yes of
course but.
Certainly got great support.
The second she is as for
for
The
lower Rio Grande we have to we
have
the US Texas others were used on
their The New Mexico serious
about implementing of creations
control management program down
there
as well as of to provide
resources for new supplies
reusing stormwater like I
mentioned earlier and also
looking at brackish water for
industrial use because rectus
water treatment the super
expensive you can't really
benefit from a for agriculture
in any large amounts of what it
certainly works well for
municipal and industrial uses
particularly Senators area where
you might have very high end
industrial work that that needs
a specific amount of water that
could treated both and if you
have little energy to go with it
it's a perfect perfect solutions
we want to do a lot of work like
that and then the governor of
also authorized thirty five
million dollars worth of dollars
for New Mexico yes to begin that
wreckage
for and other act for
assessments that are that was a
major recommendation in this
report as well that needs to be
done so we know how much water
we have we know how to develop
the brackish water treatment
that's the next steps that we go
to take so I would urge use the
support Mexico tax of.
Budget in that regard those are
R. Pirtle or seven December
twenty twenty six and a lot of
these are off the dollars and
ten dollars as well as we can
see there's other numbers in
their forty two point five
million for a little while.
the projects that we identified
as shovel ready
with New Mexico Department we
have another seventy five
million in the the government
provided for leveraging federal
dollars and but those are
privileges wells we have all
this we do and apologize for
taking so much time.
So excited to share this
information with you guys.
In some ways the other thing is
is hi given given the
opportunities that we have this
year and and well into the
future so thank you madam chair
I stand for any question that
you may have.
Thank you thank you engineer
Hamit now I I I truly appreciate
this presentation and I I think
it's a I think it's not a we
have three members of the
appropriations subcommittee who
also sit on this committee and
and I think it's going to be
important take some have
marriage you know the the the
work of the task force with the
not only are committee that the
other committees that will have
feels pertaining to this to work
to really get these budgets in
line and justices And aside and
I'm gonna take the prerogative
of the chair to say this I don't
know why when they when it
committee comes before census I
need eleven staff position after
the government get some six and
the LFC is and I they say they
can really need eleven to I hope
we look at staffing what they
need to do the work that's what
I really I and and I think we've
done that in the past and I and
I hope we give the agency says
certainly in water the staffing
they need before we move on to
questions I would just like to
recognize Stacey Timmons for a
minute who put together an
incredible workshop for both
legislators and scientists and
people who participated with
Representative Zamora
Representative Armstrong and
myself it was seem like a long
time ago but I think it was just
an audit straight at this and we
were at we're at the core of in
order you know I have been to a
lot of conferences in my life
I'm just going to tell you that
I don't know how many workshops
conferences second I hate to
even County I want to say and
maybe it's because I needed to
know this information but it was
really I thought the best
conference I've ever gone to I
learned the most and I thought
it was really good because it
wasn't just legislators together
there about I think seven or
eight legislators but they're
probably about thirty scientists
and we have a chance to talk
over a three day period it was
emphasis which is just kind of
give an overview of.
what happened there.
Sure.
Good morning everyone and thank
you for this we committed to
give you a little update on what
we did for this because of the
decision makers it previously
was called the decision makers
workshop this particular one was
called the water leaders
workshop and it was in December
but.
So as.
The intent of it was to follow
up on and what are agencies to
do in the early two thousands
which was decision makers
workshops which were
intended to provide all sorts of
natural resource content for
legislators and other state
agency leaders to have the depth
of knowledge they needed to move
forward on policy agency
management and that was done in
the early two thousands from our
agency
this year we were given an
opportunity by former foundation
to host this workshop we had
actually sixty five plus
attendees donor and supporter of
Mexico tech and the attendees
were kind of a about a third
legislators about thirds other
Agency experts and academics and
researchers content experts for
the water resources so the
correct composition of the
workshop was to provide in
classroom presentations from a
number of different presenters
on a very wide range of topics
which we reached out to a number
of legislators in the interim
committees related to water and
ask for their input to begin
with about what what material
they wanted to to learn more
about and we try to inject into
a day and a half workshop
and so I think the just the the
next half of the day we did
outside looking at actual on the
ground water issues giving
everybody a little bit more
freedom to interact and ask
questions and actually see the
issues as they were in the
landscape
and and I think the outcomes of
that were that there is
certainly an increase in
knowledge of everybody who
attended we did some surveying
before and after and and can see
that there is a general increase
in people's understanding
interest and I think bottom line
there is certainly an increased
awareness of what's the
valuations are and
Hopefully we can watch something
like this again we have
emissions of trying to do
another one in the fall of this
year twenty twenty three I would
love to work with you all to
pick a date and find some ways
to reach out to all of you we
try to connect with everyone
through the interim committee
less and what are the latest and
LFC so that we could.
Touch everyone who's interested
and they can sign up and
register so happy to do that
again we can get the opportunity
and the trainees faces around
the state thank you thank you
since and I as you can tell I'm
a big proponent for this so I
would encourage of the
membership of this committee to
attend camp New Hope and now
open a on the committee to
questions and Representative
Zamora thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr state engineer for
your testimony today
presentation
How well in tune is the New
Mexico congressional delegation.
With you and and how how well
into the usual personally like
they are with the issues of the
state and working with us.
Madam chair representative what
I I think we the right now with
the the relationships that well
officer particularly has with
our legislative with our
congressional delegation is
really high
No of all of personally and the
work with them or my four year
career at various levels of
through their careers and and
and we.
I think that I would like to
response from the text of the
same day if we have issues
coming up there helping us on
Colorado River issues helping us
with the middle Rio Grande lower
Rio Grande issues and the fact
that one of the tour stops of of
of of of our that of water
leaders workshop was to show
folks the problems we're having
in the reach of from of the the
Senate cautioned them all the
way down to elephant Butte which
is creating compact when we
problems for the military grant
this creating water shortages
also grants so.
Everything's connected right so
so and and and and our
delegation is popping us with
all of those issues are as big.
Probably on the Colorado River
ready to tell you that
there's so much of a we're we're
working closely through the
Interstate Stream Commission and
and and of reclamation
commissioner and Interstate
Stream Commission director also
a Lopez is our point is a
governor's appointee on the
Colorado River compact
commission and he's doing a
fabulous job force and thank god
for him because I would have to
be doing that also but he piece
three way better than I could
even imagine doing that myself
so we have a great
representation we've got great
legal advisors.
In our the lower Grande Texas
the Mexico and Colorado of work
I mean it's just New Mexico is
in a small state we carry out
the extent of the state in terms
of of how we in gauge because of
our congressional delegation
supports so I I'm very pleased
with that okay thank you and
thank you for that answer madam
chair and Mr state engineer that
the reason I asked that question
is because I have farmed all
online.
And I'm not presently farming
but I have in the past.
And I know that policy drivers.
Water usage on the agriculture
side of.
So for instance if if.
If the programs promote corn
pays a higher farm payments in
order I just over the years.
Things in the affirmative a
change in the law of the
programs and stuff.
But if the if it changes.
If if we plant corn it takes
more water but it pays you more
on your farm payment at the end
of the year so to me I think
it's very important that we
coordinate with federal policy
makers.
And we have
Senator Mary Lou Hahn said on
the on the agriculture the
offense sent in in DC so and
I've had these discussions with
them before but I just hope to
stay on our congressional
delegation also so that.
The farm policy that's made.
Helps Mexico takes into account
drug conditions yes yes and and
and and the state.
In the state of where we said I
mean we're we're narrative
states so I don't believe that
our policy in in in our state
like New Mexico meets up with
farm policy in eastern Texas
original home them or the agency
altered F. so I would think that
the the farm policy that's made
at the federal level can affect
our state so much.
And the I hope that.
Our people in the state.
And our congressional people
that we have in the sea yes can
work together to make those
things better and and help us
save water for.
For.
The uses that we need and I
don't mean to put.
I go cultural.
The agriculture community down
in any way but but sooner or
later I mean we're we're already
facing these.
So we just we just need to
figure out how to keep it in
balance from your house to work
thank you for your testimony
thank you madam chair that's all
come to thank you Representative
Representative Armstrong and
then Representative Ezzell thank
you madam chair and thank you Mr
state engineer for that
presentation I know of.
You're drinking from a fire
hose.
And it's a tough job.
And I know in the past madam
chair that we we've been
fighting for money for the state
engineers office for a long time
it always seems to be sure.
And I I can't I'm looking at
this I I'm gonna go talk to a
chair small and I'm sure are
other people that.
The committee will do the same
because I really think that you
can't do your job and do it
correctly with one arm tied
behind your back and it feels
like that's kind of what we're
doing in this the sort well I
work personally really hard to
try to be fully funded what
you're asking for because.
We've put all this money into
the water fifty year water plan
all this time energy and effort.
both the water leaders workshop
and and for you not to be able
to do your job this that's not
fair.
one of the things that I want to
make sure you mentioned the one
of the the Santa casa tier C..
Trying to figure out how to
maintain that better and manage
that better and put some
responsibility on somebody for
that.
And so I I just wanted to
encouraging that the other thing
madam chair that a lot of people
don't know about is that there's
not a minimum water level and it
also if you.
And that elephant Butte always
takes the deficit if there's a
deficit in water delivery often
view takes at all instead of it
being.
Are down through the Rio Grande
and so I think there's some
issues there that we need to
look at
The of course the Saint
Augustine Water planes issue is
been sent back to District Court
and that's my area I've been
born and raised there and fought
that fight for.
Ten years before I was
Representative.
And so we just need to make sure
that we're not sorting rural New
Mexico to feed but.
I am really concerned about that
and
All right rural area having
water is just as important as
urban water I just have to
always say that because it's
it's a fight.
one other thing this and I know
you're not control but but the
man at the forest management
in in catching County we have.
Flocks of national forests that
are put up for
committed to help clients help
manage the force there and it's
not like a rape and pillage
management it's a it's a decent.
Clearing of the forest managing
for watershed and for for forest
fire and the process here in New
Mexico is really that
the people that do that can get
better job to get boots on the
ground in thirty days in Arizona
which catching County borders
Arizona.
But in New Mexico it takes about
ninety.
And so it there's a real issue
there with us trying to figure
out how we help Madam forests in
a respectful manner and our
watersheds and and be able to
keep people it's a business and
capture County.
And then the weather next you
know it is going to go and or
even if they're going to get it
so I think that's part of all of
this water.
The other thing that I wanted to
ask Mr Sajan engineers is there
regional planning maps I can
find somewhere is or are you
revamping the regional map that
madam chair.
From we do have the old sixteen
region map that I can send to
you
but this this new legislation is
going to actually create a new
we can process for the
Interstate Stream Commission to
recreate.
Reinvestigate with the regional
entities how to make those
regions more cohesive and
probably a smaller number of on
because we want to more
watershed based a lot of them
are kind of cross different
watersheds and more complicated
to to have regional planning
when you have that kind of
situation so so we're we're
gonna be taking a look at that
as a as a new regional planning
efforts that will have a tie
into the five year state water
plan update right now that that
that was a disconnect there too
so so as I mentioned earlier we
need this whole process to to
change the narrative and and and
and and transform the way that
we've done business in the past
so that when you all have the
information into the really good
decisions for prioritizing
funding and and and and
policies to aid these regions
for for what they're saying they
need another practice in their
efforts okay thank you madam
chair thank you that's our I was
kind of hoping that map with the
re wrong and and then is it true
that there they found some new
offers down
on the.
In Los crucis area I'll pass on
that region.
There's certainly so Madam chair
representative on there
certainly are some wreckage
actors and things and and
there's also some we we know
about but they're they're
they're just connected aquifers
from the Rio Grande that that
could be looked at as a possible
new of terms apply for and I
uses of that region to help kind
of balance things out as we
talked about earlier
with with with the the C. a
basin so okay thank you for that
and then when my last comment is
on page six the ageing water and
wastewater infrastructure
hitting rural systems the
hardest and so you know it was
all capital outlay subcommittee
trying to figure out how can we
figure out.
How to to fund this and so I got
request this year I got Sierra
County in my new district and
redistricting half of Sierra
County and they're requesting
care Memphis twenty five million
or seventy five million what's
the difference I can't pay I
can't afford it the out of my
capital outlay their whole water
system in the whole town.
They had they waste more water
from breakage but they can't
afford to fix it and so here we
go with this balancing act Madam
chair on how how we fix the
infrastructure.
Put that money into their and
it's actually to conserve the
water and so I was just called
to my would to their capital
outlay requests are sticking on
my car.
By the way my magic wand and fix
that real quick for you but you
know what I need to try to
figure out a way how we helpful
and I guarantee you they're not
the only channel.
I do the same thing and I
believe that we don't have
enough G. R. T. it's not
matching funds for federal
money to help.
With the water systems and so
it's it is a real issue and and
I applaud you for your work and
and anyway I can help all try to
help and
but I I really will always fight
for private property rights and
water right so thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative and that the same
goes for the north I mean you
know I I said that fifty
thousand dollar bandaids on five
million dollar projects really
it it's not working capital
outlay just doesn't work in
water systems we are going to
have Marquita Russel here at
another time to present the
changes at the water of
transport and so that she can
kind of they've led mapped out a
new process that I think it
would be important for this
committee to understand
important for legislators to
understand so that we can you
know I'm gonna be holding
quarterly meetings with just
mutual domestic water systems
other takes them how to navigate
these these processes again it's
a lack of capacity it's not a
lack of hard work it's just lack
of knowledge and capacity in the
time to do it they're all
volunteers in rural areas I'll
stop there and rent a recognised
sent representatives to.
Madam chair thank you very much
director Hamm thank you for
being here it's good to see you
in person instead it is same and
that's the last meeting I was on
on the same meeting for you were
present stand DVAC the office.
I'm kind of disappointed in what
I'm seeing here a spot for going
to be following up on an icy
one designation for the east
side of the road.
So we've had our share problems
over there this and I hope that
the health problems that we are
bringing to you all are going to
be addressed.
Okay.
I gave a look to some okay.
Of Mr and madam chair and
director.
And with but if we're talking
about water and agriculture to
me that's very near and dear to
my heart.
I'm still a farmer.
Bill act with my brothers on
farms down there but Education.
And one of these days whatever
their select water there will be
a lack.
And I want people to understand
that what's going to be more
important keeping those golf
courses during or provide food
for people that need to.
And I'm glad you brought up
Representative Armstrong house
bill.
The part about application
processes and.
Bills that are coming up in the
problems with one twenty one
madam chair members of the
committee one size does not fit
all as far as what water.
Bills circulating around how
they will adversely affect the
state if there is a farm down
there that has just at the end
of this five year cycle and for
her I the five year cycle on the
water.
And they have the opportunity to
lease a little bit what more
water to the field.
The goal of being able to
produce their crop to the finish
it that need to go through a
seventy day process period.
Because it's and let's get that
pharmacists is cropping first
here she has lost the ability to
pay back farm loans to pay their
hired help to pay their
suppliers.
So this is that I can't believe
they're bringing this up again.
Madam chair members of the
committee I have been involved
in the the the the it's always
been the committee that deals
with a lot of that I have served
on since I was first elected not
started this.
In two thousand five so you'll
do the math on that one of.
It's a.
It's always been a problem in
the state engineer always caps
as we need more money we need
more money we need more money.
Sometimes the state engineers
office I am going to throw rocks
at job you create drug problem
sometimes.
By going different directions
why are we going back to study
in brackish water one of the oil
and gas industry doing that for
you why are you doing following
their lead on that and save the
taxpayers dollars on that I mean
it's only common sense away I've
never.
Catastrophic wildfires are
caused by the U. S. Forest
Service.
That's what it boils down to.
I still believe in god and I
always will but he also created
lightning.
And that was his way of saying
we need to thin it out so the
wildlife and livestock in the.
God also created.
To replenish those leads to but
when we have it is running the
US Forest Service talk about
that on on tape there because
I'm fed up with these people.
The same what they have done
this past year down and right
does so and up in this half
pre cast canyon.
Mess that went on.
We lost lost lives we lost we
lost businesses we lost a person
we have lost the ability for
many many people to be able to
make a living and it's all due
to the ineptness.
But the US Forest Service.
And the people that fund them.
Madam chair and director Hammond
I'm also glad they're there
because of I think I gave you
the look whenever you find
through in junior water right
news for system okay so always
keep that money that's integral
part of part on my side of the
state.
Okay.
Of I have served on many of
those tests force committees
with the at the end.
Representative fourth and then
Representative serve this on
trying to figure out problems
and everything else education
was always a big issue at that
time and I don't think we have
made one let the progress since
we used to serve on this task
force committees.
My side of my area of the PVA CD
by in the C. I. D. is well over
ninety five percent of days not
completed but now.
The status of our other Judy
cation project process I think
it's gone by the wayside the
safety is a no it's gonna be
hard to do everybody does not
trust government believe it or
not I feel are not aware that.
But it's important that they
know where their water rights
are and what they're able to do
with that and it is a private
property.
And I will always stand for
that.
Of.
What we're talking about experts
forces broke base on the ground
there needs to be a
collaboration there.
It does not does need to be the
so called experts.
We live on the land and we live
with the latest.
This is very important.
And they'll need right there.
Yes there is a big go for down
there but the deal city here if
this year you're talking about
representative Armstrong and
it's been there since John date
is been discussing John day and
time you stated junior the first
of.
And I think more also this will
we had that discussion of about
that are awful for consistent.
As far as a conventional
delegation goes.
We have so that they want to
work with this but we also have
one that has been working since
I'm not going to name any names.
But all in all the money that
they send back actually comes
from right here and so it.
And yet we are paying them to
not pay attention to what their
constituents that covers.
And to me.
That's inexcusable.
It really is.
They need to get back home.
And they need to listen to their
constituents to see what our
needs problems so.
With that madam chair stuff
thank you very much thank you.
Any more questions from the
committee of saying none with
any members of the audience like
to make a a two minute call.
Seeing none I am I'm very
grateful for you into near him
and for coming before this
committee
I want to recognize the people
in this room who did so much to
to put this proposal together
and all the work that was done
it's it's a you know I say
sometimes government works you
know we forget that sometimes
government works and people come
together and really produce
great products so I want to
compliment everybody on that and
I I am very sorry to say that we
cannot get the webcast up and we
will have to delay your bill
till next to state
Representative Ezzell because it
is illegal to pass legislation
without the webcast so
I there's nothing else I can do
we can wait we could take a
recess and wait around here a
little bit but they've been
working on it for what an hour
and a half and they can't seem
to get it up madam chair this is
inexcusable we have people that
have traveled from great
distances to be here for that
bill and
If Legislative Council Service
can't keep this up and running I
don't know what we're going to
do to alleviate the problem but
I'm a little bit of incensed
over.
And and I'm sure the rest
members are too because I can
look at the audience not to see
several people that are here
that have traveled over two
hundred miles just for.
Representative I share yeah and
I to and just as upset as you I
think we had it all set up last
night it was all ready to go and
and the entire staff is upset
and we this is not the way one
round and and
we have I don't know how
expensive it I that's all I can
do and I am legally I can't
continue the meeting and I
apologize to all these people is
that really I if I could do
something representative
Armstrong madam chair can't can
I just suggest that maybe in the
mornings before the committee if
I am maybe you did this I'm not
sure but maybe somebody can
check before we come in and out
to see if it's up and running.
Maybe if it was found earlier
maybe it would be this problem
thank you madam chair thank
chair is our possibility right
now because of the distance
segment some of our audience
members have traveled that we
could temporarily trying to
brand that is up and running to
run.
I I don't know that when we take
a at I will take a ten minute
recess and see what we can do a
house that
thank you Mr chair.
Is.
This
is.
This
