So thank you for that I think
that was helpful for everyone
we're we are still on the bill I
will say.
The.
Maybe hook springs eternal I
didn't think we'd be here this
long and we sell in the other
bill after this
marco can solve us
capital combat search strategies
and randy alverty of capital
council and consulting have
ordered us some pizzas so those
should be hearing about half
hour
maybe we'll be done there half
hour
next time I list I have reps
then thousands
thank you
chairman.
And thanks for lunch
for those that provide it
thank you representative for
your bill today i've got a few
questions I want to.
Try to understand
in this hand
there is a cost.
Estimated at twenty three
hundred dollars a student can
you explain that to me where
the.
Where that comes from.
Thank you mister chairman
mister representative of counsel
I will let my expert explain th.
Mister chair representative
townsend
that number came from analyzing
a number of schools but not
analyzing all of them and coming
up with a representative number
to be able to apply across all
the schools because all the
schools who run the website
which is a hundred and fifty
seven districts I believe
especially the smaller ones were
not individually analysed the
main analysis came from cobra
and dimming which are already
contracting to move forward for
this program so that's where
that number came from is a
representative to determine what
the cost would be based on the
clear energy new mexico's
pricing is the state interest
state low bid come attractive.
Well
i'm branding grass something I
played around with yes.
The.
A little bit
but I have
there's a boy didn't
understanding
you have a cost of pertinence a
system on a roof that is.
Materials nuts bolts panels.
And then you have this.
This fabricated cost I mean this
and I don't mean that disrespect
but I mean we have another
number that we have estimated
the cost that twenty three
hundred dollars a student.
How do those differ.
By what it actually costs I mean
if if cobris glore hired you and
said I want the system for on my
roof today what would it cost
for this purchase power
price this.
Mr chairman of mister chair in
representative townsend first of
all it wouldn't be on the roof
it would be free okay
my expert
thank you mister chair for cobra
school districts because they've
already been individually and
analyzed and that means their
deleged bills for an entire year
were taking it was broken down
per meter and then it was taken
to say okay how much is needed
for each meter for each
application what's needed in
terms of batteries etc it would
be virtually exactly in terms of
other school districts if you
looked at.
They've been about seven rate in
southern new mexico that have
been looked at i'm a gordon
public schools was looked at
very specifically their electric
bills for the entire year and
then all of it broken down so
that.
There there may be more
variation in school center in
some of the colder climates that
don't use as much refrigerated
air conditioning but then they
tend to use more electric in the
winter but I believe we're
within plus or minus ten
percent.
Almost chairman.
Mister bacter's representative
right but i'm trying to get two
is.
If that school had the capacity.
To go by the nets and bolts and
panels.
And put it someplace.
Except.
For.
One of these growth that were
believe is tough on the life
we're estimating mischairman
that that that systems going to
cost eight point two million
dollars.
Is that right.
The.
Let me get to blind.
Yes point two million were
estimating for the purposes of
this.
That is going to cost eight
million bucks give a time.
Are you telling me that if they
had gone to the store and bought
those pieces that their cost
would have been I would have
been the same.
Mister chair mister townsend if
belindsco district went to
their local sources and tried to
put this all together themselves
I think that they would be
probably between twenty and
thirty percent higher than this
number they are not buying on
national contracts like the
major suppliers are that wound
up being the low in low price
bid for the state of new mexico
they don't have the engineering
already set up they don't have
all the things that get it to be
the lowest price that was bid
for the state contract
and I get that chairman and back
as representative but my my
point is simply this.
We have we have a signal
significant number of schools
and.
And that collective body should
have the strength.
Two go to a.
Single contract point and say I
w.
These bill for my schools.
In the and the most cost
effective manner.
It would seem to me.
And at the moment i'm not a
posen don't get me where i'm not
a post on the process i'm trying
to understand is this the
cheapest most cost effective way
to put that type of a power
source on this one.
On school.
Property almost said rose again
and you were going to create me
on school property or are we
contracting miss.
And representative through a
process that is not as
competitive as it could be is is
that the right way to say it
mister chair and represent
townsend this is the.
Most convenient way for schools
to participate because the
contractor would take advantage
of the federal funding and
secure that right away within
this april may and then have the
four years to implement with the
schools so
this is really the effective
most effective way for our
schools in new mexico to be able
to take advantage of this and
have our contribution of support
with this two hundred and four
million to save them over the
next thirty years
millions of dollars.
And I appreciate that to
represent the chairman
with every purchase power
contract be identical.
Refer to mister back
mister chairman representative
townsend
no every.
Purchase power contract is not
going to be identical in the
case of diming schools and
cobris schools I think virtually
every contract is at least
slightly different because the
solar panels need to be
installed where the existing
parking places are they're not
ideally positioned to the sun in
general analyst paint store
panels facing south create the
most energy and so where they're
south facing there to be a
slightly lower price because
you're gonna generate more
energy and create more value for
the people that produce them in
terms of your question as to is
this the most competitive way
for it to be done in terms of an
actual price that's the purpose
of the state having a
ces I think is the abbreviation
where they've gone out to bed
and people companies whoever
have made proposals to do
exactly what you said to say if
we're gonna do the whole state
who can give us the best price
to do the whole state that's
what that contract low bidder
is.
In this bill it's also saying
you don't have to do that if you
think you can do something
better set up an RFP and do it
but if the price comes out
higher or the guaranteed savings
doesn't come out as good then
you need to justify why if you
want to pick someone else
locally or otherwise but I think
that this is by far the most
competitive way to have this
done and after the incentives it
is dramatically lower cost the
analysis for diming is an
example is that they would save.
Fifty eight percent of the
electric cost over the next
thirty years and if you let your
utility could do it more
effectively in a while they
cutting their prices instead of
it going up it's the most
effective way I think all the
facts and information point to
this is a huge benefit for the
schools it's a once in a
lifetime opportunity that I
don't expect the sinners from
the federal government to be
available like this they may not
be the oil revenues to pay for
it to be done again and this is
a great benefit long term it
multiplies the return back to
the state.
Chairman.
I'm struggling with.
The.
And I think we we all should
have some concern that we are
with that a bill that we might
propose.
Treat our children differently
some are going to get more.
I heard earlier.
With chairman respects there was
for the rural schools there was
a four more to fire.
For the larger schools that
have.
South facing facilities
they may have a little benefit
because of size and.
There system sets.
It would seem to me like we all
are a pure fighting every day to
make sure that kids are treated.
But.
And I think they should be.
But we have something here as
it's probably not going to do
that let me ask another
question.
You said these typically are
going to be on parking
structures I guess.
Is there a room.
Representative himbry mentioned
early on about the liability of
these systems of the initiative
and.
As the proximity of the solar
systems that children then that
he do we know that we're okay
there and are these
companies that would put teeth
on.
Are they adequately going to
have the financial where with
all the stand somebody posing
that.
The wreck.
Mister chairman represent towns
and
just to correct your earlier
statement briefly sir the
advantage would be to the rural
schools which will get a higher
incentive not to the large
schools which will not be
eligible because they're not in
a federally designated area to
get the uh additional incentives
for being a energy community and
that's a federal designation I
have nothing to do yeah
but rural schools like
almogordome like damning like
cobrie are going to get more
money but they're also more
expensive to do so that in
actuality I think it is totally
balancing the case so that all
schools can save at least four
times not that some would save
more it's at the additional cost
for the more rural areas more
distance more trucking etc is
being compensated by higher
insignives so that all students
are getting the same benefit it
regards to your second question
about the safety and the
allocations of the
with the locations approval in
damning the head the
superintendent for facilities
the head of construction the
head of maintenance and the head
of safety and security all made
sight visits to every location
took pictures of everybody
here's where things going to go
it all got approved the
distances from play ground
equipment or other stuff all of
those things were considered
before saying yes go ahead this
is what we want and so those
considerations I think will
always be done at the state
guidelines for how far you have
to be from certain things is a
consideration the height of of
the carport so that kids
wouldn't.
It's ultimate some kids can do
anything but for most kids
they're not going to climb up
sixteen feet to play you know
grab things are are all from our
things of that nature of four by
four call in poll is not easy to
scale to sixteen feet i'm not
saying no kid could do it but
the insurance.
Matters were part of the
discussion part of what the
school district has to be
responsible for and that was
addressed and
the last thing we want is for
any kid ever be injured as a
grandfather I want my grandkids
safe and I think everyone else
wants their kids to be safe as a
highest priority so eh.
Being available to take take
hundred and five mile per wins
in areas that have never seen
winds that high is I think going
to a very.
High degree of making sure
everything is done property
properly and it like with any
construction of a school
building or anything else on
school facilities it's it's
being subjected to the same
requirements for inspections and
codes and so forth.
Appreciate that with german
representatives
back but those wind loads.
The.
That's not you.
You build a metal building you
have the same windload that you
have to work sir.
This.
Is there a.
The.
Example of a power contract.
That the committee.
And have council service.
Saved it it.
The might be encouraged.
The.
Mr chair and representative
townsend we have a copy of the
purchasing cooperative with
clear energy solar
we were just going to include
one page but it does have the
certification in different
things mr chair would be all
right to share this
year multiple copies of the yes
I think it's okay the sheriff
III don't wanna start going over
the terms of the contract
you know contracts to get
negotiated they get changed
there's a lot in there.
Um III think i'm okay sharing
that for
you the committees information
and sir reference purposes I
don't want to start mean the
bill doesn't include a form of
contract I don't really want
down their room you know what I
mean towns.
Nope of all I appreciate that
german and representative I
that's not necessarily where I
was going
my
my thought was when
representative embry brought up
the libility issue this morning
that kind of triggered in my
mind that
we might not know a lot about
what we're doing and there are.
There are.
Probably unknown risk that are
going to be incurred by our
schools.
Possibly our children.
The.
And.
I just wanted to see I just
wanted to make sure that was
okay there's no gotcha in that
is just is it is it really not.
So rips and tells them this
isn't
this is just some sort of
superficial stuff anyway yeah
I see you know I do
we can talk about more or later
but um.
It in my mind.
I am kind of error to apologize
for that okay I heard them
reading this bill.
I had the hard time
understanding what was about
getting a better understanding
now I do think this is it
essentially creates a program
there will be a contract between
a school district in that
provider and there is a lot that
is left to that contract.
And I appreciate that but.
Mr chairman bear with me just a
minute because I am like step on
a toe but I don't mean to what
what I want to say.
Yes.
We have recently
decided that prescribed
measures.
Were required for one industry
versus another with respect to
school.
Which I get.
And in some instances there
would be.
Private contracts between a
company and a school system for
a facility that we have said is
mayor may not be
right.
My point is
I don't think we should.
Which one is.
Representative when I ask about.
Well
you you made the statement that
a school would contract way
significantly lower price.
Is that significantly lower
price.
Something that.
Can't you can you define that.
I'll refer to my expertise
moment.
Mr chair mister townsend
represent towns and gives me
okay.
I think the simplest way to
define a significant lower prize
is that to use a round number if
a school is paying ten cents of
what for electricity all in from
the utility and they can't try
to for
nine center eight cent power
that that's a significantly
lower price and if over time
that price is guaranteed to go
down rather than go up did that
becomes an even more significant
amount over time and that's the
type of contract that I believe
almost all schools will do.
Let's good information german
and representative.
At mr baccus do you think that
each of these contracts would
have a declining price a power
over time.
Mister chairman reps in towns
and.
I can't say all of them cause I
don't know who all may be it or
what schools may do but I would
say the overwhelming majority I
would expect to have a declining
price over time if this bill is
passed without this bill know I
would not expect it to have a
decl.
Okay.
Michael
representative one last question
there was
back as there was
back on the liability issue.
With all read of hill storms and
what happens to solar panels
when health or.
Is is there a potential for
contamination that would reach
the ground were kids would be
and as that being addressed.
Excuse me mister chair represent
towns and.
The current solar panels are
warranteed for a hail storm up
to I believe inch and a half
held size which is very large I
mean that's a very large hail
storm the liability for that
totally files on the provider of
the system the school does that
pay any maintenance or repair so
replacement in hailstorm would
be no cost to the school in
terms of is there any materials
that would be somehow.
Poisonous I guess is what you're
asking to the ground or to the
water
the panels are made from silicon
which is sand and they have a
very
many school coating on them
that allows them to generate
electricity in terms of could
any of that coding get
transferred to the ground.
The.
The.
I think that's next to
impossible even with the two
inch hail store they would they
would fraturate they would break
where they hit but that would
not go all the way through the
panel and and take debris to the
ground and even if the breed did
go to the ground selling is not
a dangerous material into my
knowledge there are no dangerous
materials within the rest of the
panels at the end of life they
because of cost reasons the
current process is they want to
be able to recycle all of that
and so I
i'm not aware of anything that
could be contamination in any
significant way to the ground
due to a hail store thank you
for that much german
representative back you just
mentioned some done that jardon
thought what is the useful life
of these solar panels.
Mr chair representative towns
in.
The current warranties that are
what's called tier one
which means their investment
grade by major international
banks were
government or other projects
around the world is the only
thing it'll be used on these
projects these projects will be
american made panels there.
Panels coming online in in
american.
Factories the
life expectancy.
Is very long and by that the
warranty is to be at
approximately eighty four
percent of original capacity
thirty years from now and so if
they're not at that capacity
that's a warranty bill claim
that could be made.
How much longer after that does
it become economically feasible
to say well we can get more
production at a new panels and
so will change amount
it's somewhat similar to windows
in the life expectancy of a
window do you expect that glass
to last three hundred years
maybe not but the experience on
houses and
churches that have been around
for hundreds of years as some of
them have the original class and
this is special glass to be more
resistant to hail and so forth.
But I would in my opinion the
lifecycle is beyond fifty years.
The.
A mischairman representative I
thought I read something that
said it was twenty five years
but I won't argue with that you
say it's fifty it is.
A mister representative
the question.
Of.
I will.
That I appreciate it.
Mr chair representative.
The heroes and towns in
represent scott.
Thank you miss terman
representative from
mister barcus.
To follow up on representative
towns line of questioning
and let me use belarun
consolidated schools
the cost of that system is
twenty three hundred dollars per
student and that's a bit price
for
the state wide is that accurate.
The.
Mr chair mister scott yes this
is since they correct.
Up.
Mr chairman representative in
mister.
Could you tell me what the
margin is.
On that eight point two million
dollars.
The.
Cost.
Mister chair mister scott
I have an accounting degree from
many years ago but I know that
people think of margin in a
whole lot of different ways
and some people think of it is
what the net profit is some
people think of it is the amount
above cost of materials labor
and direct overhead.
Just so I give you a correct
answer could you give me what
you're direct definition of
margin is and i'll try to answer
their mischairman mister.
A representative and mister
both ways worth and without the
overhead.
Mister chair mister scott
I think that the
in general the materials and
labor without overhead
engineering etcetera etcetera.
Is generally in the fifty
percent the sixty percent range
and the net profit that I sit
well the net profit for solar
companies that are doing this
has been very low in some cases
I think testling on their solar
show that particular division
never made a profit as they were
trying to move towards the
future I think that for a
company to be healthy they
should be making a net profit of
ten percent or they're not going
to be healthy and I have not
gotten specific information from
a clear energy solar of new
mexico to ask them specifically
so i'm talking about in general
for the industry and not
speaking specifically to what
they would be doing or what
their margin is their margin may
be tighter because of a volume
bed for the entire state.
Okay.
Mister chairman.
The.
Representative and mister bark.
This forty percent.
Refundable tax credit let me
make the assumption I believe
it.
There's not stated in the bill
it would be possible.
For the entire.
Two hundred and four million
dollars state commitment to be
spoken for in your one
is that accurate.
Mister chair representative
scott
it is my believe that that
entire amount will be spoken for
in the first year of past
because there's going to be a
rapid effort to get the
additional incentives and
if that entire amount was done
that would mean seventy percent
of new mexico schools would have
had to have committed to go sold
which I think is a very positive
thing to have it happened.
Okay so there.
The grocery expenditures there
would be.
If my math is correct.
Mister chairman representative
in mr aucus five hundred and ten
million dollars is that
accurate.
Mister chair represents card yes
that's I believe correct okay.
And in addition to the
state refundable text credit.
There are as I understand it
another forty percent.
Oh federal tax credits that
would be available can those be
modernised.
Mister chier representative
scott a a four profit company
does not have the ability to
have it monetaries by the
federal government
the ability for them to then
sell those to companies such as
the microsoft the googles the
nikes and others that buy those
incidents and have a mission to
develop renewables and and
address climate change itself
with do provide a way for them
to sell them but that's it a
discount those companies still
make a profit offer that so
they're not sold for a hundred
percent of value.
The.
Ok I
believe that is actually the
case but.
Let me.
Because i've got the math here
in front of me for easy math.
The.
Of course.
Five hundred and ten thousand
dollars.
Out of pocket costs if we assume
a ten percent margin would be
four hundred and fifty nine.
Four hundred and fifty nine
million dollars.
And if we surprised off another
four hundred and eight million
dollars
that we have monitors
in tax credits.
We are down to
a net out of pocket for these
folks.
Mr chairman.
Representative ferrari and
mister barcassio
fifty one million dollars.
Plus remarks
in the ball park.
Mr chair representative scott
i'll defer to my great expert.
Mister chair representative
scott
I was trying to follow the
numbers without looking at them
which is not as helpful but I
would tell you that
out of five hundred million
dollars that the project's
caused if there were not the
incentive of this forty percent
they would be probably only
twenty percent of those projects
being done because they would
not yield enough savings to the
schools in the case of dimming
school district for example
they're looking at a ten percent
savings.
With the current status but
they're looking at over fifty
percent savings if this bill is
passed because the company that
is doing that which is son
wealth lc which is a public
benefits corporation out of
massachusetts has agreed that
they will lower the price and
pass the savings on and they
will also be able to do
additional schools that did not
pass the financial information
right now so depending on who is
doing the work and who is
contracted with there are groups
that are very much passing all
the incentives on their others
that may not pass all the
incines on but then from the
school districts is looking at
different proposals if one is a
lot higher in the other I
believe they will choose the
lower costs when they provides
more benefit to the score but
there's not a situation where
there's a windfall available
because you have competitive
pricing if your price is real
high and you're trying to keep
all the money for a greedy
company it's as I guess what
you're suggesting then.
They probably are not going to
get bid they're not going to be
able to charge twice as much or
three times as much if another
company is offering a little
lower price which is why there
was the competitive state bid
done and that's why there's the
ability for them to do our.
Mr chairman representative
program mister barkers I can
certainly appreciate or with a
numbers and front of us
they out of pocket for this
program.
Two d
contract
would be around.
Fifty one million dollars plus
or minus.
The.
Up brokerage fees and on the
sale of these other.
Forty perc.
Forty percent
from the fed.
The.
So.
The.
Mister chairman representative
ferrari mister barkers follow
the money.
S seldom failed.
In my analysis of these.
State projects.
And in this case.
Makes the installation of these
systems at twenty three hundred
dollars per student.
Pretty lucrative.
Let me ask.
Let me ask one more question in
that will conclude this two
hundred and four million dollars
of state commitment will yield.
Four eggs of that and savings.
Over a thirty year period.
Does that accommodate a time
value.
Of those savi.
Mister share representative
scott.
I think you only ask the last
question the other was a
statement so i'm not sure you
want to be to say anything on
that or or did you sir i'm not
not clear.
It just the last question mister
chairman representative in miss
mister just the last question
mister chair that eight hundred
and sixteen million dollars.
A commodate the time value of
those savings.
Mister chair represented scott
that's that savings is based on
the minimum savings committed to
by the
blow bidder and it does not
accommodate time value of money
it also does not accommodate the
fact that others will save much
more and so it was not practical
in the analysis I was doing too
trying to and most people
frankly don't understand that
present value and how it works
in that what an impact that is
they also don't understand
escalators on electric prices
and all of that I can tell you
that
i'm happy to do those kind of
analysis but I think I lose most
people when I try to explain it.
Yeah.
Mr chairman representative for
or mrperiod bakers that is in
fact one of the great
deficiencies that is present in
this legislature the president
value is a thirty year present
value of two hundred and forty
two hundred and four million
dollars.
Out thirty years is about one
point two billion.
So.
A case could be made.
That
this forex guarantee
we are leaving about four
hundred million dollars on the
tabl.
The.
And with the
reps in for and mr barclays
thank you for your answers.
Thank you.
They hear of serving.
Thank you mister chair
representative
and represent a scott no offence
taken.
Um
mr barclays
just briefly.
Clear energy solar of new mexico
I just tried to do a quick
google search.
And I am not able to find a way.
Where is clear energy.
Mister chair representative
clear energy spoke briefly in
the answers today and
they are owned by clear energy
and I can get you the website
for that but their main officers
as I recall in new jersey
working multiple states which he
described but I think I believe
it's in new jersey's their head
office but III can certainly
supplement and send you their
email I mean website i'm sorry
okay thank you mister chair I I
was just looking under specific
rather clear clear energy solar
of new mexico and I was trying
to so is there a location here
in new mex goes are an office
here currently or is the say
if this goes through there will
be looking to move an office.
Mister chair represented montoya
I don't know if we're their
offices are specifically I don't
know i've talked with their ceo
but he's the value spoke to go
to day renew christian
randall christian but he goes by
renew and I believe he's located
in new jersey but he's the main
decision maker that I needed to
talk to and as far as how many
officers are where they have
offices and how they
implement and do installations
across new mexico I did not ask
I can't tell you that.
Thank you mister chair so.
Um.
I the one thing that seems to be
a constant the only thing that I
can see here that is a constant
and what would be the
calculation as the
twenty three.
Per student.
Seems mister chair and.
This.
Each structure is going to have.
Unique c.
The person
ratio versus the expenses to
build it it doesn't it's not
gonna be a wonder one
correlation from school to
school.
So I i'm i'm wondering why the
twenty the two thousand three
hundred dollars per student.
Size of a parking lot
which way the parking lot is
fair.
Whether there is over headlines.
Property if there if there is
any bit of an angle.
Just the angle of the solar
panel.
Natural fit facing south or if
it's facing and you have to face
the so our panels are different
directions seems like the cost
to construct a wide variable so.
Just assuming that's the case
how did we end up with the cost
of twenty three hundred dollars
per student as the.
As the.
The cost factor.
Mister chair represent montoya
the analysis was done on
literally hundreds of sites for
schools and that's with electric
analysis to see how much they
need permeter that's with all
the different parking lots uh
the locations of the parking
lots and
the structures themselves across
the state are virtually
identical whether you have a.
Parking structure that covers
twenty vehicles or four vehicles
or four hundred vehicles the
structure itself is the same
parking lot sizes of about nine
feet wide by about twenty feet
long a very consistent across
the state and so when you're
doing structures with solar
panels on them that's pretty
consistent the variation in
which direction says the solar
phase the angle was almost
always ten degrees as far as
angle
to the sign
but the angle
to which direction and faces
north southeast west now tell
you that virtually none of them
are going to be done north
because that is a significant
degradation and performance but
east worth even northeast
northwest all of that was looked
at and then in looking at all
other sites and coming down okay
what does it look like what's
the best way to project it for
the other sites that were not
individually analyzing great
detail that's where this number
came up with to say okay this
looks like a good number to go
to schools whether they have.
A single room five students in
perhaps a charter school it's
getting started all the way to
schools that have little
thousands of students.
So I appreciate that I I guess I
should have given mister chair
a.
Other factors that I think
probably needed to be considered
for me to
it's why i'm questioning this
this per student number is
mister chair
the remoteness of many of the
locations.
Is going to bring in a bunch of
unforeseen costs mister chairen
representative i've
worked for and and managed a
construction company that did
a lot of work in remote areas
angel fire red river places
where accommodations are are a
big cost of the construction.
Mister chairman and and
representing ferrari what what I
found was if we were building in
a
in a.
Area the size of bloom filled a
rastec which was near a
farmington where there was
accommodations for a work force
versus building in.
Eaglenessed.
The cost of the project almost
doubled.
Because of remoteness
so I am i'm i'm just seeing some
numbers here that i'm
questioning as a solid number
that I don't and so i'll leave
it at that I don't want to be
labor that point is just seems
to me like that those are some
some wide variables
other than just the cost of
materials that the the work
force in a cost to keep a
workforce in place.
Mr chairman and representative
ferrari
also would like to to ask about
the projecting out over thirty
years
this projection
taken to account the potential.
Cost because it this may be an
answer in your favor as to how
how this
savings is was calculated was it
calculated on what the cost of
electricity is today as it as a
just a solid number and then
projected out or where their
assumptions in here about the
increase to the cost of
electricity projected out over
the years how how.
How did we come up with a solid
number
I mean that that is really good
whoever did this i'd want them
to go to work for LFC
to help us with some of our
other numbers that we have i'm
trying to figure out how they
came up with that number for
saved over that period of time.
Mister chair representative
montoya
to your first question about
remote locations we did look at
that I personally worked on the
nab nation for a period of time
i'm aware of those things the
overwhelming majority of the
cost is in the materials not the
labor and so even with your even
if you double the labor cost
that's well within the ten
percent additional incentives
that are available in those
areas and so that's why we
looked at that and said it would
be able to be done in rural
remote areas as well as the
large cities and those costs
would come out because they get
more money that cost is covered
in terms of how were the
projections done the united
states department of energy
national labs at uh up in golden
colorado in their name in real
is appreciation I can't remember
the inacronym they have done
extensive studies over a very
long time and take everything
from cloud cover to rain to wind
etcetera etcetera dust storms
into account and coming up with
formulas for what the production
will be over a long period of
time the production is degraded
every year based on the
degradation factor to which hits
about you know eighty six eighty
seven percent at thirty years
out so that is taken into
account in the thirty year
analysis the electric rates
there was a lot of debate on how
that should be done there some
people that feel because of the
energy transition act that new
mexico is going to more than
double its rates because if you
take equipment offline you still
have to pay for it and therefore
it still gets recovered in rates
and they get of what it cost or
I can't think of the right word
but cause they can't recover
because something no longer
being used
looking at that
suggestion of red escalation of
as much as eight percent was
suggested but for these
calculations at three percent
escalation and utility rates was
used over the thirty years.
It's all those factors were all
looked at in order to come up
with a fairly complex model of
maintenance insurance etc etc
all of that was in some very
sophisticated models that had
been used across a nation for
littlely billions of dollars of
solar in those same calculations
were used for this
thank you mister chair and thank
you representing frerian really
thank you mister baucass for
telling us what we've suspect it
is at our rates are going to
double because of the eta which
was the discussion that many of
us had in the that debate but
that's for another day.
Um
baccus I I think
I do think your estimates are
low on remoteness once again
that is something that I did and
that was a very hard to
calculate from community to
community and I I did that for a
year and a half.
Mister chairman and and
represent ferrari and that was
the biggest thing
prices in one remote area could
literally be thirty percent less
than another area because of
trucking and other things
that had to take place that the
cost of materials not just the
materials but
getting those trucks in and out
of there and adding in all those
all those extra costs so I I
adjust i'm having hard time
believing the assumptions
but
mister chairman switched here my
line of questioning because.
I think the bigger thing is we
can't estimate
the budget costs
over the next four years or the
next twelve years
as a matter fact I not only was
I have in hard time with this
kind of open ended two hundred
and four million total
aggregate.
And then over twelve years it
could be deployed
we have two departments on the
fire emerged and TRD both had
widely different assumptions.
Now what the fiscal impact would
be to our budget
is was cannot be taking your
assumption I believe mister
bocas and that is that if this
has passed virtually all the
school districts were interested
will look at this almost
immediately.
And in an effort to not miss out
one the federal program
I feel like m emnerd they look
like that they're saying up to
ninety percent up to ninety
million the first year or into
and not the first year nothing
the first year twenty twenty
five ninety twenty twenty four
ninety and then up to a hundred
and eighty on the third year.
It's
there's no way to budget for
this
and that and I think that's
going to be your biggest hill
decline
in this is I I think two hundred
million is the total amount
that's been budgeted in
appropriations for tax
incentives this year
somewhere around that number.
I think miss chairman and
represent frery and I spent a
long day already so i'm not
going to go too far into this
but I think it had been a lot
easier if you would have put a
maximum that could have been
used on this per year
rather than what I think is
exactly going to happen
is.
The folks who want this will
i'll get it in the first year
and to not miss out on them on
the program so I I see some
other problems going forward tax
I think is gonna ever real hard
time with this trying to figured
it figure it in considering I
think a hundred and forty
million is already
taken out in the tax bill for
moving the.
The money from
vehicle registration and moving
at all over to the road fund set
up money's already coming out so
I I think you're what you've got
here is two hundred and four
million dollars
bill tax tax credit trying to
shove it into about a sixty
million dollars window so anyone
mister chair thank you for
indulgence.
Anyone else on the committee
before.
Okay.
Um.
So I only had a couple of
questions
my first question is
let me search the comment I read
this bill this morning I got
early.
The nature of the program.
Is not readily a pair
and that's not necessarily a
flat because the nature of the
program I don't think isn't
something we necessarily
legislate you contractors you
talked about they won't be on
buildings they'll be in parking
lot.
Like that wouldn't be
appropriate to put in the bill
but that's horrible information
is really relevant our
understanding of how the bill
works.
So if this means forward I would
incrude you to have.
It really clear and concise
description of what this is
about and that would be a good
thing for people to read first
I read the fire in the different
analysis of the bill and it's
pretty clear that the analyst
didn't understand the bill
either.
There is a suggestion that it be
made clear that the schools
would own the equipment because
it appeared to people that what
we are talking about was a
donation.
That's not the case
so like that the analysis are
with all over the place.
A I think you need to be
you need to communicate to
people better about what that
build us.
Um
let me let me ask you this is.
In order to access the federal
money.
Do we need a state program.
Mr chair i'll differ to mister
b.
A state state money is not
required in order to access his
federal money the state money is
required just to get a lot more
of the schools to be financially
viable.
The.
So that that's that's one of
those details that.
It does it shouldn't be spelled
out in the bill.
But it should be spelled out
somewhere
does again I know I am growing
to understand the program
through our discussion today.
And coming into a committee
having read.
The bill.
Heavy rare the now sees it are
going in different directions I
mean it's her hard to get back
focusson on what you're
proposing.
I want to talk a little bit
about
I don't call them purchase power
agreements I call them power
purchase agreements.
Um.
I i've seen these I did one for
a client for a church.
It happened be one that put I
put the solar on the roof.
Perpertisagreements are
complicated agreements
in a lot of this like
parapurchase creams are
referenced at all in the bill
again I don't necessarily think
it's appropriate to say that but
it wasn't evident.
To mir other people that that's
where we are going.
I am a little nervous about
power purchase because when we
saw abuses in the residential
context they were power purchase
agreement right there there was
someone else owning the
equipment on top of a resident
and the owner of the residents
moving or passing away and that
that that's a concert
but within a power purchase
agreement
to address representative
concern I mean there's
consideration exchange rate and
i've been I was thinking about
this
yeah that the perfect
disagreement sirs you all
provide the services we will
provide access to our grounds
and that's the exchange and
that's why it's not a donation
from the school there is a
it's not a separate visa
agreement but there are lease
components to a parapurchase
agreement you know those kind of
facility citing components in
the way I was thinking about it
was
imagine if you had a public
school and I don't know that
they do this but maybe you had a
service provider who was
providing meals
right and there's probably
federal money to do that and
maybe the school pays and we
sign a contract that you will
come in and provide meals and
you get to use our kitchen as
part of that process to me
you're putting the equipment in
the parking lot.
Is kind of like using a kitchen
they don't own the property
you're not donating the property
it's just part of the
arrangement between the two
contracting parties.
A lot of this bill
you know
it is come boil down there
what's in that contract in
having good contracts and having
schools that are have.
Council and **** fiscal enough
to negotiate could contract
is going to be important but
that's what that's what it.
So thank you representative for
you thank you mister pockets I I
appreciate your your answer sir
questions.
What's the year was the pleasure
of the committee.
The.
That do you pass motion
we have a second
day a substitute motion table
takes priority we'll take the
vote on the substitute motion to
table first.
The.
This food is on a motion to
table.
Representative
about yes on the substitute
motion to table and i'd like to
explain my boat
representative dick then.
The.
Representative gracia
representative hembry yes.
Representative montoya.
Representative rubio.
Yeah.
Representative scott.
Representative small.
The.
Representative.
Madam vice chair.
No.
Five years.
Okay so the tabling motion fails
sir we're back on the original
motion represent bericha i'm not
gonna have you explain your vote
because that I don't need to
think so now we we are on a due
pass motion.
And whenever you're ready.
The.
Representative.
Mr character what I vote yes but
I would also like to
ask in the next committee.
That a opinion a legal opinion
on the anti donation
rate forward.
Representative dixon.
Representative yeah
representative henry no
representative montoya
representative rubio yes
representative scott.
That isn't it of small.
Representative townsend.
Represent it matter best chair
mr chairman yes.
Seven years and foreigner so you
have a department motion seventy
four thank you mister chairman
committee thank you mister and
committed
okay so.
I see everyone enjoying pizza
i'm going to go enjoy peter
we're gonna take a ten minute
break.
If you.
Yeah.
The.
A lot of way just like your boy
understanding time value.
As long as you don't take.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
