The agenda today we're gonna go
first a house built ninety so we
can get representative casting
on all out of here quickly so
without world take role really
quickly.
Representative brown
right
representative day look cruze
representative harper.
Representative journalisms
representative later
representative
representative madrid.
Representative peter group
representative romaro.
Represent mr vice chair garcia
madame chair hotmain vehicle.
Thank you very much and also we
are going to roll over her house
bill one forty six today
unfortunately we did not get an
fire for it in time so
representative castian take it
away
thank you madame chairman was
the committee
I want to thank you for a long
to address me this morning I am
joined by coming leaders from
some gale coming or the subject
matter experts that will answer
any specific questions you have
regarding the funding of the
epiderian regional crisis.
Human center I would be
remissive I don't acknowledge my
close bonus as website
represents a large ortion of
northeast.
I've with the day's commission
to commission doctor regional
health provider normal public
health advocate from las vegas
locals with any county and our
county manager joint
so madam chair what this bill
does is it gives us funding to
finish the epiderian building I
think at one point five million
is the right now we are about
seventy to seventy eight percent
on.
Why do the finishing of the
construction and.
Thank you does your expert have
anything added he wants to add
experts
just for a little bit of history
of if it's a project that we've
been working on with the one
hundred at least one hundred of
of our community partners
in this effort and that includes
the the entire northeast region
region semi water look at more
accounting specifically we're
also looking at up
have been out some of our other
partners that call fax cone
hearing cone
a project that we've been
working on for several years now
and it's directly needed in the
community to help I save some of
ira population
manager if I made to date there
are no short term long term
facility centers offered in
northeastern new mexico early
anyone for northeast and in my
school looking for treatment
have to go outside of our
community often those who are
seeking treatment changes or
minds due to unforeseen
variables which are typically
due to availability when seeking
to get into a treatment facility
so I think disappointably very
important for their northeastern
park and the real communities of
my.
Representative do we have anyone
in the audience here in favor of
house.
We have anybody in opposition to
household.
Okay with that we will go to
committee members looks like my
first question is representative
of delicates
thank you madame jones and
curious is this a infrastructure
requesting.
I represented a lenstrum.
In the opposition from the
committee.
Representative of okay then we
will go to a car the vote.
And
the bill.
The.
Okay well call the other off.
Yeah.
Representative brown.
Representative day lookers
representative harper.
Representative jones
representative latter yes
representative monster yes.
Representative
address yes.
Representative peter group
representative romaro.
Mister waster.
Madam chair.
When their boat first will go to
representative think you made a
chair.
Representative.
Yeah.
So I think.
Representative next to go to
repres.
Thank you.
House transportation public
works and capital improvements.
That we haven't heard.
Technically they usually go to.
Doesn't go to appropriations so
I think the.
A little bit different than what
we've done in the past but I
hope that.
Definitely.
I can agree with you more
representative one stream and
then that's what i've been
fighting for from this committee
to have a more about subject
matter in the last couple years
hopefully that will happen
then let the last representative
to explain their vote is
representative.
The.
The.
The body.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you very much with that
you have a pass bill
representative eight eight three
so thank you for coming in front
of us this morning thank you
manager thank you members of the
committee when while taking on
all your discussion.
And before he moved into our
next bill everybody I wanted to
remind the committee and all of
our committee attendance in
endless that we have our
committee dinner scheduled it's
going to be february first at
dinner for two begins at six pm
please make sure to bring your
plus one it's rumored to be the
dinner of the year i'm just
saying
all right and now i'm going to
move into the southern chairs I
can I present hospital three
worth joy sim.
The.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you mister chairman see if
I can get to the right bill for.
Sure we do have an amend.
Thank you very much at this
point i'm going to defer to joy
simon he is our eleven c
analysts to a transportation who
are is going to explain to you
how spell three and the
amendment for house will three
our process earned what we're
here with doing with it today
way joy
thinking madam chair mr chairman
members of the committee
house bill three contains the
operating budget for the
department of transportation and
each year the staff of the
legislative finance committee to
department transportation the
department of finance and
administration and the
and the house transportation
public works and capital
improvements.
You know they're passionate
amendment right now and then we
get it done and they can cut it
in the world from their opinion
yes mister chairman.
The.
Everybody got a copy.
The.
Yes mister chairman
mister chairman members of the
committee so as I would as I was
saying hospital three includes
the operating budget for the
department of transportation and
each year the department and
other stake holders meet to
discuss a proposed changes from
the various recommendations that
were made
this year the uh the group met
and decided to make adjustments
based on the department of
finance and administrative I
should see the executive
recommendation for the
department of transportations
operating budget that one was
more aligned with the department
of transportation's request
for the operating budget and is
particularly in the area of of
personnel.
So are you should have a
memorable for mister chair that
I don't mind some of the changes
that the proposed amendment
includes.
So based on the department of
transportations a revenue
estimates a joy could give me a
number and a lot of them.
The amendment number mister
chairman is number two two seven
four nine nine point one thank
you.
And
the the memo before you says at
the tops of synopsis of proposed
house bill three.
And as I was saying based on
revenue estimates that are
conducted by the department of
transportation that that
department identified a total of
two point five million in
additional funds from state
funds based on those revenue
estimates that's a mix of some
increases and decreases this is
this is just the revenue side
we're get to the front balance
in a moment so there was about a
million dollars increase in
state road fund revenue that the
department projected
point you also
transportation projects fund due
to a decline in motor vehicle
excise tax the department pulled
back the forecast for that for
that particular funds that that
needed to be reflected in the
budget and see some small
some small declines for some of
the other restricted funds in in
the motor program additionally
the department
asked for an additional six
point six million dollars in
federal transit funds so what
typically happens with those
federal transit on those are
flow throughs to local
governments the department will
has typically in the past
brought those in via a budget
adjustment request if it's
included in the operating budget
that would save the department
from having to make that request
down the road so that that was a
proposed inclusion additionally
there there was identified fund
balances for the department of
transportation the department
projects a total of fifty four
million in uncommitted fund
balances and from the state road
fund and eight hundred thousand
dollars in fund balances from
the traffic safety fund so this
particular.
So this fifty four million
represents the entirety of the
department's estimate for state
roads on balance doesn't end is
not hold back any funding for
other parts of the budget.
So together with all of those
proposed revenue changes that's
a total of sixty four million
dollars that was added to the
executive recommendation for the
proposed amendment before you on
page two of the memory you can
see the areas where those the
expenditure areas where those
funds were added so that the
largest area mister chairman of
members of the committee was for
state funded projects are in the
project design and construction
program that's a total of
eighteen point seventy five
million across contracts and and
other cost there was nine
million dollars included for
project design.
There was a total four point
seven million included for
maintenance projects in the
highway operations program
well and I should say the
fifteen point eighty five
million on the next one you see
there are it also relates to
maintenance activity but that
specifically for the department
to be able to purchase supplies
to conduct those maintenance
activities
can see two million dollars in
the program support budget for
facilities improvements for the
department
and in the in the motor program
the big state road fund areas
were for visions your grants and
and grants to local governments
there the vision zero program
looks to improve traffic safety
programs.
So in addition to those
operating there's this based
operating budget things there's
a couple of other things that
are included in a house you are
sorry soon household three each
year
so
the department typically is
provided with the ability to
roll over incumbent funds on
projects you're over a year so
basically they don't have to use
to to stop a road project just
because the fiscal you're
changes so section five of the
amendment is actually a number
nine that you'll see on the
amendment it's labeled section
five that is the non reversing
language for the current fiscal
year that allows the department
to roll over those fights into
physical you're twenty twenty
five additionally this includes
a budget just not authority for
the department that allows them
to budget additional funds if
they receive for example a
federal award for which they
need to budget state match or if
there's an emergency.
Finally section eight provides a
reauthorization of a former
of a special transportation
appropriation from twenty
nineteen
the amount there is the totals
listed as two hundred and fifty
million that's the total amount
of the original appropriation
the amount that the department
is has has unspent is about
eight million and that's what
they'd like an additional year
for it so that they can finish
those paper
and so with that mr chairman I
will turn it back over to the
sponsor.
Thank you very much mister simon
I think with that mister
we will rest for questions on
the amendment.
Thank you mister chairman I do
have some questions.
The.
I'm gonna start with the
assumption on revenue that the
department's revenue.
Projection is two point five
million.
Representative one stream if
you're referring to
on page one some total state
fund two point five oh three is
that what you're referring to
yes yes that is the assumption.
What happens when senate finance
gets a new consensus revenue
update and ignores this.
So madam chair and sorry mr
chairman and representative the
uhm the department of
transportation can their own
revenue estimates and does
very familiar with that but the
general appropriations that is
built on a consensus revenue
report
which includes this budget so my
question to.
Is released and it doesn't
indicate this increase what
happens madam chair mister
chairman i'm sorry and
representative so my my
understanding is the consensus
revenue estimates incorporate
the uh the revenue estimates for
the department of transportation
they do but they also look at it
did you have a economist you as
and your economist.
Yeah.
Mr chairman and representative
if the senate finance committee
saw a consensus revenue estimate
that did not agree with the
department of transportations
projections I would imagine they
would probably reduce the
departments on.
That's why sometime in the
middle of a session both hfc and
senate finance would.
December.
The.
I also wanted to ask.
I'm looking at the sixty four
million dollars that was added
to the new mexico dot budget
based on revenue projections of
the department
so what was the inflation factor
for last year
mr chairman representative i'm
sorry don't have that
information so my point in that.
How close is this current
operating budget to what we
approv.
Mister chairman and a
representative the total amount
would be about four million
dollars increase over fy twenty
four operating budget that's out
of four chance of one percent.
I think that they use.
That really change.
So what is the actual reduction
in this budget if it's a thirty
perce.
So mister chairman mischairman
representative I do.
Uh but I think that's a concern
for the committee to think
about.
If the budgets are exactly the
same.
But this last year we had a
major inflation f.
And it's based on a projection
of the departments it's itself
without going to concess
consensu.
Appropriations.
Before we go any further.
If i'm just you'll need around
number joy if it was three h.
Two hundred and ten million
and that thirty perce.
Nine hundred.
Listen up that but.
So i'm.
Mister mister chairman are so if
with the thirty percent
inflation factor uh the the
budget does not acc.
And you know in the middle
another concern that I have and
I know I have questions from the
committee is what it's the
senate deci.
Without being.
You mister chairman so the
curious.
I would like to.
So miss mister chairman and a
representative delicrous
I I have not
i'm not i'm not aware of a
specific instance where a
particular budget was tide
specifically to inflation it ma.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So miss mr chairman and
representative I I know
where area where it's quartified
that budgets need to go by
infla.
So yes there have been ongoing
discussions with the senate to
talk about you know sticking
with the consensus budget and
with a ramifications that they
were night to stick with the the
consensus that all the agencies
have come up with also I fill I
feel comfortable sharing with
the c.
Inflation may not be built into
the numbers of house bill three
there are not ongoing
negotiations for the creation of
another fund you utilizing
general front revenue so that we
could have an additional slash
fine if you well for
inflationary costs so that we
can at least he keep that in
keep that consideration in the
budget so that we're not cut
flat footed on these large major
projects later on it's just not
in house bill three.
This is talking about mister
chair.
The ability to do transfers.
Transfer.
Miss mr chairman represent
harper so
the department currently has
budget adjustment authority in
the amount of eighty five
million dollars for the current
fiscal year so essentially
section seven only what you
passed last year right so what
section six would do with
provide an additional thirty
five million in budget
adjustment authority to the
department so what would happen
is the department would identify
and available funding source
they would request that that
budget just met authority from
the department of finance and
administration who would then
look for to make sure they have
available funds they would send
that to the legislative finance
committee to allow the finance
committee to objective is so
chose and if there were
available funds they could are
that.
Sure.
So mister chairman and represent
a harper this is standard
language it could be the amount
of.
The type of federal brand could
very significantly it depends on
what the department has applied
for and what federal funds are
getting okay for instance
representative we've applied for
and received some of the
national electric vehicle
infrastructure act funding which
requires a twenty percent match
these funds would be identified
as part of the matching
component.
And we're looking at the other.
Mr chairman and represent your
it wouldn't it would only be
funds controlled by the
department that the I far the
largest of that is the state
road.
The.
Mister chairman representative
that's.
Yeah.
So mister chairman
representative harper so what
was the just a downward was
distributions from the
transportation project fund
recurring revenue into the
transportation project fund
comes from the motor vehicle
excess tax.
The.
The.
So i'm mister chairman
representative harper.
For the transportation project
fund in particular the motor
vehicle excise tax.
Was fifty one point eight
million in fiscal year twenty
twenty three there was a.
And it's an assumption that in a
fiscal year twenty twenty four
there would be fifty one point
five million in in projection
and FY twenty five that there
would be fifty three point eight
that fifty three point eight
million was adjusted down to
fifty two point five so that
accounts for for the difference
so it's the revenue is actually
still going up it's just it's
not going out by as much as he
last.
The.
Mr chairman representative that
is correct.
The largest.
So i'm going to see.
I'm going to
to jerry ball does who has been
in charge of the even charging
infrastructure program and he
can tell you exactly.
Share
chair represent harper thank you
for that absolutely we've been
working on a bus system of
charging network here new mexico
and you're right the vast
majority of charging from the
perspective of private
investments can happen however
the investments are to
supplement not sure plat that
private investment and so we're
working on right now is working
towards infrastructure that
funded by our federal formulaic
my link which is the never
program.
And so that provided the state a
little bit more than thirty
eight million dollars to build
infrastructure throughout our.
And so phase one just happened
awards went out a few weeks ago
for that first phase of all our
interstate system so that thirty
eight million dollars will go
towards that build out of its
prestructure in new mexico
madame chair women talked about
the recent award which was sixty
eight million dollars which is
are from the charging
infrastructure in fueling
discretionary graph program that
that went program however was
for medium to heavy commercial
vehicles for free a long I ten
sixty three million dollars will
be old going towards two heavy
vehicle facilities in bottle new
mexico as well as large brook
with our partners terrible when
we went out for a call for
projects through a competitive
mechanism were chosen by the
joint office to get funded for
that uh in so that build out its
happy now so we're again
utilizing our federal dollars to
supplement however what we are
doing is we're bringing in this
private investments and would
require him to put the twenty
percent masters required for me
likely from a federal
perspective till to make sure
that our private investments are
being made to ensure a robust
charge.
I'm i'm pleased with the direct.
My my question madam
chairman.
It's a chairman
however so the agreements they
were entering into with our
private partnerships throughout
new mexico is to ensure that
there is operation of
maintenance incorporated into
the agreements so we as a state
be investment that will be made
we have oversight over those
contractual obligations from our
private partners to have a
minimum minimum of five years of
operation in maintenance tied to
each and every ordinary station
that is out there to ensure not
only that the up time is being
measure the reports being
submitted but that when those
investments are being made that
those charging stations are
available to.
I'm not sure that's the way we
want to go maybe the state and
the first one help develop.
Careful I think would be a
nightmare.
And and if I may.
We've had less conversations
about that exact subject and I
think the overall belief is that
dot has zero interest in
becoming an owner and our
manager or servicer of the
electric charging vehicle
network so really it's about
putting the infrastructure in
place and then
going into operational
agreements with these services
to ensure that they know that
they are in charge of servicing
servicing this infrastructure
and that new mexico simply gave
money to be able to make this
work in the first place that we
we have no new mexico has no
interest in being electric
vehicle service or and or
charging operator
chairman i'm sure that these
before a lot better.
Then going on to.
Is there.
So
mister chairman representative
there was
a one million dollars included
for districts to.
Rateful for the progress for
making th.
To do that I would suggest
mister chairman representative
sorry the department reminded me
there's an additional fifth so
the million dollars what was
added by the amendment there is
a fifteen million dollars
already in the.
The.
Uh.
I think you misses thank you
representative I agree with you
that you know the number does
seem low but as actually part of
the ongoing negotiations that
we're having with senate finance
and house appropriations in
finance so that we can add
additional general fund money to
be able to supplement that
number everybody agrees it's a
little low it's something that
we are absolutely aware of and
working on.
Yeah.
Mr chair representative I I
think recommendation is a little
bit dangerous of a word when
you're talking to
chair transportation who would
love to see as much money as
possible go towards this this
item but I mean I would rather
differ to the department to ask
them you know what their needs
are specifically in a given year
mr pity will answer on that
occur of representative
annually.
The.
Excuse me german medicare
representative good morning
recommend rick pity executive
director department
transportation
annually we have a fifty million
dollars eco budget which we
spread out throughout the six
districts which equates to
little bilver two man per
district the bus unprospective
into that number a snow truck is
about two hundred fifty thousand
so it doesn't go very far on
when it comes to equipment
it's it the industry is hard
when it comes to heavy equipment
eleven the big stuff because
it's it's one of those we get in
line with other states under a
competing interest so as you
know if we can get an additional
tend to fifteen million annually
that would certainly help that
seems like the sweet spot write
there we can start getting
equipment they were not looking
the industry started equipment a
little by little that seems to
be the right number we could
certainly appreciate anything
you all could help us with when
it comes to equipment but right
now the need out there and
around the state is not trucks
this last big storm I think we
are down tend to twelve snow
trucks and that's out of the
fleet for the next storm so we
just really work on those who
try to get those back on I get
them out to the field hopefully
that helps.
Yeah.
Mister chairman matter chairman
representative yeah I think that
that's the sweet spot right now
i'm given the you know just the
temperature of the industry just
just trying to get in line in
those types of things yeah I
think right now that's it if
things listen up in as these
companies get more materials i'm
in their factories I think
that'll go a lot quicker and we
could spend a lot more money
than but right now like I said
that seems to be the right
number.
Blew up your negative.
The difference on that I mean
where were committee we we
function we have come any
business that we need need to
complete as part of our
my
commitment that I want to meet
the committee right now is that
all of these negotiations are
ongoing I want them to be as
open and transparent as possible
meaning I want to involve every
single committee member sitting
here today in these negotiations
to let all of you know what to
statuses and what the numbers
are looking like app to this
point may concern is if we put
any money in the budget now it
may
it may put some unnecessary
pressure on negotiations that
are already occurring but at the
same time you know we have a
committee program to do so I can
tell you maybe a little bit of
what I think would happen from
procedural point of view if we
were to change it or put money
in the budget I think without
the ability to negotiate
directly with hfc and senate
finance they would just strip
the appropriation out of the
bill anyway and they would just
hear what they wanted to hear in
appropriations and so my hope
would be for us to pass out a
clean while and amended house
bill through today going into
these additional negotiations
for the general fund money to be
included in what we're calling
section five this year section
nine not section nine is what
i'm calling it and so that so
that we have an idea of what
we're looking like what we're
going to be looking for by the
time house bill two and it's
final form arrives to the floor
but again it's my commitment to
every single person in this
committee to and including my
vice share that everybody be a
open and informed on what.
But I just think the I would ask
we need a little bit more time
unfortunately because hfc has
asked us to get us house bill
through by the twenty fifth
I
worry about slowing that process
down as it relates to house bill
three but remember house bill
three is not necessarily the
vehicle that we are looking to
to affect these changes I think
the vehicle's more house bill
too and section five for general
fund money so that would I am
sorry for the long window answer
representative but that would
just be my persp.
Which.
When I first.
Could be going to rose.
In effect if I may answer to
that of mister chair
representative so III agree with
you do your ts enterprise agency
designation does make things
difficult at times however
there's a lot of moving pieces
right now and there are a lot of
really smart people much smarter
than I am working on these exact
issues in terms of making up for
last revenue for gasoline taxes
looking at vehicle excise tax
figuring out other revenue
sources so that do you think can
continue to sell find and as
inflation continue surrise and
we see prices of these projects
balloon we don't have to worry
about being able to find these
larger projects into the future
so it's a very complex moving
organism we have several bills
that are working in tandem to be
able to identify that funding
and hopefully will take a few of
those for steps this year in the
vehicle excise tax bill you know
in possibly the trust fund bill
in and in others so that we can
feel better that we're getting
done to the money they need to
complete that the job that they
do for the state which is
incredibly imp.
Mr chair representative lunch
from the committee the
negotiations are ongoing now and
we need to start meeting on that
immediately and I expect and and
will be calling those meetings
probably starting today because
we need to finish those
negotiations as soon as possible
so that we can get them the
information that they need but
that's something that we as a
committee need to decide and I I
have faith in us that we can
start to do that right away.
But I don't know how a
contingency fund.
That but.
And the operating budget is
built on.
What I see here mister chairman
is we built a budget based.
It's not where it starts.
Revenue process.
I don't know what last year's.
Specials thing goes in.
So is there going to be a new
transportation line o.
And thank you mr chairman and
representative of lunch to
himself I I think unfortunately
just because of the time
restraints we have this year
we're going to have to utilize
an ad hoc system four specials
and supplementals to make sure
that we just have money in
section five to make sure
everybody is covered and that
these projects can be completed
but I agree with you completely
representative we need a new
consensus
we need a new consensus process
and we need to sit down and
figure out a better way for all
of us to come did consensus and
then again
trust each other that we're
going to be held to these
numbers over time and I don't
know if that looks we're talking
about a specific
find that be a closing phone
that could also be tapped for
additional expenses related to
inflation or expenses related to
projects that already need to be
finished I don't know exactly
what that finished product will
look like right now but I
guarantee you this this
committee will have a lot of
input in what that looks like
and it is a long term project
that we unfortunately have to
start with right now but it
doesn't mean that it ends here
it's just beginning and our job
is to make sure we have enough
money in this budget right here
today to get dot what it what it
needs and we will continue to
look we will continue to explore
new vehicles as we go along
through the interim I know that
representative peter grow has a
bill that I think is incredibly
important to render the
transportation committee a real
committee a statutory committee
not just a subcommittee so that
we are allowed to do that work
continuously through the state
we get more staff and we get
myself more support so that we
can come up with that exact
information and language and
consensus so by the time we come
to session time we are ready
we are ready to to make our
point for this and we are ready
to have better solutions so
that.
What i'm going to s.
So if we expect to see
recurring.
Of up to forty s.
There was a question earlier mr
chairman about.
I'm surprised that all of.
Was built into the process.
That wasn't mentio.
And that's what we would use as
a gauge.
And madam chair at this budget
this operating budget is based
on a foundation of only one
revenue projection
and that what makes this budget
hall is going to come out of
another section that's not re
occurring
so i'm gonna i'm gonna ask you
that we have input into that
section and I don't want to wait
a year to do that I don't want
to do it in the interim now is
the time to do it this is a
budget session you've got
several people on the
appropriations committee that.
But
it's a little awkward to talk
about those things what.
So I quit talking but I am
concerned about what the revenue
estimate is.
Thank you representative.
With the microphone look the
closer because they're having.
Thank you chairman
mister western determined for
the presentation and for the for
the w.
I guess chairman were my first
thing that.
How we
with the dots then that.
I'm not going to get into the
fight with that in the fact that
we are warning to put these
charging stations then
that money should not come from
the dot you budget
if we want to find that we
should be funding that through
general fund and through other
avenues i'm gonna go through a
real quick math equation for you
on the bil and never side and
mister valdes can correct me if
i'm if i'm wrong
and I think i've done enough of
the research on this.
To qualify any location for that
you have to have two four port
le.
The single level three charger
averages about a.
That by four in them by two you
get your numbers to I just did
the math again because if we got
to bring it up here
let twenty six thousand kilo
watch per hour you across the
whole day that's the equivalent
moose provide share amount of
chair of six hundred and forty
four homes
so you can take jail
unis
take him just for my district
amount again loving
any county
that's equivalent or bigger than
the existing substation.
The.
We talk about making sure that a
company.
The existing infrastructure is
designed to supply a town.
Now we're adding if if we put a
two port or two to four port
chargers in tam at the arts of
where it's planned to go
the substation for that town has
to be completely reduced the
infrastructure to give to this.
You cannot put the four port
charger up there that is based
off of what is existing in
supplying that town
if the electric company comes in
and puts in the transformers
they have to be able back that
up on a twenty four seven
approach.
Well we can do it this time of
the day
so I don't think we're looking
at the entire big picture with
respect to that and I feel very
strongly shouldn't come out of.
For infrastructure for road.
We need to be focusing on on
roads
and
misreview share amount of chair
as we go through this
I was hoping that our
conversations over the interim.
We're would have focused on that
I feel like our inner old
session was.
Highly disappointing for me
because we didn't focus on the
things that
I thought we left the sixty day
session with as a committee and
that we were going to talk about
confined step and we're talking
about codifying temp we're
talking about making sure we had
an avenue to be able to do this
and instead
we're listening to cling fuel
standards and listen to this not
saying those are important.
Our focus needed to be on what
we're talking about not talking
about now
what our focus is going to be on
the next
that was
I am i'm
it I really wish
we would have taken the focus
that I thought in a very
confident after going back and
listening to different
conversations online where we
were going to go through the
inner
this isn't enough this doesn't
do it
for me.
Darcher does it fulfil.
I would venture again we have
representatives around the
stable that was a thr.
You know I listen the week
before session started in house
appropriations where were
pulling back because of the
others not doing.
That's what was told to use
we're not going to do this
because while they have a
haven't done that if you go back
to the.
In the money they had
every bit of it was either spent
or incumbent.
From my same point.
Does the dealt run like a well
machine one hundred percent of
the time.
With respect to that are they
improving and continuing to move
forward with the funding they're
getting I think the right job
and with the unfunded task for
given that that you know
on any given day before mr
probably wakes up to the text
message and says or by the way
there's something else that
you're.
And and so it is frustrating I
don't think I spill three
guesses where we want to go and
and from a section five.
There's three hundred and
thirteen lines on the specialist
and supplementals.
Take out the section nine it was
stolen
flat out for four year let's try
this out project.
Third ends up with about two
hundred and eighty n.
They don't have guard rolls on
we're going to spend somewhere
north of two billion dollars on
two hundred and eighty nine
lines of funding one time
general non recurring funding
with no guard what sort of.
Completely inappropriate I don't
even know where they come from
I sat through her sea all summer
didn't expect to see th.
Didn't expect.
Everybody
talks in this fear exon
we've got to have we've got to
take care of our instructions
we've got to do this we got to
do that then we get here in this
like oh no we we need to spend
two point two billion dollars
on social projects.
That we shouldn't be doing that.
We're doing everything we can to
destroy the very industry to
this providing us the money
to be able to take care of our
inf.
And instead of doing that.
We're spending it in other
places
we can start other projects up
but the money needs to be put
into a system to where we can
take care of our road.
That that's what disappointed
points me with that your efforts
german and manager
I appreciate
appreciate what.
With the negotiations.
The other side of that is it's
not enough we have everybody sa.
And that's what's happening and
appropriat.
We need to get them back.
Um
very important committe.
Look at things from an overall
basis the two biggest
departments in the state and
mexico will be the soon to be
newly created are health care
agency.
When you add in all the federal
funds and everything.
We need to start treat.
But I don't think we're we're we
need to b.
Yeah.
The.
Mister chairman representative
can I just clarify your question
are you talking about these the
prayer special appropriations
are you talking about all
projects the department prior
appropriations was during
because I know that.
The.
Yeah so
mister chairman and
representative or
the department's prior special
appropriations
there's been there's been a
total of one point six billion
since twenty nineteen of that
seven hundred and sixty two
million has
been spent an additional
three hundred m and thirty
million or so has been incumbent
and and and five hundred and
nine million is in the pipeline
for the department due.
Again this may be.
So mister chairman and
representative they're at their
own number really big projects
one of them I think the biggest
project the departments doing is
on interstate twenty five
between month gumree and command
she and alba kirky that's
more than hundred i'm not
recalling the exact amount of
the top my head that's a huge
project the department is
getting ready to to undertake so
significant amount there there
are other large projects across
across the different districts
the department has provided us
with a list in.
For a lot of other.
Yeah.
I know.
Registration.
From what I can read.
The forecast at least.
Current state.
So
mister mister chair and and
representative so the total is
mister mister chairman because
of that broadly correct yes so
five hundred and fifty million
in in state road fund revenue
and additional hundred and two
million in restricted fund
revenue.
We know that about.
So mister chair represented
brown so forth for just between
five it's expected to be up five
hundred and sixty million of the
one point two billion
little okay thank you for that
yeah I missed.
But I don't see a tally.
So
mister chair represented branch
of a member in front of you with
a with the table on it I was not
given.
I've been searching at a.
The.
So mister chairman and represent
a page four of that packet
you can see the breakdown of its
under the column each be three
slash a h t p w c
the one point two seven six
billion and in the breakdown of
those.
I think.
This particular
uh
version I don't see.
I'm so.
Madame madam mr chairman
representative
I i'm not i'm not sure what
we've provided before but we
can.
I'm not sure about the answer
that questions
mr media i'm pretty sure we
usually have a fine tally in the
bill
perhaps.
I don't see it here.
So mr t.
Yeah.
I voted for against hospital
three.
Um
as a quick clarify in question
mister chairman representative
so you mean a final tally so we
have paid for and we are talking
about the various app budgets
the recommendations in the
changes the changes in the exact
record you're you're you're
talking about just the total
complete number budget of house
will three for the department
right like the numbers spent in
house bill three is that what
you.
Yeah
mr chairman was in brand sir I
I understand your question now
so yet the total numbers aren't
on the bottom of hospital three
but they will be in
the total amount
for
the
for house bill
three with the proposed
amendment is one billion two
hundred and seventy five
thousand nine hundred and fifty.
A one billion two hundred
seventy five million nine
hundred and fifty two thousand
and four hundred dollars
that is almost entirely in the
other state funds category there
is five hundred and fifty eight
eight million three hundred and
sixty
three hundred sixty thousand
four hundred dollars in the
federal funds column.
And nine million eight hundred
thousand dollars in the inner
agency transfers.
Well it's on.
I just you know I don't want to
be surpris.
Sociations are ongoing and.
But this your chair manager I
don't know how it's going to end
up with.
And I just have so many
constituents who.
And it's.
I don't know how it's going to
go.
But we need to see some big
gains.
Mister chero just failed common
as well mountain rate.
Right the wild way crossings and
quarters and all.
So would.
So couple answers you're a
question representative and i'm
i'm turning over to joe is as
well but mr chair representative
the wildlife corridor right now
we are working on one court or I
believe it's offered
and it is there's an fifty
million dollars I think between
thirty and fifty million dollars
allocated for the first phase of
that wildlife corridor in the
very first version of this
budget that was actually coming
supposed to come out of the cash
efforts of the road fund we have
corrected that that was actually
in the.
That's where that money will be
coming from so it will not be
coming from the cash bound.
The.
And mister chairman
representative you you talked
about
asked about sort of what it
would but it would look like so
the idea behind wildlife cordors
is
is to a minimise and or even
eliminate a collisions between
wildlife and vehicles so that
accomplished by doing either
over passes are under passes on
roads for animals depending on
the type of animal to cross.
Yeah it mister chairman about
share enjoy so I
don't support the idea I think
it is preva.
They didn't use it at all so.
I'm just i'm just trying to make
the point mister chair that I
think there's some areas where
we're spending some money where.
Represent.
Mister chiro.
That.
Mrperiod chairman and
representative so on the other
cost line
that the change from average
twenty twenty twenty twenty four
into the bill would be minus
sixty six million that's largely
due to a decrease in the amount
the department needs to pay debt
service which is paid out of the
other category so that uh those
funds were allocated to the.
Recommended for th.
Madam chair sorry mister
chairman made a representative
the change is from the outbut I
will I just now noticed.
The total doesn't total
correctly it reports the total
amount not to change that's what
i'm asking you when every.
Mister chairman representative
that's correct the the change
from the fiscal year twenty
twenty four operating budget was
four million six hundred and
sixty two thousand dollars.
In total.
Mr chairman represented that's
correct.
Yeah.
You know we have too much money
and here we are.
The.
I.
You know.
You know to me personally i've
been i've been here in this
committee for eight years now to
me.
There's but there's a lot of
issues you know can be my part
of the country.
My main conter.
What were developing ran.
And we need to address.
You know in the disagreement and
and i'm going to go back a l.
Good.
Private.
That part of the.
You know we're spending a lot of
money in charges station we're
really.
Not it you know.
The big thing.
And another thing I want to
point out to the committee and
and to everybody and you
transparency is the biggest.
Going you know what you're
doing.
We're going to succeed
europe is going to make us.
I'm the bicycle this committee
and we kind of be transparent.
Two point.
To me that's that.
You know you.
Would I just.
Yeah.
We have a second.
Madame representative second
room a lot of.
To accept the amendment
represent brown.
Represent more.
Vice.
He could get away.
Mhm.
Thank you very much mister chair
I think you committee for the
reverse discussion I think it
was really important that we
hands discussion and it is
ongoing mister chair you spoke
about transparency I really
appreciate that I really
appreciate you bringing that up
I will I will renew a my goal
and my promise to this committee
to continue to keep this process
transparent so that we were all
apart of these continue
negotiations for section five or
section nine nine nine whatever
you want to like to refer to it
but we do still have a lot of
work to do that I do appreciate
the committee's willingness to
keep the forward momentum that's
what we need to keep doing so
that we can come up with the
finished product better to
greece the wheel than to get in
the way so the thought I think
were ready to vote on the bell
if you
are.
Oh that's right.
Revenue.
And if I may chairman and
representative lenstrum it when
the time comes perhaps I could
ask you and tap you for your
knowledge to try and figure out
some ways to counter that
situation if and when it does
develop with the senate.
The.
Mr chairman I think it ready to
take about the bill.
Alright mr chairman I did
secretary sterna has been
listening and he was wondering
if he could just chime and
quickly on the amendment if that
would be.
Go ahead mister secretary if
you're there.
Good morning.
The personal project that can be
the person I I are sure you're
working on businessing with
beauty official gender part of
los angeles then tomorrow so
i'll be back on thursday I want
to thank you for the discussion
I just want to
be stressed one point really and
that is that house will be is
derived from consensus
discussions between the detail
i've seen of course the chair
has been involved in those
discussions of tea certainly has
weakened consensus on house go
through as presented to the
committee I want to think joey
and and chair have been behilled
for working with us on being
able to address the earmark for
fifty million dollars
you know we are not favorable as
is reflected in this
movie revenues out of our
salaries because we are going to
hustle like we never have before
the particular vacancies
especially in our engineering in
your text pm positions I do want
to share the committee's
concerns if you want to express
that I share the committees
concerns of the latest you also
recommendations on the
construction and maintenance
revenue for the upcoming year I
did that of course in our first
please engage in the house
appropriations I have been part
of the discussions that madam
chairs with leadership on the
house and I too am hopeful that
if we continue to have those
were business questions about
what's necessary needed that a
healthy section five nine or
whatever we want to call it will
materialize between now and when
the the budget is leaving the
senate and so we'll continue to
work with the chair make herself
available to provide the
estimates you provide across
this deletions to provide
essentially what's necessary for
members to continue to find the
department to transfer to the
way they have a year so thanks
for the discussion again
apologies that I could be there.
I think you.
And with that mister chair we
stand for questions or where
were open for a vote.
Mr chairman
beaching.
At least three times this
morning.
The foundation for the revenue
estimate was not based.
Was this or was this not down
with consensus reve.
So
mister chairman and
representative I think the
consensus that
the secretary was referring to
was consensus on where to put
the money on the expenditure
side the consensus revenue
estimating group did not
participate in.
I think.
So mister chairman and
representative the consensus
revenue estimating groups signed
off on the uh dot revenue
projection why didn't you say
that.
Yeah.
Ah mrperiod chairman with that I
think we rest with an amended
bill.
Representative brown.
Representative day like ruse
representative harper.
Representative journalisms.
Representative latter.
Representative lundstrom.
Representative madrid
representative peter group.
Representative
yes
representative harper.
The.
Representative one stream
yes.
Representative madrid.
Mrperiod vice.
Madam chair.
Thank you very much mister
chairman members of the
committee.
